CXLV Expository Sermons UPON The whole 17th CHAPTER OF THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO
St JOHN: OR, CHRIST'S PRAYER Before his PASSION Explicated, AND BOTH Practically
and Polemically Improved. By Anthony Burgess Minister of the Gospel, sometime
Fellow of Emanuel-Colledge in Cambridge, and now Pastor of the Church of
Sutton-Coldfield in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed by Abraham Miller for Thomas Underhill at the Anchor and Bible
in St Paul's Churchyard. MDCLVI.

TO The Christian READER.
THe Evangelist John, because of that admirable, useful, and excellent matter,
which he has left on Record for the good of the Church, is dignified with some
remarkable Titles; That which is the principal, and most to be observed, is
the name Christ himself gave him, Mark 3.17 Of the reason why Christ imposed on
some new names, see Casau^. ad Annal. Exerc. 13.
He with his brother James are called, Sons of Thunder; When our Savior
changed Peter's Name, there is the reason of that mutation expressed; but
because here is none given, therefore the conjectures of Interpreters are
various: As for the application of it to John, Some say, It was because of the
greatness and vehemence of his voice, (...), but it is hard to prove that.
Grotius thinks our Savior does allude to that of Haggai chap. 2.6. Yet once
it is a little while, and I will shake ((...), from which he makes Boanerges,
though other Critics judge much otherwise) the Heavens and Earth, etc. This
Promise was fulfilled in the great Mutation and Change, which was made by the
Gospel, in which this Evangelist was an excellent Instrument: Some attribute it
to the Secrecy and Sublimity of that matter which he delivers, as having more
familiarity with Christ, then others, for he used to lean on his Breast, and so
might receive some peculiar instruction from Christ. Thus Heinfius making
Thunder to be no more then the Hebrew Shechina, Gods Presence and Majesty,
applying that place, Psalm. 81.7. I have heard thee in the secret place of
Thunder. But that which is most probable is, Because of the admirable gravity
and weight in the matter delivered, as also the short and sudden expressions
thereof. Those Sentences in the beginning of his first ^hapter, are like so
many thunderbolts, insomuch that if you do regard the Matter and Manner of his
expression, he might more truly be said (...), then Pericles in his Orations;
Whatsoever therefore we find delivered by this Divine Penman, we are with much
reverence and awful respect to receive it. Antiquity also has in a peculiar
manner honored him with some other names, He is called the Heavenly Eagle, and
that because of the sublime Mysteries manifested by him in reference to the
Godhead of Christ; And to this purpose, he is likewise styled Theologos, the
Divine, where (...) or (...), is not used in that sense, as afterward it was
in the Church of God, for it is opposed to (...), hence they say, the other
Evangelists do deliver (...) of Christ, the manner of his Humane Nativity, but
this Evangelist does the (...), the Divine Nature of Christ, although the
Socinians have sacrilegiously perverted the beginning of that first Chapter of
John to another sense, then of Christ's Eternal Deity (which yet was used
instrumentally to convert Junius from his Atheism.) Now although the whole
matter delivered thus by this Evangelist be so admirable and excellent, yet
this Seventeenth Chapter, wherein is related the Prayer of Christ for
believers, not long before his Death (and mentioned only by him) has some
appropriated Reasons for a more peculiar Attention and Affection toward it;
Hence it has always had a peculiar Presidency in the hearts of Believers: So
that the opening of this precious Box of Ointment, must needs send forth a
refreshing fragrant smell to those that are spiritual; For it is truly said by
Melancthon concerning this Prayer, Nec digniorem, necsanctiorem, nec
fructuosiorem, nec magis patheticam vocem in Coelo ac Terra unquam fuisse
auditam, quam hanc ipsius Filii precationem; There was never a more excellent,
more holy, more fruitful, and more affectionate voice ever heard in Heaven or
Earth, then this Prayer. So that we may call this Chapter, as some of the
Psalms are, A Chapter of Degrees, If this reason may be admitted of that
Inscription, because they did surpass other Psalms in Excellency, as also
thereby the soul was like Elijah carried up in a fiery Chariot to Heaven, At
the end of every verse we may write Selah. There was a very superstitious
Custom among Christians in Chrysostom's time, which he does severely inveigh
against, that they would hang this Gospel of John, or part of it about their
necks, as an Anulete, nor a Spell against malignant things: But certainly, a
gracious heart, preserving this Prayer of Christ, and making a wise and
skillful improvement thereof, will find it wonderfully advantageous, both for
the increase of Godliness and Comfort, here will be both Bread to nourish, and
Wine to refresh and comfort. Although therefore multitude of Books be
complained of, as glutting the world; So that we may justly think there are
more Books then Readers, yet the Excellency, perpetual Usefulness, and
ravishing Consolations of the matter delivered by our Savior in this
Valedictory Prayer, have prevailed with me to publish these Expository Sermons
to the world, and the rather, not knowing of any English Writer, who has
purposely made it his business to explicate and practically improve this
Chapter, whereas some other parts of Scripture have been diligently discussed.
In the managing of this Work, I have occasionally entered into some Socinian
and Arminian Disputes, some Verses in this Chapter being the proper subject for
them. Although the greatest part of my Work is to make Honey rather then to
sting; to inform us how to believe and walk in a Christian life, then to
dispute and digladiate about Controversies, for we seldom gather Grapes from
such Thistles; Yea sometimes in stead of Conviction, they work confirmation in
those Errors, the minds of men are prepossessed with. And here I shall take
leave to enter into a short Digression, which would have come out more
seasonably long before this time, but I had no opportunity till this occasion
was offered to me.

Not long since I published The Second Part of the Treatise of Justification,
wherein among other particulars, my Work was to prove, That Works, though done
by Grace, are not the Condition of our Justification, but that we are justified
alone by Faith, as the Means or Instrument receiving of it. These two kinds of
Justification (viz. by Faith receiving, or Faith and Works as a Condition,) I
conceive to differ specifically one from the other, and that he who is
justified the one way cannot be the other. The former way, as the Scripture
does maintain, so generally the Reformed Churches have readily insisted in; The
latter way the Remonstrants have vehemently pleaded for, opposing Faiths
instrumentality in Justification, with whom Vorstius and Grotius in this,
Opinion associate themselves, as also one or two late English Writers, Doctor
Hammond, Pract. Catech. lib. ^. Sect. 3. Now when I had endeavored to state
the Question in a most candid and fair way between those that deny Works to be
a Condition sine qua non of our Justification, and those who affirm. A
Reverend and Learned Brother, judging himself to be concerned in this Opinion
likewise, does complain of the want of candor and truth ( Confess. Preface) in
my stating of the Question, wherein I rather expected thanks for my ingenuity:
For first, I said, All Merit and Efficiency was with great distaste removed
from these works of Grace in our Justification: Therefore the Question was,
Upon what account these are required in Justified persons, Whether in some
Causality or Concurrence, as Faith is, only not with such a Degree of
Excellency? Now let any Judicious Reader, that is acquainted with this
Controversy decide, wherein any candor or truth may be desired herein: For I
say Causality (which is a general word) not Efficiencie or Merit. Again, I
say, Some Causalitie, Causalitas quaedam, which is Terminus diminuens; Yea, I
added the word Concurrence, which might easily satisfy any, how low I brought
the Question; Yea, as if this had not been enough, I propounded it in other
terms, Whether good Works be required, as well as Faith? Yet when I had done
all this, he complains, as if wrong were done. I am still more confirmed, and
that by this instance, in what I delivered in that Preface, That it is not a
compendious or proper way to find out truth, and discover an Error, by
dealing with persons according to their particular expressions, or to attend to
personal reflections, but to abstract the Question, and to handle it in Thesi,
For how many words upon words may be multiplied in this very particular. My
Reverend Brother says, He vehemently disclaimeth all Causality of Works in
Justification: Surely his meaning is all Proper Causall Efficiency (and so did
I in the stating of it) but to deny Causality in a large sense is plainly to
contradict himself: For in his Aphorism 74 Thesis, They both (viz.) Faith and
Works justify in the same kind of Causality, viz. as Causae si^e q^ibus non,
or m^d^ate and improper Causes; Or as Doctor Twiss, Causae di^positivae but
with this difference, Faith as the principal part, Obedience as the less
princ^pall: Here is Causality, though improper; Here is a Causa dispositiva,
and yet shall I be blamed, after I had removed Efficiency and Merit, to sta^e
it with a Causalitas quaedam, some Causality or Concurrence; And therefore all
the Arguments I produce, are not against any supposed Causality, but that Faith
only is that which justifies, and that good Works, qua Works (let them be
Meritorious, Efficient, or Conditions only) are excluded as to the Act of
Justification. Grotius (in cap. 2. Jacobi) who makes this Promise of
Justification and Salvation, Ad donationem sub condition, quam ad proprie
dictam locu^ionem and conductionem, propius accedere (happily this may occasion
such great recourse to the Lawyers about the Nature of Conditions) does yet
notwithstanding on the 2^th verse of the 2d Chapter of James, from that
expression of the Apostle, Faith did (...), infer, Docemur non male fidem and
opera fidei posse dici causam Justificationis -- modo non intelligamus, cau^am
primariam -- sed conditiones quae saepe cau^ae sine quibus non, aut sui generis
causae dicu^tur. But I need not run to this, for my Arguments militate
against Works, as Works justifying under any pretended Notion whatsoever: And
this makes me admire, how my Learned Brother could let ^f all one Passage,
wherein he may be so p^lp^bly and ocularly convinced to the contrary by the
first looking upon my Arguments, That which he says, is, The strength of my
Arguments lies upon a supposition, That Conditions have a moral Efficiency
(not to examine how freely he manageth his Answer to such a supposition.) Now
this is that which I aff^rme, That there is not one o^ these ten Arguments
brought against Justification by Works, as a Conditio sine qua non, that is
built upon this su^position, or has any dependence on it, only in the fourth
Argument, after the full strength thereof is delivered, then I do ex abun^anti,
and by way of amplification, show, that a Condition in a Covenant strictly
taken (I put in that limitation) has a moral Efficiencie, and is a causa cum
qua, not a causa sine qua non: But this is only by way of addition, The
Argument did not depend on this Assertion. In his Apology, page 8.
And my Learned Brother says, Some conditions (and most among men) are Moral
Impulsive causes. I find another thing urged likewise, as not fair dealing,
and that is, To fasten upon his Opinion, that we may say a Justifying
Repentance, as well as Justifying Faith, and also Justifying Love; Indeed in my
Book it is Law, and that was the Printers fault, which I am sorry for, because
I see my Learned Brother so much moved at that, as if he were charged to hold a
justifying Law, it should have been Love: But why does this offend my Reverend
Brother? He does not say, It is not true to say, justifying Repentance, or
justifying Love, but it is not fit to say, (Confess. in the Pref.) Why is it
not fit, if it be true? It may be such an expression would be offensive to
godly ears, and therefore not fit: Can Love be a Condition of Justification,
and yet not Justifying Love as a Condition? This seems very strange. But it is
said, Faith has a peculiar fitness and aptness to receive Christ, which Love
has not. It is true, and therefore Faith only Justifies, and not Love: Thus
it makes against him, and not for him. Besides with him, Faith justifies as a
Condition, not from its peculiar aptness, and therefore Love and Repentance
being Conditions, must justify aeque with Faith, though not aequaliter, Faiths
aptness is the remote reason, as it is a Condition, that is the proxime and
formal reason: Now Repentance and Love have this formal reason, for they are
Conditions: Certainly, if Brutum were Animal rationale, he would be Homo, as
well as man is. Some other minute and inconsiderable Objections are also
brought in, but they are not worthy of a contest.

I therefore return again from this Digression to the Subject in hand, which is
to take notice of the great Usefulness and Excellency of the matter contained
in this Prayer of Christ's. Luther did justly call John the Evangelist for this
Book, Malleus Pelagianorum, the hammer of Pelagians, we may add also of
Socinians and Arians. Hence Sixtus Senensis speaks of some Heretics called
Alogi (a name that Epiphanius did justly put upon them) because they rejected
this Gospel of John, and could not endure this (...), the Word, so often
mentioned by him; What is thus said of the whole Gospel, may also be applied to
this Prayer. For

First, Here is the Systeme, as it were, of most exact and pure Divinity,
especially the Socinian and Arminian Errors are most powerfully and evidently
profligated by it; Possevine charge it under his head of Atheism upon the
Heretics, that Luther should say, There was no other Gospel but that of John,
as if the Books of the other Evangelists did not deserve that Name; but till I
can find that expression in Luther, I shall not be sollicitous for an answer;
This is certain, that this very Chapter I am treating of, is enough to put to
flight and conquer the Armies of the chiefest Heretics; there being scarce
any Doctrine of weight in Religion, which may not from hence be strongly
confirmed. Chrysostom makes this Chapter (...) not (...), a Sermon, not a
Prayer, but it may have this instructing matter in it, though poured out
prayer-wise.

Secondly, As this Chapter is thus, the Compendium and Marrow of Divinity, so
it is also the Foundation of the Ministry, yea and of the Church also; For as
at the Creation by that word of blessing, Increase and multiply, all things
have their being, and are continued therein, so from the virtue and efficacy
of this Prayer, the Ministry, the Ordinances, the Church it self have their
existence and preservation.

Thirdly, Whereas the life and comfort of believers lies in their Union with
Christ, and Communion one with another. This precious truth is largely
mentioned by our Savior, which gives occasion to treat of a Believers Union
with Christ, as also of the Unity which ought to be amongst Believers, from
which Foundation we treat concerning the means to preserve Unity, as also the
causes of Divisions amongst them, and likewise how far a Forbearance and
Toleration in a Church Way (for that Question of a Political and Civil one, is
not so pertinent to our Saviors words) is to be yielded unto in respect of
erring Brethren.

Lastly, This Prayer of Christ may be compared to a Land flowing with milk and
honey, in respect of that treasure of Consolation which is contained therein:
For as Chrysostom (Praefat. ad Johan.) says, Though he be the Son of
Thunder, yet his voice is sweeter than any Melody; therefore at the 13th verse
he relates, that our Savior said, These things have I spoken in the world
that my joy might be fulfilled in them. It is observed, that when Christ did in
a more extraordinary and ardent manner pray unto God, he went into some secret
place, and was alone; And Casaubon leaves it to be considered by the Learned
(Exerc. 16. cap. 62.) Whether our Lord did not also pray this Prayer privately.
But this expression [I speak these things in the world] do plainly
demonstrate, that it was at least spoken in the presence of the Disciples, and
that for their Edification and Consolation. Seeing therefore this is such a
Fountain for healing and refreshing, Come with a spiritual thirst to be
replenished thereby: Seeing here is the Honey and the Honeycomb, do not with
Jonathan taste a little only, but eat freely and abundantly thereof, thou will
by a serious and constant Meditation find this heavenly matter in Christ's
Prayer make thee heavenly also, and assimulate thee into his own likeness: How
vain and empty will all the Glory of the world appear to thee, when thou shall
be lifted up upon this Mount of Transfiguration? They that live under the
Torrid Zone never feel any cold, and thou who shall find this Prayer of Christ
active and vigorous in thy breast, wilt never have cause to complain of that
Dullness, Formality and Coldness which many others groan under. The Lord grant
that thou may find this savoury Power, and experiment all Efficacy upon
thy heart in the reading thereof.

Thy Souls Well-wisher ANTHONY BURGESS.
Sutton-Coldfield, June 22th. 1656.
ERRATA.
Page 5. lin. 45. made rusty. p. 6 l. 24. r. purd. page 14. lin. 18. dele
either. p. 28. lin. 4. r. spiritual. page 31. lin. 17. r. (...). p. 31. l. 51.
r. frcer. p. 36. l. 11. r. hunc. p. 53. l. 2. r. assured. l. 21. r. assured. l
45. r. Lord. p. 57..31. r. quo. p. 65. l. 4. r. this. p. 66. l. 40. r. omnis. p
76. l. 33. r. have l. 50. r. eundum. p. 77. l 35. r. ignoti. p. 79. l. 14. r.
vides. l. 19. r. Christiana. p. 84. l. 16. r. Effectus concomitantes. p. 89. l.
8. r. animat. p. 93. l. 19. r imagunc^la. l. 25. r. adoranda. p. 97. l. 16. r
Nation. p. 106. l. 8. dele mention. p. 106. l. 35. r. (...). p. 109 l. 26. r.
vincemur. l. 3^. r. rocks. p. 112. l. 31. de^e not p. 115. l. 4. (...). p 123.
l. 26. r. is. l. 29. r. finished. p. 126. l. 5 ^. r galling. p. 127 l. 46. r.
began. p. 129. l. 55. r. fibi ipsi. p. 131. l. 31. r. Philosophers. p. 132. l.
47 r. words p. 135. l. 27. r. (...). l. 29. r. (...). p. 147. l. 8. r. bunches.
p. 157. l. 42. r. (...). p. 162. l. 6. r. ha shem. p. 196. l. 45. r. labor. p.
208. l. 39 r. fancy full. p. 2 1. l. 15. 1. ^ rough whom. p. 220. l. 27. r.
for. p. 232. l. 47. r. homiletical. p. 240. l. 53. r. (...). p. 241. l 9. r.
and. page 243. l. 34. add of. p 244. l. 29. r says. p. 249. l. 28. r.
gratuita. p. 258. l. 15. r God. p. 266. l. 18. r. (...). p. 267. l. 38. add
to. p. 273. l. 24. r. excited. p. 274. l. 4. r. though. p. 275. l. 37. David
to. p. 27. l. 34. r. ad vera. l^ 35. r. seeming good. p. 279. l. 50. add Paul.
p. 280. l. 3. r. world. l. 32. r. casts p. 291. l. 24. r. absence. p. 292. l
33. r. many times. p. 295. l. 4. r. Trustees. p. 301. l. 36. r. (...). p. 301.
l. 39. r. Enosh. (...). p. 308. l. 4. r. (...). p. 317. l. 43. add et. p. 319
l. 7. r. last. p. 338. l. 9. r. (...). p. 353. l. 10. add to recover. p. 363.
l. 47. r. not. p. 369. l. 3. add lose. p. 384. l. 1. r. of. p. 391. l. 16. r.
what p 397. l. 31. r. mild. p. 407. l. 23. r. (...). p. 424. l. 19. r. up. p.
425. l. 17. r. power. p. 430. l. 29. r. bitter. p. 439 l. 25. r. (...). p. 451.
l. 2. r. if. l. 4. r. in. p. 481. l. 1. r. and. l. 27. r. (...). p. 515. l. 20.
add if p. 516. l. 26. r. Scriptorem. p. 520. l. 36. r. people. p. 521. l. 11.
r. a ^eer. p. 528 l. 11. add may. p 532. l. 35. r. antequam. p 543. l. 32.
add of them. p. 554. l. 30. r. (...). p 579. l. 35. r. sapiens. p. 581. l. 19.
r. room. p. 590. l. 14. r. (...). p. 600. l 40. r. Abailardus. l. 53. r.
Noveris. p. 615. l. 21. r. darkness. p. 617. l. 20 r. diligent. p. 64^. l. 23.
r. be loved. p 644. l. 17 dele days of his suffering. p 646. l. 39. r when. p.
670. l. 19. add nature. p. 682. l. 17. r. shine. l. 30. r. them. p. 688. l. 5.
r. Obadiah. p. 690. l. 53. r. ancient. p. 690. l. 53. dele we are.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON. I. JOHN 17.1. These words spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to heaven,
and said, Father the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may
glorify thee.THe Necessity of adding Prayer to Preaching, for its good effect:
Showing also what kind of Cause the Word is of Conversion; and what are the
requisites of Heavenly and Spiritual Prayer. SERMON. II. The transcendent
excellency and efficacy of Christ's Prayer (in respect of the matter and nature
thereof, as being Mediatory, his person and Relation, etc.) held forth as a
ground of unspeakable Comfort to Believers. SERMON. III. Shows, how prevalent
the Prayers are that are poured out to God as a Father, and what disposition
and frame of heart this compellation Father may breed in every one that does
fervently pray to God. SERMON. IV. Of Gods appointing an hour, a set time for the
dispensing his Mercies and Judgments, in reference to particular persons, and
his Church and Churches Enemies. SERMON. V. Of the Nature and Manifestations of
that Glory which Christ prayed for, and is invested with; And how comfortable
it is to all his Members. SERMON. VI. Of Heavenly-mindedness, Showing that we
should seek both earthly and heavenly Blessings, chiefly for this end, viz.
That God may be Glorified. SERMON. VII. JOHN 17.2. As thou have given him power
over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given
him.The Text vindicated from Arians, Ubiquitarians, and Papists; and the power
and dominion of Christ observed and applied, to the Comfort of his Disciples,
and Terror of his Enemies. SERMON. VIII. The Effects and Appearances of the
Kingly power and dominion of Christ. SERMON. IX. Christ under the notion of a
Head, applied to the Terror of his Enemies, and Comfort of his Members. SERMON.
X. Of Predestination, or Gods giving some of mankind to Christ, (not all) for
him to Redeem, and what unspeakable grounds of Comfort to Gods people flow from
thence. SERMON. XI. Treats of Eternal Life in the Nature and Properties of it.
SERMON. XII. A Consideration of Eternal Life, compared with this present Life,
and with its contrary, viz. Eternal Death. SERMON. XIII. Weighty Considerations
upon Eternity. SERMON. XIV. JOHN 17.3. And this is (...) ^ternall, that they
might know thee the ^ly true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.The
Necessity of Divine Knowledge, and arraignment of Ignorance. SERMON. XV. More
Reasons of the Necessity of Divine Knowledge, and the Causes of Ignorance.
SERMON. XVI. Shows what saving Knowledge is in its Concomitants and Effects.
SERMON. XVII. Of the Knowledge and Worship of the One true God: and the contrary
thereto, viz. Idolatry. SERMON. XVIII. The Necessity of the Knowledge of Christ
Jesus, as well as of God the Father. SERMON. XIX. JOHN 17.4. I have glorified
thee on the earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do.Shows
how a Godly life (though it merit no good) is a ground of comfort at the hour
of Death. SERMON. XX. Shows who they are that cannot, at the close of their
days, take comfort in this, That they have finished the work God gave them to
do: As also, what things, if not avoided, will much diminish the comfort of the
Godly ones at that day. SERMON. XXI. Of Gods being Glorified by man's Salvation,
Christ's chief end in what he did for man, was the Glory of God, which bespeaks
both our imitation and unspeakable Consolation. SERMON. XXII. Of Christ's
Finishing the work he undertook, with the end and properties of it, and the
great Comfort of i^ to Believers. SERMON. XXIII. JOHN 17.5. And now, O Father,
Glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory which I had with thee
before the World was.Of a holy working life, the Excellency, Equity and
Necessity thereof in order to Glory. SERMON. XXIV. Of vain Tautology in Prayer,
and what Repetitions in Prayer are such, and what not, showing also what things
are absolutely necessary to a good Prayer. SERMON. XXV. Of the Promises, and of
Prayer. SERMON. XXVI. Of heavenly Glory as opposed to earthly; and how the hopes
thereof earnestly sought and prayed for, will comfort a man against the, fear
and in the midst of all trials and afflictions. SERMON. XXVII. The Eternal Deity
of Christ proved; and whence it comes to pass that there are any so vile, as to
deny it; showing also what sins do much provoke God to give men up to such
Blasphemy. SERMON. XXVIII. Proves, That the world was not from Eternity, but had
its beginning in time, and reduces that Consideration into Practice. SERMON.
XXIX. JOHN 17.6. I have manifested thy Name unto the men which then gave me
out of the world, thine they were and thou gave them me, and they have kept
thy word.Of Divine Knowledge, its Excellency and Rarity; Showing that God is
truly and properly known only by the Godly, and wherein their Knowledge of God
differs from the knowledge that others have of him. SERMON. XXX. The great End of
the Ministry, and what should be the End of both Ministers and people, in their
Preaching and Hearing. SERMON. XXXI. That Gods people are not of (though in) this
world; Wherein is also showed the vast difference between them and the men of
the world. SERMON. XXXII. Of the peculiar propriety Gods people have in Him, and
He in them. SERMON. XXXIII. The truly Godly man only is obedient to Gods Word: Or
the great Character of a Christian. SERMON. XXXIV. JOHN 17.7. Now they have known
that all things whatsoever thou have given me are of thee.Of Growth in Grace,
the Duty, Necessity, and Glory of it. SERMON. XXXV. Of Faith in Christ the
Mediator with the Ingredients or Concomitant acts of it. SERMON. XXXVI. JOHN
17.8. For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have
received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have
believed that thou did send me.Of Obedience to all the Commandments of God;
showing, That that only is truly Obedience, and the property of a Godly man.
SERMON. XXXVII. Shows, That Gods people are ready and willing in Obedience,
Whence it is that they are so: Tending to rouse men up from dullness and
formality in Gods service. SERMON. XXXVIII. Of the Excellency and Necessity of
Believing in Christ as a Mediator; That it is acceptable to God, as well as
Obedience to a Command; yet withal shows the difficulty of it, and whence it
does come to pass that the children of God, sensible of their sins, are so
hardly brought to Believe; As also why ungodly men think it so easy a thing.
SERMON. XXXIX. Further shows, how acceptable it is to God to believe in Christ
the Mediator, and sets forth the dangerous nature of Trusting in our own
Righteousness. SERMON. XL. Further sets forth the Excellency and Necessity of
pressing the Doctrine of Faith in Christ the Mediator, and of our being
affected with it, and invites the greatest sinners to come unto him for
Salvation. SERMON. XLI. JOHN 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but
for them which thou have given me, for they are thine.Of praying both for the
Godly and the wicked, with the Reasons and Motives thereof. SERMON. XLII. The
Excellency and Efficacy of Christ's Mediatory prayer; set forth in many
Aggravations of it for the Consolation of the Godly. SERMON. XLIII. Of the Extent
of Christ's Mediatory Prayer, and of his Death; That he prayed and died not for
all and every one of mankind, but only for the Elect; and that the Scripture
expressions of Christ's dying for all, are to be understood indefinitely and not
universally. SERMON. XLIV. Reasons why the Scripture speaks thus universally
about Christ's death, when yet but some were intended. Also what Benefits
Reprobates have by Christ, with some Arguments further proving the point of
Christ's dying not for every man, but some. SERMON. XLV. The Application of the
former Subject; setting forth the Necessity of Faith and Repentance, as to the
interesting us in Christ; The Freeness of Gods Love* The Qualifications of
those to whom Christ's death is made advantageous, and also their privileges
above all others. SERMON. XLVI. Of Free Grace opposite to Arminianism, tending to
raise the hearts of those that are Godly to Joy and Thankfulness. SERMON. XLVII.
Of Gods Propriety in his people, as the ground of all the good that accrueth to
them. SERMON. XLVIII. JOHN 17.10. And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and
I am glorified in them.The Deity of Jesus Christ cleared and defended against
the Socinians. SERMON. XLIX. Of man's glorifying of Christ, and how many ways
that is done. SERMON. L. JOHN 17.11. And now I am no more in the world, but these
are in the world, and I come to thee, holy Father, keep through thine own Name
those whom thou have given me, that they may be one, as we are.Of Christ's
tender care of all his people in the greatest of their care and afflictions.
SERMON. LI. Of the great danger of Gods peoples being in the world, chiefly from
its tempting and seducing to sin. SERMON. LII. Of the danger Gods people are in,
in the world, in respect of its hating and opposing of them; with Reasons why
the Lord makes the world such a disquieting place, such a valley of tears unto
his own people. SERMON. LIII. The Exaltation of Christ improved for the Joy of
all Believers. SERMON. LIVE. That all Civil Governors (as well as
Ecclesiastical) from the meanest Master of a Family, to the greatest Monarch,
have from Christ a spiritual charge of those that are under them; and are
above all things to endeavor the good of their souls. SERMON. LV. The great
Lord Keeper of Israel from inevitable Ruin both of body and soul, extolled.
SERMON. LVI. That it is not enough to be put into a state of Grace, unless by Gods
power we are kept therein. How far men may acknowledge Gods help, and yet
with the Pelagians, Arminians, and Papists, not give him his due Glory: And
also shows, how many ways the power of God keeps his people. SERMON. LVII.
Reasons proving the Necessity of Gods preserving his children in Grace: That
God keeps them by Faith; Also, why and how Faith keeps them, rather then other
Graces. SERMON. LVIII. The greatness of the mercy of being kept sound in the
Truth, and the damnableness of Error demonstrated. SERMON. LIX. That it is a
special Mercy for the Ministers of the Gospel to agree in one: Wherein their
unity should be, and the Reasons of the differences that are among them. SERMON.
LX. The great Pattern of Unity, the Nature and Property of the Unity that is
between God the Father and the Son, against the Socinians; That the Ministers
of God should endeavor after a perfect Unity, even to be one, as the Father
and Son are, Also some Rules guiding thereunto. SERMON. LXI. JOHN 17.12. While
I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy Name, those that thou gave
me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled. The great changes that even a Godly man is
subject unto, in respect of the having and losing those sensible supports, both
outward and inward, which God at sometimes vouchsafes to them: Also what those
sensible enjoyments are, and why God does so change the condition of his
people. SERMON. LXII. Shows, how prone men are for to know Christ after the
flesh, and wherein it appears. SERMON. LXIII. Of the Saints Lord Keeper, showing
how safe the Godly are kept to Salvation by Christ, as a trust committed to
him. SERMON. LXIV. Of the manner of Christ's keeping those that are his: Of a four
fold principle that is operative to the preservation of Believers: And of the
excellent effects of the Lively Meditation of this Doctrine, of being kept by
Christ to Salvation. SERMON. LXV. Of the Perseverance of the Saints: The Question
stated. SERMON. LXVI. Of the Perseverance of the Saints. SERMON. LXVII. Arguments
proving that every one that is in the state of Grace shall be preserved to
Eternal Life. SERMON. LXVIII. Of the son of perdition, Showing that some
persons are wilfully set for to damn themselves, though they have never so many
excellent Remedies and Means to the contrary; And what are the Causes that move
them thereunto, and Characters of such persons. SERMON. LXIX. Of the son of
perdition, Showing more Causes and Symptoms of such wretched persons that are
desperately bent to damn themselves. SERMON. LXX. Of the son of perdition,
Shows from the example of Judas, that men may be eminent for a while in the
Church of God, and afterward prove desperate Apostates. SERMON. LXXI. Of the
son of Perdition. SERMON. LXXII. Of the son of Perdition. SERMON. LXXIII. The
great stumbling blocks of Religion removed SERMON. LXXIV. Of the Scripture. SERMON.
LXXV. Of the truth of Scripture-prophesies, and against Judicial Astrology and
Witchcraft, showing the vanity and wickedness thereof, and of seeking to them.
SERMON. LXXVI. John 17.13. And now I come to thee, and these things I speak in
the world that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.The Joy of Saints
handled both as a duty and privilege, as being one great end of Christ's
Prayer, Command, Promises and Ministry. SERMON. LXXVII. Of Joy and Comfort,
showing how many ways the Spirit of God works it in the hearts of his people.
SERMON. LXXVIII. The several sorts of Joy, and the Nature of Spiritual Joy,
showing also how far it transcends and differs from worldly joy. SERMON. LXXIX.
The excellent effects of Christian Joy. SERMON. LXXX. John 17.14. I have given
them thy Word, and the world has hated them, because they are not of the
world.That the Word of God preached and received, does inrage the wicked world;
and Reasons thereof. SERMON. LXXXI. Of suffering for Christ's Cause, and how it
ingageth God for to take care of such as so suffer, also the duty of Ministers
about preaching Gods truth. SERMON. LXXXII. Of wicked men's hating the Godly, the
Causes, Effects and Properties of it. SERMON. LXXXIII. The Application of the
foregoing Observation, both to the godly and the wicked, tending to encourage
and rejoice the one under all their sufferings, and deter and reclaim the
other from all oppositions. SERMON. LXXXIV. Of Conformity to Christ in not being
of the world, and in his sufferings. SERMON. LXXXV. John 17.15. I pray not that
thou should take them out of the world, but that thou should keep them from
the evil.Shows why God continues his children in this world of sin and
sorrow, and does not take them immediately to Heaven? and also how far it is
lawful for a man to pray for, or desire to be taken out of this world. SERMON.
LXXXVI. That it is a greater mercy to be kept from sin and all evil in our
afflictions and troubles, than from the afflictions themselves. SERMON. LXXXVII.
That God has determined a precise time to every particular man in the world,
how long he shall live. SERMON. LXXXVIII. JOHN 17.16. They are not of the world,
even as I am not of the world.The Heavenly man much improved by much
considering that he is not of this world. SERMON. LXXXIX. JOHN 17.17. Sanctify
them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth.Of Growth in Grace, Showing that, and
how many ways a Godly man may be sanctified. SERMON. XC. The Contraries of
Growth in Grace. A Comfortable Advertisement to such as mourn under their sense
of not Growing; with Reasons of the Necessity of Growing in Grace. SERMON. XCI.
Of the Causes of Sanctification, and in particular of God, as the Isntrumental
Cause. SERMON. XCII. Of the Truth of the Scriptures. SERMON. XCIII. The
transcendent Properties of the Scripture. SERMON. XCIV. JOHN 17.18. As thou have
sent me into the world, even so have I sent them into the world.How requisite a
sound mind and a holy life are to a Minister of the Gospel; and Christ's
peculiar love to, and care of such. SERMON. XCV. Of Christ's Mission to the Office
of a Mediator. SERMON. XCVI. Of the public Office of the Ministry, some
distinctions concerning it, and the Necessity of a lawful Call thereunto; Also
showing wherein private Christians should exercise their Gifts, both ordinarily
and in extraordinary Cases. SERMON. XCVII. That the Scripture appoints a distinct
Office of the Ministry: Shows wherein the Call to the Ministry consists, and
that none may enter into that Office without an Authoritative Mission, also
what the Ministry of Preaching is, and whether Reading be Preaching. SERMON.
XCVIII. JOHN 17.19. And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also
might be sanctified through the Truth.Of Christ's sanctifying himself to be a
Mediator: Showing what is implied in it, how pure, willing and fit he was for
that Great undertaking. SERMON. XCIX. Shows further what is implied in that
phrase of our Savior, I sanctify my Self; Handling chiefly the Priestly
Office of Christ, in opposition to the Socinians, and for the Comfort and
Direction of Penitent sinners. SERMON. C. Of Jesus Christ as Priest, Sacrifice
and Altar: The Properties of that Sacrifice; The way how men come to partake of
the Benefit of it; Its Efficacy as to Sanctification as well as Justification.
SERMON. CI. Of Sanctification, as the Effect of Christ's death; showing that no
man truly believes in Christ for Justification, that does not also for
Sanctification. SERMON. CII. JOHN 17.20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for
them also that shall believe in me through their word.Shows, why Christ, who
could do all things, yet puts up prayers: What difference there is between his
prayers and ours, and the great advantage Believers have by Christ's praying for
them. SERMON. CIII. In what respects the Benefits of Christ's mediation extends to
all Believers alike, and in what not, for the comfort of weak Christians, and
such of them as are most contemptible in the eyes of the world. SERMON. CIV. That
in some particulars the poor weak Christian has more respect from Christ then
the strong one. SERMON. CV. Of Christ's love and care of every one of his before
they had a being. SERMON. CVI. Of both the moving causes and effects of Election,
and of Christ's prayer and death; Against Arminians and others. SERMON. CVII. Of
Faith, the several kinds of it, and especially of Justifying Faith, its
object and seat, etc. SERMON. CVIII. Of Justifying Faith, showing what things are
necessary thereunto; and how or in what method the Spirit of God inableth the
humble soul to Believe. SERMON. CIX. Of Justifying Faith. SERMON. CX. Of Justifying
Faith, that it is a fiduciall Recumbency in Christ. SERMON. CXI. That a Gospel
Ministry is to continue to the end of the world, and for what ends. SERMON. CXII.
JOHN 17.21. That they all may be one, as thou (Father) art in me, and I in
thee, that they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou
have sent me.Of Unity among Gods people, the Nature of it. SERMON. CXIII. Of
Unity among Christians, the Benefits and Necessity of it; and the mischief of
Divisions. SERMON. CXIV. Of Unity among the Godly; More particulars setting forth
the excellency of it, and mischief of Division; Answering this Objection, viz.
Seeing God has promised one heart and way, and Christ prayed for it, How comes
it to pass that there should be so many breaches amongst the Godly. SERMON. CXV.
Of Unity among Believers, Cautions about it: Also setting forth some good
uniting Principles, with a censure of some bad ones. SERMON. CXVI. Of Christian
Unity, setting forth some Rules for Unity in Doctrine, Church Order, and
Affection, for the preventing of Error, Schism and Wrath. SERMON. CXVII. Of the
distinction of Persons and Unity of Essence in the Deity: against the
Socinians. SERMON. CXVIII. The Glorious mystery of the Saints Union with Christ,
and with the Father by him, opened. SERMON. CXIX. Shows, what a special means
Unity among Believers is, to enlarge the Kingdom of Christ, and yet
notwithstanding that Unity, without true Doctrine, is no Infallible Mark of the
true Church, against the Papists. SERMON. CXX. A Consideration of Faith in its
General nature, as Dogmaticall or Historical, carried out to
Scripture-Truths, because of Divine Authority. SERMON. CXXI. Of Dogmaticall
Faith, the Properties of, and Contraries to it. SERMON. CXXII. JOHN 17.22. And
the Glory which thou gave me I gave them, that they may be one, even as we
are one.Of the Glory which Christ communicates unto all his Disciples, even in
this life, and of Union with him as the ground of it. SERMON. CXXIII. Practical
Conclusions from the foregoing Doctrine. SERMON. CXXIV. That Jesus Christ though
God co-equall with the Father, had many things given him by the Father, and how
that can be? SERMON. CXXV. Unity among Christians is part of that Glory Christ
has purchased for them. SERMON. CXXVI. JOHN 17.23. I in them and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one, and that the world may know that thou
have sent me.Of Union with Christ: Showing how, or in what respect Christ is in
every Believer, and how he is not. SERMON. CXXVII. Showing something of the
Nature, Manner, and Effects of Christ's being in Believers. SERMON. CXXVIII. Of
the Fathers being in Christ, of both their being in Believers, and how that can
be, and yet they not quite freed from sin and sorrow. SERMON. CXXIX. Of the Unity
of Believers, of the cause and nature of it, and what makes to the perfect
consummation of it. SERMON. CXXX. Shows that every one that believes, knows
the thing that he believes: Against the Popish implicit faith, and what
Knowledge the knowledge of Faith is. SERMON. CXXXI. Of the unspeakable love of
God to Believers, showing wherein Gods love to Christ and Believers is alike,
and wherein it differs. SERMON. CXXXII. Shows of what high concernment it is to
the men of the world, to know how greatly Believers (whom they hate and
persecute) are beloved of God. SERMON. CXXXIII. JOHN 17.24. Father I will that
they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold
my glory which thou have given me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of
the world.Of the Connection between Grace and Glory, and that Glory even to the
most Godly, is the free gift of God. SERMON. CXXXIV. Of immediate Enjoyment of,
and Communion with Christ in Heaven, as the Complement of man's Happiness. SERMON.
CXXXV. Of an humbled Christians improving, in his prayers, the sweet Apellation
of Father. SERMON. CXXXVI. Of the state of Glory, showing what it is to behold
Christ's Glory in Heaven. SERMON. CXXXVII. How Christ, as Mediator, had his Glory
given him, although as God he could not properly have it given him, except by
way of Manifestation: Against the Socinians. SERMON. CXXXVIII. Of Gods love to
Christ as Mediator, and in him to all Believers from all Eternity. SERMON.
CXXXIX. JOHN 17.25. O righteous Father, the world has not known thee, but I
have known thee, and these have known that thou have sent me.Of the
Righteousness of God (as Judge) in his Administrations to Devils and Wicked
men: and (as a Father) unto his own people. SERMON. CXL. That every unregenerate
man, whether in or out of the Church, is destitute of the true saving Knowledge
of God. SERMON. CXLI. Christ is the great Teacher of his Church. SERMON. CXLII.
Setting forth the singular Christian cleaving to God, though the multitude go
another way, and how his Godliness in that case endears him to God. SERMON.
CXLIII. JOHN 17.26. And I have declared unto them thy Name, and will declare
it, that the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in
them.Of Christ's teaching Believers: Showing what great need the most
illuminated Christians have still to be taught. SERMON. CXLIV. Of the powerful
sense and feeling of the Love of God; How it is attained, and what a great
advantage it is to him that has it, both in reference to Duty and Comfort.
SERMON. CXLV. Directions how to obtain, and always to preserve the Knowledge and
Assurance of Gods Love in our Hearts.
IF any thing in the Contents of this Book appear incongruous either to the
Author or his Work, let it be hereby known, that not the Author, but a Friend
of his gathered them as well as he could.

T. U.

CXLVI SERMONS Upon the whole Seventeenth Chapter of the Gospel by St JOHN.
SERMON I. The Necessity of adding Prayer to Preaching for its good effect:
Showing also what kind of cause the Word is of Conversion; And what are the
requisites of Heavenly and Spiritual Prayer.
JOHN 17.1. These words spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to Heaven, and said,
etc.
MY Purpose is (God assisting) to go through this Chapter, being the Prayer of
Christ immediately before his Passion: If the words of a dying man are much to
be regarded, how much more of a dying Christ? And words put up in a Prayer way,
which came from the most serious and heavenly affection within; Christ's love
was sincere and natural; Now as in natural motions the nearer the body comes
to the center, the swifter the motion is, Thus Christ's Love though great
always, yet the expressions of it were overflowing most at last; His best wine
was at last: And certainly if it be lawful to prefer Scripture before
Scripture, we may say, Though all be gold, yet this is a Pearl in the gold;
Though all be like the Heavens, yet this is like the Sun and Stars: Oh that
both my heart and your hearts were purified with a coal of fire from the Altar
for this Subject; Not only parts but great grace is required both to preach
and hear this Subject: But let us enter into this Land of Canaan.

The Apostle John of all the Evangelists is compared to an Eagle, because he
treats of the highest and most sublime matter; For as it is commonly
received, He outliving all the other Apostles, there were damnable Heretics
risen up that denied Christ to be God, at the Churches entreaty therefore he
wrote this Book, mainly asserting Christ's Godhead, and handling those things
especially which the other Evangelists had left out, especially insisting upon
those excellent discourses and dialogues Christ had with the Pharisees; As also
those divine Instructions and consolations he gave his Disciples at his
departure from them, of which the other Evangelists record nothing at all: Now
when our Savior had been large in instructing and confirming them, he bends
himself to earnest prayer for them, that what he had said might take place in
their hearts, so that in the Chapter you may take notice of, 1. The
Introduction to the matter, and 2. The Matter it self.


The matter is Christ's earnest prayer, and that for a threefold Object, 1.
Himself. 2. His Apostles. 3. All others who in time should believe in him.


For the Introduction, there we have 1. The order of Christ's Prayer, and 2. the
description of his gesture.

The Order is, These words spoke Jesus, that is, after Christ had finished
those admirable and comfortable Instructions, then he betakes himself to
prayer, From whence observe,

To all Instructions and Consolations Prayer is necessary for their good effect.
That to all Instructions and Consolations Prayer is necessary for their good
effect. Christ himself does not think it enough to plant, but he prays there
may be a watering from above; Thus all Ministers and all hearers are to take
Christ's way; Even as at other times we read that Christ spent the day in
Preaching, and the night in Praying; For if the Apostle 1 Timothy 3.5. say of
every creature for nourishment, it is sanctified by Prayer, when yet the
creatures have in themselves a natural strength to nourish, how much more is
this to be seen in the means of grace, which work not by inherent but
instituted efficacy altogether? If therefore we would have our preaching and
your hearing do any good, be powerful to an heavenly alteration and change,
then look up with your eyes to heaven; It Is from God that this must do me good,
It Is from God that this must teach my heart; In vain is a Teacher without if
there be not also a Teacher within, 1 Cor. 3. You see the Apostle there taking
believers off from all Ministers and Instruments, and to rest on Jesus Christ;
They are necessary but as Ministers by whom we do believe, not as authors of
our faith.

Reasons.
Let us consider, Why Prayer is thus necessary in the use of all other means, And

I. On Gods part.
First, From God in these respects.

1. God is the sole fountain and author of all grace.
1. He is the sole author and fountain of all grace; It Is not the gifts or parts
of Men and Angels that remove the stone of the heart, that can make the
withered dry bones to live again, unless the Spirit of God breathe upon us,
Jam. 1. Every good and perfect gift is said to come from above, That as the
natural Philosophers say, The Sun and Stars are the cause of all the life and
perfection which is in these things below, insomuch that without them all
things would be destroyed; This is much more true in heavenly and supernatural
effects, therefore he is called the God of all grace, and the God of all
consolations, 2 Cor. 1.3. There is no godliness, no comfort can stream in the
heart, but from this Fountain; we lie like so many lumps of earth, like so many
noisome Lazarusses in the grave, till God bid us Come forth; So then to have
any doctrine or truth enter into thy heart, to have the Ministry effectual and
powerful to thee, is of greater consequence then thou art aware of. There must
be much struggling and striving with God ere thou can behold him in his glory
in the Ordinances; Thou must be Jacob ere thou can be Israel, as an Ancient
said; Wonder not, if you see men living in the same lusts, and roving in their
former excess of riot, though the clouds drop upon them daily, yet they are a
barren wilderness; Alas, all the rain in the world would not make the Earth
spring forth and increase, had not God at first commanded the earth to do so,
and certainly if God can by his Word make the dull, dead earth so glorious,
that Solomon is in his greatest state not like the glory thereof, how much
rather can he make a heavy, dull, earthly, carnal people, glorious and
admirable in variety of graces, he can make them a Paradise who were a parched
heath; Prayer therefore is necessary because God only has the command over
all Ordinances to bless as he pleases.

2. On Gods part we are therefore to pray, 2. That all the praise may redound
to him.
that so all the glory and praise in every thing may redound to him, so 1 Cor.
1. that he who glories may glory in God only; Hence it is that as in the Old
Testament we read of many good women, and they were most of them barren, to
humble them, and that they might see it was not their goodness but Gods glory
and power to give them children; So it is here, God many times causes not the
best and choicest Ministers, to be fruitful in conversion of others, to be
able to say, Behold I and the Children which thou have given me, that hereby
all the glory may be attributed to God only.

3. Therefore after all doctrinall Instructions is Prayer to be used, 3.
Because God in anger many times does blast the Word to men for their sins.
because God in anger many times for men's sins does blast the Word to them,
does not give them a tender and an understanding heart; Oh then how much is he
to be sought to that has the key of all men's hearts, that opens and none can
shut that shuts and none can open, Rev. 3.7. Observe that expression, it
denotes Gods absolute Sovereignty, that all the devils in hell, and all the
wicked Instruments in the world are not able to hinder the good effect that God
has appointed such a Sermon, or such a Ministry to produce; What then, though
we sow all the day long, though we exhort, entreat and beseech, yet if God be
angry with thee, and will let thee alone in thy sins, thou shall die and be
damned in thy obstinacy and unbelief: Though Solomon with all his wisdom were
here to persuade thee, thou would be wilful in thy iniquities; The seeing
eye, and the hearing ear are both said to be the gift of God, Pro. 20.12. and
what a terrible expression is that to the Israelites, where after all the
miracles and wonderful works that God had done before them, it is said, God had
not given them an heart to understand till that day, Deuteronomy. 19.4. and famous is
that place Isa. 6. thrice repeated in the New Testament, of blinding their
eyes, and hardening their hearts, lest they should understand and be converted;
Who then is there but must necessarily conclude, that God is earnestly to be
prayed unto, lest he be left to a spirit of slumber and giddiness, lest God
swear in his wrath, that no preaching shall ever do thee good? How did Paul
rejoice to be at Ephesus, because an effectual and large door was opened to
him, 1 Cor. 16 9 It was opened by God, the Ministers themselves, II. From the
nature of Preaching, and what kind of cause the Word is of conversion.
nor the people, had not ability to do it; Thus on Gods part we have cause to
pray.

Secondly, If we consider the nature of all Preaching, and what kind of cause
the Word is of conversion, that will also compel to Prayer. It Is disputed
among Divines what kind of causality the Preaching of the Word has in
regenerating of men. I shall not now lanch into that deep Ocean, but two ways
are wholly to be denied.

1. The Word converts not necessarily.
1. The Preaching of the Word does not convert necessarily, as the Fire does
necessarily burn, the Sun does necessarily shine; No, for then wheresoever the
Word is preached, all their eyes would be opened, all their hearts softened
that hear it, but experience does woefully confute this; We see Christ who
preached as one having authority, and no man ever spoke like him, yet he threw
in his Net and catched few fish, yea, we do not read of so many converted by
his Ministry as by some of the Apostles.

2. Nor as a natural cause.
2. As it does not work necessarily, so neither as a natural cause, that has
inward power to produce its effects; As the fire has an inherent strength to
burn, the Earth an inherent power to bring forth fruit, or as a two edged Sword
pierces: For though the Word be compared to it, yet

3. Its efficacy is only by Gods Institution according to his command and good
pleasure.
3. This efficacy is only by Institution, according to the command and good
pleasure of God: Of it self it works no more then Exhortations to a dead man,
but when clothed with divine authority, then it beats down every thing that
opposes it self; If then we are bound to pray to God that he would make
natural causes, though with so much inherent pronenesse, to cause their
effects, as that our bread may nourish us, our clothes may warm us, how much
rather when there is no such natural efficiency; If man lives not by bread
alone, but by every word proceeding out of Gods mouth, much less is man
converted, enlightened, or regenerated by Preaching of the Word only, without
the power of God manifested from heaven; Yet oh the security, the sencelesnesse
of most people herein, They do not earnestly contend in prayer with God before
they come hither; What earnest wrastlings and strivings have thou had with God
to day, that thy soul might be put into an heavenly travel, and Christ be
formed in thee? This is the true reason why you hear your selves into
damnation, and we preach you into greater and greater spiritual judgments
daily, because few are diligent in praying for a blessing upon that which shall
be delivered to them.

III. Because of man's inability to what is good.
In the third place, After doctrinal Instruction there is great need of prayer
to God, because of the utter insufficiency and inability that is in every man
to what is good: Such is the contrariety and enmity in every man's heart against
Truth preached, that we had need pray and pray again that God would open our
eyes, and soften our hearts; The Scripture in several places does describe
man's Impotency, and his utter averseness to what is holy; He is a Tiger, a
Lion, a wild Bear, he is a mere briar and bramble; There cannot be any good
wrought in him, till God make dead men to rise out of their sins; We do not
hear Sermons as the Heathens did their moral Orations, for they had some
imbred strength to do those things that were civilly good, but when we have to
do with supernatural things, there all must be planted in us: There is nothing
in us to love or embrace it, yea, whatsoever we are, think, or will, it all
rises up in rebellion against God; and certainly if the godly themselves,
though endowed already with an heavenly life do yet earnestly pray that God
would open their eyes, Psa. 119. That he would quicken them, and make them to
grow up in an higher stature, how much more do men destitute of Gods Spirit
need this help, yea, we may take notice, Ephesians. 6.18. that when the child of God
is fully completed with the whole Armor of God, he has his helmet, his
shield, his brestplate upon him, yet he must not trust to this, but after all
this he is to pray always with all prayer and supplication; So that you see in
all holy exercises, we are to be as the little child who leans only upon his
Father, we are like the Fowl, when we have drunk down a little, presently to
lift up our heads to heaven, that it may work on us.

Use of Instruction, From this order of Christ's, learn we in Preaching, Use.
and you in hearing what we ought to do, know it must be Prayer that will
sanctify every Sermon; According as thou have laid up Prayer beforehand, so do
thou expect to speed; What a woeful thing will it be if God make this Heaven
brass and iron, these helps of salvation furtherances to damnation, and all
because thou do not carefully seek to him. Can thou pray in other things
and not here? Is not every Sermon of eternal consequence? Is not heaven or
hell delivered at this time, why then are we such stupid blocks as not to lay
fast hold on God, and say, I will not let thee go till thou give me a
blessing; It Is taken up as a sad Question, Why in these latter days the Word
preached makes no more wonderful works? At first Propagation of the Gospel, so
many fish were caught in the Net, that it was ready to break; And at the first
Reformation out of Popery, the Kingdom of God suffered violence, but now he
that is profane is profane still, the blind are blind still, the proud
proud still: What is the matter? Is not the Word of God as powerful as ever?
Is not the Lords arm as strong as ever? Yes, but the zeal of people is grown
cold; There are not such fervent prayers, such high esteems of the means of
grace; Men do not besiege Heaven, giving God no rest day or night till he come
with salvation into their souls, and truly the Spirit of prayer is a sure
forerunner of spiritual mercies to be bestowed, Optat dare qui mandat orare,
when God will bless the Word and Ministry to thee, he will stir up thy
appetite, make thee hungry and thirsty, fill thee with daily pantings after his
grace. And thus much of the order.

I proceed to the gesture used in prayer, He lifted up his eyes to heaven: In
the Scripture we read of several gestures in prayer, one of the Publican
clean contrary, He cast his eyes upon the earth, and that did arise from the
great and real sense he had of his unworthiness, and of the multitude of sins
that were upon him, but yet that which is most commendable and indeed most
natural, is to lift up the eyes to Heaven, the place of Gods special presence,
though he be also every where, for the eye in this case should be the
demonstration of the heart, Cor in oculis, that if it were possible we would
both in soul and body, while praying, be lifted up into heaven; Now how our
Savior, who was God as well as man, could pray, and what kind of Prayer this
was, will hereafter be cleared. From this gesture Observe,

That all our Prayers should come from a spiritual and heavenly heart.

It Is the very definition of prayer, that it is Elevatio mentis ad Deum, Doct.
That all our prayers should come from a spiritual and heavenly heart.
The lifting up of the mind, and of the whole soul to God; To pray is a far
more difficult and noble exercise then most are aware of; It Is not the running
over a few words like a Parrot, but the soul is then to be on the Mount of
Transfiguration: There must be many things meeting together ere thy prayer be
an heavenly Prayer: It Is good to set this home, for prayer is the universal
Instrument of all thy good, if that be blunted or unprofitable, all is marred;
If a poor man that lives by his handy labor has marred his tools that he
cannot work by them, how shall he subsist? Prayer is the Key to open heaven, if
that be empty and unprofitable, how can thou be replenished? You ask, and
pray, and have not; Jam. 4.2. No sins are removed, no spiritual mercies are
bestowed on thee, and all because thy prayer is not heavenly; The requisites to
spiritual prayer.
Now these things make an heavenly Prayer.

1. It Is necessary the Spirit of God do enable and move the soul to this duty,
Romans 8. 1. The Spirits enabling and moving the soul to this duty.
It is the Spirit of God that helps against our infirmities, and enableth us
with groans unutterable. The heart is but as so much dull earth, till the
Spirit of God inflame thee; Thy prayer is a body without a soul, if there be
words but not Gods Spirit in the heart; But oh what shall we then think of most
men's prayers that have nothing but custom and formality in them: No wonder if
these be birds without wings, Messengers without feet, good for nothing at all;
Thou say thy prayers, and thou have thy prayers, but oh consider the Spirit
of God must move upon thy heart, else thou art only a worm crawling on the
ground.

2. An heavenly heart.
2. An heavenly Prayer must have an heavenly heart, that which pants after and
delights in heavenly things, but Ps. 4.6. Many say, Who will show us any good?
Every one can pray for earthly and temporal good things, for health, strength,
peace, and outward plenty, but few with David, Lift thou up the light of thy
countenance. In the Lords Prayer we are first to pray for those spiritual
things that relate to Gods glory, before we are to ask for our temporal
comforts; yea, while we pray for temporal mercies we are to do it in a
heavenly manner, for this end, that we may be more instrumental to Gods glory,
and be brought nearer to him; Difficile est erare, quia difficile est
desiderare, said Aquinas. It is a very hard thing to desire heavenly things,
and therefore as hard to pray for them; how happy then is it when the matter
prayed for and the frame of the heart are both heavenly; Now like Christ he is
gone up to the Mount, and prays alone, he is above all earthly things, alone
with God himself.

3. When the heart and affections are purified and made fit for the enjoyment
of God.
3. That Prayer is heavenly when the heart and affections are purified and
sanctified fit for the enjoyment of God: In prayer we have an immediate
approach unto and fellowship with God; There cannot be greater honor
vouchsafed unto a creature then to be admitted to pray to him, but who is
sufficient for this duty? The Heathens did often press this, that God was to
be worshipped prae mente, but the Apostle more divinely, 1 Timothy 2.8. Lifting up
holy or pure hands, Mat. 6. Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see
God; A sore eye with corrupt humors is not fit to look on a bright object, and
truly in all our prayers we should think nothing so comely as to have heavenly
hearts for heavenly work; If the godly man's conversation even in buying,
selling, and all other lawful emploiments, is to be heavenly, much more in
prayer, then there should be Sabbatum mentis the rest of the Soul, there should
be no distractions, no debasings of it by earthly affections, we should have a
garden readily dressed for the Spouse to walk in; If Christ's body was to be in
a Sepulcher where none ever lay btfore, how much rather will whole Christ abide
in a clean heart; The devil would not come into his Lodgings but because they
were swept and ready garnished for him, how much rather will Christ expect that
the soul should be in an holy and heavenly manner fitted for to enjoy him.

4. Heavenly prayer moves the heart to more love and delight in heavenly
things.
4. An heavenly Prayer is, When it stirs and moves the heart to more love
and delight in heavenly things; Prayer is not to be only heavenly in its nature
but in its effects; By praying holily we are made more holy; It Is like exercise
to the body, which makes it more strong and active; It Is the rich Ship that
brings in glorious returns from God: Heavenly Prayer leaves an heavenly frame,
it keeps a soul in longings after God; As Moses who had been in Gods presence
his face did shine with great luster. Thus the soul that is heavenly in Prayer
to God, leaves an excellent and spiritual luster upon all his actions, his
conferences, his conversation speaks the mighty glory of this prayer; oh what
godly man may not fall down with shame and confusion to think how far short he
comes of this heavenly prayer.

Use.
Use of Instruction in two things, 1. How hard it is to pray indeed; You may
say of the dull Formalist that has bare words and no heart, he prays but it
is as unprofitable as a body without life; Oh that the God of grace would work
this in you, that he would pour the Spirit of prayer and supplication upon you;
I know nothing wherein people are more to be instructed and rectified then in
this particular; They have good prayers, and they say good prayers as they
speak, but understand nothing at all about an heavenly prayer.

2. Why it is that after many public and private prayers thousands of people
live in the same wickedness they did. Who would not think their sins would
make them give over praying, or praying their sins, how can this fire and Ice
stand together? The reason is, they are not heavenly prayers, neither private
or family prayers do raise thee up, like Elijahs fiery Chariot: You ask and
receive not because you ask amiss; He does not say you ask mala but male, you
do not pray for unlawful things, only you pray not in a right manner; Oh then
say, the decay of all my godliness, all my comforts arise from my decay in
prayer, Pray heavenly and all will be heavenly; and on the other side, mere
dead and customary prayer leaves a man in a destitute estate, he may pray in
that manner all his life, and yet receive nothing at Gods hand; Think and
meditate of this more, say, the beginning of all my spiritual consumption is
in my lean empty prayers,

SERMON II. The transcendent Excellency and Efficacy of Christ's Prayer (in
respect of the matter and nature thereof, as being Mediatory, his Person and
Relation, etc.) held forth as a ground of unspeakable comfort to Believers.
JOH. 17.1. These words spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to heaven, and said,
Father.
THE Introduction has already been dispatched, which contained the Order and
Method of Christ's Prayer, as also his gesture; We now come to the prayer it
self, he said, Father, etc.

To open this Consider, That Prayer is of two sorts,

Either 1. Mental, which is only in the soul and spirit, for God being a
Spirit and omniscient, knows all the thoughts and desires of the heart; Thus
Angels and the spirits of just men perfected in heaven do pray, The souls under
the Altar cried for an holy avenging on their enemies, Rev. 6.9.

Or else there is 2. a vocal Prayer, when our desires are manifested by
outward signs of words, and thus Christ's prayer here is a vocal prayer,
neither may such kind of praying be thought needless, Why we should pray with
the tongue.
for we do not use words as if God needed these signs, in which sense Eliah
derided Baals Priests, bidding them cry aloud, it may be Baal was asleep, or in
a journey, 1 King. 8.27. but hereby to excite and stir up our affections, for
the soul and body do mutually help each other, and partly because we are to
glorify God with our body, and with our soul, and lastly what is strongly in
the heart cannot but empty it self in words: Hence are those expressions, I
cried unto the Lord with a loud voice, so that a vocal prayer is commanded as
well as a mental, only in that we must remember there ought to be a threefold
attention, first unto God the object unto whom we pray that our thoughts be not
distracted. 2. In vocal prayer there must be a threefold attention.
To the matter that it be lawful and according to Gods will. 3. To the words,
that they be sober, grave and decent in so religious a duty. And thus much from
that expression, Christ said, Father.

How Christ being God could pray.
In the next place let us consider, how Christ could pray, for being God it
seems prayer is as incompatible to him as to God; The answer is in respect of
his divine nature, so he could not pray, but in his humane nature and as he was
in the state of humiliation, so he did not only pray, but he prayed wirh
agonies and strong cries, as the Apostle says, Heb. 5.7. for in this
consideration he was capable of many mercies which God did bestow upon him, and
also upon all the Elect, for he prayed for them also, yea, he did not only pray
in the state of humiliation, but in his glorified estate; Now whilst he is
exalted on his Throne, he makes intercession for us, Heb. 7.15. 1 John 2.1.
Though this Intercession in Heaven is not in that humble way of supplication,
as while he was in the flesh, but a presenting of his sufferings and obedience
to the Father, with an earnest will that all his Elect should partake the
benefits thereof; But of this Point, how Christ could be said to pray, more in
its due time. This prayer Christ powered forth, so far as it relates to the
Church of God and all believers, is part of his Priestly office, for the Priest
was to do two things, first to pray, then to offer a sacrifice; Now Christ in
this Chapter he prays and afterward offers up himself an holy and
unspotted sacrifice for the sins of his people, and as the High Priest was to
carry the names of the twelve Tribes in his breast to present them to God, so
does Christ here, he presents all his children unto God the Father by this
prayer; There is no godly man so mean, so weak, so inconsiderable but he is
commended unto the Father, and may justly expect the fruit of this prayer.

Doct. That all the godly are under the benefit of Christ's Mediatory prayer.
That all the Children of God are under the fruit and benefit of Christ's
Mediatory prayer: Take up these two forementioned places, 1 John 2.1. If any
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father; Here is supposed that upon every
sin we commit, there is an indictment, an impleading of us, an accusing of us
unto God; Thou think nothing of thy sins when committed, they are
presently out of thy mind, but oh the charge and Indictment that is against
thee before God, only the godly they have Christ an Advocate, he dosh
constantly plead for them, he takes their parts and he is sure to prevail;
What treasures of comfort are here for the godly, when thou art not thinking or
minding thy own self, Christ in heaven is pleading for thee; It Is good to have
this Friend in the Court of heaven, so Heb. 7.25. He everliveth to make
intercession for them; he ever-liveth, and this he attends unto, When thou art
sleeping and can not pray for thy self, he makes Intercession for thee; So
that Christ though exalted and made glorious in heaven, has not laid aside his
love and earnest affections for thy good; But as Joseph when lifted up in
Pharaohs Court sent for his Father and Brethren to give them the good things of
Egypt; Thus it is here, Christ said, he went to his Father to provide mansion
places in heaven for them, Joh. 14.2. Oh the unspeakable dignity and happiness
to be under Christ's Intercession; If we do so much esteem the prayer of a godly
man on earth, and the effectual prayer of one righteous man prevails much.
The excelltncy of prayer appearing in that it only is compared to Frankincense,
Heb. 5. and cap. 6. signifying as this does recreate and refresh man, so does a
true right prayer please God;) what then will the prayer of Christ himself do?
If a Job, If a Daniel, If a Moses could do so much in prayer, when yet their
prayer needed Christ's prayer for acceptance and impetration, how prevalent
must Christ's prayer be for his believers?

To open this Doctrine, Consider

First, The matter of Christ's Prayer for his Children, and that is,

1. For the accomplishing of all grace here and glory hereafter; I. The matter
of Christ's prayer for his Children.
There is no heavenly or spiritual mercy but Christ has prayed for it; Thou
do not only pray for it, (alas what are thy prayers?) but Christ has prayed
for it, thy conversion and sanctification is prayed for; There is no man to be
converted by the Word but Christ prayed for that man's conversion, Joh. 17.20.
1. All grace.
It was said of Austin, because his Mother Monica prayed so earnestly about
him, that it was impossible a child of so many prayers should perish, but that
is not necessary, though all the men in the world should pray for such a man's
conversion, it might not be, only we may say, It Is impossible a child of
Christ's prayers and tears should perish.

Again, 2. Pardon and forgiveness of sin, and that as often as it is committed
is the matter of his prayer: We have an Advocate, as you heard. Alas, 2. Pardon
of sin.
upon the committing of any sin, if there were no more strength to do them
away then is in the prayers and tears of the godly, if all the guilt lay upon
them to discharge, how insupportable would it be? but there is no sin at any
time committed by thee, if repented of and forgiven, but Christ has prayed
that it may be forgiven thee: so then though there be weakness, unbelief, and
dullness in thy prayers, yet there was no fault to be found ^n Christ's
prayers; In all thy agonies, desertions and temptations, plead the
Intercession of Christ;

3. Further, Another main spiritual mercy prayed for, is preservation from
sin, v. 15. I pray not thou should take them out of the world, 3.
but that thou should keep them from the evil; Oh admirable and necessary
prayer; we are in the world as in an infected Hospital, as in a fiery furnace:
Now to be here and not diseased, not to be burned therein, is the wonderful
expression of Gods power and goodness, for this River to run into the Sea, and
not to partake of the salt taste thereof is beyond expression, Christ has not
prayed that we should have no afflictions or troubles in the world, but that we
should be kept from the evil of them; He did not pray for Peter that he should
not have woeful and sad temptations, but that his faith might not fail in the
midst of them; O what a comfortable cordial may it be in times of great
commotions and violent temptations! how do the godly fear lest their strength
should fail them, lest one time or other they should yield to sin, and be
overwhelmed? Now in the midst of all these fears Christ has prayed for thee as
well as for Peter, that thy faith may not fail: Insomuch that we may say,
Christ's prayer for believers is all their hope and foundation; In some sad
exigences how careful are we to have the prayers of all Gods people, to be
remembered in such and such a Congregation, but if all the Churches in the world
should pray for a man, it would not amount to so much as Christ's prayer;
therefore let the godly comfort one another with these things.

Lastly, He has prayed for their glorification; Thus he prayed, 4.
Glorification.
that they may be one even as he and the father are one, and that they be where
he is, viz. that they may enjoy that glory which Christ had purchased for them;
Therefore he is called the Resurrection, Job. 11.25. because he will raise up
such at the last day: The body though dead and consumed to ashes shall not
always be in the grave, neither shall the soul have such rags and deformities
upon it continually, but shall be clothed with glorious robes; Thus you see
the chief and main matter of Christ's prayer, not so much earthly and temporal
things, as heavenly: for although Christ did comfort his Disciples even in
earthly straits, Mat. 6.25. that they had a Father in Heaven, and if he did
provide for all the creatures in the world, they might much rather be persuaded
of his care to them, and Paul argued Romans 8. he gave his only Son for them, how
shall he not give all things else? Yet the great things that Christ before his
sufferings thought fit to commend unto God, were spiritual and heavenly
benefits. And that is the first consideration, The matter of Christ's Prayer.

II. The nature of his prayer by way of Mediation.
Secondly, Take notice of the nature of this Prayer, it is by way of Mediation;
It Is a Mediatory Prayer, and so differs from all the prayers of other men: As
they are bare mere men, so their prayers are bare mere prayers; There is no
merit, no mediation in thee, but Christ's prayer is of a far more transcendent
nature, Even as the blood of the Martyrs came far short of Christ's; Their
blood was not expiatory, it was not by way of a Sacrifice for sins, whereas
Christ's was; Thus there is a vast difference between prayers and prayers, God
may regard one man's prayer more then another, it may be more effectual, as in
that supposition, though Daniel and Job stood and prayed, they should not be
heard; Job, you know was commanded to pray for his Friends, and his prayer was
accepted of more then theirs, and Daniel was said to be a man greatly beloved,
because his prayers were so readily heard; Likewise the prayer of many, or a
Church, is more prevalent then the prayer of one single person; So a Prayer
from one in office as a Minister, is more then of one in a private condition:
but yet the prayer of Christ as in the office of a Mediator does far
surmount all. So then in Christ's prayer we are especially to look to the
Mediatory power, to the impetratory efficacy of it; It Is not a mere
supplication as ours are, but a powerful obtaining of what is desired; His
prayer can be no more refused then his blood, they both are in the same nature,
they go along under the same respect, his blood may as well be without
advantage as his prayer; The Highpriests prayer for the people was of greater
concernment for the people then their own prayers; I tell thee all thy own
prayers are not of that consequence to thee as Christ's prayer is, all Mediatory
and impetratory efficacy is from that.

III. The dignity of the Person praying.
Thirdly, Consider the dignity of the Person who did pray for believers, and
thereby comes an infinite efficacy and worth to it. Christ who prayed for us
being God and man, in regard of his divine nature, there comes an infinite
worth upon his prayer, his prayer is like himself, and from this account it is,
that it is meritorious with God, that it is just with God to grant him his
Requests; his Supplications are put up in his own name, he needs no
Mediator, there is none to make way for his acceptance with God, so that this
Meditation affords unspeakable consolation, though all thy prayers and duties
be nothing worth, yet Christ's is of infinite value: The dignity and merit
whereby any good comes to us, is not for our prayers but for Christ's;
Certainly the people of God do not live so cheerfully upon this consideration
as they ought; They are careful to pour out their own prayers, but not by faith
to rest on Christ's; What need thou fear who can bring prayers of infinite
merit? The Lord Christ has prayed that I might have this mercy; he has prayed
that this grace should be vouchsafed unto me; What fault can be found with
Christ? What blame or imperfection is to be seen or found in him? how can
Christ be denied in justice? It is his right to have his Requests answered.

IV. His relation to God the Father.
Fourthly, Consider the respect and relation Christ stands in toward God the
Father, And then you will still say, his prayer is of great concernment to
(...), Now his relation is, the only Son of God, and dearly beloved by him,
This is my well-beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased, Mat. 3.17. So that his
prayers are heard unquestionably upon a twofold ground, the one of justice
because infinite in worth, the other of love because the only begotten Son;
This Heb. 5.7. He is said, while he prayed, to be heard in what he feared, and
Joh. 11.12. Christ thanks the Father that he heard him always, and often does
he profess that the Father loves him the Son, and that the Father and the
Son are one. This also is very comfortable to meditate upon, Thou have the
prayer of him who is the only begotten of the Father, whom the Father hears
always, and to whom he denies nothing, if we are able to say, Lord, this is
not my prayer only, This is not my desire only, but its the request of Christ
so beloved of thee, then thou may justly believe thou shall be accepted of; O
Lord, though I have no loveliness, no comeliness, yet Christ has; Some have
doubted whether Christ was heard in every thing he prayed for, Whether Christ
was heard in every thing he prayed for, or no.
and they instance in his prayer, that the cup might pass from him, but that
was only conditional* If it be thy will, and therefore he added, Not my will
but thine be done; That which he absolutely prayed for, was Gods support and
preservation of him, as also the raising him out of the grave. That which
seems to have gteat difficulty is his prayer, Luke 23.34. Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do, but of the efficacy of this we need not
doubt of, because the Pharisees and others they sinned against their knowledge
and conscience, and for such Christ prayed not, but others that knew not what
they did, many of them were converted afterward, and did believe in him, whom
they had pierced, so that we need not doubt of speeding, when we bring Christ
with us. Hence Joh. 16.24. Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my Name, he
will give it you; If we were to draw nigh in our Name, If we did appear in our
own Name, we might justly look for anger in stead of mercy, but God is not
angry with Christ, he does not frown upon Christ.

Fifthly, V. Christ's prayer had all the qualifications requisite to acceptance.
The prayer of Christ had all those internal qualifications that are requisite
to acceptance: For first, There was holy faith and confidence, the Preface is
Father, which is not a bare Title, but an expression from inward affection,
indeed Christ was not capable of justifying faith, he was too perfect a subject
to need such a grace, yet as the habit of faith does include no imperfection in
the subject, but a full dependence and affiance on God, so Christ did believe,
and in this sense he cried, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? My God,
My God, were acts of fiduciall dependence; As for repentance and sorrow for
sin, which is requisite in all our prayers, such also Christ was not capable
of, but then for love and zeal to God, for heavenly affections, etc. The Sea is
not fuller of water then his soul was of such enlargements; No distraction, no
deadness, no imperfection did cleave to his prayer, but as he himself was
without sin, so also was his prayer; Besides the extrinsecall dignity and
worth of Christ's prayer there was an inherent perfection and fulness of all
graces in him: Oh then though the godly labor and groan under manifold
weaknesses; Their prayers are so imperfect that they need to be prayed over
again, and confession is requisite for our imperfect confession, yet remember
the perfection of Christ's prayers, There was no spot, no blemish in this
Sacrifice of his lips. At the end of thy prayer, when thy heart smites thee
for thy roving thoughts, thy dullness, thy distractions, comfort thy self with
this, there was no such defect in Christ's prayer; Christ's prayer was like that
curious confection and ointment, which had so many precious ingredients in it.

Sixthly, Consider this Prayer of Christ's had that general nature in it, VI. A
condition or medium of good things. Why Prayer is needful notwithstanding Gods
knowledge and unchangeableness
which all our prayers have, to be a condition and medium to bring about the
good things we desire: For some have disputed about prayer, What use is there
of it, seeing God knows all things before we ask, and he is unchangeable, our
prayers cannot alter his purpose; To this it is answered, That our prayers are
not to acquaint God with that he knew not, or to change his will, only God who
has decreed to do such things, he has appointed prayer as a condition or
means for the accomplishment of them; Even as God has ordained the earth to
bring forth fruit, but it must be tilled and sown, and as mankind is to be
multiplied, but by marriage, so good things are appointed for the godly but by
prayer, Mat. 7.7. This is therefore called the golden chain reaching from earth
to heaven, Ascendit precatio, descendit miseratio; and for this end is both a
command of prayer and a gracious promise to it, so that he who prays not
presumes grossly, if he expect the fullfilling of any good thing to him; As it
is thus with prayer in the general so also with Christ's prayer, whatsoever
Christ was to purchase at Gods hand for his people, the same he was to pray
for, Psa. 2.8. Ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, And thus in this Chapter he prays for that glory which yet was
from the beginning appointed for him, so that Christ's Prayer was a special
means to bring about all those admirable mercies promised to his people.

VII. Christ's prayer sanctifies our prayers.
Seventhly, Take notice of this, that this Prayer of Christ sanctifies all our
Prayers; They become accepted of through him, He is the Altar upon which the
incense of the Churches prayers is offeted, Rev. 8.4. As our tears need washing
in his blood, so our prayers need Christ's prayer, he prayed that our prayers
may be received; There is not any one Prayer could ever ascend to heaven were
it not for Christ's Intercession; The Popish doctrine therefore is very
injurious to Christ, which inventeth other treasures besides the treasures of
Christ; They tell us of a treasure or bank of prayers, which may be applied to
this or that necessitous person; They tell us of other Mediators in heaven
besides Christ, Mediators not of expiation but intercession, whereas you see
it is Christ's expiation and intercession that go together to work our redemption.

But if Christ's prayer be thus all in all, what need we pray, are not our
prayers superfluous?

Answ. No, for they are not to that end which Christ's was, not for merit or
mediation; Even as though Christ suffered for our sins, yet we also are
afflicted, but not for that end, so our prayers are for other ends, to set up
God, to debase our selves, to quicken up our graces, to give us an holy
Communion and fellowship with him, to show our obedience to his command, who
does in so special a manner require this duty.

Use, Are the people of God under the benefit of Christ's prayer, then how happy
and blessed are they, what can be denied them? There is no fear of having their
requests granted, for God looks upon them and Christ as one mystical person,
as the head and members; Who is able to preach of this Subject? It is too
glorious, Christ is in heaven making Intercession for thee; Woe unto thee every
day, every hour, Were it not for this Advocate, woe to thy own prayers, though
never so laudable, were they not put up in Christ's Name; Oh how little do the
people of God run to this Fountain when their hearts are like a dry
wilderness; This is indeed the Key of heaven that opens it for thee and thy
duties, if not for my sake, yet for Christ's sake, Though I am unworthy yet
Christ is worthy to be heard; But oh the terrible estate of wicked men, I pray
not for the world, They have no benefit in this Mediation.

SERMON III. Shows how prevalent the Prayers are that are poured out to God
as a Father, And what disposition and frame of heart this compellation Father
may breed in every one that does fervently pray to God.
JOH. 17.1. These things spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to heaven, and said,
Father, etc.
THE next thing in order to be treated of is Christ's Prayer it self, and that
is first in reference to himself, and therein we may consider,

1. The matter of the Prayer, Glorify thy Son.

2. The Arguments to enforce this, for that is the best prayer which is most
argumentative; Many words without arguments is like a great body without nerves
or sinews. Now these arguments are several and strong.

1. From the Relation he stands in to God, he is a Son, and God is his Father,
Father, glorify thy Son.

2. From the seasonablenesse of it, Now is the time, Tho hour is come.

3. From the final cause, he desires not this glory for himself only, but he
would be glorified that he might glorify the Father. Every one of these
Arguments does deserve at least a Sermon to open the excellency of it, and

1. I shall begin with the relation expressed in that compellation Father; Now
it is true God is the Father of Christ in a far more transcendent way then he
is ours, for that is a true Rule, quod Christus natura, nos sumus gratia, That
which Christ has by nature we have by grace; Christ therefore is Son to the
Father, yet so that he is of the same nature with the Father, having all the
properties of the Godhead with him, but we are Sons only by grace and
adoption, and therefore cannot call God Father in that respect as Christ does,
yet because a Father to both, and that we may improve this Title for comfort
with him, our Savior does put these together in a most excellent manner, Joh.
10.17. I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God; Go and
tell my Brethren so: The Apostle admireth this, that he was not ashamed to call
them brethren, Heb. 2.11. and in this Prayer how wonderful are those
expressions, That they all may be one as thou Father art in me, and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us; Let not therefore the great distance between
us and Christ trouble us in this dear relation, for he is our Father as well as
Christ's, though not in the same manner. From this Argument further observe,

Doct. Those prayers successful that are put up to God as a Father.
That those Prayers are successful and are sure to speed which are poured out
to God as a Father. It Is this Title, this relation that gives life and
efficacy to our prayers, Dulce nomen Patris, said he, it works much both in the
Father to move his bowels and in the Son to enlarge his affections and hopes;
Although that Faith whereby Christ called God Father was not like that in us
which we call justifying, in respect of that act, for Christ did not need
justification for himself, because there was no sin found in him, yet as faith
in the general betokens a fiduciall dependence on God, and application of his
favor, so Christ did with faith call God Father: Thus at other times we see
Christ in his prayers using this compellation as the ground of his being heard,
and having all his requests granted him, Luke 23.34*46. Joh. 11.41. Joh. 12.27,
28. And that we may not think this Prerogative belongs only to him, our Savior
in that Directory of prayer which he has left, teaches us to come unto him as
unto a Father, and this is the faith we must pray in, else we are sure to be
sent away empty. Hence Christ Mat. 6. and Mat. 7, 11. lays all the ground of
confidence and hope to speed on this, because he is our Father, an heavenly
Father, far above all earthly Fathers; Nemo tam Pater, as one in another
case; I need not tell you that God is a Father, either by Creation, in which
sense Paul allows that of the Poet, We are his Offspring; for this it makes
not any thing to confidence in Prayer, for so the devils and wicked men had
their being from God; But 2. He is a Father by grace, by adoption, and
reconciliation through Christ; This is the relation that sweetens all, This is
that which makes us confident he cannot or will not deny any thing that is good
to us; When the Prodigal Son came with this Title in his mouth, Father, To
open this Consider,
I have sinned, the bowels of the Father immediately moved, and he runs to
meet him, Luke 15.18.

1. All by nature are in a state of enmity against God.
First, That every one by nature and through sin is in a state of enmity
against God; God is so far from being a Father to such, that he is a Judge
and an adversary to every wicked man, so that it is a very rare thing, and few
there are who may call God Father; Is God the Father of Drunkards, adulterers,
proud and profane persons? It Is blasphemy, and an high dishonor to God to
think so. No, the Scripture tells us of another Father to such, Ye are of
your Father the devil, Joh. 8.44. There are many may say, Our Father which art
in hell, not which art in heaven; This I would press upon you that you may not
blaspheme God by calling him Father, when you do the works of the devil; If
children only and not dogs must eat the meat on the Table, much more must they
only be taken into the Fathers bosom; The Scripture will inform you that none
may presume to take this excellent Title into his mouth, unless he show his
filial fear and obedience. Mal. 1.6. If I be a Father where is mine honor. 1
Pet. 1.15. If ye call on the Father, pass the time of your sojourning here in
fear; Hence it is resolved by Austin, that none but a just and righteous man
may pray the Lords Prayer, because God is not a Father to any but those that
walk holily; Oh that this might strike to the very heart of every ungodly man,
Thou hopest in thy prayers, and trustest in thy prayers, when yet thou have no
right to call God thy Father; He owneth no such enemies as thou art for his
Son.

2. The state of Sonship is purchased by Christ.
Secondly, This sweet relation of Sonship to God the Father is purchased at a
dear rate by Christ; He shed his precious blood that we might be put into so
happy a relation; We that were afar off are made near by him: Hence it is that
Christ is the Elder brother, the Heir, and we made coheirs with him, so that we
had nothing to do with God in any comfortable way, we could not have prayed to
him, but had been like the devil in hell, had not Christ purchased this sure
and comfortable condition for us; It costs the mother much ere she be mother of
a child; In sorrow she was to bring forth, but Christ was a man of greater
sorrow ere he could see his seed, and his soul be satisfied. Among Brethren
what envy is there apt to be, yea, what murders have been committed by one
brother upon another, that they might solely enjoy the dignity and great
estate. but how far was Christ from this, who though only beloved of the
Father, and heir to all glory, yet grudgeth not to take in others to a
copartnership, well then, This word Father, or to be able to call God Father
cost Christ dear, even more then to make a world, for there was but a word,
here were great sufferings.

Thirdly, To be able to call God Father is so great a matter that there needs
the Spirit of Adoption to move us thereunto, Gal. 4 6. 3. We cannot call God
Father but by the Spirit of Adoption.
He has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying Abba Father.
Although it be easy for a presumptuous self-justifying man to call God Father,
yet take the afflicted mourner for sin, who is sensible of the great
dishonor he puts upon God, it is the hardest thing in the world to think God is
a Father to him, because therefore it is so great a work, God sends his Spirit
into our hearts that enableth us to cry boldly, vehemently, and notwithstanding
all opposition, Abba, Father; Where then we would use this compellation with
power and life, with success and heavenly advantage, there the Spirit of God
must inflame the heart, there all our servile fears and tormenting doubts must
be removed; Now who but the Spirit of God can command these winds and waves to
be still. There are groans and cries, great commotions of spirit ere the soul
can be persuaded of Gods fatherly love.

These things premised, What frame of heart this compellation Father may breed
in every child of God.
let us consider in the next place what disposition and frame of heart this
compellation ( Father) may breed in every one that does fervently pray to God.

It cannot but raise up the heart to great confidence and hope to speed; Indeed
if we look to our selves, to our sins, there is nothing but matter of
despair, Who can think of himself, and not expect that answer, Depart, I know
you not; But then when we consider this gracious relation God puts upon
himself to be a Father, what humbled sinner may then be afraid; O Lord, thou
art not only a Lord, a mighty and great God, but a Father also, and upon this
Title I plead; Fathers use to lay up for children, if it were an earthly
Father, Mat. 7. when the child asks bread, he would not give him a stone,
and thou art an heavenly Father, how long then shall I ask for such
consolation, pray against such corruptions, and meet with the contrary, Is not
this to give a stone for bread? If then God be a Father, if thou may conclude
on this, then expect every thing else; Now this is a great sin in the
children of God, they do not improve this relation; They do not think with
themselves, behold, I am a Father, I am a Mother, will my bowels let me deny my
poor children (if afflicted) any thing that I can give them? why then shall I
have such low thoughts of God? He that gives the father bowels, shall not he
much more have bowels? If it be thus with a drop, shall it not be much more
with the Fountain.

will cause fervency and zeal in our Petitions; The more confidence to speed
the more earnestness, as on the other side, where there is no hope there is
fainting and languishing, he said, Qui timide rogat docet negare, we may say,
Qui tepide, It Is the fervent prayer of a righteous man that prevails much,
and confidence quickens up to fervency. As men that are pulling any weight, the
more they feel it coming, the more earnest they are in pulling. This divine
hope puts wings to the soul, adds legs to its journey; Indeed a bold
presumption that God will vouchsafe him the matter of our requests is careless
of prayer, because that looks for the end without the means, but an holy
confidence that God will give us the good things we want, but by earnest and
fervent prayer, that makes the godly soul more zealous and active, when we are
sure our labor is not in vain: As the Apostle encourages to sufferings, to
wait and endure patiently, because in due time they shall receive a recompense,
if they faint not, Gal. 6.9. Oh then be afraid of those cold and lukewarm
formal duties thou art so often in; These argue no faith, no hope in thee;
It Is a sign thou do not much matter or regard the issue of thy Prayers,
whether God grant them or not.

This Title in the lively improvement of it will cause a filial reverence and
humility, even as the child does his Father, as you heard; If I be a Father
where is my honor? The good ingenious child does not abuse his Fathers
kindness, does not contemn his favors, but consider the great distance that
is between him and his Father, that he is never able to satisfy his Father,
for Aristotle says; There cannot be any justice between a father and son,
seeing therefore he has all from him, he is in a reverentiall fear and honor
of his father; Thus it is with those who have the Spitit of Adoption, their
fear is accompanied with their confidence; Their boldness and hope does not
degenerate into security and contempt of God, and if at any time they grow
wanton under his mercies, then as God is a Father to provide for us, so he is a
Father to chasten, as the Scripture speaks often; Do not then give way to thy
corruptions, do not eat too much of this honey till thou surfeit, lest God give
Physic, lest he chasten thee and seem as if he were no Father, David upon
security and other neglects, into what sad darkness is he cast? He knows not
how to call God, Father, he thinks on God, and is troubled as he says, Ps.
77.5. God will deal with thee upon thy rebellion, as David with Absalom,
Command thee out of his sight, and this will work upon thee as it did with
Absalom, who desired to die rather then to be always under such displeasure;
and herein the people of God upon their sins have a greater wound and deeper
gash then the wicked have; It Is against a Father they have sinned, so merciful
and so gracious a Father, this paineth them at the very heart.

The Meditation of this Title will breed tranquillity and quietness of spirit,
free from all sinful cares and distrustful thoughts: I have a Father in heaven,
and it is not my care, my counsel, my labor, can provide for me, but his
goodness merely, Mat. 5.25, 26. Our Savior does there at large give heavenly
Physic to kill these worms, these moths of cares that are ready to eat into us
and devour us, and amongst other helps this is one, Your heavenly Father
knows what you have need of; As we see our little Children, then eat and
drink, and take no care for their raiment, for their food, but go to their
Parents, such a quiet and composed frame of soul would God have all his
Children have; If you call me Father, why do ye not commit all to my wisdom,
to my love; Can a child order his affairs better for himself then his Father;
Is it not well for the child that it is not his wisdom and care but his
Father that he must trust to, How quickly would he undo all? Thus may God our
heavenly Father say, Cast your care and burden upon me, how quickly would you
undo your selves, ruin your selves, if all were left to you, your happiness
lies in my wisdom and love to you; Oh what a cheerful quiet heart would the
due meditation of this cause in us! It Is my Father in heaven that does all
things, that governs the whole, that dispenses all things; It Is my Father in
heaven that gives life and motion to every thing, and therefore I need not be
afraid; Know then that all those gnawing worms of unbelief and fears upon thee,
whereby thou make thy self an hell to thy self, they come from want of this
consideration.

This Relation, if rightly considered, will put us upon holiness and an
earnest endeavor to resemble and to be like him; A good child loves to
imitate and conform to all those lovely perfections that are in his Father, his
endeavor is, that in him his Father may live, even while he is dead; Now the
Scripture sets forth Gods holiness as our Copy to write after, Be ye holy as I
am holy, and that ye may be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, Matthew.
5.48. and He that has this hope, viz. to be a Son of God, purifieth himself
even as God is pure; Oh then let those vile and leprous sinners stand aloof
off, They call God Father, where is thy Image or likeness of him upon thee;
Art thou pure as he is pure, holy as he is holy, Is thy will conformable to his
will; To love and delight in those things that God loves and commands; The
Scripture tells us the godly are born of God, that his Image is restored in
them, That they are partakers of the divine nature; Now let every one see upon
what grounds he calls God Father, Is it not a mere lie and mockery? Do thou
not delude thy own self? If God be thy Father, wherein art thou like him? Art
thou holy as he is? pure as he is? Certainly even in the godly this should
raise up their spirits to higher exercise of holiness; They should consider
who is their Father, It is for them to show better breeding, then to be proud,
passionate, earthly and carnal, They are to be as Ignatius was called (...)
Those that bear God about with them, you may see the resemblance of God in
their lives; So then this Title and relation does not only vouchsafe comfort
but engage to much duty; None should be so cheerful, and yet so holy and pure
as they are.

This Relation of a Father will put us upon zeal for his glory and honor, a
desire to exalt and set him up every where, an holy impatiency to have his Name
blasphemed and his commands broken: What child can endure to hear his Father
spoken against, to have his name defamed, You see in Christ himself, the zeal
of his Fathers house did eat him up, he could not endure to see the corruption
and defilement of his Fathers worship, and thus it is with the Children of God,
his honor is dear unto them; To see and hear the wickedness and profaneness
of others torments his righteous soul; This is against my Father, I have no
patience when you thus dishonor my Father; Oh this is an excellent sign, you
look upon God as your Father, when you are thus affected for his glory, for his
truth and worship; It Is a known story of that dumb Son, that never spoke
before, yet when he saw one going to kill his Father, cried out and forbad it;
Thou that feel no anger, or grief within thee when God is dishonored, do
thou doubt of thy childe-like disposition.

The Meditation of God as a Father may wonderfully support under all
afflictions. They are the corrections of a Father, not the punishments of a
Judge, and the Apostle argues the great reasonableness of bearing Gods
afflictions, seeing we endure the chastisement of our Fathers according to the
flesh, Heb. 12.9, 10. where the Apostle shows that a good child, though
chastened by his Father; gives reverence to him, why then should not we rather
obey God, who is the Father of spirits, and that from the end of God, he
afflicts for our profit, and we live by these chastisements; Hence it is the
devils great temptation to imbitter this cup of affliction as much as he can;
To let them think God is not their Father, and if he were a Father he would
never lay such a load upon them, and all this to stir up impatience and
discontent within them: Thus you see what mighty effects this consideration of
God as a Father should produce in us,

In the next place consider, Why this does so prevail with God. And

Because it is not a bare Title, Why the Title Father so much prevails with God.
but accompanied with the real love and bowels of a Father: God is not only
called so, but is indeed a Father, yea, a Father above all earthly Fathers,
yea, or mothers too, he takes more tenderness upon him then they can have,
Isa. 49.15. when Zion sadly complained The Lord had forsaken her, he tells her,
Though a woman should forget her sucking child, yet he would not; So then love
is infinitely in God, his kindness is like himself beyond all thoughts and
expressions, and if among men it be so unnatural for a Father not to love his
child, can we think God will not love his? He that has commanded us to love
our enemies, and to forgive them seventy times seven in a day, will not he
pardon his Children? Children are part of the Father, and therefore God
visits the sins of Fathers sometimes upon their Children, because they are
as one with the Father, and Christ prays that the godly and his Father may be
one.

It Is for the glory and honor of God to hear them when they pray; What
privileges and mercies children have tends to the honor of a Father; Does it
not disgrace a Father, when he is able, and yet lets his Children be almost
famished, and be contemned in filthy rags, Oh we say, he does not go like such
an ones Son, it is a disgrace to his Father, so it is here, should not the
people of God be holy, comfortable, heavenly, and accepted of, this would be as
if God did not own them.

Use.
Use of Instruction, Concerning the happy estate of the godly, and the contrary
of the wicked; That which is a comforting fire to one is a consuming fire to
the other; The godly have always the Scepter held out to them, They may go to
God as a Father and are sure to be heard either ad voluntatem or ad sanitatem;
They may say, O Lord, if I did come to thee as an angry Judge, if I did draw
nigh to thee as one provoked, as one whose sins made a division between me and
thee, then I might be sent comfortless away, but I come to thee as a Father, a
relation thou art not ashamed off, and which thou will fulfill, though as yet
the glory of God is not fully manifested, but as for the wicked what a
thunderbolt is this to them, God is not their Father; Though they may call him
so a thousand times over, yet he is not, he is thy enemy, thy adversary, what
good things thou have comes from him as the governor of the world, not as a
Father.

SERMON IV. Of Gods appointing an hour, a set time for the dispensing his
Mercies and Judgments, in reference to particular Persons, and his Church and
Churches Enemies.
JOH. 17.1. Father, the hour is come, glorify thy Son, etc.
THE next Argument in order that is in this full and pithy prayer of Christ, is
from the time and seasonablenesse of the mercy he prayed for, The hour is now
come, God is to help now or never; If this opportunity be neglected, all other
help will come too late; The word hour has several significations and
applications in the Scripture, sometimes it is taken properly for that measure
of time we call an hour; Thus we have the first, the second, and third hour;
The learned dispute about the distribution of a day into hours amongst the Jews
and the Romans, but I pass it. 2. Hour is used for a short but indefinite
time, Joh. 4. you did for a season (for an hour in the Greek) rejoice in his
light, 3. It Is used for those things that are to be done in that hour or time,
it does not only signify the mensura but the res mensurata, Mar. 14.35. Christ
prayed that hour may pass from him, viz. those afflictions and that bitter
suffering to be in such a time. 4. Which is a very frequent and the most common
use, it signifies any particular set time, that is, a fit occasion for the
doing or suffering any thing; The peculiar time God has appointed either for
doing or suffering by his people is called the hour, and concerning Christ we
read of these hours attributed to him; First, There was a peculiar time when
he was to begin his Miracles, he lived some years privately ere he manifested
himself, though when twelve years old he argued with the Doctors, but as the
Tradition is, it was about thirty years of his age ere he undertook a public
Ministry, and did miracles; For as for those Miracles in Popish Legends
attributed to him while a child, they are nothing but impudent lies: The first
Miracle he ever wrought was at Cana in Galilee, Joh. 2.4. where because his
Mother was overhasty for him, to do a Miracle he reproves her, saying, My
hour is not yet come; That time was not then come of manifesting himself the
Messiah, though it was presently after, for he did turn the water into wine
immediately. 2. Christ had an hour of suffering and passions, so that all the
endeavors to take away his life could not prevail till that time came, yea,
and Christ himself before his time came hid himself, and went from place to
place to avoid death; whereas when that hour was come, he willingly gave up
himself to be a Sacrifice. Joh. 7.30. They sought to take him, but no man laid
hands on him, because his hour was not yet come, So Ioh. 8.20. Lastly, There is
the hour of his glorification upon his passions and sufferings, and that is
meant here, Father, the hour is come, glorify thy Son; although indeed this
hour may comprehend both his Sufferings and his glory.

Doct. That God in his wisdom does appoint times and seasons both of his
childrens afflictions and their mercies: They fall not out by chance, Doct.
That God does appoint times and seasons for his great works.
they come not at unawares, but God has decreed the particular times and
seasons, before which they cannot come, and in which time they are sure to
come: The time of Isreal's Captivity was seventy years, Though all the godly on
earth had prayed to God, there would not have been a shortning of that time;
Again, when those years were expired, all the power in the world could not stop
or hinder their deliverance; Their very enemies procure it for them; Therefore
that of the Psalmist is very pertinent, Psa. 102.13. The time to favor her,
yea, the set time is come: Hence you have in the Prophecies of Daniel and
Revelation, the determinate fixed times for the great troubles and great
deliverances of the Church, though expressed obscurely; A time and half time,
as also so many days putting days for years.

Let us first consider this as relating to Christ; and observe the special
times and hours God had appointed concerning him, I. In relation to Christ.
and then treat of it more generally.

And 1. The time of Christ's coming into the world was wholly determined by Gods
wisdom and his good pleasure; Why Christ did not come sooner or later, who is
able to give any other reason but the good pleasure of God? Hence it is called
Romans 5.6. a due time, and Gal. 4 6. the fullness of time. There was no such
convenient time as that appointed by God, and it is observed as one reason, that
then Christ came rather then at another time, because the devils power was so
great over men; We never read in any age of so many possessed by devils as was
while Christ abode upon the earth; If therefore the wise man observe a time
appointed by God for every work and purpose under heaven, then must this much
more be true concerning that great and masterpeice of all Gods works: The
sending his Son into the world, our Savior judged it a blessed thing to live
in those days, and see those times wherein Christ lived, doing the work of a
Redeemer, Luke 10.23, 24. It was Austins desire to have seen Christ in the
Flesh, but though it was so happy a thing to have seen these things, therefore
Simeon desired to depart as having happiness enough when he had seen Christ
the salvation of Israel, yet unless also they did behold him with the eye of
faith at the same time, they are so far from being the more happy, that they
were the more miserable, as appears by what is said to Chorazin and Bethsatha.

2. To take up what was hinted before, There was an hour and time for Christ's
discharging the work of a Prophet, and doing such Miracles as might confirm him
to be a Messiah, as you heard, Joh. 2.4. and certainly in that Christ did not
before publish himself to the world, but staid till Gods call came, till the
time appointed by him; This should teach all, especially those that undertake a
public Ministry to follow his example in humility and modesty; Christ himself
though endowed with all wisdom took not his own time, but Gods time; and Paul
would not have a novice taken into the Ministry, lest he should be puffed up with
pride and fall into condemnation of the devil; 1 Timothy 3.6. We may justly wonder
what Christ did all that time, as some have; What God did before he made the
world, and although the Papists have feigned many things yet we must conclude
he lived a private life, following the trade and profession of his Father,
which made them say, Is not this the Carpenters Son? Mar. 6.5. And it is good
to observe how diligent our Savior was, while he had this hour to work, I must
work while I have day, the night comes and none can work, Joh. 9 4. Thus we
should be like Bees gathering honey, while we have the Spring; get Manna in the
morning while it falls.

3. The third hour of Christ was the time of his sufferings, concerning which
he often said, My hour is not yet come, and when it was come, he most readily
yielded himself; Now in this hour many things are observable, as

1. That all the power and policy that his enemies did use were not able to
prevail over him till his hour came: Though he preached every day, and went up
and down doing good, by all which his enemies were the more provoked against
him, yet they were not able to take an hair from him, and how observable is
that when some bid him depart, for Herod would kill him, Go says he, and tell
that fox, behold I do miracles, to day, and to morrow, and the third day I
shall be perfected; Nevertheless I must work to day and to morrow: The meaning
is, that maugre all his malice and power* yet he should do his work, and be
preserved till his hour did come, so that all endeavors, all counsels are
frustrated which meet not with Gods appointed time, only Christ knew when his
hour was, which God keeps sometimes secret from his people. Again

2. Observe the wisdom and prudence of Christ when danger was come, because
then it was not his hour; Sometimes he departed secretly, and went from place
to place to avoid the malice of his enemies, yea, his father and mother fled
with him while a child to escape death, This teaches us, That it is our duty
to preserve our selves from ruin, when we have not a call or obligation
thereunto; So the Prophets in Jezabels time were hid by many in a cave, and
those Noble Worthies recorded by the Apostle that fled and hid themselves in
caves and mountains, they are said to do it by faith; It was not sinful fear
but faith, so that we are diligently to consider when it is our call, our duty,
when God requires of us, as the time and hour of our affliction, that we must
lose all for him, and in this we must not consult with flesh and blood; for
that says as Peter to Christ, Master, save thy self, who had that severe
Rebuke, Get theee behind me Satan. Then on the other side, when the time of
Christ's sufferings did come, every thing brought it about; A Judas, a Disciple
of his own he betraieth him, and all his adversaries do easily insult over him,
and then he does not as before depart out of the way, no, but though be knew he
was to suffer at Jerusalem, yet he set his face to go thither, and though he
could have commanded Legions of Angels to have rescued him, and we read that
those who come to surprise him fell down immediately being stricken with his
Majesty, yet he will not deliver himself; No, though his enemies did with so
much scorn bid him save himself, which teaches us, that when the hour of our
afflictions is come, when God manifestly discovers it must be the time of our
trouble, that then we do with all patience and cheerfulness resign our selves
into his hands.

And thus much as it relates to Christ, II. Gods other dispensations.
Now let us consider of it in the general, and we shall see how God has hours
and times either of anger, or mercy in the world.

As 1. 1. A time is set for the Reformation of his Church.
When the Church of God has been greatly corrupted by all manner of vice and
idolatry, so that there has been an unclean Leprosy over the whole body, God
oath appointed an hour, a time for its Reformation and purity, which shall
certainly take effect, though all the world oppose it. Men can no more hinder
it then the Sun from breaking out of the Cloud, and oh how happy is it when
such a time comes, how wonderfully are m^ns hearts prepared to forsake all
their former Idolatry and profaneness? This you have notably Joh. 4.23. Our
Savior tells that ignorant superstitious woman, The hour is coming and now is,
when the true worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth: This was
in Christ's time, he came as Malachy cap. 3. prophesied, to refine the Sons of
Levi, and to be like the Fullers Soap: This was so terrible as that the Prophet
cries out, Who may abide the day of his coming? It was to the Pharisees and
chief Priests as terrible as the day of Judgment: Well, though Christ goes
about to take away all that admired will worship, which was then exalted; and
this was so contrary to men's inclination and education, yet the hour comes
that they shall worship him in spirit and in truth: Thus it was at the first
Reformation out of Popery, when Luther, though but one unarmed man, and a
despicable Monk by his profession, set himself against the torrent of all that
Idolatry and corruption which reigned in Popery: Was it not as ridiculous as if
a man had set his shoulder to some huge Mountain, thinking to remove it? It was
so in all men's account, and therefore when Luther opened his Councels to one
great Doctor, who did not approve of the Romish courses, yet he bid him go into
his Cell, and say, Lord have mercy upon us: As if the case were desperate; Now
although it was thus unlikely, yet we see how truth and purity did break forth
to all men's amazement, and which aggravateth this, There had been many before
Luthers time who witnessed against the practices and doctrines of the Church of
Rome, yet still they were vanquished till Luther came, and then no water could
quench this fire; Now why was all this Gods power was as able to go along with
John Husse or Jerome of Prague as well as Luther? but now was Gods hour, now
was his appointed time: Thus till Gods time came for the removing of all the
Jewish Rites, they lay like that stone upon the Sepulcher, that the woman could
not remove, yea, neither men or Angels could remove, and therefore it is called
the time of Reformation, Heb. 9.10,

2. God in his just judgment lets wicked men have their hour: 2. God lets
wicked men have their time.
That is an opportunity of expressing all their wickedness and impiety, so
that you would think God took no notice of the things done in the world, and
was as some Philosophers profanely thought included within the circles of the
heaven, and had given the earth to the Sons of men to do what they would:
This our Savior told his enemies, who consulted and practiced against him,
Luke 22.53. This is your hour and power of darkness; Thus in the Revelation we
see that Satan was let loose for many years, and then he was bound up for many
years, which denotes that God by his just permission did suffer Satan and his
Instruments to prevail in the world; And when this hour of darkness is, all the
prayers and all the tears of the godly shall not prevail till his time of
deliverance come; And this we may find even from the beginning of the world,
since there was an Abel and a Cain, that God lets some wicked men have their
hour, a power and season to act their impieties, and yet Gods ways were
always just, when the causes were hid from us.

3. A set time for judgment.
3. God has appointed an hour or time for judgment to judge the whole world:
To call all men to their accounts, that the counsels and thoughts of all men's
hearts may be made manifest. This is an hour, a day, a set time, that the word
of God does often speak of, pressing every one to watch and pray lest it take
us in our sins, Luke 12, 12, 39, 49. etc. how large and admirable is our
Savior in telling us such an hour is coming, and that it will come unawares,
and that if any man knew at what hour of the night a Thief would come to rob
and spoil, he would watch and prepare, how much rather now when this time is
uncertain, and the matter is of such everlasting consequence, should we tremble
and look to our selves? and for this end God has left the knowledge of that
day and hour secret from men and Angels, that every one might prepare
themselves: Oh how little do men think of this hour, our Savior says it will
come upon most men, as the deluge did to those that were eating, drinking, and
making merry, or as a Snare to the Bird which is taken, while she is skipping
and hopping up and down. Look we then to our selves, Art thou in such a
condition, have thou so repented of thy sins and made thy peace with God,
that if this hour were to come immediately thou could think of it with joy,
and go out with lamp and oil enough to meet the Bridegroom?

4. The hour of every man's death is set.
4. God has for every particular man appointed the time and hour of his death;
When that fatal moment comes, no ransom can be given; No art nor skill can
prolong it; I confess this has been greatly disputed, whether a term be
prefixed by God to every man's life, beyond which he cannot go, but they must
needs hold many absurdities, that will tend grossly to the dishonor of God, if
it should be granted that our days are not appointed by God in this world, and
the Scripture does unquestionably assert it, Job 4.5. His days are determined,
the number of his months are with the^, thou have appointed his bounds which
he cannot pass; This place is so clear that I need not mention more, and
whereas the Scripture says, Wicked men shall not live out half their days,
that is, in respect of second causes, for they might if we do regard nature
have lived long, but God for their wickedness removes them away, and whereas
the Prophet told Hezekiah that ^e must die, yet upon his prayer, fifteen years
are added; That was but a conditional thre^^ni^g, neither were those fifteen
years added to Gods decree, but in regard of Hezekiahs expectation, who upon
the Prophets words looked for no other but present death; Neither does this
doctrine bring a Stoicall necessity, as if we need not eat or drink, for God
has appointed the means as well as the end; Even as Paul told those in the
Ship, Act. 27.31. with him, that none of them should die, 5. There is a
remarkable set time of grace wherein God may be found.
yet he bids them use the means, and some got planks and boards to get to the
haven; We should not make such captious conclusions but with fear and patience,
expect till this hour come.

5. The Scripture speaks of a remarkable set time of grace, There is a time
whilst God may be found; There is a time wherein he holds out the Scepter of
grace: The Fountain runs, and there is an Ho, to every one that thirsts,
to come and drink freely of it, 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold, now is the accepted time,
speaking of that season of grace God vouchsafed them, and Heb. 4. To day, if
you will hear harden not your hearts: Hence Luke 19.44. Christ does so
bitterly bewail Jerusalem, Oh that thou had known in this thy day, and that
thou had known the time of thy visitation: This hour is of great consequence,
Jerusalem had her hour, all the several Churches of Asia had their hours,
England, Sutton, every place where the Gospel is preached, they have their
hour: Oh that then you would learn of the Ant, that gathers her meat in the
Summer time, While you have the day of grace be busy in praying, hearing,
meditating, and treasuring up the things that belong to your salvation; When
the night comes upon thee thou can not work, and it is but a day of grace
that hastens away, neither can thou with Joshua bid this Sun stand still;
Oh the bitterness and terror of soul that will be upon thee when thou shall
see this hour passed away, and thou have got no good; There is a set time for
grace, and our Savior he threatens to remove the Candlestick when men walk
unworthy of the light, Rev. 13.11, 12. The Apostle presses this consideration.

Lastly, God has appointed for his Church a set time of afflictions and
troubles, 6. The times of the Churches troubles and deliverances are set.
as also an appointed time of salvation and deliverance, which made Job say,
that affliction rises not out of the dust, and the Psalmist, Promotion comes
not from the East or West, Psa. 65.6. As there are times of snow and rain, of
winter and hard weather, so there are of calamities and exercises of the Church
of God, Jer. 30.7. This is the time of Jacobs trouble. Rev. 3.10. It Is called
the hour of temptation, Rev. 2.10. Fear none of these things, thou shall
suffer, for the devil shall cast some of you into prison, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days, that is, a set, appointed, but a short time: Thus you
see God in his wisdom does appoint a dark black hour sometimes for his
people, and then afterward he has the time of their deliverance; The time to
favor her, the set time is come, as Christ had the hour to suffer in, so he
had the hour to be glorified in; So that by all these particulars concerning
Christ, or the Church, or every believer, you see there is no such thing as
blind Fortune, or chance, nor is it according to the counsels and purposes of
men, but the great God of heaven he appoints the hours and seasons for all
things, and they fall out accordingly.

Use of Admonition, Are the times and hours for all things appointed by God,
and they may be divided either into the hours of his anger, Use.
or the hours of his mercy, then labor we for the graces suitable to such
hours; In the hours of anger set upon these duties.

1. Humble and debase thy self in these days; It Is a time wherein God calls for
mourning and weeping; As God does every thing beautiful in his season, so let
thy graces be beautiful in season, God complains that when he looked for
mourning and sackcloth, there was jollity and carnal mirth.

2. Under this dark hour be patient and submitting to God, be not overhasty
before Gods hour comes; We read in the Scripture that the more extreme and
desperate his peoples case was, the greater was their hour of deliverance, Hab.
1. speaks much to this.

3. The hour of Gods anger is far shorter then the hour of his mercy, The
night is not so long as the day, Isa 54.7, 8. and Mat. 24. Christ speaking of
the calamity which should fall on the Jews, he says, For the Elects sake those
days shall he shortened, the meaning is, that whereas those public calamities
might have been greatly prolonged, if we regard second causes, God out of
compassion to his people did shorten them.

Secondly, Are they the hours of grace and Gods mercy, then 1. Be thankful to
him, he might make it always a day of blasphemy, of reproach, and rebuke unto
thee, but he causes a comfortable day to shine upon thee, but

2. Do thou improve the day of grace and Gods mercy, Oh say, this is Gods hour,
this is mine hour, what I will do for my soul, what I will lay up for Eternity
must be now done or never; Oh remember it is but an hour, but a day, and this
will quickly pass away: In what despair and torment will many wish for these
hours again.

SERMON V. Of the Nature and Manifestations of that Glory which Christ prayed
for, and is invested with; And how comfortable it is to all his Members,
JOH. 17.1. Glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee.
WE take the words as they lie in order, The two former Arguments to enforce
Christ's Petition have been dispatched, We come now to the Petition it self,
Glorify thy Son, and here it will be at first objected, How Christ who is
also God can be glorified: It may seem that he can no more need glory being the
fountain of it, then the Sun light, or the Sea water.

How Christ who is God can be glorified.
To open this, Consider,

First, That to glorify is taken two ways in the Scripture.

1, By any testimony of words, or otherwise to acknowledge the greatness and
honor of another, and in this sense only are we said to glorify God, for we
cannot indeed add any thing to his glory, he is essentially glorious, though
there bad never been any creature to acknowledge it, only we manifest and
celebrate that glory which God had before, Thus gloria is said to be clara
notitia.

2. To glorify is by real exhibition and vouchsafing of honor and glory to
those who had it not already, and thus God glorifieth us, Whom he justifies,
he glorifieth, Romans 8. 1 John 2. Those that honor me, viz. by declaration or
manifestation, God will honor by real exhibition; Now if we look on Christ as
God, having the same honor with him, then when he prays God would glorify
him, it must be only in manifestation, That whereas he had been in outward
appearance the meanest of men, now God would manifest that he was the natural
Son of God, But this is not all.

In the next place, we may say Christ has a twofold glory.

1. That which was essential and eternal, which he had from the beginning
with God, for being God he could not really be divested of that glory.

2. There is his Mediatory glory; That which he has not as God but as
Mediator; This God bestowed upon him after he had been in the state of
humiliation, for after all that debasement and misery he willingly undertook,
God did exalt him to glory, and gave him a name above all principalities and
powers: yea, giving all power in heaven and earth to him; The government of the
whole Church, and a command over all Ordinances and duties therein, to bless
and give success to them, of which the Scripture speaks often.

3. It has been greatly disputed, Whether Christ did merit glory for himself.
Whether this glory and exaltation was by Christ truly merited at Gods hands,
whether from his sufferings he merited at Gods hand all that glory he speaks
of; All confess he did not merit to himself the hypostatical Union nor his
habitual grace, or the happiness of his soul, because no merit could precede
these, only this is disputed, Whether all that honor and glory which accrewed
to him after his birth, and before and after his death, he did truly merit at
Gods hand by his active and passive obedience: Some not only of the Papists but
of the Orthodox, as Zanchy, contend he did truly merit this, though here he
prays for it; Others as resolutely deny it, because Christ had no respect to
him, but to us only in this work of redemption; Others think it is but
rashness and curiosity to busy our selves in the Point; but I have spoken to
this more fully in the doctrine of Justification, and shall ere we come to the
end of this Chapter more particularly consider the Socinian errors in this
Point. This is plain, the Scripture affirms God has appointed such an order,
that first he must suffer, and then enter into glory, as Phil. 2.8. Luk 24.26.
Romans 5.9* Here is an order, but whether it be of mere antecedency, or causality
and merit, that is not expressly said, I shall not trouble you in it, it is
enough, that we see God did answer this Petition he prays for, and that in
every respect to the highest degree, Father, glorify thy Son.

Obs. Doct. It was the holy and wise will of God to glorify Christ.
That it was the holy and wise will of God the Father to exalt and glorify
Christ. Gods great purpose from all Eternity was to give honor and glory to
Christ: Indeed Christ while he was here on the earth, had some beamlings of
this glory, some irradiations now and then, Joh. 12.28. Therefore the Father
told Christ he had both glorified his Name, and would glorify it; Gods purpose
to glorify Christ was above that purpose to glorify men, for they are but
members, and he is the head* yea, some say, this design to glorify Christ is
so immutable and absolutely intended by God, that though man had not fallen,
yet they say Christ would have been incarnated and exalted by the Father: But
if we consult with Scripture we have no other reason there assigned of Christ's
coming into the flesh, but of saving sinners: Now lest it should be thought
that while we preach of Christ's glory, Christ's being invested with glory
redounds to the advantage of his members.
this is nothing to us, and what comfort or profit is that to us, to hear that
Christ in his own person is invested with such glory, you must know that this
redounds to our profit and advantage much every way; For

1. Christ's glorification is a plain demonstration of his Conquest over all our
Enemies; For had death and the grave, or the Prince of this world been
prevailing over him still, he could not have been glorified, 1. It Is a
demonstration of his conquest over all our enemies
and so that would have been true, he did not save himself, and therefore could
not save others; Therefore it is a most comfortable saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, to hear that Christ is glorified, for this proclaims to all,
that no enemy could have any power over him, that all our adversaries are
vanquished; That our David has killed the Goliath, so then hear this Truth with
comfort, with attention, it concerns all the godly; It Is blessed news to hear
Christ is glorified, for then thy sins, thy guilt, thy death, and every thing
thou fear is conquered; If any of these do accuse thee, say, if a discharge
had not been fully made, how could Christ be glorified?

2. Because of rhat near relation that is between us.
2. It makes much to our eomfort, because of that near relation which is between
us so miserable and afflicted here, and Christ our head now glorified: What can
be a greater cordial, then in the midst of all those exercises and trials and
reproaches the people of God are debased with, then to think they have a
glorified head in heaven? Though they be contemptible, he is not: This is but a
conformity to him in his sufferings, that we may also resemble him in glory.

3. His glorification a cause of ours.
3. It is much to our comfort and advantage to hear of this, because his
glorification is a sure and effectual cause of ours, so that our hearts may
greatly rejoice at this truth; For as the Apostle argues from Christ's
Resurrection, If he be risen then shall we also certainly rise; So does the
Argument unavoidably follow, if Christ be glorified then shall we also be
glorified with him; so that when those innumerable Objections do arise, how
shall these vile bodies ever be made glorious? How shall these corrupt and weak
souls ever be made happy and blessed? The answer is easy, What is already done
to Christ glorified, will in time be fulfilled to us; Death and the grave had
no dominion over him, no more shall it have over us: Hence it is that the
Scripture says, We are already set down with Christ in heavenly places, Ephesians.
2.6. because he is our head; Fear not then, such a glorified head will not
forget his members: He said, He went to provide a mansion place, Joh. 14.2. It
cannot then be but that Christ will set you on Thrones of his glory as well as
he himself is set; So that this doctrine is wholly for thy comfort.

4. In his glorified esta^e he is pleading for us
4. It may much rejoice us to hear that Christ is glorified, because in this
state of glorification he is mindeful of us and pleading for us; So that
howsoever the greatest parts or effects of our mediation were seen in the time
of his humiliation by his life and his death; The Scripture attributes all the
mercies we do enjoy, yet since he ascended into heaven, and is partaker of all
this power, he makes intercession for us, his daily will is that the
privileges he purchased should be applied to us; He daily acts as a King
subduing our lusts, conquering our corruptions, applying his comforts and
consolations to his people; Well then, Christ is glorified not for himself
only, neither is he exalted for his own honor merely, but it is for our glory
as well as his, for our honor as well as his; As Joseph was lifted up in
Pharaohs Court, not for himself merely, but for his brethren to succor them in
their necessities; And as the glorious effects of the Sun are not so much for
it self as for us the Creatures below; oh then let thy soul cast off all
unbelief and trouble when it hears of Christ glorified, for in all this glory
he does not forget thee, he is not ashamed of thee.

5. It encourages us to lift up our hearts to heaven.
Lastly, This advantage the soul may make of this Truth, thereby to lift up our
hearts to heaven, and to desire to be there where our glorified head is; Thus
the Apostle he longs to depart to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. and the Church
longs for and hastens the coming of Christ, from whence we look for Christ,
says the Apostle, Phil. 3.21. Who shall change our vile bodies into his
glorious body. Oh this should make us draw off all our affections and desires
from other things, Christ glorified should be the loadstone, we should not be
at ease or quietness till we come to him, which made Austin say, That as there
were some men who needed patience to die, so there were others, who needed
patience to live, for the love and desire after Christ did so burn in their
hearts, that having tasted of this honey, they judged every thing else gall and
wormwood, so that this Truth may be like fire burning in our bones.

In the next place let us consider the nature of this glory, The nature of this
glory which Christ prayed for. There were three degrees to it.
which Christ prayed for.



The first and immediate beginning of this glory, was upon his Resurrection:
After the black and dismal clouds this Sun had been in, the first glory of
it began to appear in its Resurrection from the grave: By this he was conqueror
of death and the grave; By this he judged the Prince of the world; Till this
was, in all men's thoughts Christ seemed to be overcome, in all appearance he
was now brought under the power and command of death and Satan. He was judged
weak till this power discovered it self, and this resurrection being not only
by the Fathers power but his own. He being the Sampson that brake the bars
and bonds of death, it was thereby made manifest to all the world, that he was
the Son of God; Resurrection is such an impossible thing to humane reason,
and so incredible, that Paul was cried down, for a vain babbler, Act. 17.18. in
promulging such doctrine, and only in the Church of God, Was ever such a thing
heard of? But this Resurrection was remarkable in Christ who not only raised
himself from the dead, but also caused many others to rise with him, here was
the first degree of his glory.

2. The second degree was his ascension into heaven, and this did exceed his
Resurrection, for though he was risen, yet he conversed with his disciples, did
eat and drink with them occasionally, so that he was to partake of greater and
fuller glory, when he ascended into heaven. This Ascension of his into Heaven
was great matter of wonderment and astonishment to his Disciples; They all
stood admiring when he was carried up thither, Act. 1.

3. The last and chiefest degree of this glory, was sitting down at the right
hand of God; By which expression is meant that great and wonderful honor
which God put upon him, he sits at the right hand, that demonstrateth a full
and complete victory over all his enemies, and a quiet possession of this
glory: In these three things lies all the glory Christ prays for,
Resurrection, Ascension, and sitting down at Gods right hand, all which
immediately followed his passions and sufferings, and God had appointed such an
order, that one must be before the other, and such a way God also does take
with his people: They must have a Crown of thorns before they have a Crown of
glory.

In the third place let us consider some of the most eminent and chiefest
particulars, wherein this glory of Christ does manifest it self. Wherein this
glory of Christ does consist.


And 1. It lies in that spiritual command and authority which he has in his
Church; This is expressed when he says, All power is given to me in heaven and
earth, therefore go make disciples, and baptize. Here you see the Institution
of Sacraments is founded upon that power given to Christ, and from this it is
Ephesians. 4, That upon his Ascension, He led captivity captive, and gave gifts to
men: By this power the Church of God is like Solomon's Queen richly attired in
all curious needle work; It Is from this glory of Christ's that he puts such
glory on the Church, so that for all the Ordinances and dispensations thereof,
for all the success and benefit to be reaped by them, We are to look up to
Christ, hereupon we say, that to bring any other doctrine, any other Sacrament
or worship then Christ has appointed, is a capital crime; It Is to invade the
Jura regalia, which Christ has obtained of God, and therefore to despise the
Ordinances, the gifts, the Ministry that Christ has appointed in his Church,
is to neglect and contemn a great part of that glory God put on Christ for this
end Col. 3. You have the Apostle running out into such full and large
expressions concerning Christ, making him the head of the Church, in whom God
has put all fullness, that he is to have the pre-eminence in all things; Let
us not then despise but magnify all the Ordinances, Offices, and gifts Christ
has appointed, for when he ascended in his triumph to heaven, he scattered
these gifts as great Emperors do use to do large bounties to their people, and
they are for heavenly and spiritual advantages, All power he has is to
bless, to convert. to comfort, to sanctify every Ordinance about which we are
employed.

2. Another particular of his glory, is to make all things subject to him;
whatsoever dignities or principalities there are, that all should acknowledge
and bow to him; This is the Sun to which all the Stars do their obeisance;
This is the name that God gave him above all Names, that every knee, every
creature should submit to him, Phil. 2. By name is not meant bowing the knee at
the name of it, that was never heard of till many years after Christ in the
Church, but by name according to Scripture custom is meant Christ himself;
Even as the Name of God is God himself, glorious, manifested, believed on, and
every way exalted; Now this subjection all give to him as the King of Kings and
Lord of Lords, is twofold, in some it is voluntary and willing, Psa. 110. Thy
people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Christ does by his glorious
power change and alter their natures, whereby they are full of love and
cheerfulness in taking him to be their Lord and King; They do readily obey his
commands, so that the glory of Christ is magnified by all his Children; But
then there is a necessitated and forced submission, such whom he is said to
rule with a rod of iron, and the devils who are under the earth, they by
constraint submit unto him.

3. This glory vouchsafed unto Christ is, that all things should be done in his
Name; All Church-meetings, all Church Censures, all Church-duties, should be
wholly performed in and by him; Thus for prayer, whatsoever ye shall ask in my
name, Joh. 14.13. For Church-meetings, when two or three are gathered together
in my Name, Mat. 18.20. For Church Censures, When you are met together in
Christ's Name to deliver such an one to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. Thus the glory of
Christ is wonderfully magnified in the Assembly of the Saints, for every thing
that is due is accepted of in Christ's Name; No prayer is received but in
Christ's Name, no performance has its due effect, but in Christ's Name; This
heavenly and holy Court is kept in Christ's Name only; We are to preach in his
Name, we baptize in his Name, all things have their success and efficacy, as
they come out in his Name; Thus (beloved) you see that all our thoughts and
desires should be to glorify Christ, If it be the Fathers will to glorify
him, it should be ours much more.

4. This glory given to Christ will be wonderfully expressed in the day of
judgment, for 1. then he shall make known his power and majesty to all the
world; what glorious descriptions have we in the Scripture of Christ coming to
judge? with what terror and trembling to all beholders? what great alterations
and changes will be upon the whole world? What a glorious train of Angels
accompanying him? never was such a sight seen, No words can express it; Now
all this is to be managed by the Son. The Fathar has given all judgment to
him, and he has appointed to judge the world by that man Christ Jesus, Act.
17.21. Howsoever then while he was in the flesh, he was judged by others, he
was as a worm and no man, yet then a great alteration will be made; He that was
a Lamb shall then be like a roaring Lion; The day of Judgment is the greatest
day that ever was or shall be, called therefore the day and that day, and the
day of the Lord, and the judgment of all things and persons in the world is
given to Christ the Son of God, and this tends to his exceeding great glory,
for then his friends and loyal Subjects shall receive their full and final
reward, and then his stubborn and obstinate enemies shall receive their
complete punishments, all the honor Ahashuerus could put on his favorites was
nothing to this spiritual and heavenly glory, which the Father will put on the
Son, for it is a spiritual glory, that was a temporal in earthly things only;
There are those who would make the kingdom and glory of Christ to be in a great
manner temporal, and consisting in a Monarchy here on earth, but as Christ's
Priesthood was wholly spiritual, so also is his kingly glory, for as he has
made the godly Kings and Priests only in a spiritual sense, thus was he also;
Here then is work for the eyes of Faith, Come with the Queen of Sheba to see
all the glory Christ has, not with a bodily eye, but an eye of faith, and thy
admiration will be greater then hers was.

2. This glory is eternal, not like the glory of the world, which the devil
showed in a moment, it quickly passed away, but this will abide for ever; not
but that Christ shall at last give up this Kingdom into his Fathers hands
again; He shall no more discharge the acts of an Advocate or Intercessor for us
in heaven, only the glory of this shall always continue; It shall to all
Eternity be recorded, that he was the Mediator; That he is the Savior who
has brought us to life and immortality; Thus to all eternity the tongue of all
the Saints shall be employed in celebrating this glory.

Use of Instruction, Is Christ thus glorified by the Father? then take this as
a sure pledge of thy glorification in time; It cannot be that he should have
glory alone himself; No, in this prayer he says, Father, I will, that they be
where I am; Oh let this comfort and animate thee, my glorified head is in
heaven, and will in time make a glorified member suitable to him.

2. Is it Gods purpose to glorify the Son? then let us also glorify him,
our hour is continual, we have occasion every day, we glorify him.

1. By blessing and praising God for him, God never did so much for us, as when
he gave Christ.

2. We glorify him when we live to him, when we wholly set up Christ, give him
the glory of all the comfort and grace we do partake of.

3. We glorify him when we can part with and leave all things for his sake,
when we can say, All things are but dross in comparison of him.

SERMON VI. Of Heavenly mindedness, Showing that we should seek both Earthy
and Heavenly blessings, chiefly for this end, viz. That God may be glorified.
JOH. 17.1. Glorify thy Son, that thy Son may also glorify thee,
THE next thing in order is the last Argument or motive Christ uses in this
Prayer, for Glory, and that is, the end and motive why he desires it, which is
altogether pure and sincere: He desires it not for himself, or in reference
merely to his own advantage, but thereby to glorify God; O admirable example
of modesty and humility! He that thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
yet as Mediator challenges nothing for himself ultimately: He that in other
places is called Alpha and Omega, now denies that prerogative, and gives it
solely to God his Father, so truly did he say, Nulla Creatura humilior Deo,
that is, Christ, you see then this Sun of Righteousness making himself like
one of the inferior Stars, borrowing all light, and returning the same again
to God, and certainly if Christ himself as Mediator will not take to himself
the glory due to God, then this will highly condemn all that arrogance in man,
who shall desire any earthly or heavenly advantages merely for his own sake;
That shall desire riches, honors greatness, or heaven it self, for any other
end but to glorify God thereby: It Is not the much eating but the good
digesting that gives health, and it is not the possessing of great abundance but
the wise improving of all for Gods glory that makes happy, so then this example
of Christ shall be considered by us as an argument a majori ad minus; That if
Christ prayed for all that heavenly and transcendant glory principally to
glorify God thereby, and did not chiefly aim at himself, then how much more
should man desire either heavenly or earthly glory, not so much that it is his
own good, as that thereby it will be isntrumental to Gods glory? and hence
observe.

Doct. We should desire comforts and advantages chiefly that God may be
glorified.
That as Christ so much more all men, are to pray for and desire any comfort or
advantages, not so much for themselves as that thereby God may be glorified.
that as Christ said, Joh. 8 50. I seek not my own glory but the glory of him
that sent me, so every one should say, If God make me rich* great in this
world, I do not regard these things as my advantages, but as opportunities to
glorify God; It Is a Rule in Logic, Media non sunt appetenda propter se sed
propter finem, and appetitus finis est infinitus, the desire of the end is
infinite, but of the means is only finite and limited; Thus not only all our
earthly comforts here below, but all that eternal glory and happiness which
we shall have in heaven is but a medium to promote the glory of God, and
although the salvation of our souls be in some sense the end of a man, yet even
this end has a further end, the glory and honor of God, of which we are to
say as the people of David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us, so is the glory
and honor of God of more worth then the salvation of all men's souls; But that
you may all feel power coming out from this doctrine to your souls, let us
consider the truth of it in Christ briefly, and then more largely how it is to
be fulfilled in us.

And first For Christ, Consider his two states, the state of his humiliation,
I. Christ did so
and his exaltation, for this Sun of Righteousness had his setting as well
as his rising, and if God be said to humble himself to look on the Children of
men, 1. In his humiliation.
Psa. 113.6. how much more then to become a child of man; This humiliation of
Christ the Apostle expresses by an emphaticall word, Phil. 2.7. (...) and
(...), Though he was equal with God, yet he laid aside all the glorious
manifestation and appearance of this, and was of no repu^ation; This
humiliation expressed it self two ways, in his active obedience and passive,
in both which he still referred all to Gods glory; Though he be called Heb.
1*3. (...), The brightness of Gods glory, yet by his humiliation, he is said
to have no comeliness on him, a worm and no man: For his active obedience
subjecting himself to the Law of God, teaching and declaring Gods will to all
men, and revealing the truth of God from the bosom of his Father, He in all
this professes, Joh. 8.50. He sought not his own glory but the glory of his
Father; If you ask him why he was born, why he was baptized, why he did fulfill
all righteousness, he would say, for the glory of his Father; Oh but in all
our religious duties how much vainglory does infect and rotten them! That is
the Pirate which does intercept the golden Fleet of our prayers, that they
return not again fraughted with good things for us, yea, that is remarkable,
Heb. 5.5. Christ is there said not to glorify himself, he did not undertake
that office of a spiritual Priest till he was called by God, he glorified not
himself; And as for his passive obedience, all those sufferings and ignominious
reproaches which he did undergo, it was only thereby to glorify the wisdom
and goodness and infinite love of God to man, which made the Apostle call
Christ crucified, the power and wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24, 25. Joh. 13.31.
There we have Christ's glorifying of God, and Gods glorifying of Christ both put
together;. When Judas was gone out to accomplish Christ's death, Now (says he)
the Son of man is glorified and God is in him: Christ's sufferings were his
glory, and Gods glory, and then mark the connection, If God be glorified by him
God will glorify him again, he shall be no loser, and that in himself, Oh how
admirable and different is that glory which God himself gives from that which
either Men or Angels can bestow! so then we see all the end of Christ's
humiliation, both in his active and passive obedience, was to glorify God.

There remains the second part of Christ's state, which is his Exaltation, 2.
In his exaltation.
and in that we shall find all the glory and honor he had did not stay in
him, but was carried out further to God the Father, This glory he prayed for,
God bestowed it on him, yet so that at the last he shall deliver up the
Kingdom unto his Father, that so God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. Not but
that all honor and glory shall be given by the Saints in heaven to all
Eternity to the Son, only it shall be to him as the meritorious and procuring
cause, II. Much more should all men be affected more with Gods glory then their
own good.
whereby we are brought to enjoy the Father.

Having thus considered Christ's intentions in all his works, that the Sun
cannot be free^ from spots, then his holy will was from all oblique and
sinister respects, Let us consider man, who being a mere creature, having all
both in being and continuation from God, as the beams from the Sun, and the
streams from the Fountain, it lies as unavoidable upon him to be affected more
with Gods glory then his own good: This is a very hard task to flesh and blood,
but self-love and de-ordination of the faculties of the soul has made it thus
difficult.

The goods of a godly man.
Now we may divide the good of a godly man into two sorts, Either that in
heaven, 1. Heavenly.
his treasure laid up there in the upper Region, Or all the good he can have in
this life in the lower Region; And of both these we commit a kind of horrible
Idolatry, when we desire them upon any other terms then in tendency to God* If
it be so great a sin to alter the bounds and change the Landmarks which the
Laws of a Nation have set, how much more to break that good and excellent order
which God has appointed between him and the creature? Let us consider the
first kind of a godly man's good, his eternal felicity and salvation; even
this glory he is to desire in subordination to Gods glory; For if Paul could
make a conditionate wish and veleity, that he might be accursed from Christ,
Romans 9.3. to serve his brethren; how much rather might this be done for the
glory of God? yet take heed of a mistake here; some have gone so far as to
say, that a godly man is never truly humbled till he can be willing to be
damned for Gods glory, and that it is unlawful to look at the reward in heaven;
This is dangerous as well as false, for it is not lawful but a duty to seek our
salvation, Romans 2.7. To them who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for
honor and glory, and Moses is said (...), to have a fixed earnest eye upon the
reward, Heb. 11.26. So that it is a Speech full of vanity, and no man can speak
it truly, that he is willing to be damned for Gods glory, for such a thing
cannot be, and our salvation we are bound to desire, so that we must take heed
lest by overmuch wringing a good truth we make blood come out, instead of milk;
yet though this be so, it is no contradiction to say, that a godly man has such
an holy principle within him that would carry him out to the obedience of God,
though there were no heaven, and that the glory and honor of God is his
principal end, that it is dearer to him then his own soul, and truly if we see
in nature God has so ordered it, that every particular denies it self to
preserve the universal; The water will ascend upwards that there may not be a
vacuum, and the particular orbs are carried about against their own motion,
according to the power of the first mobile, how much more must this hold in man
and God? all his life comforts and happiness it self is to give place for Gods
honor and glory, Let God be glorified, and ruat mundus, but I shall not insist
on this.

2. Earthly.
Let us descend to those particular good things we have in this world, riches,
honor, greatness, and parts; We shall see it is the greatest reason in the
world that we should not desire these things to advance our selves, to satisfy
our appetites, but only thereby to glorify God, but who does this? yea, who is
able to bear this truth, to take this yoke, till a renewed nature has made it
easy? And therefore let us first consider the causes procreant, or principles
constituant of such a gracious disposition as to be able to say, O Lord I beg
for health, The principles constituent of such a gracious disposition.
for a good name, for outward comforts in this world, but it is not for my own
sake so much that I do this, as that hereby I might glorify thee. And

1. He must necessarily be born again or from above, he must be partaker of a
divine nature that can ascend thus high; 1. He must be born again that can do
it.
He that is of the earth is earthy, he that is of heaven is heavenly; Till a
man have the Image of God, and be made like him, he cannot but mind earthly
things; When men are made godly, you cannot say, O Curoae in terras animae, No,
then their souls as well as their bodies are made straight up toward heaven; A
worm can never do as the Lark, soar up on high singing as she goes, but when
descending toward the earth, silent as if she were grieved, Till then God has
made us new creatures, given us new hearts, and a new spirit within us, we
cannot desire these worldly comforts for any other end but our selves; To be
rich, to be great, to be wise only for our selves.

2. There must be great love to God that can make us relate all things to him;
2. He must have great love to God.
Jacobs great love made him do every thing to obtain Rachell, and so a strong
love to God will make us sacrifice all to him, insomuch that our love is of so
great an operation that God in a special manner commands that for himself, and
that not a mere love, but love with all the heart and might, Mat. 22.37.
Nothing is to be left out, love is fire, and where that is, it will burn,
separat heterogenea, it divides all heterogeneous matter, if riches, if honors,
if friends oppose this, it trampleth on them all, and for this reason it is
that our Savior says, If a man hate not Father and Mother he is not worthy of
me, Luke 14 20. so that the love of God is not kindled in men's hearts, if it
were, as fire assimilateth all things into it self, so would this love make us
refer all things to him whom our souls love: Thus David, Whom have I in
heaven but thee? and Paul the love of Christ constrains me, 2 Cor. 5. Oh that
we had the experience of this more. Do thou not see what the love of money
puts the worldly man upon; What the love of pleasures puts the voluptuous man
upon? They do all things in reference to such corrupt ends; Thus where there
is an heavenly love, that makes use of every thing to glorify God, that
studieth and meditateth how may I advance and set up the honor of God by these
things; This love would quickly put out all carnal and worldly love, as the
beams of the Sun will put out the material fire.

3. Mortified affections to every thing here below, when we can perform the
Apostles commands, To buy as we bought not, to weep as if we wept not, 1 Co. 7.
3. And be mortified to the world.
This duty of mortification the Scripture often speaks of, as a necessary
companion to the minding of heavenly things; There is no external duty of
praying or hearing that will make the heart moderate and regular in the use of
all comforts, unless it be accompanied with mortification; Let not then the
waters overflow the banks, Do not over-love, over-desire, over-grieve, about
these earthly comforts; It Is an argument thou love them for their own sakes,
or thy own sake, and not for God, who art thus over-sollicitous about them, so
then to say, I desire no temporal mercy but to honor God thereby, requires
an heart mortified and crucified, if we would speak the truth, and not deceive
our own souls; Till therefore we be thus divinely qualified within, You may as
soon gather grapes of thorns and figs of thistles as the honor of God from
such men.

In the next place take notice of the Reasons why we are to pray for all our
comforts in reference to Gods glory. Reasons.


And 1. Because God himself does all things for his own glory; 1. God does all
things for his own glory.
His own actions are for it, and therefore much more ought ours to be, God made
the world, God saves his people, and all this is for his own glory, and indeed
as Gods wisdom is only able to comprehend himself, so his own love is able to
love him, in quantum est amabilis, yet we are commanded to be holy as he is
holy; Now as his holiness is in willing of his own glory, and all things in
reference thereunto; So our godliness consists in willing and procuring Gods
glory, and improving all we have for that purpose; If God made the world for
his glory, do thou use it for his glory; If God give thee parts and gifts to
glorify him, oh do not abuse these against their good and lawful end.

2. From the nature of Gods glory and all these earthly comforts respectively,
2. From the nature of Gods glory and all earthly comforts respectively.
that is the ultimus finis, and these are the media, and moral Philosophy
teaches us that media movent bonitate finis, it is not absolute goodness in
the means, but the relative goodness of the end in the means, that excite and
provoke the appetite: It Is not Physic for Physics sake though never so sweet,
but for healths sake that we take it; Lay this as an undeniable argument upon
thy own soul; These good things are but the means they are not the end; Now
they are desired not in an unlimited but commensurated manner, If a man would
quench his thirst, he does not desire all the water in the Sea; but as much as
will quench his thirst; If a man desire a garment to cover his nakedness, he
would not have all the cloth in the world, but what is proportioned for his
body, So it is here; Thou art not to will as much wealth, as much honor and
greatness as may be had, but what will be serviceable to that great end the
glory of God, otherwise thou art in thy abundance as David in Saul's armor; It
was too great for him, and in stead of being serviceable was cumbersome, and
truly hence arises the inordinate sinfulness of our senses in all earthly
comforts, we desire them for their own sake, and so are infinite and never
satisfied, still saying Give, whereas this regulated desire would much moderate
us, Appetitus non est regula concoctionis, the appetite is not the rule of our
concoction, is in Divinity true, as well as in Philosophy.

3. Because of the greatness of Gods glory, and the value of it.
3. Consider the greatness of Gods glory, It Is more worth then all the world,
all thy wealth, estate, and greatness is nothing to this glory of God, neither
thy soul or body, no nor all men's souls and bodies are to be compared to this;
Better we all perish then that God should lose his glory; Oh then how should
this make us whatsoever we do, to do all to his glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. because
the Sun is far above one Star, the Ocean above one drop.

4. Else we are guilty of spiritual Idolatry.
4. If we desire not all things in reference to him, we are guilty of spiritual
Idolatry; we set up another God besides him, or we attribute that supreme
dominion to another which belongs only to him, unless we were God himself; we
might not do so, how severe was God against that Jewish Idolatry in worshipping
Idols, his glory he would not have given to another; Now this is not the less
Idolatry because it is not so bodily; The more secret and hidden it is the more
abominable; Herod was eaten up with lice because he was not displeased when
others said, The voice of God and not of man, Act. 12.23. He was tickled with
it, and received it well enough, I tell thee such sins as this, are committed
when thou take thy wealth, thy honors, and exaltest thy self thereby and not
God.

Use.
Use of Instruction, How few then take notice of this doctrine, who desire
mercies only to serve God thereby, riches and greatness, to promote God
therewith; If this were so, there could not be those immoderate and unsatisfied
affections in thee; Thou would be more solliciuous bow to improve all for
God, Thy heart would tremble, lest God receive not more glory by giving thee
more mercies, We give thee of thy own said David, 1 Chro. 29 14. and certainly
if we have any thing to glorify God by both the gift and the good use of it,
is wholly of Gods grace; What will thou do who take the good mercies of God,
and usest them as weapons against him? Thou servest thy own lusts and the
devils, Will the patience of God always bear this?

SERMON VII. The Text Vindicated from Arians, Vbiquitarians, and Papists: And
the power and dominion of Christ observed, and applied to the comfort of his
Disciples, and terror of his Enemies.
JOH. 17.2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him.
THe Verse before spoke of the mutual glorification which is between the Son
and the Father; Now this second verse is specificative or declarative of that
wherein or whereby the Son may and does glorify the Father, viz. by the
power that he has in the whole world, more especially in the Church of God,
giving eternal life to them that do believe; So that this Text contains one
principal way or manner how the Son does glorify the Father; All the
wondrous works that are done in the world bring not so much glory to God as the
spiritual works which are wrought by Christ in the Church.

In the words we may take notice of Christ's power, and the use or exercise of
it: The power is mentioned in the former part, The exercise in the latter.

Concerning the former observe

1. The power expressed in this word (...), which say some does not signify a
mere power, but a power with right, and so difference it from (...), as if that
signified any power, this only is just and lawful; As among the Latins
potentia and potestas are diversified, but this is not universally true, for
(...) is sometimes applied to those powers and principalities of the Kingdom
of darkness.

2. You have the extent of this power by the universality of the Object, over
all flesh; Flesh is usual put Synechdochically for man, to denote his
fragility and meannesse.

3. There is the manner of the obtaining this power, It is given him.

Before we gather our doctrine, Let us Theologically explicate this Text; The
Text vindicated against
Christ says he has all power given him, From whence three corrupt Opinions
have been by some in a seeming way established.

1. The blasphemous doctrine of the Arians, 1. The Arians.
What Christ has (say they) is given him, Therefore he is, Deus constitutus,
Deus creatus, Deus datus, not Deus natus, how can he be of the same nature with
God, who has all he has given him in time. But this is answered, first, If
Christ speak here of his divine nature, then though not as God yet as the
second person he is of the Father, and so not in time, But from all Eternity
had with his person all those divine properties communicated unto him. for
therefore he is called the Son because begotten of the Father. But secondly,
If the Text speak not of his nature but the office or reward rather of his
Mediatorship, then that power and glory which is here said to be given him, may
well be understood of that Mediatory power and honor God vouchsafed to him,
and although by reason of the personal Union all honor and glory was due to
him, yet God had so ordered it that he should not have the manifestation of it,
till he had suffered and run through the whole course of his active and passive
obedience; Therefore many understand this power here said to be given Christ
only in respect of manifestation, for in Scripture Language Haec aliquid
dicitur fieri, quando incipit patefieri, as God said, This day have I begotten
thee, Act. 13.33. upon Christ's Resurrection, because then he was truly
manifested to be the Son of God.

2. The Ubiquitarian Lutherans.
2, Another party rises up, and squeezes blood instead of milk: Those Lutherans
that are called Ubiquitarians, because they hold, that the humane nature of
Christ is every where, saying, that the properties of the divine nature are
communicated to the humane; Thus because it is said All power is given Christ
therefore they conclude the humane nature of Christ is omnipotent, omniscient,
omnipresent: But this is to argue fallaciously from the abstract to the
concrete; For suppose this be an infinite power that is here spoken of, it only
follows that it is given to Christ in the concrete, to be omnipotent, not to
his humane nature in the abstract, Christ is made omnipotent, his humane nature
is not.

3. Papists.
3. Some Papists but not all from this expression gather, that the right of all
temporal dominion was here given to Christ, and from hence would gather, that
because the Pope is Christ's Vicar, therefore he succeeds him in this power,
and so can dispose of all Kingdoms and Nations as he pleases. But the most
learned of the Papists say, This power over all flesh is restrained to the
matter in hand, viz. to gather and preserve his Church, and at last to save it,
otherwise Christ would not have said to the man, who desired him to divide the
Inheritance, Who made me a Judge? Luke 12.14. For if men had not, yet if God
had, he had a full call to exercise such a temporal jurisdiction, as Valentia
the Jesuit well urges.

The Text thus vindicated, let us observe this Doctrine.

Doct.
That Christ has power over all men: There is no man so great, so powerful,
nor no company of men, nor all the men joined together in the world, can exempt
themselves from that power Christ has over them; We have one or two Parallel
places that confirm this; Mat. 28.18. All power is given me in heaven and
earth; There the Subject is more large, not only all flesh but all spirits,
Mat. 11.27. All things are delivered unto me of my Father; There also the
subject is more large, not only all persons but all things, as Heb. 2. All
things are said to be made subject to him.

Observe these particulars to clear the nature of Christ's power.
Before we come to mention what acts there are which declare this power of
Christ, we must lay down several particulars to clear the nature of this power.

And First, When its said, that Christ has power over all men, that is not to
be understood restrictly or exclusively, I. Christ's dominion universal.
as if his dominion was only over men; No, you heard it was in heaven as well
as earth, yea, and in hell also, Phil. 2. Every thing under the Earth was to
bow to him: The devils are wholly in subjection to him, We read of his power
over the unclean spirits, casting them out against their wills from the
possessed, insomuch that they could not enter into the Swine, without his
permission; Oh this part of Christ's power, that he has conquered the devils,
has them all in subjection, should be no mean part of a Christians comfort,
for who is thy greatest Enemy? Who is likeliest ^o undo thee? not man but
devils; In their temptations how greatly are the godly in danger of being
swallowed by them? but Christ has power over them, he bids them go our leave
of tempting, and they dare not or cannot come again, yea, the good Angels,
those thousands and ten thousands of ministering spirits they are wholly at his
beck: No servant will sooner stir at our beck, then the host of Angels will at
his word; Therefore Heb. 1. when Christ is coming into the world, The Angels
are bid to worship him, So then here is a glorious power indeed, which reaches
not only to men but to devils, to Angels, oh how happy are the Children of God
who have this Christ for their Savior, that is clothed with so much power! If
our eyes were opened with the Prophets Servant, we should see more were with us
then against us; And then all things, the inanimate and animate creatures are
under his power; The Disciples wondered at it, when they said, What manner of
man is this whom the winds and Seas obey? Mat. 8.27. So that this power of
Christ is far more comprehensive then this Text expresses, for Christ only
speaks of men, because he instanceth in that part of power whereby he gives
eternal life to those that believe, and such are only men.

Secondly, We are to know, That though all power be given to Christ, II. The
administration of Christ's power is by his Spirit
yet the administration and exercise of it is by his spirit called therefore
the Spirit of Christ, by that he convinces, by that he converteth, by that he
comfort; Insomuch that Christ told his Disciples, It was expedient he should
bodily depart from them, but he would send the Comforter to them, Joh. 15.26.
so that not the Pope but the Spirit of God is Vicarius Christ's, in Christ's
stead; Hence it is that all the same glorious and spiritual effects in the
Scripture, are sometimes attributed to the Father, sometimes to Christ, and
sometimes to the holy Ghost in their peculiar appropriation; Christ by his
Spirit is to be expected and prayed for as the author of all that grace and
comfort we stand in need of.

3. Although the power of Christ extend to the bodies and externals of men,
III. Of Christ's dominion over the consciences of men.
yet that which in the Text is considerable, is, that it reaches to the hearts
and consciences of men; And this is more then any temporal power can do, He
bids Matthew the Publican Follow him, and he leaves all to follow him; He
casts an eye upon Peter, and he presently goes out and weepeth bitterly; It Is
upon the spirits and consciences of men this power of Christ is most
conversant; It Is by this their minds are enlightened, their hearts changed,
their lusts subdued, and they made new creatures, which made him say, he was
the life, the truth, and the way, Joh. 14.6.) he is all things efficiently for
our salvation, so that the great things we are to expect from this power is
convictions of conscience and conversions of heart; If the blindness of thy
mind, if the hardness of thy heart be too heavy a stone for thee to remove,
then lift up thy eyes to Christ, Say O Lord thou have power over all flesh,
Thou can subdue and conquer every man's heart; No man, no Angel can do this,
Therefore take thou the sole glory in doing of it.

Fourthly, As it is the heart of a man this power reaches to, so the main and
chiefest effects of this power are spiritual and such as tend to salvation; IV.
The chief effects of Christ's power are spiritual.
To give faith, to give repentance to men; When I am lifted up (said Christ) I
will draw all unto me, Joh. 12.32. Though Christ as God made the world, all
things are supported and born up by him, Heb. 1. yet these things are not so
considerable as what is done to man's salvation; Therefore he makes the great
end of his coming into the world to save that which is lost, he came to
dissolve the works of the devil. His Titles that he has are in reference to
heavenly advantages; He is called Jesus because he saves his people from their
sins, and Christ because furnished with all fitness and fulness to be a
Savior; The Jews indeed they looked for a Messiah that should deliver them out
of the captivity and bondage they were in; They hoped for such a power over all
flesh, that should restore them to their ancient temporal glory; But this
carnal prejudice was their undoing.

V. It is infinite power.
Fifthly, This power must needs be infinite, for although it does not follow
that because he has power over all flesh, that therefore he is omnipotent and
infinite, yet if you do regard the end why he has all this power, it must
necessarily be infinite, for it is to gather and save a people out of the world,
to justify their persons, to sanctify their natures, It Is to judge all men at
the last day; Now how can he be judge of all men's lives, yea, their secret and
heart sins, if he have not infinite knowledge, and although the humane nature
of Christ be not capable of infinity and omnisciency, yet the person that is
the Judge must be so qualified; This infinite power which Christ has on one
side proclaims unspeakable terror to Christ's enemies, and on the other side
ineffable joy to his friends.

VI. It is arbitrary in the use of it
Sixthly, This power is arbitrary in the use of it; He opens this man's heart and
leaves another shut, he cures this blind eye and leaves another in
darkness, Mat. 11.27. When Christ had acknowled that sovereign arbitrary power
of God in revealing the Mysteries of salvation to babes, and hiding them from
the wise of the world, he adds, All things are delivered me of my Father, No
man knows the Father but he to whom the Son will reveal him; So then this
gracious power of Christ is not indifferently exercised upon all; To some
Christ reveals the will of God effectually, to others not; There were many
Publicans besides Matthew, yet to him Christ makes known himself and not to
others. Many Pharisees besides Paul that were not so bitter and violent against
the Name of Christ, yet Christ makes him feel this glorious power on his heart,
and others not.

In what particulars Christ's dominion appears.
These things laid as Foundations Let us consider some of the remarkable
particulars wherein Christ's dominion over all flesh and especially the Church
does so appear, that so we may take heed how we neglect him.

1. In appointing a Ministry for the conversion of souls.
And First, This is a remarkable Instance of his power to appoint a Ministry
for the conversion and saving of peoples souls: Whatsoever thy thoughts may be
about the nullity or uselesnesse of it, yet this is a clear effect of his
power, Mat. 28. when he said, All power was given him in heaven and earth, then
he gives his Apostles Commission to go teach and baptize all Nations; Observe
the reason why Christ begins with this Preface, All power is given me, etc.
and therefore Go and baptize; Because it is of high concernment to encourage and
imbolden the Ministers of God to consider whose Servants they are, whose work
they go about; They come from him who is able to defend them against the whole
world, how easily might the Apostles be dejected with the greatness of the
work* and their utter unfitness? What are such poor and despicable men as they
are to set against the lives and manners of the whole world? but he that has
all power in heaven and earth bid them Go preach, Go baptize, and thus Ephesians.
4.11. The Ministry is there made the great and noble work Christ did, upon his
Ascension to heaven, so that to oppose Christ's Ministry, to set against this
is to set against Christ himself; It Is not their power but Christ's power thou
would destroy.

2. In giving success to the means of grace
Secondly, This power goes further then to appoint a mere Ministry, he
blesses it, he gives success, he makes it to bring forth much fruit. This
makes the Apostle in his first Epistle to the Corinthians so much exalt Christ
and advance him, While one cried up this Teacher, another that, he bid them
remember that all the Paul's and Apolloes in the Word though never so eminent,
were but Ministers by whom they did believe, yea Col. 3.19. those that did so
much admire and set up Angels, who easily may be thought to do more then the
best Ministers, yet Paul throws all such doctrine down to the ground, and
bids them hold the head Christ, from whence all parts of the body receive their
nourishment; Oh this cannot be pressed enough on you, Many are not so profane
to despise the Ministry, to cry down Ordinances (though there be such in the
world) but then they are without Christ in the Ministry, without Christ in the
Ordinances: As the Apostle spoke of some without God in the world, So these are
without Christ in the Church: It Is not the Ministry or Ordinances but Christ
in them and by them which communicates virtue and efficacy.

Thirdly, Christ's power is seen in convincing and enlightening men's
understandings so far as to see their sinful and damnable estate, III.
Enlightening the Understanding.
as also the absolute necessity of a remedy through Christ. Thus Christ does
exceed the Sun, for though the Sun give light to the world, yet it does not
give eyes or ability to see, but Christ does not only make the bodily blind to
see, and deaf to hear, but those that are spiritually darkened in their
understandings, he makes them to know Christ he does so teach, that the soul
cannot but learn, it cannot refuse or gainsay, O Lord, I feel such light in my
heart, such evidence upon my conscience, that I cannot hide this light any way;
But as those glorious apparitious of light which Paul had and others, came with
great amazement, filled them with trembling and astonishment, so does Christ's
power upon the hearts of Believers; Oh then enquire who are they, where are
they that have found Christ's power thus upon their minds and consciences? How
weak are books, yea the best Book, the Bible it self, t^ll Christ take such a
threatening, or such a promise, and set it home with power on thee? This
heavenly teaching and persuading Christ speaks of as to be wrought by his
Spirit, Joh. ^4. And it was wonderful in the beginning of the Gospel yea, in
the first beginnings of Reformation out of Popery, the glorious workings of
Christ were admirable to this purpose; Then Christ and the Ministry went along
together; No sooner did the Trumpet blow, but the walls of Jericho fell down;
When Christ thus powerfully taught them, they were quickly persuaded to leave
their Idols and their lusts to follow him: The first Reformers were so many
divine Orpheus's that made the very beasts and trees to move, the illiterate
and stupid people to seek out for wisdom and heavenly understanding, You may
say then, Why does not Christ still come with the same power? Why are not our
Churches Christ's Schools, wherein every day he teaches some or other, many
learn by the Minister, but few are taught by Christ? They do not know the
truths as they are in Jesus; There are many go to false causes; But those
impediments which indeed resist this Point are

1. The atheism and unbelief reigning every where, so that we may take up that
old complaint, Lord, Who will believe our report? It Is said of some, Christ
could do no miracles there, because of their unbelief, Mar. 6.5, 6. Not but
that he had power, but to show what an obstacle unbelief was; When they
insulted over Christ at the Cross, Let him come down and save himself, if he
be the Son of God let him deliver him, Heb. 4.2. Christ did not these things
not because he wanted power but they were wicked; so Christ's power is not
shortened; It Is not because there is no Ministry, but because the unbelief of
man is great.

2. Christ demonstrates not his power it may be because Customarinesse under
the Word breeds contempt and negligence: At the first men's affections are
quick, but when accustomed to the world all the excellency and liveliness of
it is taken away. A blind man upon the first recovery of sight would admire
the Sun, but those that are used to it regard it not, though so glorious a
creature.

3. The unthankefulnesse and unfruitfulnesse under the means of grace makes
Christ deny his power; When the people of Israel murmured at their Manna, then
God was provoked against them; He punished the Heathens because they did not
glorify God according to their knowledge, neither were thankful, how much
more Christians for abusing the Light of the Gospel.

IV.
4. Though there are not so many yet there are some few in most places that have
found this mighty power of Christ on their souls; Though there were not many
raised out of the grave by Christ, yet one Lazarus is enough to demonstrate the
glorious power of Christ; One in a Family, one in a Town, yea, one in a whole
Nation, is enough to prove that Christ though now in heaven has this power
over men in the earth; Let such then who have been thus taught, so as no man,
no book could teach them, give glory to Christ, bless Christ for good Sermons,
good Books, especially the Word of God, but above all that virtue comes from
Christ by these to heal thee; Though the woman had touched the hem of Christ's
garments a thousand times, yet if Christ had not caused virtue to come out of
him, she had not been cured, so it is here.

SERMON VIII. The Effects and Appearances of the Kingly Power and Dominion of
Christ.
JOH. 17.2. As thou have given him power over all flesh.
WE are treating upon that main and necessary point in Religion, Christ's Power
and Kingdom; We have mentioned some effects or acts of this power, We shall
proceed to discover more.

V. The Fountain of Grace.
And first, Herein is his power over all flesh, especially his Church seen, that
he is the author and fountain of all the grace the godly have; And this is a
glorious demonstration of his power, that not we our selves or any Angel in
heaven can inspire one good thought, mollify and convert the heart, adorn the
soul with all kind of graces, but Christ only, Joh. 1.16. Of his fullness we
all receive grace for grace, that is, as some expound, abundance and heaps of
grace, as it were, or grace that is suitable and proportionable to that in
Christ, As the child receives from the Father limb for limb, Of his Fullness,
Christ then has Fullness not only for himself but for us, as the Sun has
fullness of light for the whole world, The Ocean Fullness of water for all the
streams; The Angels and Saints glorified in Heaven, yea, Adam in the state of
integrity he had a Fullness of grace, but it was limited and stinted in him,
only Christ received it without measure: In Christ there is plenitudo fontis,
in Angels or Adam there was only plenitudo vasis, as Divines express it: Now
this Fullness of Christ is for communication and our participation of ^t;
Therefore in other places he is compared to the Olive Tree, from which the
godly receive all their fatness, Romans 9. To the Vine, Joh. 15. so that unless
we are branches in him we can do nothing: If than we should say, Where is the
power of Christ, how is it manifested? I answer, look upon all the godly, Are
they able to mourn for sin with a godly sorrow? Are they able to believe in
the promise? Can they mortify their lusts? Herein is Christ's glorious power
seen, I know this does not so much affect us, as outward extraordinary
instances of Christ's power in temporal things, but certainly this is greater,
for as Moses and Joshua's deliverance of the people of Israel out of Egypt, is
nothing to that spiritual deliverance which Christ as Jesus vouchsafes to his
people in saving them from sin and hell, yet no doubt an Israelite or Jew after
the flesh would far prize the former before the latter, though the Jew after
the Spirit would far esteem the latter; Thus it is here, No power or works
are judged great but what are temporal, visible, and in civil outward things,
we are apt more to look upon Alexander the great, or Constantine the great,
because of their civil power, then Christ who is the King of Kings and Lords,
transcending all these, but in a spiritual way, 1 Timothy 6.15. Christ has this
magnificent Title, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: It Is observed by Drusius a
Learned man, that those Titles were usually given to the great Kings of Persia,
then which there were none assumed more to themselves then they did, yet the
Apostle attributes this to Christ to inform us, that as God has exalted
Christ above all earthly power, so we should magnify and glorify him
accordingly, certainly if we Christians did put forth our faith and meditations
about the greatness of this power, it would work great joy and confidence in
us; It would work an holy fear and trembling: The Apostle Ephesians. 1. Phil 2. Col.
1. is even transported with the expressions about it. Now this power of Christ
is no where more glorious then in sanctifying and preparing an holy people for
himself; To give them of the same Spirit with him, They that were dead and
noisome in sin to make them live in holiness and to adorn them with all the
graces of his Spirit; Oh then let not the people of God be dismai^d or
discouraged with the apprehension of their own weakness and impotency; how can
they love God, bear afflictions, die in hope and comfort; Alas! thou think
on thy own weakness and not Christ's power, Remember Of his Fullness thou art
to receive; A thirsty man need not doubt whether the whole Ocean has water
enough to revive him: Christ we read gave wonderful power to his Disciples and
other believers to work miracles; This amazed and astonished all the world, but
certainly this power of changing men's hearts and reforming their lives, is
far above this: To open the eyes of the mind is more then to give bodily
sight, to say Ephatha to the heart is more then to say so to the ear; To raise
from the death of sin is more then to command out of the grave: Austin said, To
make a man holy is more then to create a world. Conversion is not usually
called a Miracle, yet it is a greater wonder then a Miracle, Let that soul then
which has found Christ thus powerful upon him, admire the unsearchable
greatness of his Christ wonder at it as the most admirable expression of Gods
power to thee.

Secondly, Christ's power is seen in that he does not only give grace, VI. The
giver of glory.
but he is able to bestow all that glory and happiness the Scripture
promises; Now the reward or fruit of grace is either that inward peace and joy
of heart here, or eternal happiness hereafter, both which are in Christ's power
and munificence, It was always a flower in the chiefest power to be able to
remunerate those that did great service, and this is part of Christ's Jus
Regale: For the first the peace of conscience and joy which accompanies
well-doing is exceeding great, insomuch that if there were no heaven hereafter,
yet godliness brings a present sweetness and delight with it, It has present
pay; Now all this peace and comfort especially between God and the soul is
wrought by Christ only who is called the King of Peace, Isa. 9. yea, our peace,
Ephesians. 2.14. because he reconcileth God and man; If those Peacemakers be blessed
that make man and man to agree, how much more is he that brings God and man to
agreement? But this Christ works; Alas the heart troubled for sin, rages
and is like an hell, till Christ bids it be quiet and still: Hence he promises
to send the Comforter, and it is his Spirit which is sent into our hearts,
making us to cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. Oh then let the grieved and perplexed
soul through the guilt of sin, that can find no rest, no ease, go to him that
has power indeed to command these waves to be still, See with what love and
power Mat. 11.28. this is expressed, Come to me ye that are heavy laden, and I
will ease you: Christ will give ease; See how imperiously he speaks, Let your
sin be never so terrifying, your conscience never so disquieted, The devils
never so much troubling and tempting of you, yet I will give you ease; You
shall find rest for your souls: No earthly power in the world can say thus
truly; Therefore this is to direct the godly in their black temptations; They
cry out, It cannot be I should have peace, I should have joy; There may as soon
come fire out of water as peace and quietness out of my heart; Oh remember
this Text, The power Christ has over all flesh, Is thine excepted? Christ can
ease and quiet every man's heart but thine; Be ashamed to think thy weakness
more then Christ's power; Thy guilt more then his consolations. The other fruit
of a godly life is Eternal happiness; and this Christ does also bestow upon
those that are his; At the day of judgment we read of him putting them into
possession, Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you,
Mat. 25. Heb. 5.9. he is called The author of eternal salvation, he calls
himself the bread of life, he that eats on him shall never die more, so that
all that happiness and blessedness which is in the life to come is attributed
unto Christ, both the purchase and author of it: It Is he that will say, Well
done, good and faithful Servant, enter thou into thy Masters joy: For those
Parables that speak of a great King employing his Servants in such work, and
then so abundantly rewarding of them, is Christ. This should be a great
encouragement in Christ's service; What a glorious and powerful Master do ye
serve? one who is able to requite thee with eternal glory and everlasting
happiness, If we suffer with him we shall reign with him, Romans 8.17. The
greatness and bounty of the Master does quicken the Servant; Haman was glad of
Ahashuerus his emploiment, because he could put such honor upon him; But oh
how should our hearts be enflamed to work for Christ, what cannot such a Master
do for us? Ask any thing in earth or heaven he can bestow it on thee: How
unworthy is it when we grudge at the work Christ requires, when we repine at
the Cross he would have us take up, This is not to attend whom we serve; how
great our Master is, what Treasuries he has out of which he can bountifully
reward us.

VII. Forgive and pardon sin.
Thirdly, Christ's power is seen in that he can forgive and pardon sin, Which
is acknowledged by all, that God only can do it, Mar. 2.7. You have this power
of Christ particularly opposed by his enemies, but vindicated by him, and that
he has power to forgive sins, he proves by his power to work Miracles: Not
that to bid a lame man rise, and take up his bed and walk, is a greater thing
then to forgive him, but to their sense and in outward appearance it was so;
yea, he does not only remit sin, but he appoints the Ministers of the
Gospel to remit and forgive sins, viz. by declaration and application of the
Promises, and this he says shall be confirmed in heaven; Certainly no power
can be denied him who can authoritatively and of himself pardon sin, sin
being an infinite injury and dishonor to God, he must be equal with God that
can remit this, for it is a sure Rule, Nemo potest remittere de jure alieno. Oh
how comfortable is this to meditate on by faith, he has power to forgive
sin, who died for thy sin, who was crucified that it might be done away: If
then thy sins are a burden to thee, if thou do leave and forsake them,
doubt not of thy pardon; Oh do not say, whether will Christ pardon or no, for
seeing he has power, his will was abundantly manifested in the sacrificing of
himself on the Cross: Now sin is the sting in every thing, remove sin and
death is no death, hell is no hell, if Christ's power takes this away, it takes
all away.

Fourthly, Christ's Power is seen in giving Laws, VII. The great Lawgiver.
and prescribing duties to all according to which they should live: Therefore
he calls them his Commandments, and the Apostle urges, If they died without
mercy that refused Moses speaking, of how much sorer punishment shall they be
thought worthy who refuse him speaking from heaven? In this respect it is that
he is so often called a King, and a Kingdom is attributed to him, because he
makes Laws, and enjoyneth the observation of them under higher penalties then
any earthly power can do, and that is eternal damnation, and this
consideration is a two edged Sword to many hypocrites; They love Christ they
say, they trust in him their Redeemer, but they do not obey him as a King; This
is a Lawgiver who has power to damn and to save; Oh that the profane and
ungodly wretch, who yet hopes for mercy by Christ, would lay this to heart
more: Art thou obedient to him as Lord and King? He says, Swear not at all,
Do thou give obedience? give over thy cursing and swearing: He says, Let not
your hearts be overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness, Do you obey this
Law? and so of adultery and uncleanness, He that does but lust after a woman
is guilty of eternal death; What think you of these Laws? Are not these holy
and just? Do you think Christ has not power to be avenged on you? Oh take heed
of making this power against thee; It Is able to undo thee without hope.

Fifthly, Christ's power is remarkably seen, in enabling and strengthening his
Children in all their afflictions, so that they do not only bear them, IX. And
supporter and comforter of his people.
but triumph therein with joy unspeakable and full of glory. This has
magnified the power of Christ in heaven more then any thing else; Men have
wondered and been amazed at the patience of the Saints, and the joy of the
Martyrs: But whence came they to be thus endowed with power? Had not they flesh
and blood as well as others? Was not death with the exquisite torments of it in
it self dreadful to them as well as others? yea, certainly but Christ's power
in them made them above themselves: Paul speaking of this wonderful
disposition, to know how to abound and how to want, adds, He can do all
things through Christ that strengthens him, Phil. 4.13. So that hereby he will
rejoice in his infirmities, because Christ's power is thereby more manifested, 2
Cor. 12.5. Oh then here is a good subject for the Children of God to dwell on,
God does not call them sometimes to lay down their lives to a bloody agony, he
does but exercise them with ordinary calamities, such as are common to man,
Every carnal natural man has the like, and their natural strength bears them
up in it, yet thou though promised the strength of Christ criest out, Thou
shall be overcome, Why art thou so weak and full of unbelief? Is not Christ's
power for thy good? Has he not all this power in heaven and earth for the good
of his Children? Does not thy diffidence make thee doubt whether Christ be
able, whether he can support thee or no? Alas, if these less troubles be so
irksome, what would thou do if thou were called to more fiery trouble? If
thou can not bear rods, how will thou Scorpions? Be ashamed, yea, and afraid
of this unbelief, for Christ gives his power only to those that trust and hope
in him; Believe and all things will be possible to thee.

X. The Judge of the world.
Sixthly, If all Instances were so signally demonstrating the power Christ has
over all flesh as this, that he is appointed to judge the whole world, both
quick and dead are to stand at his Tribunal; Two things in this do manifest his
exceeding great power, 1. The immediate preparation to it. 2. The Act of
judging the preparation to it, for Christ by his power shall raise up all out
of their graves, those that for many years have been consuming into dust, shall
then by his power come out of their graves, 1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all died,
so by Christ shall all be made alive; The godly they shall rise because they
are members to him the head; Hence the Apostle argues the Resurrection of the
one from the other; And the ungodly they shall be raised by him as a Judge,
What temporal power can be imagined like this? and then his solemn coming to
judgment, in what power Majesty and trembling will it be, 1 These. 1.7, 8,
Christ shall come with his mighty Angels in flaming fire of vengeance; So then
it cannot enter into the heart of man to conceive, how glorious and yet how
dreadful this manifestation of Christ's power will be: And as for the judgment
it self, Christ is the Judge, and therefore it is called the judgment seat of
Christ, and the day of Christ's coming; Then shall the sins of all men, yea, the
secret counsels and purposes of heart be manifested, Oh what a day will this
be; Though Christ in the flesh was contemned, vilified and reproached, yet then
he shall come in power; At that time he shall give final sentence concerning
the salvation and damnation of men; This is the great instance of his power,
Though now we believe it only and not see it, yet then we shall see and behold
it with our bodily eyes; Oh tremble at this you who will not now in obedience
and humility submit your selves to him, then look for Christ to be a Judge; You
look for him only as a Savior, you think he came only to forgive; No, he
comes as well to destroy, He will judge righteous judgment; They in the
Revelation cried to the Mountains to cover them from the wrath of the Lamb.

XI. And the subduer of his and his Churches enemies.
Lastly, Christ's power over all flesh is seen even in this life, by overruling,
conquering, and subduing his enemies; Christ though in heaven has his enemies,
all those that are enemins to the Church, to his Children, they are enemies to
Christ; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9.4. We oppose Christ while
we oppose his members; Do but hurt the feet, and the head in heaven presently
feels it; But mark what is added, It Is hard for thee to kick against the
pricks; Christ will reign, his power will be exalted, maugre all the malice in
the world, Psa. 2.2. The rage of the Heathens and all their Imaginations were
but a vain thing, God will set his Son upon the holy hill of Sion, therefore
the Judges of the world are exhorted to kiss the Son, to give him hearty and
humble obedience, for they are not able to bear, though but a little of his
anger; Hence Rev. 2.27. Christ is said to rule the Nations with a rod of Iron,
and he will break them in pieces like a Potters vessel: Christ can as easily
break all the power and greatness that is lifted up against him, as we can
break an earthen pot with an Iron rod; And if you say, Why then is the power of
Turk and Pope still lifted up against him? The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 15. and
Heb. 2. All things are not yet in subjection to him, he has a Kingdom and
power, but as yet he is only Rex pugnans and vincens, then he will be Rex
triumphans; He will put down all Powers and Principalities; There will be
nothing but Christ's power; Oh then we proclaim aloud to wicked men, As you love
your souls, as you would avoid this dreadful power, go on no longer in your
rebellion and disobedience; Christ has indeed a Scepter of grace, but he has
also a rod of Iron, and thou will find his blows when he comes to judge his
enemy, and whosoever loves and lives in sin, he is Christ's enemy: O that
men's eyes were opened, and their hearts softened that the wrath of this Judge
might not fall upon them.

SERMON IX. Christ under the notion of a Head, applied to the Terror of his
Enemies and Comfort of his Members,
JOH. 17.2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, etc.
THE several Instances or Acts of Christ's power have been dispatched, I shall
only name one Title usually given him, which will serve greatly to illustrate
this power; For although he be compared to many things that denote him the root
of all our grace, To the bread of life, Joh. 6.35. To Manna, To the Vine, Joh.
15. To the Olive tree, Romans 11. In natural things, so also things of power and
love in civil things; To an husband, 2 Cor. 11.2. to a King, to a Lord, yea, a
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, yet that which I shall pitch on as being most
comprehensive, and the Scripture most delighting in, is, That he is an Head to
his Church; The Apostle does frequently use this property, 1 Cor. 1.3. The head
of every man is Christ. Ephesians. 1.22. He is there set to be Head over all things.
Col. 2.20. The head of all Principality. He is there made head of the Angels,
not properly, for Angels cannot be called members of his body, but improperly,
as head is used for the chief Governor: Seeing then many places to express
this transcendent power of Christ over all flesh, use this word Head: Let us
consider what that implies, and the rest shall be spent in practical
improvement of this Point, Christ then is appointed an head, and so has power
over all things.

1. In regard of his eminency and dignity, for he is exalted above every name,
any thing that has the greatest fame and glory either in this world or that to
come, Col. 1.18. That he might have the pre-eminence in all things. So that we
should account nothing great in comparison of Christ: All the great men with
their great power that in their generations have made such wonderful changes
in the world, in respect of Christ, should be but as a Molehill to the vast
Heavens: As God has set him above every Name, so should we: We read of some
Christian Emperors and great Lords that they would not be called Domini Lords,
as being too great a Title, only Domni, by diminution, yea, it is said of
Augustus, in whose Reign Christ was born, that he prohibited himself to be
called Dominus. Some make a peculiar Providence of God in this, because then
Christ came into the world, who was the Lord of the world, The world was made
by him, and in this particular there is a great difference between a natural
head, and this mystical, for a natural head does not make the other parts of
the body, but is made proportianably with them, only this mystical head makes
all his members, he does not only give nourishment but create their very being:
It Is true, Christ in the state of his humiliation was a little lower, or as the
word is to be interpreted for a little while lower then the Angels, Heb. 2. But
after this he was lifted up above all principality and power, and certainly
this is a wonderful thing, that so great part of the world should set up that
Christ as their God in whom they believe, that was crucified, dead, and buried,
and though now ascended into heaven, yet we see him not with bodily eyes,
neither is his Kingdom and power after an earthly and pompous administration,
yet for what a long season, with so many thousands and millions of men, rich
men, great men, Learned men, Kings and Emperors of the world, has he been
worshipped, This shows the Name God has given him: Only the Apostle, Romans 2.
tells us of many that blaspheme this Name of our God, by reason of the
wickedness of Christians; You who profess your selves Christians, and yet
live in beastly and brutish lusts, you keep off Heathens and Pagans from
coming in to own Christ.

2. Christ is an head in respect of his spiritual influence and powerful
communication of his grace and strength to those that are his members, Col.
2.19. The Apostle there and in other places does much dwell on this; That as
the head is the Fountain of all life and motion (for the Scripture seems to
go with them that make the head, not the heart, the Fountain of all life and
motion,) From that every part has its proper nourishment, so it is with the
Church of God, so that this similitude affords many precious Meditations: for
is the godly man fearful his sins will overcome, this lust or that lust will
be too strong for him, he shall not have grace enough to conquer it? Let him
consider the Fullness of his head; is there such a sin that Christ himself is
not able to subdue? Again, do the godly complain they cannot grow, they
continue dwarfs, They do not find any progress, Oh let them consider, that
Christ is the head, and he will have his members grow up to their due
proportion. Further, Is there any one sin, any passion, or lust that is apt
to prevail over them, to captivate them? here also they may have strong
confidence in prayer, saying, O Lord, how unseemly is such a member to so
glorious a head, such an ulcerous noisome part to such an eminent head, if not
out of love to me, yet for thy own honor cure me; What head is there that
would suffer a leprous, noisome part in the body, if it could help it? Again,
Do the godly say, they cannot perform their relative graces, their general
calling they are able to discharge comfortably, but as a Minister, as a
Husband, as a Wife, herein they fail; O the weakness and imperfections there,
Consider this head gives nourishment to every part sutably; The hand has a
nourishment of the hand, the eye of the eye, and thus there is in Christ a
particular suitable ability for thy proper wants; And if you are not enabled in
these things, it is not because there is not fullness enough in Christ, but thy
faith is weak; There is Oil enough but thou have no cruse.

Lastly, If the meannesse and lowness of thy condition trouble thee, saying,
though Christ the head may communicate to such worthy and eminent Christians,
they are enabled to do him great service, yet will he look on such a dead dog
as I am? If thou art but the foot, the lowest part in the body, yet the head
minds that, and procures its welfare as well as other parts, so that this
very consideration is a Catholicon, It Is a Remedy against every Disease.

3. This relation of a Head implies a near Union and Conjunction; What can be
nearer then the head and the body? yet such a communion and conjunction there
is between Christ and the godly, and this very consideration proves the
perseverance of the godly; Shall Christ lose one member of his body totally,
and suffer it to be damned in hell? Oh the comfortable and hopeful thoughts the
children of God should have from this relation, from Wife, from Husband, though
they be bone of thy bone, and flesh of thy flesh, thou must part, but not from
Christ; This Union with Christ is the foundation of all our comfort and hope
against Apostasy; Again, because of this conjunction we may expect protection
and provision even in outward things: Does not the Apostle say, No man yet ever
hated his own flesh, but cherished it, Ephesians. 5.29. Shall Christ then the head
forget thee? Shall he withhold his e^e from his own flesh? Will the head suffer
the foot to starve? Certainly this consideration should wonderfully support
against all discouragements and necessities whatsoever.

Lastly, Because of this conjunction Christ has a sympathy and f^llow-fe^ling
with us; What is done against the Saints on earth is also against Christ; If
one part suffers the head condoleth with it, and for this end Christ endured
those many temptations, that he might know how to pity those that were in the
same condition, Heb 4.15.

3. Christ is the head in respect of government and direction, he is the King
of Saints, and the King of Nations: You read he had a Rod of Iron to bruise
his enemies, only this government though it be in the world, yet it is not in a
worldly manner; The b^st and choicest part of it is in preparing and fitting
those whom the Father has given him to eternal life, and to these his
spiritual government is full of sweetness and full of power admirable in
positive and preventing mercies; It Is from this gracious government that
nothing shall fall out either through the malice or policy of hell, that shall
be able to hinder them from their crown; He is the strong one that has
conquered all the enmity against his people; Oh what treasures of comfort are
in this; Thou art under Christ's spiritual government, and so all conditions,
all necessities, all occurrences in the world they further thy spiritual good;
There is nothing can befall thee against his will; Thus you see all his power
summed up in this, that he is the head.

I shall now spend the other part in practical Inferences, for it is a womb big
with many such Conclusions.

As in the first place, Has Christ this power over all? then let us take heed
how we refuse him speaking or commanding; If his goodness and mercy will not
win you, he has power enough to awe you: If not love, let fear bring you in,
and that quickly, lest it be too late; The Apostle Heb. 10.17. aggravateth
this, that if they that despised Moses died without mercy, of how much sorer
judgment shall they be thought worthy who refuse Christ speaking. Think ye
(says the Apostle) any one that has reason may gather this, that he shall die
and be damned without mercy: But where is Christ? You will say, how can we
refuse him speaking? The Apostle tells you, Those that hear not his Ministers
declaring his will, they do not hear him; Ye that live against the Scripture,
you whose lives are contrary to the Word, you are enemies to Christ; It Is not
we that are refused, but Christ by us; As if an Ambassador be contemned, it is
not he but the great Person that sends him, whose Ambassador he is; Well then,
we must lay this down for an undoubted Axiom, Every man that lives in the
constant practice of his wickedness, he refuses Christ who has all this
power; Now let these Motives from his power terrify thee: 1. If it were but an
earthly worldly power, what fear, what subjection will that put thee in, Romans
13. If thou do evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain; Oh then
know much rather, if thou do evil, be afraid, for Christ has not this power in
vain; Do thou fear a Prison and not hell? Art thou afraid of losing thy
outward estate, and not thy soul, and all happiness? Thou fear earthly
power, but can that damn thee, Can that throw body and soul into hell? Ignosce
O Imperator, said one, tu carcerem Deus gehennam minatur; Well then for every
profane act of wickedness, for drunkenness, uncleanness, unjust dealing,
there is worse then any Legal fine or mulct. Christ has appointed everlasting
torments for those moments of pleasures; Be not then so brutish and
athiesticall as to think nothing grievous but what the Sword of the Magistrate
can inflict, and as for this eternal punishment thou do not matter it.

Use 2.
2. Let this make thee afraid to affront this power, because it is his who will
be thy Judge, before whose Tribunal thou art sure to be arraigned; This should
be a piercing argument: If this power were in him who had nothing to do with
thee, as a Malefactor in one Country fears not the Magistrate in another
Country, because his power does not reach to him, he is none of his Subject;
But Christ has an universal jurisdiction, we must all appear whether we will
or no, and to give an account to him; Now what can be more dreadful then to
think; This Judge I have dishonored, I have wronged, I have broken all his
Commands, Oh if it were any other Judge I could hope to speed better; Oh if you
have any love to your souls, lay this to heart; Thy wickedness, thy
profaneness it has been against Christ, It was he that commanded thee, he sent
his Ministers to persuade thee, and thou said, Give me my lusts rather then
Christ, the world rather then Christ, and this Christ is now come to be my
Judge; What do thou think or believe about these things? Why do thou stop
thy ear? Why do thou stifle thy Conscience? Why do thou labor to suppress
these thoughts within? If that all this power will not pass by thee, though
but one man, Think not what care I for this power, I will do well enough
howsoever.

Use 3.
3. Consider its power that one day will be expressed only in a dreadful way;
Not the least drop of honey in this Ocean of gall; As yet indeed Christ who
has all power emploieth much of it for the salvation of thy soul; He sends his
Ministers who entreat you to be reconciled with God, and how should that melt
you, for what are you, how despicable and unworthy that God should desire you
to be reconciled to him, he needs you not, he wants you not; This is true,
but the time is coming when all his power will be manifested in a dismal
condemning way; Then he commands his Gaolers the devils to take and torment for
ever; Then he comes in flaming fire of vengeance, cry then, if thou will, Lord,
where is thy power to save? thy power to forgive? and he will say, there is no
more time for such power any longer; Expect no more blessings, no more
invitations, but now prepare for those torments thou art adjudg'd unto, Did we
preach these things to Heathens and Pagans that do not believe the truth of
them, it would be no wonder, if they did not regard them; But how is it that
you who say ye believe these things, that you do not go out and weep bitterly.

Use 4.
4. This power is spiritual, it does reach to the hearts and consciences of
men; Oh be afraid lest upon thy wickedness he puts thee forth, lest he make
thee a Cain, a Judas: Oh it is not all thy wealth* all thy jollity, all thy
pleasures that are able to withstand these troubles and tempests, if Christ
raise them up in thee; If he deliver thee to Satan, as some were, then Christ
withdraws all his comfort, all peace, and lets the devil be thy tormentor,
and thy heart an hell, especially this is done sometimes in time of sickness,
under fears of death, when nothing but outward calamity compasses thee about,
then he commands those black and thick clouds to cover thy heart, which are as
a gulf between Gods mercy and thee; There is no sinner so haughty, so jolly, so
scornful, but Christ can quickly turn his Sun into a black night: Every thing
shall bring thy sins and hell to thy mind, oh be afraid to live so, lest you
provoke Christ to put forth this power.

Use 5.
5. It Is a just and righteous power and therefore never expect impunity and
freedom; For what is the sweet poison that undoeth thee, Oh thou think of
mercy, thou dreamest of mercy, thou speak of mercy, but shall not the Judge
of the world be just also? And is it not the greatest justice in the world,
that as thou would not hear him speaking in the day of grace, so neither
should he hear thee begging and crying in his day of justice; Is it not a most
just thing that thou who said; Let me have my lusts though I be for ever
separated from Christ, that thy own desires should fall upon thy head? What
shall Christ be refused, and that day after day, for every lust and sin, and
shall this always be forgotten? Will Christ never be avenged for it?

Lastly, This power of Christ is to inflict eternal misery; It Is everlasting
fire, Use 6.
and everlasting burnings; It Is a fire that never goes out, worms that never
die; Now what power in the world is like this? Can any make thee miserable for
ever? Can any say, Be thou in torment to all Eternity? but this is the power we
speak of: As the Apostle said, We count not those short afflictions equal to
that eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 5.14. So neither do thou judge those
pleasures equal to that eternal woe.

A second Use of Consolation, For this Doctrine is like the Be, Use of
Consolation.
it has a sting and honey, Like the Ark that had Manna and a Rod, Now what
unspeakable comfort arises from this to the godly, much every way.

1. The Children of God they are subject to sad temptations about the weakness
of their graces and the strength of their lusts, David was not more fearful one
day or other of being overthrown by Saul, then they are at last to be destroyed
either by hypocrisy or apostasy, Now what surer remedy, what more precious
cordial can there be then this Omnipotency of Christ, this plenitude of power?
It was said of the Pope who pleaded for fullness of Church Power, that it was
not plenitudo potestatis but tempestatis; But it is otherwise with Christ, his
fullness of sufficiency is for every want of thine in any spiritual way, he can
as easily give thee spiritual things as temporal, if thou wantst bread, health,
thou think it is but Christ's command* and he can multiply the Loaves, now he
is as willing to do this in heavenly things; It Is but a word from his mouth and
thy proud heart is humbled, thy unruly heart pacified, thy grieved heart
comforted, yea, he is more willing to give us spiritual things, then Parents
give Children their temporals, how much rather will he give the holy Ghost to
them that ask him, Mat. 7. Oh then though all the world cannot help thee in
this matter, yet Christ has power to do it, and as for his willingness, what
cause of doubt, seeing he was crucified and underwent voluntarily all that
ignominy and curses, that he might be exalted to this power to help thee?
Joseph's Brethren were afraid because of their guilt, that Joseph now so much
preferred would not help them, but he is Joseph, and will forgive wrongs, so
also will Christ do to thee.

The second Temptation is about Pardon of sin and Gods displeasure: Oh this
is a restless Sea in which the godly are tossed up and down; This is the
Whales belly that swalloweth up all, Oh but here is a blessed haven, here is
one can command the winds and waves to be still, here is one can say, Son, be
of good comfort, thy sins be forgiven thee.

3. The outward exercises of the godly are very many, They have many thorns in
the flesh, They have deep waters to go through; Now what is an help but the
power of Christ, I can do all things through Christ: None but Christ, None but
Christ, said the Martyrs: Thou say, I have no power, I shall never be able to
go through this condition or that, but has Christ no more? There is power in
his Death and power in his Resurrection; Every thing of Christ has power; The
Prophets dead body gave life to one, how much rather shall Christ crucified? Oh
but you will say, These are words, These are Fancies, Though Christ has all
this power, I am not a whit stronger, I am as unable as any. I answer, Thank
thy self for thy unbelief; All things are possible to the Believer, Christ has
power but the fruit of it is to him that believes; You see all the cures he
works, all the wonderful works he did, it was still believe and it shall be
thus to you, according to thy faith, so be it to thee: If the Fountain be never
so full, unless you come with your vessel you may be scorched with thirst:
You see then how all this power and greatness of Christ may be yours; There is
nothing in him, but it may profit you, and that is by relying on him, putting
confidence in him because of his promise, and if thou say, how can I believe?
that is also by Prayer to God: Even Christ he gives this also, viz. to believe.

SERMON X. Of Predestination, or Gods giving some of Mankind to Christ (not
all) for him to redeem; And what unspeakable Grounds of Comfort to Gods People
flow from thence.
JOH. 17.2. That to as many as thou have given him, he should give Eternal
Life.
THis latter part of the Verse contains the use and exercise of Christ's
Power, which he had from the Father, and therein you may consider, 1. The Fruit
and benefit of it. 2. The Subject on whom this is to be bestowed.


The Fruit is described in the nature of it.

1. Its Life, As Death is the King of Terrors, so life must be the King of joys.

2. The Property of this Life, it is Eternal; This natural life in the midst
of the joys that may accompany it, has this bridle and check; It Is but for a
short uncertain time.

In the next place you have the manner of obtaining it, Its given; There is no
merit, no antecedent worth but it is given. O this is the benefit.

The Subject who is to partake of this gift, is limited and restrained by this
qualification, To as many as the Father has given him; So we translate it,
regarding the sense, otherwise if it should verbatim according to the Greek, it
would be hardly sense to an English ear, For thus it is, That every thing which
thou have given him, to them he should give Eternal Life; Neither indeed is it
pure Grecisme, but an Hebraisme, where sometimes the Nominative case begins
the sentence, and then the sense is so cast afterward, that it quite loses
its Verb, as here, (...), There is also the Neuter gender for the Masculine; Or
else it is used emphatically to show, that not so much totus homo as the torum
hominis, the every thing of a godly man is given to Christ, not his soul but
his body also; This phrase is several times used especially Joh. 6.37. where
it is said, All that my Father gives me comes unto me, I will in no wise cast
out, and will raise him up again; Where that (...) every thing implies body as
well as soul, because it is said, he will raise him up; Now when the Father is
said to give some of mankind to Christ, that is not to be understood of his
divine nature, for so he has all things as God, but as a Mediator and
Redeemer, so that the sense is, God the Father gave some of Mankind^ to Christ,
committed them to his care and trust, that he should be their Mediator, and
obtain everlasting Salvation. From whence Observe,

That not all, but some only of Mankind are given by God the Father to Christ,
Doct. That (not all but) some of mankind are given by God the Father to Christ
to be redeemed by him.
to be a Mediator for them; Though Christ have a sufficiency and fullness in
him to obtain Salvation for all, yet some only are given to him intentionally
by Gods Decree to be their actual Savior and Mediator, To as many (says the
Text, as the Father has given him; This place does batter to the ground that
pleasing opinion of Universal Redemption, for by that not some but all are
given to Christ by the Father, and if so, then all must be saved, for mark that
place, Joh. 10.28, 29, speaking of his Sheep, They shall not perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand, for my Father which gave them me is
greater then all: We need not a cleerer place for these two things, 1. That
there are but some that the Father has given Christ. 2. All those that are
given they are sure to have eternal life, because none is greater then the
Father, So that those two dangerous doctrines, Universal Redemption, and the
total and final apostasy of the true Saints are evidently confuted by that
place. This is so clear that we need not matter their many distinctions to
obscure the truth. That there are some whom the Father has thus committed to
Christ to be their Mediator, appears by this expression, used at other
times; The forementioned place, Joh. 6.37, 39. is considerable; The occasion of
that expression was from the unbelief of the Capernaits, who though they had
seen Christ's wonders yet believed not, but it was no wonder, for says he, All
that is given me of my Father shall come unto me; If you had been thus given to
me you would believe; Now because it is invisible and altogether a secret, known
only to God, who they are that are given to Christ, he shows a sure and
certain fruit of this, They will in time come to him, i. e. believe in him and
receive him, so that we may invert the Saying, all that do truly believe in
Christ they are given unto him of the Father, and for their encouragement he
says, He will in no wise cast them out, a Metaphor from the Master that takes
a Scholar though dull and weak, yet he will forbear and not cast him out, and
lest it should be thought that though it be well with them, thus for the
present, yet for the future they may be undone, he adds v. 39. It Is the
Fathers will, of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but raise
it up again at the last day; Oh the divine and unspeakable consolations that
are here treasured up for the godly, So Joh. 10.29. which you heard before; One
place there is that may be a stumbling block, and seem to weaken all, Joh.
17.12. Those that thou gave me I have kept, and there is none lost but the
Son of Perdition: But the answer is, The Apostles are said to be given to
Christ in a twofold respect, 1. Of sanctification and glorification, and thus
Judas was not. 2. In respect of their Office and calling, as when he said, Have
not I chosen twelve, and one of you is a devil? Joh, 6.10. So that there was a
twofold giving of some to Christ. The one of Justification to eternal life, the
other of office and service, and that this is meant here is plain, because he
is called the Son of perdition, implying the reason why though he was given
to him, yet he was not saved because he was never so given, but he remained a
Son of perdition still: Thus it is answered by some, but the full discussion of
it will be when we come to that verse. Let us explain the doctrine.

And first we see here, that God the Father has power to appoint and determine
concerning the everlasting salvation and damnation of men: It Is plain, for you
see it is as the Father wills, whom he chooses he gives to Christ, and others
they are left by him, Romans 8, 19, 20, You see there the Apostle purposely
pleading this Sovereign power of God, and withal checking these bold and
curious cavils, that men may make against it; Hence Ephesians. 1. and in other
places, Election of some to Eternal life is attributed unto him, before the
foundation of the world, and this was not for any good thing foreseen in us,
but according to the counsel of his good will, which expression is often used
otherwise, as Austin observed, a notable Patron of the Truth against Pelagians,
as the Apostle said, It is not of him that wills or runs, but of him that
shows mercy, Romans 9.16. He might have said the contrary, It Is not of him that
shows mercy but of him that wills and runs. This disparity of Gods grace
choosing some and leaving others, is plainly asserted by Scripture, Mat. 11.
where Christ makes a solemn acknowledging of it: Yea, we see the means of
grace denied to those of Tire and Sidon, who would have repented in sackcloth
and ashes, yet vouchsafed to those of Chorazin, who abused and contemned this;
This is dreadful to consider of, But Austin, and after him others do
excellently curb this bold Interrogation, Why God the Father draws this man
and not the other, do not (say they) search curiously if thou will climb
higher, caveat precipitium; And again, if this Answer of the Apostle, Who art
thou O man, that reply against God? will not satisfy, Quaerat doctiorem,
sed caveat, ne inveniat presumptiorem. Take we then this Truth for a
foundation, it is in the sovereign power of God to choose whom he pleases to
Salvation, and to leave the rest in their damnable estate: Neither is this any
cruelty or injustice in God, for he might have forsaken all mankind, and not
recovered one of them, why then should we so wickedly murmr at Gods secret
but righteous dispensation of these things, and not rather admire the grace of
God that any are saved?

How warily the doctrine of predestination should be preached.
2. This Truth although it be not wholly to be buried, yet it ought to be
preached with much sobriety and circumspection, that so no just offense be
given; It ought to be preached though there are those that would have this
light under the bushel, For we see the Apostle Ephesians. 1. and in many other
places does greatly encourage and comfort the godly with that mercy of God in
choosing of them before the Foundation of the world, Certainly if this be not
known, we cannot set forth the riches of his glory and grace, as the Apostle
implies. The godly are hindered from much of their duty and much of their
comfort, while they do not attend to this, yet because this is not milk but
strong meat, we must regard the auditory and subject to whom it is preached;
It Is Nazianzens excellent Rule, (...), two or three qualifications as so many
battlements he must build to this roof, lest men fall down, as 1. That
notwithstanding this predestination, the Fathers giving of some to Christ, yet
as every man is saved by the grace of God, so every man is damned from his own
proper fault and demerit; So that we see the Scripture is clear in these three
things, that God from all Eternity did choose some to eternal salvation, which
cannot be frustrated, and that these he will in time effectually call, and
change their hearts, nothing shall prohibit or hinder their conversion; and 3.
Those who die and are damned, have cause to blame none but themselves, Thy
destruction is of thy self, Death and hell is always made the Wages of sin:
Now if you say, how can Gods Election and converting grace in time be
reconciled with the use of means, this is clear, the Scripture asserts one and
commands the other, and if we could not untie this knot, it were our weakness,
not any disparagement to the Truth.

Therefore 2. This is so to be preached as that all diligence and care is to be
used in the means; For we cannot think that the Scripture speaks contradiction
so notoriously; For in the Epistle to the Ephesians, the beginning of the first
Chapter is to describe this great work of God from all Eternity, yet in the
latter part he exhorts them to put off all sin, and to be diligent in all
their relation graces, and at another time Work out your salvation with fear
and trembling, for it is God that works in you; Yea, Paul who was so ashamed
of his Election, and that the Arminians grant he had an absolute Election, yet
he kept down his body that he might not be a Reprobate, 1 Cor. 9.27. This
indeed is the difficulty how to reconcile these, that absolute Election is not
opposed to the means, nor the use of means contradict an absolute Election is
affirmed by the Orthodox, several ways have been attempted by the Learned for
the concord of them, but suppose we could not be so comprehensive, as Cajetan,
and some of the Schoolmen confess it an unsearchable Mystery, and therefore
advises Preachers to teach their people to submit to it, as to the Mystery of
the Trinity, yet seeing the Scripture affirms one and commands the other,
it is plain they are consistent and compossible one with another, though we
could not find out the manner how.

3. Nor to dwell at this time long on this Subject which is but obliquely
touched on, Gods giving of some only to Christ, is so to be preached, that it
does not discourage any humble Penitent, or troubled man for sin, that seeks
and thirsts after the grace of God; The weakness of this Doctrine lies here
as it is thought; Therefore the adversaries thereof do continually batter at
this place; As if like Pharaoh we demanded bricks, and gave no straw, commanded
duty, when at the same time they are excluded by God, Therefore say they, this
casts into the bottom of despair, for the troubled heart may think I am none
of those that are given to Christ, though I pray and seek for pardon, yet I may
be a dog and not a child, and so none of the Childrens bread belongs to me; To
this we easily answer, that all those who thus repent of sin and seek after
Gods favor, they are to be ashamed that this is an effect of their being given
to Christ, as you heard, Joh. 18.6. To be given unto Christ is indeed a secret
Mystery transacted in heaven, but to come unto Christ, that is the sure effect
of those that are given to him, and those that come to Christ he will in no
wise cast out; So that the grieved contrite spirit ought to be so far from
having any trouble herein, that he ought exceedingly to rejoice at it, for the
efficacy of all the promises will be to such, They are blessed that hunger and
thirst after Righteousness, Mat. 5.

These things premised, The Doctrine repeated* Corollaries from hence,
let us consider what admirable treasures are bound up in this Truth, that God
the Father has given and betrusted some with Christ, that he should be their
Mediator, and some things are considerable from the Father, and some things
from Christ. I. From the Father giving.


From the Father,

First, That the Original and Fountain of all the good and happiness Gods
People partake of is from the Father. 1. The Father is the original Fountain of
all good.
This primary and first Root was so far from being merited by Christ, that
Christ himself is a fruit thereof; God so loved the world that he gave his only
Son, that he that believes in him should have eternal life, Joh. 3.16.
Howsoever therefore Christ be the meritorious cause of all the fruits of
Election, conversion, justification and salvation, yet of Election it self, or
that will of God to bestow eternal life on some, and for this purpose to send
his Son, this is only from the Father: The impulsive cause was the only good
pleasure and counsel of God, yet this love you must know was not a Law of
reconciliation or amor amicitiae, for so God is reconciled with us only in
Christ, but benevolentiae or beneficentiae, a will to do good, and for that
end to ordain efficacious means thereunto; so then if we go to the Spring and
root out of all those glorious privileges Believers partake of, it will be
found the mere good will and pleasure of God, and certainly this should greatly
enlarge us in thankfulness, that when we could not have any thoughts
concerning our selves, when we could not so much as desire, yea, when we lay in
the womb of nothing, that God had a gracious purpose to us, yea, before the
world was made, Gods thoughts were upon thee; The Apostle does often mention
this.

2. That the Father expects the salvation of those he has given to Christ.
Secondly, This does imply that God the Father has chosen some from others, and
given them as a charge, or trust to Christ, so that he does expect their
Salvation and happiness by Christ's means: They are called Gods Jewels, They
are called his hidden ones, all the other part of mankind is but as refuse,
dross, these are his Pearls, These are his Stars, his peculiar people, Though
all the earth be his, and all the men in the world under his dominion, yet
these have a peculiar interest; No marvel then if God make such comfortable
promises to them, if all Angels must be their guardians, If all things shall
work to their good, for God has set his seal on them; Oh the transcendent
happiness of those that are thus dignified!

3. No cause to doubt of Gods accepting of Christ's Mediation.
Thirdly, Hence it is that there is no cause of doubt to be made by the people
of God, whether God the Father will accept of Christ's Mediation for them, for
it is as amongst men; as if he should offer to lay down a sufficient prize to
redeem such a captive, considering that all this agreement came originally from
the Father; So that Christ says, The Father gave him these to he a Mediator
to them, yea, that the Father loves him, because he laid down his life for his
Sheep: This follows unquestionably, that whom Christ presents to his Father,
the Father will not refuse; Oh then stand and admire at the felicity which the
Scripture has assured thee of; Those whom Christ brings to the Father, it was
his will and antecedent purpose that Christ should mediate, and is there any
doubt then whether God the Father will embrace thee or no?

4. All that the Father gives to Christ shall come to Christ
Fourthly, Those whom the Father gives to Christ, that they may know this mercy
by the effects of it, shall assuredly one time or other find this glorious
work upon them, that they shall come to Christ. Though their temptations be
never so great, their oppositions never so many, Though of all men in the world
you would think such were the farthest off from Christ, yet Joh. 6. They shall
come to him, God will so wonderfully change their hearts, mollify and soften
them, he will so overcome and conquer all contrary resolutions, that of
unwilling they shall be made willing; Oh that is a commanding expression, He
shall come unto me, and lest we doubt of it, again it is said, None can come
unto me unlosse my Father draw him; So the Father will draw him to Christ, that
is, he will certainly and surely so overpower his heart, that he will not, he
cannot withstand any longer the motions of grace upon his soul.

5. This throws all merits to the ground.
Lastly, In that God the Father gives some to Christ and not other, we see all
works, all merits, any supposed good or worth in us falls to the ground; No
wonder then if the Scripture does so diligently exclude all the works that we
have done, giving all to grace, for you see the great business of our
salvation was accomplished between the Father and our Mediator, before we had
any being or knowledge of it; O that even such pestilentiall doctrines full of
pride and haughtiness should ever get footing in Christ's Church, for though
the Scripture pleads the necessity of works, yet wholly excludes the causality
of them.

II. In respect of Christ.
In respect of Christ the Mediator; There is observable,

1. The transcendent love of Christ who did willingly undergo this charge; For
when the Father gave them to Christ it was on those hard terms that he should
live so meanly and die so ignominiously for their salvation; 1. A demonstration
of the transcendent love of Christ.
This was a bitter cup for him to drink, which made him pray, If possibly it
might pass away, Mat. 26.42. howsoever he submited to his Fathers will, What
is man or the salvation of man to Christ that he should so prize it? Could
their salvation have been as easily obtained, as Christ made all things, by a
word, it had been something but it cost him many agonies, He became a curse for
us, he seemed to be forsaken both of God and man, so then stand and admire the
terms upon which these are given to Christ, God the Father says thus to him, I
will that thou procure the salvation of these men, but it can be no otherwise
then by thy own blood, whatsoever curses justice would have inflicted on them,
thou must undergo; Oh the tongue of men and Angels is not able to express
this; Were we not such cold clods of earth, this love of Christ would set our
hearts all on fire, who would not part with his lusts, with his sins, for
Christ who has thus loved us to the death of the Cross? Shall he part with
his blood, and wilt not thou with a sin which will breed nothing but torment
hereafter? Though it be now honey in thy mouth, yet it will be gravel in the
belly.

2. This supposes the security and safety of the godly, Nothing can hinder
them of this salvation, Our life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. 2. It
shows the safety of the godly.
They must pull Christ out of heaven overthrow the power of God the Father ere
they can be destroyed, and their security stands upon a twofold bottom. 1. His
faithfulness to discharge his trust; What doubt may be made seeing Christ has
undertaken the work of thy salvation, Not that thou should live in ease, and
eat and drink, and take no care for thy soul; This is to add honey to poison,
but in respect of the meritorious and satisfactory part, so Christ has
undertaken all, when thou art required to believe and repent, it is not to
merit, to satisfy, it is upon other grounds; Now then will it not be blasphemy
to say, Christ will be found unfaithful in his trust? To say that Christ should
lose any of those jewels that were put into his custody? indeed if our
salvation and happiness were in our keeping, we should be prodigal of it every
day, we are found unfaithful in every temptation, but so is not Christ: As he
is yea and Amen* the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, so is thy
salvation sure to be; It must needs be sure because of the power of Christ,
Joh. 19.30. I and my Father are one, said Christ, even to this particular, Now
none is greater then my Father, None can pluck them out of his hands, Consider
that they are in Gods hands, he keeps them always as a precious jewel, and he
that will destroy them must pluck them out of Gods hands whether he will or no,
he must be stronger then God that can do this; It was Caesar's boast that he had
ten Legions of such valiant Soldiers that could vel ipsum coelum diruere, pull
down even heaven it self, a vain and wicked boast, but no power of men or
devils are able to take these treasures out of Gods hands.

Use of Examination, Try whether thou art one of those that are thus given to
Christ; and in this I mean not thou should climb up into heaven, Use.
see whether thy Name be written in the Book of Life, but know this by the
infallible property of him who is thus given to Christ, and that is to come to
him; What my Father has given me will come to me, and the Father will draw
him; Now coming to Christ is not pedibus but affectibus, Do thou take him for
thy Lord and King? Art thou willing to renounce all those lusts and sins which
have had dominion over thee? Do thou cry out and say, Oh blessed Lord, my
sins, my oaths, my pride, my uncleanness, have kept me from thee? Conscience
bid me come, the Word of God bid me come, but still this sin or the other
kept me back; But now Lord I have broken all the snares, here I am to do what
thou will have me, oh it is to be lamented with bitter lamentations to see how
few come to him though he gives such encouragements.

SERMON XI. Treats of Eternal Life in the Nature and Properties of it,
JOH. 17.2. That he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given
him.
HAving dispatched the Subject to whom this fruit of Christ's power is to be
vouchsafed, we come now to the Fruit and benefit thereof, and that is Eternal
Life; In which we will also comprehend the manner of obtaining it; viz. by way
of gift, He will give; The greatness of the gift though it may be apprehended,
yet it cannot be comprehended; Though we had the tongue of Angels, and the
understanding likewise, yet we should but speak as a child, and think as a
child, when this matter of Divinity is our Theme. Every thing is inviting; Its
life, No rich man, no poor man, but desires this; It Is Eternal Life, and so
can be much less rejected, and it is by way of gift, Nothing can be more
welcome; It Is life, there is the necessity of it; It Is eternal life, there is
the excellency of it; It Is given, there is the freeness of it, so that this
gift here supposed is not within this Horizon, nor is it made for this
Meridian, but it extends to the world to come; The wisest of the Philosophers
were in a misty darkness about this matter; It was much debated whether any
happiness did remain after this life, and although sometimes confused thoughts
did work on them, as on that man who reading a Book of Immortality, was so
transported, that he killed himself immediately to enjoy it, yet these were but
general indigested notions, only the Scripture does give us a distinct and
accurate account of this blessedness after our lives in this world, so then we
see here an unspeakable privilege, and that most certainly to be bestowed on
them, whatsoever their lives be here, though poor, though miserable, though
afflicted, though troubled, yet they shall have an eternal life.

Doct. Christ will give to those that are his Eternal life.
Obs. That Christ will give to those that are his Eternal life.

I shall not enlarge my self according to the vast nature of this Subject,
which cannot be well understood but by the fruition of it, and if you should
ask what it is, we should desire time still to express it, as he did, what God
was, yet I shall limit my Discourse to a threefold general head.

1. To speak of it positively what it is. 2. Comparatively to this temporal and
present life. 3. Oppositely, to eternal death.
Eternal life considered
And these three particulars will tend to manifest the greatest excelleneies of
it; Though when we have fully satisfied* you with this bread, it will so
multiply, that many fragments may be taken up.

First therefore positively, I. Positively what it is. 1. It consists in
This Eternal Life does essentially lie in the immediate fruition and enjoyment
of God: This the Scripture does often call seeing of God, for howsoever it be
disputed by the Learned whether the bodily eye shall be elevated so
supernaturally, that it shall be able to see the divine essence, 1. The
immediate fruition and enjoyment of God.

He is an universal and infinite object.


though spiritual and immaterial, yet so far as seeing does imply enjoying
and immediate fruition of God, so far they are sure to partake of it; Now
then consider how great a mercy this is, To have God the Object of all our
love, joy, and delight, For he only is that universal and infinite object which
can satiate and comfort the heart: All these earthly comforts they are too
narrow, too little for the soul: Divines say, The soul of a man has an
infinite appetite, it desires this, and it desires that, and nothing but God
is such an universal good that can fully replenish it; Now David even in this
life he says, Whom have I in heaven and earth but thee? Psa. 13.35. how much
rather will this be true in heaven? God is the center of the soul, it is
unquiet and restless till it fix there: Take all the men in the world, who
have drunk deepest in the streams of these earthly comforts, yet still they
thirst; There is a dropsy on them, still they would have more and other
objects, They have a feavori^h heat with them, That makes them restless,
whereas when we come to Christ we shall find rest to our souls, and He that
drinks of this water shall never thirst more, Jo. 4.14. so then we see what
eternal life is, it is all the good that God is, What good is in God, that the
believer has, and how unreasonable is it to think that there is a better good
then he; If the Creator cannot satisfy, can the Creature? From hence it is
that the godly do so long for this time of enjoying him, I desire to depart,
says Paul, Phil. 2.23. The Church cries for Christ to Come quickly: Those
Patriarchs looked on themselves as Pilgrims, and desiring a better City then
that of this world; so then you can but judge of this happiness by the
footsteps, by the drops of it; If there be any attractive good in the creature,
it is but a drop, God the Fountain he is the Ocean: Now in this object God
enjoyed, there are these remarkable properties of his goodness.

1. He is the Universal good, he is the bonum in qua omnia bona, He is the
Universal good.
There cannot be any desirable perfection but it is in him; The Creatures have
their particular limited goodness, health has its, wealth has its, learning
its, but now God is the Jehovah, all beings are eminently in him; As the
Psalmist argues, He that made the eye, shall not he see? he that made the ear,
shall not he hear? Psalm. 94.9. He then that makes this and that thing
desirable, is not he much more desirable? Is there a ground to love Father,
Mother, Wife, or Children, and not much rather to love God? so that that
Command Mat. 22. has the greatest reason, where God wills to be loved with
all the heart, all the soul, all the might; for there is nothing has any good
which is the Object of love, but it is in God, or from him, There is none good
but God says Christ, so then what are Stars to the Sun? The Stars cannot
dispell the night, only the light of the Sun can do that; Thus only God and the
light of his countenance can make the heart happy, as having all things.

2. That good which God is, it is an unmixed sincere good; He is an unmixed
sincere good.
He is so good that there is no trouble in him, for that is the imperfection of
all earthly good things, as there is a drop of honey, so there is a drop of
gall; Every Rose has its thorn; If God gives thee any mercy in this life, yet
still there is a sting as well as honey, so that no condition, no mercy has
every thing in it; Though they have this, yet they want another, and hence
Solomon who gave himself to find out this Philosophers stone, to obtain an
happiness if it could be in this world, yet upon experience he gives this
Motto of every thing, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity Eccl. 1.1. But do the
Saints in heaven, who have had the experience of enjoying God, pass such a
sentence upon that happiness in heaven? Of this honey in the world we must not
eat too much lest we surfeit; But there is fulness without nauseating; There
is replenishing and yet always hungring, God is as much desired after millions
of years as at the first moment in heaven; Hence this life is to be spent only
in joy, in praises, and gladness of heart; Oh that we could affect our hearts
more with this eternal life, it would be a great comfort in afflictions, and a
quick spur to all duties.

And a proper, peculiar, and convenient good.
Lastly, God who is thus the object of this Eternal life, is the proper,
peculiar, and convenient good; No object is so suitable and adequate to the
heart as he is, howsoever moral Philosophers say, good is the object of the
will, yet they say, It Is not good in the general or absolute, but that which
is proportionable and convenient; The sick man desires health, because it is
the good proportionable to his wants, so the tormented man, ease; Thus although
it be true that since man is fallen and corrupted with sin, God is not
proportionable or suitable to him; Hence wicked men are said to hate God, Exodus
20. yet take we man according to his Creation, and the Image of God first
planted in him, and so God was his ultimate end, in him only could he have full
complacency, and so as far as we are regenerated and this holy Image restored
in us, Nothing can satisfy us but God, We see David in many of his Psalm^, he
discovers several extremities and necessities upon him, yet the only cure is
the light of his countenance; Let God look graciously on him, let him draw near
to him, and then the troublesome waves are presently quiet.

2. It consists in the perfect sanctifying the sou^ and body thereby si^ting a
man for the enjoyment of God.
2. This Eternal life does positively consist in the beatifying the soul and
the whole body, sanctifying it so fully that now it can enjoy God: For though
God be never i^ glorious an object, yet till the soul be made perfect he cannot
enjoy God; No more then the Sun which is primum visibile, yet because of its
dazzling luster the eye is too weak to behold it steadfastly; Now in heaven the
spirits of just men are said to be made perfect, and no corruptible thing can
inherit the Kingdom of heaven; This then, this eternal life is seen in that the
soul, yea, the whole man is ^o heavenly and holy, so perfected in every thing,
that it is made capable of all this happiness; The godly have communion and
fellowship with God in this life, now they are no more capable of this, if not
sanctified, then a beast can converse with a man; Hence because this
sanctification is impotent, we know in part, we believe in part, We see him but
in a riddle, not face to face, but then shall we know him even as we are known
of him, 1 Cor. 13.12. It was a general received opinion, as appears by
several examples in the Old Testament, that if God made any glorious
appearance to man, he should presently die, so Manaoh and others argued, and
whence rose that apprehension but because of the glorious Majesty of God, and
the vain, weak, frail nature of man? Oh but in heaven where God is in all his
glorious manifestation, and we shall behold him continually, yet there shall be
no faintings, no fears within us, and all is, because the Saints are then
glorified and perfected in soul and body; There Is not the least spot or wrinkle
of sin to put them to any shame or fear within.

3. In a quick and lively apprehension of this happiness.
3. This Eternal Life consists in a quick and lively apprehension of this
happiness it has, without which happiness could not be happiness; A man in
a Lethargy though he lives, yet he is as good as dead, because he perceives
not his own life, neither does he take any pleasure in any earthly contents;
Hence it is, that the inanimate creatures, Trees, and Rocks, though they should
be free from pain, yet cannot be said to be happy, because they have no faculty
of reflection, They cannot perceive or discern their happiness, but in this
eternal life, The knowledge and assurance of their happiness is that which
makes it indeed to be a blessed life; The Heavens are not happy though they
shall abide ever, because they have not life, nor can they reflect upon what
they are; A child in the womb, though heir to a vast inheritance, yet cannot
take any comfort from it, because he has no reason to discern it; But then our
souls shall have the most accurate quickness, and there will not be the least
circumstance that shall aggravate our happiness, but we shall apprehend it, we
shall know how to improve every comfortable consideration; Alas, in this life
the godly through their weakness of knowledge and faith, make not that
advantage of Christ as they may: There are many blessed arguments to refresh
their souls, and they know them not or attend not to them, but when we shall
come to eat of this bread of life, we shall not lose one crumb of it; Then
there is nothing shall be hid from our eyes, but according to our capacity we
shall then love God and Christ, and enjoy them to the full.

Come we in the next place to the properties of this life, And it has these
properties.
for we can better speak of them then the life it self, as we can better look
upon the Sunbeams then the Sun it self.

And 1. It Is a continued life of happiness; 1. A continued life of happiness.
There is no interruption or stop put to this joy and comfort, and that is a
transcendent thing, for in this life two things intermit our joy.

1. Occurrent adversities, contrary miseries, our health is taken away by
diseases, our wealth by poverty, our hopes by fears, so that every man's life
has more gall then honey.

And 2. If there were no opposite calamity, as there was not to Adam, yet there
is a natural intermission of it by sleep, so that if we were never so happy,
yet as often as we sleep our Sun would be ecclipsed, but this happy life we
speak of admits of neither of these Interruptions; There cannot be any misery
or grief there, for God will wash away all tears from their eyes, and it must
needs be so, because all the cause of misery which is sin, is there taken
away, so that as there cannot be any thunder or lightning in the upper Region,
because the vapors which are the materials of it cannot ascend so high, can
have no entrance there, so because no unclean thing, no sinful thing can enter
heaven, therefore no evil, no misery, or affliction can come there; This should
make us all despise this valley of tears for that Mount of Vision or
transfiguration, What is this Wilderness to that Canaan? What are these husks
to that Manna? Why are we so hardly plucked out of this world that has so many
thorns and troubles with it, to enter into heaven? where there is no grief, no
complaining or discontent at all.

Again, There is not the second intermission of this happiness; for there is
no night, no sleep nor drowsiness, but it is a waking, joyful life to all
Eternity: Alas, if here we should have the most desirable comforts that can be,
yet we would call for a time to sleep, they could not keep us alive without
this bodily Rect; but there the body is made so glorious a body that it is no
more capable of sleep, then it is of hunger or thirst; Oh then happy and thrice
happy is that life where thou shall not for a moment be taken off from God.
It Is impossible for the godly in this life to have an actual love and
complacency in God, never to be distracted or diverted by other thoughts,
something or other comes and steals the heart away, and lays the dead child
in the room of the living one, but then we shall have a constant intuitive
beholding of God, and nothing shall withdraw us from him, Thus it is not to be
interrupted.

2. 2. It has in it all desirable things
In this life there is an affluence and an accumulation of all things to make
it blessed; The very Philosophers thought happiness must be such a state
wherein was an aggravation of all good things, so that if a man could have all
good things, and want but one, he could not be called an happy man; Hence in
the Scripture the Hebrew word for happiness is in the plural number, because
it is not one or two, or twenty good things can make a man happy, but there
must be all things; And for this reason it is that the Scripture has so many
variety of resemblances to represent this blessedness; To show you, that it
has all desirable things; It Is called a Kingdom, a Crown of glory, a Feast and
Banquet, a place of joy; Heaven is said to be paved with all precious stones;
Now why does the Scripture use such expressions? Not that we should conceive
any carnal pleasures or worldly contents there, as Mahomets Alcoran speaks,
of a brutish happiness altogether sensual, but from earthly things would lift
up your hearts to heavenly, it would gather you a Posie of the finest flowers,
and tell you, heaven is this, Do but abstract the imperfections of the
creatures, and the perfection that is in heaven; Even as Divines say concerning
the perfections of creatures, God has them, but in an eminent manner
abstracted from the imperfections, he has wisdom but not the imperfection of
man's wisdom, he does understand, he wills as well as a man, but not with the
imperfection of a man, So it is here: Heaven is riches, heaven is health,
heaven is glory, heaven is honor, but still without the imperfection of these
earthly comforts.

3. It is a glorious Life.
3. This life is a glorious life; Beside freedom from evil and a positive
affluence of all good, there is external glory to make it yet more desirable;
Our souls shall be made glorious souls, our bodies glorious bodies: Heaven is a
glorious place; The Angels are glorious, the Majesty of God will then be
resplendent in all his glory; If the Queen of Sheba had no more spirit within
her, beholding Solomon's temporal glory, how ravishing must this heavenly glory
be? The Scripture every where speaks of the glory of this condition, now glory
is that which exciteth all generous spirits, What did the Romans, the Pharisees
do for glory? but it was a vain, empty glory; This is called by the Scripture,
The exceeding weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. It Is a solid, substantial glory,
glorious within and without also.

4. A holy Life*
4. It is an holy life; For if you ask what shall be the emploiment of those who
have this Eternal life: The Scripture tells us that both Angels and Saints are
wholly exercised in this, in praising and glorifying God; The Angels Isa. 6.
are brought in crying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts: And this is that
which makes wicked men so careless about it; They rather desire a brutish
sensual life, Let us eat and drink, as if they were so many Swine, but as the
life of a Beast is not comparable to that of a man, so neither are the
pleasures and joys of the flesh like those of holiness; Hence it is that those
who live holily have a taste and firstfruits of this eternal life; He that
believes has eternal life, Joh. 6.54. He has it already, both in respect of
a sure Title and interest, as also of the taste and pledges of it in his soul;
Wonder not then if you see men given up to their lusts, no ways diligent to
obtain this life; The holiness of it is no motive to them, no more then a
Pearl does affect a Swine; They must be holy who desire such an holy life.

5. It Is a spiritual life that differs from the former, because it is opposite
to that animal life, 5. A spiritual life
we live here; The body is made a spiritual body, we shall there no more
hunger or thirst, no more eat or drink: All those civil and natural actions
will be done away; No more delight in Father, in Wife, in Children, for the
soul is wholly swallowed up with the love of and delight in God: As when the
Sun arises we cannot see the Stars, so when God shall come to fill the
capacity and potentiality of the soul, no more earthly comforts can be
discerned by us: It Is a true Rule, that spiritual delights are far more
transporting and affecting the heart then any bodily can be; As those who are
in an ecstasy and rapture, they mind no worldly thing: Paul did not know
whether he was in the body or out of the body, yea, the delight in study did so
transport Archimedes, that he was drawing lines when Syracuse the City he was
in, was taken, so that as David said of prevailing grief, some Philosophers
could say of their delight in study, They forgot the time to eat their bread:
Now spiritual delights must needs elevate higher then all these: Hence it is
that Divines say, The beatificall vision or fruition of God makes it impossible
for the Saints to sin, They cannot leave God so excellent and full to cleave
to any creature; As a man that has tasted honey does not like the taste of
other things, or as he who has long gazed on the Sun has his eyesight taken
away to behold other things. The Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 4.15. that while we
behold the glory of the Gospel, we are transformed into his Image; If faith in
God in this life is so able to assimila^e us unto God, that he purifieth
himself as God is pure; If Moses by speaking with God face to face had such
glory communicated to him, that the people were not able to behold the glory of
his face, what a Transmutation will that immediare beholding of God make in us?
We see the Disciples in a transient sight of this were so transported that they
said, It is good for us to be here, let us build Tabernacles; They would never
have gone to their former lives again; If a drop do thus work, what will the
Ocean do?

Use Of Instruction to Inform us, That true happiness which is Eternal life
cannot be had on this side heaven; It Is said, Use.
the desire of happiness is imbred in all; No man can refuse the desire of it;
Ask every man in the world what he would have, he will answer you, happiness;
Only here is the miserable corruption in us, we mistake where it is, we seek
for it where it cannot be had; The voluptuous man would have it in his
pleasures; The Ambitious man in honor and earthly greatness; All seek for it
in this world; But how do you, like the blind Sodomites grope and feel after
that which you cannot find? Go home and say, I am not yet happy, I am rich but
not happy; I have worldly comforts, but this as no more happiness then a
Landfloud is to the Sea, yea, for all this happiness thou had better never
have been born, Every worm, every toad is happier then thou art; Oh then
persuade thy self thou art not yet in the haven, Thou art in the Wilderness,
not yet in Canaan; Nulla verior miseria quam falsa laetitia, and such joy, such
comfort, such delight is all thou have who have not God.

SERMON XII. A Consideration of Eternal Life compared with this present life,
And with its contrary, viz. Eternal Death.
JOH. 17.2. That he should give to them Eternal Life.
6. It Is an eternal life.
ETernal life in the nature and some properties of it has been treated on;
There remains one more, which I shall mention, viz. that in the Text Eternal;
Therefore take the best wine at the last, That which crowns all, and without
which whatsoever happiness or glory might be had, it would in time fall as the
leaf from the Tree, and this is Eternity; And here again we must be more in our
acclamations and divine amazements at it then descriptions of it. The Schoolmen
they tell us, that Eternity is like a fixed star now, whose whole is
altogether; There is no succession, no former or latter in Eternity, but all is
together: I shall not perplex you with such intricacies, Eternity it self being
only a fit space to know what Eternity is This only take notice of, That a
thing may be said to be eternal in a twofold sense, 1. Absolutely and simply,
so that it has neither beginning or ending, and thus only God is eternal. Thus
Deuteronomy. 33.27. God is called the Eternal God: Or else Eternal is used for that
which had a beginning but never shall have an end, this is called Eternum a
posteriori; and so this blessed life is called eternal, for although it had a
beginning, yet it shall never have an end, but after millions and millions of
imaginary years, they are to continue in this life, as if it were the first
moment; Let us then consider as much as we are able what an infinite and
incomprehensible happiness this is, which shall be for ever, Then shall we be
with the Lord for ever, says Paul, 1 These. 4.17. Who is not put into ecstasies
and raptures, while he seriously meditateth on these things? Alas in this life
if we had the confluence of all desirable comforts, yet because our life is
short and uncertain, our joy also can be no longer; But there, whatsoever glory
thou do once partake of, thou shall never lose it; It will be thy Crown for
ever, thy Kingdom for ever, thy glory is ever lasting glory; O the depth and
unsearchablenesse of this grace and love of God: well might Christ say, he
would give it, and Paul call Eternal Life the gift of God, Romans 6.23. For who
can think that these duties which we do here are meritorious of such eternal
glory, for grant they were perfect, and had no dross in them, yet there is no
proportion in the time, for thy faith, thy repentance, they were transient
acts, such as do pass way, but this Eternity abides for ever. So in that it
is eternal, the freeness of it is necessarily implied; What has a cup of cold
water given in the Name of Christ of condignity with an eternal reward: Oh then
that by faith we could fix our hearts upon this eternal life, that we could
say, what do we here? What is this life that we now live to that eternal life?
Why have I not this more in my thoughts and desires? Why do I not rise and go
to bed with hungrings and thirstings after this? especially let wicked men, who
for to fulfill every base and unworthy lust, lose this eternal life, to go home
weeping and how^ing, and making bitter Lamentations; For they for a lust that
passes in a moment, undo themselves to all Eternity.

Thus you have heard the properties of it: II. Eternal Life considered
comparatively with this present life.
In the next place consider it comparatively with this present life, and you
will see what a Mole-bill is to the vast heavens, that is, this life to eternal
life.

For 1. This life is but short, fading, and flees away as a shadow; It Is not a
life but a shadow of a life; We live but in a dream, We act a life upon a
Stage, There is but a life represented not really lived; 1. This life is but
short.
Hence the Scripture uses so many similitudes to express this nothing;
Sometimes this life is called a flower, Psa. 90. which though sweet for a
while, presently dies; Sometimes a Flood, that makes a sudden noise, and is
immediately swallowed up in the earth; Sometimes to a bubble, to a vapor, to a
shadow, to a thread: Now why are all these expressions? but to tell us. This
life is no life, it deserves not the name of a life, and yet as poor and short
as it is, what an imbred desire have we to it? Skin for skin, and all that we
have we would exchange for it; how welcome then and desired should eternal life
be, which compared with this life, is like the Ocean to a drop? Now lay up both
these lives together, this fading moment, and that enduring Eternity, and
admire the madness of wicked men, who say, Give me this life, Let me here live
in my pleasures and lusts, though I be deprived of eternal life, This foolish
choice is made by every wicked man.

2. This life as it is short so it is full of troubles and miseries; 2. Full of
troubles and miseries.
Few and evil have my days been, said Jacob, Genesis 49.9. though a godly man who
had sometimes the presence of God immediately refreshing him in this Pilgrimage.
It has been the saying of some, That if they were to live the life they have
lived, over again; They would not accept of such an offer, because the water of
it has been more then the wine, the gall then the honey: Hence Job says, Man
that is born of a woman is for adversity as the sparks fly upwards, Job 5.7.
Nothing is so connatural and proper for man as to be miserable: Compare then
Eternity with this where all evil is done away: Nothing but glory and fullness
of abundance; Eternal and happy may the Saints glorified say, their days are;
Yet here again is a great discovery of every wicked man's madness, To have a
few evil days, wherein thou have more vexation then comfort, thou will lose
this eternal blessed life, and if thou say, I hope not so, I do not intend to
do so, that will not avail thee, for this eternal life is vouchsafed to none,
but those that repent of, and wholly forsake their sins; Never then blind
thy eyes, and delude thy self with vain hopes; Thou for thy sins sake do
voluntarily refuse this eternal life.

3. This life is full of fears, We are obnoxious unto death from principles of
corruption within, as also from violence without; 3. Full of fears.
So that if we could suppose an universal good in this life, That we had
mercies and no sorrow mingled with them, yet the fear of losing them or our
death no longer to enjoy them, may justly be the death in the pot, or the root
of bitterness in all our joys: There is no ground we can shadow our selves
under, but a worm will arise either from it, or from our selves, or God will
create one to destroy it, so that when all things are to our hearts desire, yet
we are not able to say, I fear not the loss of it, neither death, or the
violence of man can deprive me of it, but still we are subject every moment to
an alteration, set we then this eternal life by it, and there we shall see how
glorious that is comparatively, for as there is an universal good, so there is
a quiet, full, and secure possession of it; There is no danger from within or
from without: Adam though created happy, yet was mutable, The devil seduced him
out of all his felicity; but now there is a confirmation of the Saints in
heaven, if once in possession of glory there cannot be any to eject them,
unless there could be a stronger then God: It Is not so much happiness as
security in happiness that makes a man blessed, Fear to lose it takes off from
the enjoying of it, but it is not so with this eternal life, There is all
quietness, all security, and ease, and certainly if the Apostle Rom 8. even in
this life can make such a glorious charge: Who shall separate us from the love
of God through Christ? Neither death, nor things present, nor things to come.
How much more shall they in heaven triumph after this manner? If those that are
tossed up and down in the Sea have such security, what may they have who are in
the haven? Upon this account it is that our Savior bids them treasure up that
wealth, Mat. 6.20. where thieves cannot break through and steal; By that he
means no secret craft or open violence can get away that treasure; Here again
we see the madness of wicked and earthly men; They venture their souls, and
God, and heaven and all to get this uncertain wealth, these uncertain
pleasures, which when they have they may fear every moment that voice from
heaven; Thou Fool, this night thy soul shall be taken from thee; Thus they do
when a secure, certain and permanent treasure is to be tendered to them: It Is a
rule which all commend for the wisdom of it, Tene certum, and dimitte
incertum, and this they will keep too in earthly affairs, but then for heaven
and eternal happiness, there they are devoid of all understanding.

4. Measured by time.
4. This life is measured by time, as are all the things therein: There is a
succession of comforts, we cannot have all comforts together: All these things
in the world are in a swift motion, and nothing stands still: The comforts we
had the last year, or the last day, or the last hour, they are gone, we cannot
have them any more; Thus every thing in this world being measured by time is in
a continual flux: There is the first, and the second, and so still all is
passing, and what is past we have not, and what is to come we do not yet enjoy,
so that there is nothing but the present advantages that we are properly said
to possess, now put eternal life to this, and it is the clean contrary, even as
Eternity is to time, for whereas time is in a continual transient being,
Eternity is an whole and full possession of all together; There is no past,
present, or to come in Eternity, but Eternity comprehends all these things
together, even as the greater wheel comprehends at once all the motions of the
less wheel within it, and certainly this consideration is able to swallow us
up, Thy comforts do not flow and reflow, They do not pass and others come, but
thou art in a stable, permanent way of enjoying all happiness together, Thou
can not be less happy at one time then at another; Thou can not expect
greater joy then thou have, neither can thou wish for any joy that is past,
so great a matter is Eternity.

5. Full of dissatisfaction^
In the Last place, This Life is full of dissatisfaction, even in the vertical
Point of all its blessedness; The heart of a man morally as well as naturally
is always in motion, never lies still: It Is always hydropical, the more it
drinks the thirstier it is still: Solomon you heard that made it his study
and endeavor to have content in this world, yet it could not be, he may as
soon think to make an Oistershell hold the Ocean, as that these earthly things
can fill the heart; What man is there who lives a mere earthly life, that can
say, he is satisfied, he desires nothing? Indeed we read of Paul Phi. 4.
saying, I have all things, and abound, but that is through grace, because
enjoying of God otherwise, the Air can as soon fill the hungry stomach as
earthly things the appetite of the soul; But compare this eternal life hereto,
and there is all fullness and satisfaction* They never desire a change, they
cannot wish it better with them; We see Peter but in a taste of it, yet cried
out, It Is good to be here, Let us dwell here, he would not have parted with
joy; The soul in heaven is arrived at its haven, it is come to its journeys end,
it is now fallen to its center, it cannot go any further; It now cries out,
Here is enough (Lord) here is enough, yet this fullness breeds not nauseating
as they were weary of Manna: No, it exciteth desire and yet fills it; It
provokes love, and yet satiateth it, so that this particular likewise
proclaims the madness of all wicked men, for why is thy soul like the devil,
compassing about the earth, seeking out for this comfort, and then for another;
Even as children cry for this thing, and then quickly weary, cry for another,
and in the mean while does neglect that which would be instead of all.

Thus have we handled it comparatively, II. Eternal life considered oppositely
to eternal death.
the last way is to consider it oppositely, for that is an old Rule, contraries
put together, illustrate one another the more; The Sun is most glorious after
the breaking out of a black thick cloud; Now the contrary to Eternal life, is
eternal death, so that we may apprehend the good of the one by the evil of the
other, and indeed man is so slavish and brutish that fear does more prevail
then love; Therefore though we propound all the joys of heaven, and invite to
this eternal life, yet few make that Question, as he did to Christ, Master,
what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? but if we speak of eternal
death in all the terror of it, then fear may for a while at least, awaken
them, Let us then consider wherein the contrary to this eternal life consists.

And 1. That is in the deprivation of God, and an utter departure from him,
Eternal death lies,
and this privative part of eternal death is the great aggravation of it; At
the day of judgment, that dreadful doom runs thus, Depart from me, Mat. 25.
1. In the deprivation of God.
41. That is worse then the eternal fire they are cast into, you have heard
that God was the fountain of all good, every creatures goodness is but a
stream from that Fountain; At thy right hand (said David, Psa. 16.11.) are
rivers of pleasure for evermore; So that this eternal death takes thee from the
light of his countenance; Thou art never to be admitted in his presence, and
when God departs, all comfort, all hope departs with him: Oh that wicked men
would lay this to heart, you that now bid God depart from you, you will have
none of his knowledge, none of his commands, God will requite you in your own
kind, he will then command you to depart from him: Were it not that Athiesm
and unbelief did reign in your hearts, this truth would make your ears to
tingle, and your heart to tremble, while you hear it: Was it not death to
Absalom to be kept from his Fathers presence? Why do ye not kill me, says he
to Joab, rather then let it be always thus, yet he was but an earthly Father,
he could not give peace and joy to the consciences of men, but this heavenly
Father is a Father of spirits, whom he bids Depart from him, all terror and
horror immediately seizes on that man; There is no quietness in his bones,
Michah had lost but an Idol-God, Judge. 18. and he wringeth his hand, and cries
out bitterly; Oh but what roarings and yellings when we shall have lost the
true God and his favor for ever.

2. This eternal death brings all the positive evil that can be feared or
imagined upon a man; For as here we told you, 2. It is seen i^ that it brings
all the positive evil that can be feared or imagined.
was not one kind of comfort but an aggression of all, therefore the Scripture
delights to represent it under several desirable good things, so neither is
hell one kind of misery, one kind of torment, but the Scripture represents it
under every thing that is terrible, Because death is so much feared, therefore
it is called death, because fire and brimstone are so terrible in burning it is
called that; Because a dark dungeon and prison with chains in the darkness are
so miserable, It Is resembled to that, because men in extremity of pain and
misery do use to weep and wail, and gnash their teeth, therefore is hell set
out by all these dreadful things, so that as the glorified in heaven have every
thing they can desire, there is no good they want; Thus the damned in hell have
every thing they fear; There is no torment or pain imaginable but they partake
of it, and this they are filled with, having not the least ease or respite:
Dives desired but a drop of water to cool only the top of his tongue, and he
could not obtain so much; Oh that men who give themselves up to the pleasures
of sin would remember these torments; These howlings to all Eternity: What are
we preaching follies and fictions to you? If you believe the Scripture, you
must believe those things to be the portion of every unreformed sinner; O what
a vast difference will there be between thy pleasures here and eternal torments
hereafter, and not to have a drop of ease in all thy misery.

3. To all Eternity.
3. This eternal death as it has fullness of torment so likewise Eternity; For
heaven and hell have no period; There is no time set when the fire of hell
shall go out, called therefore unquenchable fire, So that these two properties
easelesse and endless might startle and amaze every ungodly man, Why will thou
buy these eternal torments at so dear a rate, for a moments pleasure to have
everlasting woe? So that here are two Eternities before thee, an Eternity of
happiness, an Eternity of misery, Sin says, and the devil says, taste of
the honey of sin, God says, There is eternal gall for this; Now which will thou believe, either sin tempting, or God threatening? Was not Eve at first
undone? because she would hearken to the devil against God; What fruit or
profit had Judas for thirty pieces, procuring to himself eternal horror and
trembling?

Thus you have seen eternal life in the contrary to it, We have been upon the
Mount of Blessing, and upon the Mount of Cursing; If good things will not
allure, Life a gift, death is deserved.
let dreadful things astonish and terrify; Only you must know the grand
difference between eternal life and eternal death in the manner of coming to
it: So you see in the Text it is given by Christ, and it is called the gift of
God, but eternal death comes by desert, It Is the wages of sin, Romans 6. ult.
Our sins deserve hell, but our graces do not heaven, and whereas it might be
thought an unjust thing in God for a transient sin to inflict eternal
torments, yet that is no wonder.

Why God for a transient sin will inflict eternal torments.
For 1. We see amongst men, that Malefactors for a crime committed by them,
which was acted in a very short time, do yet suffer death, which as to this
world is their eternal destruction, they can never come back to live here
again. 2. All sin being committed against God who is of infinite glory has
thereby an infinite guilt, and so deserves eternal damnation. Hence it is that
D^vines say, Omne peccator punitur citra condignum, Even hell it self is not a
punishment adequate to the nature of sin, for Gods honor is more worth then
ever our sufferings can make up again: And lastly, There is no injustice
because all those torments can never make any satisfaction; For hence it is
that thy misery is eternal, because thou can not pay the utmost farthing;
Thou art never able to discharge the debt, therefore thou must for ever lie in
prison: Thus there is justice in every man's damnation, and there is only mercy
in every man's salvation.

For 1. Those graces and good works thou do have no proportion to this
Eternal and glorious reward. The Apostle did not account his suffering which
seem to be the most efficacious for salvation, any whit comparable to that
eternal weight of glory; If a man should have the whole world given him for
lifting up a straw, that is not so great a disproportion as to give heaven for
Martyrdom, the highest act of love to God.

And 2. It Is only of grace, because he who gives the Crown gives us legs and
strength to run in the race: Coronat dona sua, non merita nostra; so that we
are so far from meriting by good works, that the more we do, the more we are
beholding to the grace of God.

Use Of Invitation, Use.
Who is there of you that has heard of the nature and properties of this
eternal life that is not brought in love with it? Who is there that has heard
of this pearl, that will not sell all, throw away every sin to enjoy it? If
there were nothing but this it might work on thee: Have thou any lust that will
be equivalent to eternal life, that will be in stead of that to the^? What
will thou do when a mortal disease has surprised thee? thy friends weeping,
thy children crying, and thou dying, Will these lusts then help call to them
and see if they can give thee eternal life? What, will thou be worse then
Balaam? he wished, Oh that I might dye the death of the righteous, and his
later end might be like his: And shall there be not so much as a desire, as a
sigh, though, if there be no more, if thy life be not the righteous man's life,
thy death cannot be his.

SERMON XIII. Weighty Considerations upon Eternity.
JOH. 17.2. That to as many as thou have given him, he should give Eternal
Life.
Eternal Life is the glorious gift mentioned in the Text, and though I was
concluding this verse, yet the consideration of this glorious matter shall make
me once more endeavor thoroughly to possess your hearts therewith. It was the
fault of one of the Kings of Israel that he did not strike arrows often enough
to the ground, 2 King. 13.19. for then he should have obtained more victories.
It shall therefore be my endeavor, if possible, that the arrows of this truth
may be stricken often even through and through your hearts. And that I may
further quicken you hereunto, consider these particulars, as so many effectual
conclusions upon this subject.

And first, 1. The great question that all ought to put is, How may I have
eternal life?
The chief and most principal and necessary question which every one should
seriously propound, ought to be that Luke 18.18. What shall I do to inherit
eternal life? Not indeed upon such a corrupt opinion as he did, who thought by
his own works merely to obtain this eternal life; No, that cannot be, it is the
gift of God: and when we have done all, this eternal life is of grace, not
merit, but in a right sense, viz. what way ought we to walk in, what is to be
done that at last we may not eternally perish. This (I say) is a most noble and
necessary question, if this were more studied and practiced, it would advantage
the soul ten thousand times more then other unnecessary and impertinent
disputations. The best method in moral Philosophy is to begin first with the
end, because that is the chiefest, there must be first a knowledge and desire
of that: Now all Divinity agrees with moral Philosophy in this, it is wholly
practical. The first thing then in your thoughts and meditations should be,
What is that end for which I was made? how may I obtain that eternal life for
which I came into this world? Oh why are we busy in unnecessary things? for
what end and purpose were you made? Was it to heap up wealth? To satisfy the
lusts and pleasures of the flesh? No, it was at last to enjoy this eternal
life. The Heathen did well call man the orizon of time and eternity; for in
respect of his body, he partaketh of time, in respect of his soul eternity: So
then the chief and more excellent part of thee, that which makes thee differ
from a beast, it is that which relates to eternity, so that the first and the
last thing thou have to think on is, how to come to this eternal life. The
Apostle uses an emphaticall word, 1 Timothy 6.12. Lay hold on eternal life; as a
man that runs in a race, at the end thereof streacheth out himself to lay
hold on the garland; so that as he who runs in a race neglects all the
pleasant objects he runs by, and has his eye only upon the prize: Thus it
ought to be with us, neither riches, honors, friends or earthly advantages
ought to be inordinately minded by us, but eternal life that is the prize,
upon that our eye is to be, after that we are to pray and strive: But who may
not blame himself, and judge himself for neglect herein? Oh how little is this
eternal life in thy affections and hopes; thy cares about thy body, about thy
estate will greatly condemn that sluggishness about eternal life.

2. We must take the right way to answer that question.
2. As this ought to be the great question we are to rise with and go to bed
with, so we must take the right way to answer it. It Is not enough to make the
question as Pilate did to Christ, What truth was? and never matter an answer;
but we are to be restless in our souls till we have a full answer, till we
know the way. Now that we can only be instructed in from Gods Word, John 6.68.
Whither shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life. The Scripture then
is this Tree of Life, the fruit thereof and the leaves likewise are for
eternal healing. Hence our Savior in the next verse tells us, what is the way
to have this eternal life, even by knowing of God and Jesus Christ. As all the
Heathens were in dark confused thoughts about immortallity, so they were in
Egyptian darkness, or like the blind Sodomites, groping and feeling for a way
to it, but could never get in. Would thou therefore be resolved in this, How
may I have this eternal life, betake thy self then to the Scriptures, make
them thy counselors; do not attend to the ways of the world, matter not what
they say, or what they do, for that tells thee the way to heaven is clean
contrary to the manners and practices of the world. If you do not rectify your
self by the Scripture, and resolve to follow the light of this star, though
you should hear many hundred Sermons of eternal life, yet they would do you no
good; say then, let me consider what way the Scripture would put me into, my
life I yet live is wholly repugnant to Gods Word, whatsoever course that
prescribes, though never so contrary to my lusts, to my former practices, yet
I will gladly renounce all. Do this and then expect eternal life.

3. Consider upon this little moment we have here depends all eternity.
3. Consider this deeply, that upon this little moment we have here depends all
eternity. Thou have a short brittle life in this world, and upon the good
improvement of this depends all eternity. Oh the searchings and turnings of
heart this particular should make in you; My everlasting condition, that estate
which is to be for ever and ever, it wholly hangs upon this uncertain life. It
may be thou have but a day, an hour to live longer, and all thy eternity
depends on this: Oh men foolish and unwise, who will not lay these things more
to heart. God has given us a candle to work by, a short day we have to
improve, and if this pass over thy head, then comes unchangeable eternity. As
at thy death thou art cast for eternal life or everlasting torments, so it
must be without ever any recovery or alteration. Oh how precious should thy
time be, how dear should every day every hour be, all this has influence into
eternity. Well might the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.16. command us to redeem the time.
Time is the most precious jewel in the world, eternity depends on it, and
therefore will thou let thy lusts or wicked companions steal away this jewel
that is more worth then all the world? Oh let us so live every day, every hour
as those that say, as I do now, so will eternity be to me.

4. Consider this, that the most of men even called and enjoying the means of
grace, 4. That most shall miss of eternal life.
shall miss of this eternal life. What is a thunderbolt if this be not, Luke
13.24. There are few that enter into the strait gate, and many are called, but
few chosen; our Savior used that apothegm more then once. How formidable and
dreadful should these words many and few be unto us! Many perish in the broad
way, few enter in the strait way: What will make thee cast off presumption,
security and negligence, if this do not? The number of those who shall have
this eternal life is very few, a little flock they are comparatively to those
many millions that are cast into everlasting flames. Oh how long shall we hear
these things and yet be void of all spiritual understanding. If such an
asseveration should be used concerning any temporal misery or calamity, Many
shall dye of the plague, few shall escape; Many shall be cut off by famine or
the sword, and a very few shall be preserved, who would not fear lest he should
be one of the many? And yet in these things many are as idle, having ears they
hear not, and hearts they understand not.

5. Desire to have such thoughts and resolutions now, 5. Desire such thoughts
now as if thou were already in eternity.
as if thou were already in eternity: For if the damned in hell that see no
escape from those everlasting flames were asked, what they thought of their
sin, how they loved it? would they not make miserable howlings, it is that
which has undone us, oh that is the sting that enters into the very bowels,
that is the scorpion which pierces to the very heart: Oh we mad men and void of
all understanding, who though forewarned of this, and threatened about it, yet
regarded nothing, believed nothing; but now, oh now, after millions of years in
this tormented place, we are as unlikely to come out, as at the first. Think
you they are not then altered and changed, do they not cry out of those bitter
sins which were once so sweet? Should God give them leave to be here again
upon the earth, would they not repent in sackcloth and ashes? would they not
day and night mourn after God and his forgiveness? Oh that every wicked man,
who finds pleasure and delight in his sins, would think and say, Do the
damned in hell judge it so? Do they feel sin so sweet? And thus also desire
to have the same enlarged affections and delight in God, as those glorified
Saints in heaven have. Do thou find thy heart worldly, unruly, distempered,
say, Do those in eternal life rejoice no more? have they no more enlivened
flames of zeal for God then I have? Thus to judge as those who are in eternity,
would be an excellent spur to all piety.

6. Remember this likewise, 6. Better a man had not been born then to miss of
eternal life.
that it is far better thou had never been born then to miss of this
eternal life. It had been far more easy to have been an abortive, or that
the womb had been thy sepulcher and grave, then to live here, and at last to
dye thus eternally. Shall Job and Jeremiah so passionately curse the time of
their lives, and wish there had been no day or sun, and only because of some
temporal extremity, which yet did not endure very long? what outcries and
wishes shall these have who are to dye eternally, and yet shall never dye? Job
speaks of some that desire death, Job 3.21. but cannot have it; thus shall all
those deprived of eternal life call to mountains and hills to cover them, bite
the tongue with madness, and call for death to devour them, but it cannot be.
Though Judas could make away himself out of this hell he had here, yet he
cannot out of the hell afterward.

7. Consider with thy self, how unable thou art to bear any extreme pain, 7.
Consider how unwilling thou art to bear any extreme pains.
though it be but for a night or day: what tossings and tumblings, when it is
night wishing for day, and when it is day wishing for night: Now if a moments
pain be so grievous, what is eternal? If thou art not able to endure the
sudden scorch of fire, what then to be in everlasting fire, Isa. 33.14. Who
amongst us shall dwell with the everlasting burnings. Oh how should this
meditation even swallow us up; If we are not able to endure the rod, how shall
we the scorpion? If the gout, the stone be thus grievous, what is everlasting
torment? Should not we judge him a mad man, that to have one night of quiet
rest and sweet sleep, would all his life after be tormented with restless
nights and terrifying dreams? such folly is in all wicked men, They to have
this short life of pleasures and jollity, which is but a dream, will undo
themselves for ever in this endless and easelesse woe: Oh remember this
eternity is so incomprehensible by thee, that when thou have thought and
thought ten thousand millions of imaginary years, yet it is to hold as long as
at the first beginning. Some have represented it thus, Imagine, say they, that
all that vast space which is between heaven and earth were full of sand, and
once in every thousand year, no oftener, a bird carry away one crum of it in her
bill, what a long while would it be ere this vast huge heap would be carried
quite away; yet if the damned in hell might have ease at the period of such a
time, though so infinitely long, yet there would be some hope; but now it is
everlasting fire, it is a fire that cannot be quenched, but as long as God is
God, so long shall they be in their chains of darkness. God you heard was
properly eternal, because he had neither beginning or end; therefore he was
said by the Heathens to be a circle, whose center was every where, his
circumference no where. Hence the Heathens represented his eternity by a snake,
or a ring, that has no beginning or end. The Romans built their Temples round,
and Pythagoras rule was when to worship, turn thy self round: Here they had
confused notions about eternity; but the Scripture does most clearly affirm his
eternity: Now our life is eternal only because it shall have no end, and so
for the future it will abide for ever, and never change: What a great word is
this, never to change; thy happiness will never change, thy misery will never
change. These things duly pondered will be of great use. But thou will say,
this subject is indeed very necessary, this eternity is a wonderful and
transcendent point, oh that I could rise with it and walk with it; Helps to be
affected with eternity.
how then shall I possess my self with it, how shall I be affected with it? Do
these things.

Exercise a firm and strong faith about it, that there is such a thing. This is
a good and necessary foundation, for as long as Atheism or unbelief is in thee,
and thou think there is nothing after this life, thou doubtest whether there
be any such eternity or no, as long as this wicked disposition is on thee there
cannot be any good in thee. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, Heb.
11. so that this eternal life which is the great hope and expectation of the
godly, by faith is made really to subsist in the heart, it does as lively
embrace it, as if it were already in eternity. Oh then let a firm and divine
assent overruled thy heart, say, I do believe it more then any thing of sense
or of reason, more then that I breath or live* For the Word of God is so
punctual and positive in afirming such a condition of eternity hereafter, that
faith must needs bear witness to it. Now this Divine faith of such a thing
would be like so many sparks of fire in our breast, it would make us speak and
live and do all for this eternity, we do so certainly believe it.

Do not only believe, but accustom thy self to frequent and serious meditations
about it. Meditation in the Word of God is made a blessed thing, and certainly
this is a duty, though much neglected, yet wonderfully necessary, to set thy
self to meditate and think over and over some main points of Scripture truth,
whereof this eternity is not the least. Meditation is like the birds sitting
upon her eggs, if she should not be constant upon them, there would never be
warmth enough to cause living young ones; thus it is here: It Is not a transient
thought, it is not a sudden motion, but it must be a constant serious meditation
upon eternity; certainly if thou were careful in this, thou would find it
raising up thy heart, heating thy affections, and making of thee earnestly
desire this eternal life.

Consider this, that one great end why God has thrown so many bitter roots in
every thing here below, why there are so many sad exercises and afflicting
troubles, it is to seek after eternal life. Thou have not perfect health, thou
have not full content, every day has some evil or other, and why is all this?
because eternal life should be desired by thee. God sees thy mouth cannot be
brought off from sucking the breasts of the creatures, therefore they are
rubbed with wormwood to wean thee. As God therefore suffered the Egyptians to
afflict and oppress the Israelites, that so they might be weary of Egypt, and
long for Canaan, thus it is here, God makes this world a valley of tears and
fears, a valley of death, there is no ground but some worm or other devoureth
it, and all this, that thou should long for an haven, who art tossed in this
restless sea of the world: Look then upon all the afflictions, pains,
miseries, or whatsoever bitter thing it be that thou art to grapple with, and
say, The Lord does this to make me undervalue these things below, it is to make
me esteem a better life. If every thing were here as I would have it, heaven
would not be so welcome: Had the Prodigal not met with husks and extreme
hardship, The effects of lively meditations on eternity accompanied with firm
faith.
he would not have resolved to go back to his Father again. Think and practice
these things, so will thou be greatly affected with eternity: And to encourage
thee herein, consider the blessed effects which a lively meditation of
eternity, accompanied with a firm faith, will put thee upon.

For first, Who so has this eternity set upon his heart he will not be
immoderatly and inordinatly desirous after these things below. 1. A low esteem
of the world.
As the beams of the sun will put out the fire, so will the thoughts and
affections about eternal things, overcome temporal. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.
presses all upon an hard duty, To marry as if we married not, to buy as if we
bought not; Why so? because the time here is short, eternity is coming upon us:
And thus those holy Patriarchs mentioned Heb. 11. they accounted themselves
pilgrims and strangers, and they sought a City to come, not built with hands.
Thou complainest thy heart is so full of deadness, dullness, so full of the
world, the cares and distractions thereof devour thee up, there is nothing will
help thee against this temptation, then often thoughts and affections about
eternity.

2. As the thoughts of eternal life will thus moderate our affections, 2. A
longing for the coming of Christ.
so it will work in us (...) longing for and hasting of the coming of Christ,
who then will bestow this eternal life upon us. We wonder how Paul should be
lifted up above all these earthly comforts, as to desire to depart and to be
with Christ, Phil. 1. It seems very difficult to us, that any hasten in their
prayers and desires Christ's coming, but all this is because our hearts are not
as full of hope and expectation of eternal life as theirs were: Alas, many of
us know no better, and so cannot desire any better then what may be had in this
world, and therefore the thoughts of death and the coming of Christ are
unwelcome to us: Whereas to The godly, it is the coming of the bridegroom, and
they are to lift up their heads with joy, when that approaches, Matthew. 26. Let
then that godly soul which does so complain that it loves life too dearly, and
fears death too immoderately, let that be strengthened and comforted with the
sure hopes of this eternal life: If an heavenly frame of heart were powerful
in us, this very world would be a wilderness, it would be tedious to us to be
kept so long from that home we have in heaven. The Saints have a rest provided
for them, and who does not desire to be at his rest? Oh blame your selves more,
that you have not David's exclamation, and now Lord, what long I for? truly my
soul waits for thee, As the heart pants after the water brooks, so does my
soul after thee O God, Psalm. 42.1. David spoke this but of enjoying God in the
Ordinances in this life, Oh but how greatly must the soul be inflamed for the
life to come.

3. Calm the soul under any troubles.
3. Powerful thoughts of Eternity will quiet and wonderfully calm the soul under
any afflictions and troubles. No such antidote as this; Paul abundantly
witnesses that we account not the light afflictions of this life comparable to
that eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. so this Eternity made him not value or
regard any temporary affliction: It was this that made the Martyrs joyfully
take the spoiling of their goods, and the loss of their lives: Thus in every
affliction and exercise, if sanctified to thee, how sweetly and joyfully may
thou dwell in heaven while thou art on earth; Thou may be in heaven every
day, even while thy condition is beset with many troubles; It Is thy sin and
unbelief if thou make thy house a prison, Thy self a torment to thy self, if
thou set faith on work about this Eternity, it will put thee into heaven before
thou come to possess it: Eternal Life will give thee a better body, a better
house, a better heart, oh this Eternal life, it is the health of our bones, the
light of our countenance, a continual Feast, and a perpetual cordial; Hence the
godly even in this life are said to have Eternal life, because of the right
they have to it, and partly because they have the beginnings and first fruits
of it upon their souls.

Use of Admonition, Take this Subject more into your thoughts, how many roving
thoughts have thou? but if placed on Eternity, it would be great profit; How
many thoughts have thou unbeleeving, disquieting and troubling, if fixed on
Eternity, they would all vanish, especially let the wicked man turn from all
sin, saying, There is an Eternity; If it were only death, that would not so
much trouble thee, but it is Eternity after Death.

SERMON XIV. The Necessity of Divine Knowledge, And Arraignment of Ignorance.
JOH. 17.3. And this is life eternal that they might know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
IN the Verse before we had the great privilege vouchsafed, viz. eternal
Life, and the Subject to whom, viz. Those that are given to Christ In this
Verse our Savior informs of the manner or way how we may come to it; For to
speak of eternal life and not direct to the enjoying of it, is to see Canaan,
but to want a pillar of fire to guide to it, and although our Savior had
described such as should inherit eternal life, yet because it is a secret
written in Gods Book, which no man can read, who are given by the Father to
Christ, and who not; Therefore it is necessary we should be told the way, and
that is done in the Text.

In the words you have then affirmed the way to this happiness, This is
eternal life, this will make you have eternal life; None can ever attain it
that take not this course, for (...) may either relate to (...), or else after
the manner of the Hebrews be put absolutely for (...); This phrase is like John
12.58.

Now therein Consider, 1. The way or duty enjoined. 2. The object of it.


The duty is To know. Among other distinctions, this is very obvious in
Scripture to speak of a twofold knowledge.

1. That which is merely speculative and apprehensive; If ye know these things,
happy are you if ye do them, Joh. 13.17.

2. Which is practical and operative, for it is a known Rule, that among the
Hebrews, Words of Knowledge are put for all the affections and effects that use
to follow such Knowledge; Thus God is said to know the way of the righteous*
Psa. 1. That is, so to know as to approve and preserve the righteous, and in
this sense To know the true God is taken so to know as to do all those things
that are commanded by him, and the reason why the Scripture comprehends all
under knowledge, is, because this is the Introduction and gate to all
practical piety: Although to know here is more particularly taken for
believing, for it is a good Rule that Divines have, whereas Faith has three
acts ingredient to it: 1. Knowledge. 2. Assent. 3. Fiducial application. The
Scripture describes the whole nature of Faith sometimes by one act, sometimes
by another: In other places it is described by assent, and most frequently by
trusting, but here by knowledge; For whereas the Papists would make ignorance
rather of the definition of faith then knowledge, they show plainly what an
ignorant faith and Religion they would have people take up with.

In the second place there is the object which is twofold, 1. The only true
God. 2. Jesus Christ That is both God in respect of his nature and attributes,
oppositely to those Heathens who worshipped Idols; and 2. Jesus Christ, that is
opposite to the Jews, who knew the true God but not Christ, and withal that
the knowing of the true God as a Creator by the creatures is nothing at all
without the latter: It must be, as he is Father in Christ, so that hereby is
implied that the knowing of God absolutely is not saving, it must be relatively
in the glorious dispensation and mystery which is by Jesus Christ.

I shall not explain further on this, only remove an Argument which the Arians
and Socinians use to triumph in from this Text as their Achilles; Arians and
Socinians collection from the Text.

The Text vindicated.


Oh say they here it is plain; That Christ is not a true God, because they are
distinguished; God is the only true God, and therefore Christ is not; But this
is absurd, That the only true God is opposed to Idols and to the heathenish
gods which were worshipped by them, in which sense he is sometimes called The
Holy One of Israel, and not to Christ, for if he were not God likewise how
could eternal life be said to be both in knowing of God and Christ, and that
Christ is truly God, take instead of many, two undeniable places, Romans 9.5. Of
whom after the flesh came Christ, who is over all God blessed for evermore; And
the other which is an excellent Comment upon this place, 1 John 5.20. We are in
him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ; This is the true God, and
eternal life; and then adds, Keep your selves from Idols; So that God the
Father is the true God and Christ the Son is the true God, and all other made
gods are Idols.

This Answer is sufficient, and indeed the Socinians themselves may be
convinced, for they grant this Rule, that the word (...) solus does not exclude
the inclusa or subordinate, for they acknowledge Christ to be truly God, though
not essentially; Whereas by their Argument Christ as true God should be
excluded, and nothing is more ordinary then to use the word solus, not to
exclude what is concomitant or homogeneall but diverse, as Mat. 11.16. None
knows the Father but the Son, where the Father himself is not excluded, nor
the holy Ghost, for it is said, 1 Cor. 2.11. None knows the things of God but
the Spirit; Others of old made this order of the words, To know thee and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent, to be the true God, but this may seem too much
forced. Lastly, Many answer that the restrictive word (...), does not determine
the Antecedent te or Patr^m, but the true God, so that the sense is not, the
Father alone is the only true God, but that he is the only true God, and then
this expression does not exclude the Son or holy Ghost* but because by other
places it is evident they are also the true God, therefore they are necessarily
included.

Observe.
Obs. That by the knowledge of the true God and Jesus Christ we come to eternal
life, 1 Timothy 2.4, God would have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge
of the Truth: Here you see the knowledge of the Truth is the way to be saved: I
shall not now treat upon the nature of this knowledge, especially as it
includes faith, but shall first handle it in the general, as it is opposite
to ignorance and error about the true God.

And to open this Consider,

1. All men naturally ignorant of God in a saving manner
1. That all men by nature are ignorant of God in a saving true manner, For
although Romans 1. it is plain, that God has implanted (...), some imbred
apprehension about a God, so that Divines say, there cannot be a natural
Athiest, yet this knowledge is so confused and dimmed, that it is better called
ignorance then knowledge.

2. Imbred knowledge may be increased by the contemplation of the creature.
Yet 2. This imbred knowledge may be actuated and perfected by the contemplation
of the Creatures, as Romans 1. None that observes such a curious Fabric as the
world is, can conclude it made it self, but it had some Creator; Even as when a
man hears curious Music upon some Musical Instrument, every one will
conclude there is some artificial hand playing upon it, that it does not move
it self: Thus the Heathens have many expressions concerning a God, whom they
discovered no other way but by the creatures, although this was accompanied
with some hesitancy and doubting; And their light was like that of the Moon and
Stars, yea, not so much, for it was not able to direct them in any manner
acceptable to him: Hence it is that the Scripture speaks of them as without
God, Ephesians. 2. and such as know not God.

3. True knowledge to be had only within the Church.
Therefore 3. The true and right knowledge of God is only had within the Church,
That as God says of his people, You only of all Nations have I known; so they
only of all Nations have known God, Hence the Samaritan Woman is said to
worship she did not know what, Joh. 4.22. because Salvation was only of the
Jews, viz. the knowledge and true revelation of it. Hence is that saying of
Divines, Extra Ecclesiam non est salus; As without the Ark every one perished;
For although some of the Ancients and others have been very prone to ascribe
salvation even to a natural knowledge of God, as if God would require no more
of them; Then in that condition thinking otherwise, that he would reap where he
had not sown, yet this Text puts out of all doubt as well as others, that
the knowledge of the true God and of Christ is necessary to Salvation: Now
whatsoever they might know of God, yet it is plain they could not by the
Creatures know any thing of Christ, his Nature and Offices, being of mere
Revelation, and from hence likewise it is apparent that even among the Jews,
though the knowledge of the Trinity, and of Christ seemed more obscure and
implicit, yet those that were saved had some measure of the knowledge of it,
for says Christ, This is eternal life; The way to it, and those in the Old
Testament went in the same way to Heaven, as well as those in the new; You see
then our Savior by this Proposition does assure us that without the knowledge
of God and Christ, there is no eternal life, and thereby that it is had only in
the Church; There are no flowers can grow out of this garden, No gold
sanctified that is not in this Temple.

4. Though the true knowledge of God and Christ is to be had in the Church, 4.
All true knowledge is not presently saving.
yet all true knowledge that is most plentiful and exact, is not presently
saving knowledge; Therefore in the Text when eternal life is said to be in
knowing of God, and Christ, that is, with the due concomitants and genuine
effects thereof, when we so know as that it is an acknowledgement of the truth
after godliness, Tit. 1. This is good to be considered by those who have
obtained some good measure of knowledge, how apt are men to be puffed up by it,
They swell with this wind, as those in antiquity that were called Gnostics,
because of the knowledge they gloried in, but this light may be and often is
without any heat at all: Their heads are better then their hearts or their
hands, so that they are a kind of a spiritual Monster, A man's head above, but
bruit beasts below, look then that with thy knowledge there be also a good
conscience and a godly life, otherwise thy knowledge will serve but to make
hell hotter for thee.

5. Though all knowledge be not saving, 5. Without knowledge no Salvation.
yet without knowledge there cannot be any salvation; I speak not of Infants,
They come not within the ordinary way of Gods dispensation, For the Apostle
says, Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. Even as Aristotle says, Disciplina
est ex auditu, the Ear is the organ of Learning; No knowledge, no faith; no
faith, no godliness, and so no salvation, Isa. 23.11. They are a people of no
understanding, therefore he that made them will not save them; As without this
there cannot be any salvation, so neither any true piety, Psa. 14.3. All the
wickedness of man is because he does not understand or seek after God, and
Hos. 4.1. The Land was full of swearing, lying, and killing because there was
no knowledge of God in the Land; Knowledge then is the eye of the soul, the
needle to draw in the thread, and to neglect this is wilfully to refuse the
Salvation of God offered to them.

6. Although this Knowledge be thus necessary, 6. The great ignorance of most
to be lamented.
yet how woeful is the stupidity and ignorance of most people; Who can take up
Lamentations bitter enough? Who has bowels tender enough to pity those
ignorant and senseless people that are every where, who know nothing of God or
Christ? we use to pity poor blind people that are not able to step one step
without danger, but oh the sad and miserable estate of those who have these
blind and darkened understandings! Every step they take they stumble and fall:
If Paul Heb. 6. did so severely threaten those that were but in their first
principles, and were not carried on to perfection: What danger remains for
them who have not so much as attained to first principles, who have not yet
laid a Foundation? yet this is the sad condition of many who though in the Land
of Goshen have Egyptian darkness upon their hearts; Though baptized in the
Name of Christ, yet know nothing of God or Christ, but are become like bruit
beasts that perish.

7. It Is not therefore enough for a man to believe as others believe, or as the
Church believes, without some personal or explicate knowledge of his own; 7.
We must have personal and explicit knowledge, and not believe as the Church
believes.
He does not say, It Is Eternal life to know that others know, To believe that
others believe, but he that would have eternal life, he himself must know the
true God and Christ; So that this does palpably condemn that strange but
politic doctrine maintained in the Church of Rome, That the common people
need no more faith then this, to believe as the Church believes, Politic I
call it, for hereby they keep the people in a blind obedience, They receive
any kind of worship, any kind of doctrine, without trial or comparing it by
the Scripture, and thus they commend darkness, because their deeds are evil;
But the Apostles Exhortation is to all private persons as well as others, Prove
all things, 1 These. 5.21. Believe not every spirit, 1 John 4.1. Let the Word of
God dwell plentifully in you, Col. 3.16. Indeed it cannot be denied but that
God has appointed Officers and Guides in the Church, and the people are
commanded to hear them, and to submit to them, but all this is to be understood
as Paul says, Follow me, even as I do Jesus Christ. Phil. 3.17. We must take
heed of extreme errors either to make the Ministry infallible, or else to
account of it as nothing at all; No, there is a peculiar promise of assistance
and direction to thee in their work, though not of infallibility, but this by
the way to comm^nd ignorance, to praise blind obedience and devotion, is to
offer God a Sacrifice without eyes: Do not then think, I am a poor ignorant
man, I have no leisure to mind Religion, to enquire after the principles
thereof; Let those that have learning mind such things, What is this but to
say, It Is not for me to look to salvation; It Is not for me to be saved; It Is
for Learned men and knowing men to go to heaven, not for such as I am,
certainly our voices are to sound like the Angels Trumpet at the day of
judgment, to awaken men out of their ignorance, Men in the dark are usually
afraid: Oh then why should not thou be afraid who art all over darkness,
Ephesians. 5, 8. as the Scripture calls thee; There are too many whom this truth
concerns.

Reasons. Why knowledge is so necessary to Salvation.
Now let us consider why some measure of knowledge about God and Christ is
necessary to salvation.

And First, In respect of the Object it self, there are many duties God and
Christ require of us, which we are never able to perform without some knowledge
of them. I grant that as the Stars do differ in their glory and light, so one
man may far exceed another in knowledge, I. In respect of some duties we owe
unto God which cannot be acceptably performed without knowledge
yea, God does not require so much of some as he does of others, such a degree
of knowledge will God accept of in some, which he will not in others, so that
according to the means and opportunities of knowledge more or less is
required: We grant also some may know more then they can express through some
impediments or other, but there is none can be saved who lay not in some
measure a competent knowledge in Christianity, because there are several
duties required, which he that knows nothing of God cannot perform acceptably.

As 1. Every man that will be saved must worship the true God and not the
false: But without some knowledge this can never be; Why is the first and
second Commandment so plain to have no other God but him, and to worship him
in his way, and that he is a jealous God in this matter, like an Hu^band whose
jealousy is his rage against his adulterous Wife; Why is all this but to show
that of all sinners, an Idolater is sure to be excluded from the kingdom of
heaven; Now the ignorant man worshippeth that which others do where he lives,
but whether it be God or an Idol that he understands not. The Athenians had an
Altar dedicated To the unknown God, Act. 17.23. and Paul with much zeal does
reprove this their superstition and Idolatry, telling them they were out of the
way to heaven, yea, the more devout and zealous a man is for that worship, he
understands not, the more swift he runs in the way to hell, so then where
ignorance is, It Is all one whether Christ or Mahomet be worshipped, whether an
Image or the true God: So truly does Seneca observe of the common people, Eunt
qua itur, non qua eundem est, They do and go not whither they ought, but
whither they see others before them, yea, by this means men come to worship the
devil in stead of God, Oh terrible and heavy aggravation! Thou that think
thou do worship God, yet by thy ignorance going on in Idolatry do worship
the devils: Thus Jeroboam is said to set up calves to the devil, 2 Chronicles.
11.15. the people little thought so; and so those that would be at the
Idolaters Feasts, they did partake of the cup of the Lord, and of devils, 1
Cor. 10. Now although it be true, that thou art brought up in that Religion
where the true God is worshipped, yet this is all one to thee who has no
knowledge of God or Christ, for if it had been to Moloch, to Baal or Ashtaroth,
had it been to Mahomet, or to Images and Idols in every high way, thou would
have done that as well as this, for any true knowledge or understanding thou
have, O pray then that God would give thee true knowledge. As it is thus for
the generality of Gods worship, so in more special manner ignorance does wholly
overthrow prayer unto God, which is more necessary then food or raiment, and is
a duty to be performed to God every day; Now says the Apostle, Heb. 11.1. He
that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those
that seek him, but how can this be? when a man by ignorance is in a confused
chaos, Oh that ignorant people would attend to this, They say, they pray, yea,
they hope to be saved by their good prayers, when (alas) thou that know
nothing of God or Christ can not pray at all, Thou never did pray
acceptably to God all thy life time; If a Parrot be taught to say the Lords
Prayer, shall that be accounted a prayer? and is there not many that pray Gods
Name may be hallowed, his Kingdom may come, and yet understand not at all the
sense of their prayer? Thus in Popery they do sinfully nourish people in their
ignorant prayers, for seeing their prayers are in Latin, it is all one whether
they pray good matter or blasphemy; The Apostle 1 Cor. 14. does expressly argue
against praying in an unknown tongue, saying for himself, He will pray in the
spirit, and with understanding also. What terror then does this proclaim?
ignorant people, pray they cannot, they do not, no not when they pray; If that
Question should be put to them which Philip put to the Eunuch, Understand
thou what thou read? So Understandest thou what thou praiest? Were they able
to say one word of knowledge to you? We may cry out, Be astonished O Heavens
and the Earth at the ignorance and blindness of many people, and yet nothing
will provoke them to get knowledge.

3. We cannot do that great and necessary duty which is the substance of all
Gods command, viz. to love him with all our heart, with all our soul and might,
neither the consequents of this love, which is to desire after him, to delight
and rejoice in the light of his countenance, without knowledge; for what a man
knows not, he cannot love, Ignota nulla cupido; Let ignorant people by this
see the great gulf that is between them and heaven; Thou can not love God nor
desire him as long as thou do not know him, so neither can you fear God if
you know not his infinite Majesty, the greatness of his power, and his hatred
against sin; What makes men so desperately wicked to commit sin without any
fear or trembling? They know not God; Hence is that frequent expression in
Scripture when God says, he will bring such and such punishments. Then they
shall know that I am God.

4. Those that serve God ought to be full of fervency and zeal; For all duties
without zeal are like a Sacrifice without fire, a Bird without wings, a
Messenger without feet, Now all zeal without knowledge is refused by God; They
have a zeal but not according to knowledge, Romans 10.2. Ignorant people may be
very zealous as those that offered their children to Moloch, That did cut and
lance themselves in calling upon Baal, but this fire of zeal was like that of
hell, calidus and not lucidus, hot but not light.

Use, If Eternal life be to know God, then this is eternal death not to know
God; This is eternal damnation to be ignorant of him; It was Gods promise that
all should know him from the greatest to the least, Jer. 31.34. but how few
find the fruit of this promise? How many Families, how many persons are there,
who do all they do to the unknown God? yet these hope to be saved, yet these
say, They have a good heart, when nothing can be good while ignorance is
predominate, neither a good faith, or good love, or good duties, or a good
heart, and as ignorance is damnable of it self, so much more when it is where
the means of knowledge are, where the Sun shines, where the Ministry is
instructing; Oh what woe and woe again will befall such men.

SERMON XV. More Reasons of the Necessity of Divine Knowledge; And the Causes
of Ignorance,
JOH. 17.3. And this is Eternal Life to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent.
THe Doctrine observed was, that without the knowledge of God and Christ there
cannot be any eternal life obtained; The first ground or reason of this was
from those several duties that are required of us toward God, which without
some knowledge could never be acceptably performed.

II. From those duties we owe unto Christ.
The second ground shall be from those duties we owe to Christ; And herein
damnable ignorance will far sooner possess us then in the former, for there
are some common notions and dictates about a god, which made Tertullian cry
out, O animam naturaliter Christianam; But in respect of Christ, we have not
the least implanted notion about him, so that the doctrine of Christ is far
more supernatural then that about God, for the hoti quod si Deus is, I
discovered by natural light, but who he is, and how to be worshipped this is
merely supernatural, but concerning Christ both the quod sit and the quid sit:
That there is a Christ, and what he is are both by divine manifestation; So
that whatsoever we have of Christ, it must only be by the Revelation of God,
and in this respect though most people may have some general apprehensions
about God, yet about Christ they have none at all unless by hearsay: It
behooves us therefore who are called Christians to know what that Christ is
whom we worship, and trust in for salvation, and the great ignorance of Christ
is present death; He is the door, he is the truth, the way, and the life, Joh.
14.6. All that miss of him are carried violently to death and destruction.

For 1. Where this ignorance of Christ is, there cannot be any historical
faith, which is the least degree of faith that can be, and where there is no
historical faith there cannot be any justifying, for how can a man trust in
Christ for salvation, whom he does not believe to be, so that historical, or as
some call it dogmaticall faith, whereby we believe that there was a Christ both
God and man, is the first stone that must be laid in our Christian building,
and without this we have not so much as learned the Alphabet of our Religion,
yet this is the case of thousands that have no explicit formal faith in this
fundamental Point, I grant they have a traditional form, whereby they say they
believe in Christ, but they have no express faith concerning the person and
natures of Christ; Now that traditional form is not a reasonable worship of
God, as the Scripture expresses it, Romans 12. where we are commanded to give up
our selves as reasonable sacrifices, But here men are as bruit beasts in
respect of any express, formal faith, insomuch that hundreds of people if they
be asked what they believe concerning Christ, they cannot give any knowing or
express answer; Oh how near are such foolish and stupid persons to the very
brink of hell^ and if you should say, If it be Faith then it cannot be
knowledge, Vbi rides, non est fides, and by all faith and knowledge are
opposed, but that is to be handled afterward, viz. how that Faith does
necessarily require knowledge, and yet there is some kind of knowledge that
Faith is opposite unto, for the present we conclude, that where there is not
some knowledge of Christ there cannot be so much as a bare historical faith,
They have no faith that have no knowledge, I know whom I have believed, says
Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12.

2. Where gross Ignorance is, if there cannot be historical Faith about
Christ, much less can there be saving and justifying Faith, a fiducial relying
and resting of the soul upon him as the Mediator appointed by God: The
Scripture does often speak that we are justified by faith, Romans 5.1. that we
have remission of sins through Faith in Christ's blood, Romans 3.25. So that
Justification and Faith are inseparably joined together, but where ignorance of
Christ is, there cannot be any of this saving faith, for can any man trust in
that which he does not know of; yea, though such ignorant men say they trust in
Christ, yet because they know not Christ, these are but traditional and
customary words; They speak falsely and say they do not know what; Philosophers
say there is actio hominis, and actio humana, an humane action is that which
comes expressly or impliedly from reason, but actio hominis is that which is
done by a man, but not as a man, as the moving of the foot or lifting up a
straw which came from the imagination merely, So truly we may say, there is
actio Christiani, and actio Christiani, a Christian action is that which comes
from knowledge and faith, either directly or indirectly, but that is an action
of one that is a Christian in name and profession only, that does such actions
as others do, but not from any knowledge or faith within, only from custom
and mere tradition; if then knowledge be in all the historical and justifying
acts of Faith, where shall the stupid and ignorant man appear?

3. The gross ignorant man cannot admire, bless, and praise God for Jesus
Christ the Medtatour; This is evident, he that knows not the nature, office,
and use of Christ, what he was, and why he came into the world, what was that
which he did for us, it is impossible he should ever be affected with the love
of God, or with the love of Christ, This made the Apostle pray that they might
know the breadth and depth of the love of God through Christ, Ephesians. 3. For
without this knowledge all Gods love and Christ's love is disregarded; We read
of Paul's divine raptures, and holy ecstasies, because of Christ, I desire to
know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified, 2 Cor. 2.2. It is impossible
in a lively manner to know this divine truth of God the Fathers love in sending
his only begotten Son to die for us, and not break out in heavenly praises
and admirations, but the blind ignorant man sees nothing of this admirable
mystery; As he said, it fell out ill with Artificers, when ignorant men judged
of their works; Thus certainly God loses much of his glory-Christ much of his
honor, when ignorant men only speak of this Doctrine, As Christ Joh. 4. said
to the woman of Samaria, If thou had known who it is speaks to thee, thou
would have asked for the water of Life; So here, if thou had known what is
in this love of God and Christ, if thy heart did meditate and study on it, thou
would be more affected and enlarged in thy affections to Christ.

4. Where gross Ignorance is of Christ, there cannot be any improving of him
for all these blessed effects to which he is appointed by God. Christ is of God
unto us wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. Of his Fullness
we all receive grace for grace, Joh. 3. But the ignorant and unwise man cannot
make any advantage of this, The ignorant man knows not the virtue and good
use may be made of such herbs as grow in the field, but the wise Artist does,
Solomon asks, Why is a price put into the hands of a Fool, seeing he knows
not how to make use of it? If the man in the Parable that found a Pearl had not
known it to be a Pearl, he would not have sold all to have bought it; So then
let there be never so much fullness and sufficiency in Christ, yet he is a
Fountain sealed up, and a garden enclosed to the ignorant man, and this must
necessarily exclude such from heaven, because in Christ is all our salvation,
whatsoever conduces to our happiness is bound up in him, now the ignorant man
not knowing this treasure must needs perish in his sins.

5. Where a man is ignorant of Christ, he must needs be in a damnable
condition, because thereby he is also ignorant of himself, he knows not his
own sinfulness and misery, and so cannot desire a remedy: These two are
necessarily known together, or unknown, Christ the Physician, and sin a
desperate disease; Christ a Savior, and the sinner that is lost; But the
ignorant man not knowing the one must necessarily have the other hid from his
eyes: Can there be any hope of that man's cure who knows not and feels not his
disease? Thy Ignorance of Christ argues thou art also ignorant of thy self,
for did thou know thy own poverty and guilt, nothing could hold thee till
thou might get some interest in Christ, pain of body will make a man cry out
for ease, but pain of soul through sin, much more; Thus you see the ignorant
man is in the plain way to hell.

III. Because gross Ignorance is immediately opposite to the means that bring
the soul to God and Christ.
Thirdly, Gross Ignorance must needs be damnable, because it is immediately
opposite to the sanctified and appointed means that bring to God and Christ,
viz. the Ministry: The Preaching of the Word is instituted by God to bring us
to understanding and faith about these things; Therefore they are called the
Light and Guides; But where there is gross Ignorance there commonly the
Preaching of the Word has least effect and fruit, as the Sunne-beams do no
good to the blind man, For seeing the Word of God is a moral Instrument, and
though potent by the power of God, yet it does by argument convince and
persuade, where men are brutish like beasts, what improbability is there of
doing good? Indeed the Word does give eyes to the blind, and understanding to
the simple, where God uses it efficaciously, for nothing can resist it then
because it takes away the actual obstinacy, yet the Ignorance of men is that
which of it self would make all Preaching to drop like the water upon the rock,
where no fruit can grow; For what does the ignorant man understand? what can he
remember? what can he meditate upon when he is gone hence? Take a knowing
though profane man in his life, yet we have something to work upon, we speak
to wise men that will judge what we say, but to the blind man day and night is
all one, Preaching and no Preaching; To the deaf man Thunder and a still voice
is all one: Consider then lest thy ignorance does not damn thee, in that all
the means and instituted ways of God become altogether unprofitable unto thee,
That makes all preaching in vain: I shall not further enlarge on this.

Here is an Objection will presently be made, Obj.
Does not ignorance quite absolve a man from guilt? Is he not to be pitied
rather then blamed? I ^t does not excuse a toto, yet a tanto, He does not sin
so much as knowing men do, which does greatly encourage and comfort them.

We may answer this by that known distinction, of an Ignorance merae negationis
and pravae dispositionis: It Is true mere negative Ignorance does excuse; Answ.
The Heathens and Pagans that never heard of Christ, though they have other
sins they are damned for, yet the mere ignorance of Christ who was never
revealed to them, does not condemn them, Infidelitas negativa non damnat, but
then there is an affected and wilful Ignorance, this does not excuse but
accuse and aggravate, and such is the Ignorance of all those that live under
the means of grace, and where the Name of Christ is preached; It Is thy wilful
and wicked disposition in thee that makes thee thus blind; You say, as those
in Job, let the knowledge of the most High depart from you, Job 21.14. Seeing
you will not see, and hearing you will not hear, Therefore your condemnation is
the greater. It Is disputed among Casu^sts, whether God may not have mercy upon
natural fools, that cannot know any thing of God or Christ because of a natural
incapacity; But thou art a voluntary fool, and do wilfully deprive thy self
of all knowledge, and how then shall God be gracious unto thee? In the next
place you may say, If the estate of an ignorant person be thus dangerous, how
comes it about that there are so many ignorant persons? Why cannot all say with
the Apostle, We know that we know? 2 Cor. 8.1. There are some outward causes or
inward causes, or causes from the ignorant man himself, or in respect of others.

Many are therefore so ignorant in matters of Religion, The causes of Ignorance.
because they understand not the damnable estate this ignorance puts them into;
So that the ignorance of their dangers makes them also ignorant of the remedy;
As Austin said of Original sin, It was peccatum causa peccati, and poena
peccati, 1. Internal.
the same is true of Ignorance; It Is a sin in its own nature, because
contrary to that command of God, which does so often require that we should
know him, and then it is a cause of sin, yea, of all sin; It Is because men
do not know God, that therefore they are so bold to transgress his Laws.
Lastly, It Is the punishment of sin for all that black darkness and confusion
we are in, is, because of our revolt from God, Ignorance then keeping man off
from the true understanding of his misery, makes him the more secure and
content in it: If thou did know what curses hang over thy head, If thou did
know what a gulf is between God and thee, In what utter darkness thou art in
here, which will be rewarded with utter darkness hereafter, thou would have
no rest within thy self.

Slothfulness and negligence; They strive not, they pray not for knowledge,
whereas this cannot be obtained without prayer and diligence: Then shall ye
know if ye follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.3. and Solomon bids us seek after
it more then for gold, or the richest treasures, Pro. 2.3. and 8.10. to love it
as thy Sister or Mother, many people complain they are ignorant, God help them,
for they have little knowledge, and where is the fault all this while? Is it
not thy negligence, thy slothfulness? May we not produce many instances of
those who have been very ignorant and stupid, yet by prayer and hearty
endeavor have obtained to a competent measure of knowledge: for humane
knowledge shall there be so much labor taken, sudavit and alsit, said the
Poet, and for Christian knowledge wherein is our happiness and eternel life,
shall we not be as industrious? Why do thou not rather cry out of thy self
every night? I go to bed, and yet have got no knowledge: I understand such and
such things in the world, but nothing at all about God and Christ; Thus the
sluggards Field is full of briars and weeds; At the day of judgment when God
will call for an account of every day and hour, thou will bewail thy folly,
that time was not more redeemed to get knowledge.

Earthly and worldly affections; These do so immoderately possess the whole
man that they regard nothing else; Why is it that men, ordinary plain men get
so much skill and craft in worldly affairs, they know the best way for
improving every worldy advantage? It is because their heart is set upon it,
They mind and regard this thing, They rise with the thoughts of it and so go
to bed; If their hearts were thus affectionate toward God and Christ, they
would be as labourious for heavenly knowledge; They would know how to improve
Christ, To make the best advantage of the means of grace, They would not let
any truth go till they did fully understand it, but the Scripture complains
men are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no understanding: These Moles
that live and delight only in the earth they must needs be blind; These are
internal causes.

A negligent, ignorant, and careless Ministry; For seeing the Ministry is
appointed to be a light, 2. External.
to be a guide, if that be not light, then all the people must be darkness; If
they are not salt the people have no seasoning; An Idol-Shepherd makes
Idol-sheep; This God often complains of, and Christ also, when he says, The
blind lead the blind, Mat. 15.14. and that some took away the Key of
knowledge.

And 2. Negligence of Parents and Masters, All Governors who have Inferiors
under them, they are to teach the principles of knowledge, Parents are often
required to do it, and truly hence is the Original of all Ignorance, even the
rudeness and wicked orders that are in Families: There is no praying, no
catechizing, no instructing, and when these are Nurseries of blindness and
impiety, what good can be expected, Oh that Parents and Masters would remember
how much God requires of them in this particular; It was the commendation God
gave Abraham, that he would teach his Family, and make them worship him, Genesis
17. I shall no longer insist about this Point, but come to the application, for
men will hear and hear, and never set about the work.

Use.
Let it therefore be a Use of importunate Exhortation to follow you as closely
as that Widow did the Judge, that if nothing else importunity might prevail
with you, Let the ignorant pray that they may receive their sight, Let them not
give over day and night those means that may help them, What though thou can
say, I am no thief, no adulterer, no unclean person, yet if ignorant, thou art
upon the brink of hell, and so you that are Parents and Masters, bring up your
Inferiors in the true knowledge and fear of God; It Is said of Constantine, who
was truly great in this, that he would have his whole Court gathered together,
and the Scriptures read to them, with Instructions from it to them; What you
see me do at the Church, that let the Master of the Family do at home, said
Austin; Let your Families be Christ's School; Thou would not have a Servant
that knows not how to do his proper emploiment, much less then should thou
have one that knows not his Christianity; Now there are many pregnant
arguments to enforce this duty.

Motives.
The necessity of a competent knowledge, This is eternal life; You cannot
expect heaven, There is no way for thy salvation whilst thou art in this dark
night, so that this is the one thing necessary, Be like Mary to choose the
better part; Martha was showing much love in entertaining of Christ, yet
because Mary was wholly busy in hearing of Christ, and learning from him;
Therefore she chose the better part: Oh then thou that art more careful to
know God and Christ then to get any worldly mercy, thou choosest the better
part; This undoeth you, you are not possessed with the necessity of it, you
will not believe this text of Scripture, you hope to do well enough for all
this, though the Word says, He that made them will not save them, Isa. 11.

Be stirred up hereunto, because there cannot be any godliness, any true
holiness in thee, till this knowledge be in thee. Ephesians. 4. Those that are to
have the Image of God restored in them by righteousness and true holiness,
they are to be renewed in the spirit of their mind: As God created light at
first in the world, so he does in the new creature; hence they are called light
in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. and conversion is a translation from a state of
darkness into light. Oh what a goad should this be in thy side to get
knowledge. There cannot be any grace, not the least degree of holiness, till
God renew my mind: Though all that have knowledge are not renewed, yet none are
renewed with out knowledge; and men are said to escape the pollutions of the
world, through the knowledge of the Gospel, 2 Pet. 2.20.

Consider what pains men take to get humane knowledge; these will condemn
Christians at the last day. There is no Art or Science can be obtained without
much study and daily consumption of the body, and men have not thought it too
much to impair the health of their body by perfecting their mind, and yet how
much uncertainty was there in that knowledge did not one of the wisest say,
This only he knew that he knew nothing, so confused and unsatisfied were they
in their studies: But this knowledge is certain, and that which will greatly
quiet and satisfy the heart, Fides non tantum est apprehensiva, sed quietativa.

Consider how bitterly and woefully thou will cry out of all thy negligence and
abuse of the means of knowledge hereafter: as Prove. 1. God often called and you
would not hear; Wisdom daily invited you, How long will ye pass by O ye simple
ones and void of understanding: When thou shall fall into hell, that is like
thy soul, utter darkness, and there remember, The time was when Manna fell and
I might have gathered it: There was a time to have gotten knowledge and
understanding, but I desperately refused it, and now I am suffering the just
punishment of my ignorance! This must perpetually torment thee. Its made an
heavy curse in Job, chap. 36.12. when a man shall dye without knowledge.
Therefore it is not only a sin but a curse, because you would not see, God
gives you up to a blind eye, and this is the more terrible under the Gospel,
when a promise of plentiful knowledge is spoken of by the Prophets.

SERMON XVI. Shows what Saving Knowledge is in its Concomitants and Effects.
JOH. 17.3. This is Eternal Life, to Know thee the only true God.
KNowledge you heard is necessary to every man's salvation: We now come to
discover what kind of knowledge this must be; and as for the comprehending of
Faith under that knowledge, I shall not treat of that notion, but refer it
till further opportunity offer it self in this Chapter. That therefore the
knowing man may not presently bless himself as if his eyes were enough to
carry him to heaven, though he has no feet to walk in Gods ways: I shall now
manifest what knowledge it is, and raise this Observation,

Observe.
That knowledge which brings to eternal life, ought to be accompanied with the
true and proper effects of it. This is grounded upon the use of the word know,
which does denote the affectus and effectui concomitatis, frequently in
Scripture; and that this knowledge must be so here, is plain by that of our
Savior, If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, John 13.17.
Therefore mere knowledge without doing, is not happiness: And this we see the
very Heathens could pitch upon, that happiness did not consist in a
speculative knowledge, but in virtuous actions: Yea Aristotle observed, that a
profane dissolute life did not corrupt speculative sciences, as Geometry and
the Mathematics, but it would immediately moral habits: So then, Knowledge
with affections and good effects is that which leads to eternal life. Hence
wicked men are many times said not to know God, because though they have never
so much speculative understanding, yet because by their lives and ungodly ways
they dishonor him, therefore they are said not to know him.

The effects of saving knowledge.
Now the concomitants or effects rather of this knowledge are of two sorts,
either internal in the heart, or external in our actions. We will enumerate
the first and then the later. Saving knowledge has this internal effect:

I. Internal.
That it makes a man have a firm and divine immovable assent to
Scripture-truths: For if we should have all the knowledge of men and Angels,
yet believe nothing, what advantage could it be to us? There may be knowledge
merely apprehensive, as those heathenish Writers, Julian, Porphyrius, and
others, who argued and disputed against the Christian Religion; in this they
knew what it was, else they could not have disputed against it, but they did
not believe it to be true. The Pharisees that so much opposed Christ, they knew
the sense and meaning of this doctrine but did not believe it; so that if
knowledge be not accompanied with faith, though we had the highest degree of
it, yet it would profit nothing. Therefore Christians are not called knowing
men so much as Believers, that is their frequent title, because the firm assent
they give to Gods truth is that which is most available to salvation. Enquire
then after thy faith, men of great knowledge are many times great Atheists or
Scepticks; they can say as much for one way of Religion, as for another, and
hereupon are always wavering and doubting, but have no determinate fixing of
the heart upon God; yea Aquinas observes, that a knowing man has more
temptations against his faith then one more simple. It Is well then, when with
thy knowledge thy faith is also firm and steadfast.

Then is thy knowledge saving, when the main and noble act of the will does
presently follow, which is to choose and take God for our chiefest good, and to
embrace the goodness of all those things we know; for the devils they have
knowledge enough, called therefore (...), because of their exceeding great
knowledge, yet they are most maliciously opposite to God, because by their wills
they do not choose and embrace that which is good. The two main pillars of the
soul, or the chief faculties thereof are the understanding and the will: The
object of the understanding is truth, of the will is good; Now the
understanding is to be like a torch or star to guide the will, and whatsoever
the mind discovers to be true and good, that the will is readily to receive;
so that then our knowledge does attain it is proper perfection, when it
prevails upon the will and moves that; the understanding is the counselor,
the will is the Queen, if that then be moved to choose the good discovered,
then has the understanding obtained its end: See then how it is with thee,
thou know God and Christ, but how, as the chiefest good? as to be chosen
above any worldly excellency, and therefore thy will cleaves fully to them;
this is rightly to know: While something is done upon the will, till that be
bowed and changed, the strongest hold stands out against God. Oh then pray, and
again pray that thy knowledge may so far prevail on thy will, that it shall
renounce all other things to adhere to God only.

This knowledge of God must draw out those eminent affections of love, joy,
delight, and fear of God. You see God in the Scripture is made the proper
object of all these affections, as if we had them for nothing but God; our
love, that God will have all, Thou shall love him with all the heart: and so
for our fear, that is often required, Sanctify the Lord God, and let him be
thy dread: and we are often commanded to rejoice in the Lord: So then seeing
God is the proper object of these affections, and we may not place them any
where but on him, and things relating thereunto, it behooves us to see whether
our knowledge do thus kindle and inflame us after God or no. Certainly it is the
greatest reason that our knowledge should have such Divine operations, for if
we know God as he is revealed in his word, he is there discovered to be so
great, so glorious, full of all goodness, that we cannot but give him the
superiority in all things.

a melting, sorrowful and grieved heart that we have provoked God by our
sins: For who can but grieve and lament his folly, when he knows how great
and terrible a God he has provoked: Thus Manasseh, after his great troubles
and afflictions laid upon him, when he had prayed, mourned and humbled himself,
it is said, Then Manasseh knew that God was the Lord: Then he knew, not before,
2 Chronicles. 33.13. A man then truly comes to know God, when through the
apprehension of his Majesty and glorious power, he abhors himself, is
afflicted because of his rebellions: As you see when Job had a further
discovery of Gods greatness, how greatly he debased himself.

A genuine and proper effect of the knowledge of God and Christ, is trust and
dependence upon them. This is so great a matter, that it is called the just man's
life, The just shall live by faith, Heb. 2.4. Now this grace of trust or
dependence is branched into two parts: First. A trust on God for his
protection, care and providence over us: This is the trust David does so often
speak of in his Psalms; and the Prophet makes him accursed, that makes not God
his trust, Jer. 17. The rich man trusts in his riches, the idolater in his
Idols, the great man in his power, but all these set up another God besides the
true God. They that truly know God, viz. that he is the Lord of hoasts, that he
is the principal efficient, and all creatures are but instruments depending on
him both quoad esse and operari, will quickly see it a sacrilegious and
idololatricall sin to trust in any but the true God, Psalm. 9.10. They that
know thy Name will trust in thee: All our unbelief, diffidence and distrust,
all distracting cares about these things below, argue our want of knowledge of
God: Therefore Mat. 5. when our Savior forbids these dividing cares, he says,
All these do the Gentiles seek after; they that know not Gods power and his
goodness, they are solicitous sinfully about these things. Hence when Israel
did see her vanity by false confidences in the creatures, see what God says of
her, Hos. 13.4. Thou shall know no God but me, for there is no Savior beside
me; and Hos. 8.2. Israel shall cry unto me, My God we know thee. Though
therefore knowledge be better then the greatest duties performed out of
ignorant devotion, the same Hosea 6 6. God there desires knowledge more then
burnt offerings, yet this is but a lame imperfect knowledge, if it breed not
dependence on God, as on our heavenly and gracious Father. The other branch of
dependence is on Christ for Justification and Salvation, that is the believing
on him which our Savior so often promises eternal life to: Oh when our
knowledge of Christ and the fullness and sufficiency of a Mediator, makes us to
cast all our burden on him, and to have free access to the Throne of Grace by
his blood, this is precious knowledge. This is that excellency of knowledge
Paul, Phil. 3. counted all things dung unto comparatively. See then what trust
and dependence does the knowledge of God cause in thee; for all thy knowledge,
art thou not as full of cares, distractions and diffidence, as if God did not
rule, as if Christ were not the Mediator, as if there were no promises in Gods
Word.

Then is our knowledge saving, when it makes us glorify God as God, giving the
praise of all things to him, Romans 1. This the Apostle taxes the Gentiles
withal, that though they had a knowledge of God by the creatures, yet they did
not glorify him according to this knowledge, but they made sensible Images of
him, and worshipped wood and stone, the work of men's hands, They did not
glorify him as God; there is a great deal in that, To glorify God as God, is
so to honor him, as to give him the best and the supremacy in all things: When
our hearts are as much upon the creature as God, or when we would serve God and
Mamon, this is not to glorify God as God: When we do any thing not principally
and chiefly for God, we do not honor him as a God. These are the inward
effects of knowledge.

II. External.
Now there are outward effects which will necessarily follow true and saving
knowledge, even as the beams of the Sun do the Sun, though they are not
called external as opposite to internal, no, they both go together; for they
that know God, know him to be a Spirit, and that he must be worshipped in
Spirit and truth, that all outward duties done without the heart, are but a
mere hypocrisy; so that these outward effects are to be taken as streams
coming from a full and precious fountain within, and they are such as these.

The true knowledge of God does make a man effectually purge himself from all
filthy and noisome lusts. To say we know God and yet give our selves to sin, is
a lie, and it argues no truth in us, 1^ John 3.6. He that commits sin has not
known or seen God, which is the reason why the Prophets attribute all the
ungodliness in a Land to the not knowing of God: So our Savior tells the
Pharisees, that all their wickedness was because they did not know him and his
Father; and in this Chapter Christ says, The world has not known thee, but
these have known thee. Ephesians. 4. If ye have been taught as the truth is in
Jesus; and ye have not so learned Christ. What is this? when we have so learned
Christ, as to put off the old man with the lusts thereof. Never then boast of
thy knowledge and thy parts, what mortification of sin, what cleansing from
thy filth does it cause in thee; if thy Christian knowledge does not work a
Christian life, but thou art brutish and dissolute in thy life, tremble at thy
estate, for thou art out of the way to heaven, 1 Pet. 2.20. some are said to
have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of God, yet
these did it externally only. They were swine though washed, not sheep, but
thou do not come thus far; though thou have the knowledge of God, yet thou
wallowest in thy mire, and lickest up thy vomit: Thy condemnation will be the
greater, because thou know thy Masters will and do it not. What sentence
then shall we pass upon all the carnal and wicked ways of most men, they
know well enough, they understand well enough, but because this knowledge has
no efficacy upon their lives, therefore they go in the broad way to hell.

Saving knowledge, as it causes an avoiding of sin, so a ready and willing
obedience unto the commands of God. And for this sake all disobedient and
rebellious sinners, are said in the Scripture not to know God: They are
excellently put together, 1 Thessalonians. 1.8. in flaming fire taking vengeance on
them that know not God, nor obey the Gospel of Jesus Christ. What obedience
then and conformity to Gods Law does thy knowledge work in thee? this God
looks at, he cares not for thy head or thy tongue, if he have not thy heart,
thy hands, and thy whole life. If so be the Apostle say, that he which doubts
whether such a thing be sin, he is damned if he do it, Romans 14. how damnable
is that man's condition, who knows and is assured that he sins, and yet
wilfully persists in it! So that our knowledge is not to be carried only to
truths, to what is to be believed, and there to sit down, No, but Romans 12.2. we
are to be transformed in our mind, that we may prove what is that good and
acceptable and perfect will of God: We are to consider what is that which is
acceptable and well-pleasing to God, and when we know it we must readily
fulfill it: Oh that men of knowledge and parts would think of these things;
Do thou that which is well-pleasing to God? Does God accept of such a life as
thine? Is there not a plain contrariety and opposition between Gods will and
thy lusts? A man of great knowledge, and also great impiety, were he not puffed
up with self-flattery, would easily see the opposition between his life and
Gods Word, the one is strict, his life is dissolute; the one calls to avoid
not only sin but the appearance of it, but thy life plungeth thee both into
sin, and the occasions of it: Oh consider all thy knowledge and understanding
helps thee no more then the devils knowledge does them, they are not able to
love or delight in God and his will.

The knowledge of God will make a man keep a good conscience in all things: it
will make him take heed of sin in secret, as well as public; it will make
him do duties in secret, as well as openly, for whosoever is not afraid to
sin in secret, whosoever neglects private duties and holiness, this man
knows not God, he does not understand that he is omnipresent, that his eye is
every where beholding all things, that darkness and light are all one to him:
Oh this is a precious and necessary effect of the knowledge of God, when it
makes a man cry out with Joseph, though in the most secret temptation, How can
I do this and sin against God, Genesis 39.21. Those wicked men encouraged
themselves in their wickedness by this, Does the Lord see, and is there
knowledge in the most high? Psalm. 73.11. And on the contrary, he that truly
knows God dares not be wanton, unjust, dishonest, because the eye of God is
upon him wheresoever he is. David is much affected with this omnipotence and
omniscience of God, Psalm. 139.2, 4. Thou know my downsitting, and uprising,
yea every thought thou know afar off. How could there be such works of
darkness, such sins committed in secret that are not fit to be named, but
because men do not know God in a right and true manner. By this we see there is
little true knowledge of God in most towns, most families, because men live
not, as sensible of the just and revengefull eye of God beholding them always.

Where there is a saving knowledge of God there is a good and holy use made of
all afflictions and miseries that fall upon them. They know they are strokes
from God, and they come because of sin, that their end is to humble ^s and
debase us under the hand of God; and thus all the godly have done: They have
looked up to God and considered not so much the blow, as the hand that gave it:
so Job, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, Job 1.21. not the Sabeans,
not the devil, but the Lord: but men that are ignorant of God, they discover it
in nothing more then in their afflictions; they look only at second causes,
they mind only the help of inferior instruments, they fret, they rage, they
are discontented, and thus they think not of God nor their sins that have
procured these. Consider thy self therefore under any exercises and
afflictions, Is thy heart presently thinking of God? do thou search and
enquire into the cause, what sins of mine have thus offended God? have
deprived me of my good things I enjoyed? this is in a saving way to know him.
Woe be to that man who like Ezechiel's pot has boiled in the fire of
affliction, but his scum has not gone off.

A true knowledge of God and Christ will make a man readily suffer and lose all
when it is required; and if at any time we are unwilling, we love our wealth our
life better, it is because we know not the excellency of Gods glory, and what an
unspeakable reward is laid up for those that deny themselves for him: 2 Cor. 4.
This made the Apostle say, We account these light afflictions not comparable to
the eternal weight of glory: What made Moses choose the afflictions and
reproaches of Christ, Heb. 11. rather then the treasures of Egypt, it was
because by faith he saw him that was invisible. The Martyrs were no fools,
though their enemies judged them so, for they knew how great that God was whom
they feared, how able to reward them infinitely above their sufferings, and
therefore their greatest wisdom was to lose their lives, that so they might
save them. It Is ignorance of God and Christ that makes us unwilling to bear the
cross he requires of us.

Why knowledge that is not thus accompanied is ineffectuall.
In the next place let us consider the ground why knowledge if not thus
accompanied is ineffectuall.

Because knowledge in it self is only a perfection in the understanding, and
seeing that the whole heart is fully corrupted, it must be universally healed,
else there cannot be any salvation. I pray God ye be sanctified throughout in
spirit, soul and body, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Yea this knowledge is but a moral
perfection, not a gracious: As we see in the devils, who have great abilities
in their understanding: And hence it is that a man may be very knowing and yet
very vicious, because this does only dispell ignorance from the mind, it does
not sanctify the heart and affections to love and delight in what is good:
Knowledge is requisite to bring in grace, yet knowledge merely is not grace: So
that howsoever it be a necessary duty to get knowledge, yet when that is
obtained there is a greater work behind in the cleansing and purifying of the
heart. Praevolat intellectus, sed tardus sequitur affectus, with the eye we may
discern many miles off in a moment, but our feet cannot so quickly go thither.

Knowledge must have practice following, because doing is the end and
accomplishment of knowing. It Is not knowing the rules of Hippocrates will bring
health, unless there be a practical use of them. Hence believing is called
eating and drinking of Christ, John 6. A man that is hungry, though he know
never so much of excellent meats, yet that will not satisfy him, unless he
eat. It Is a rule Scire malum, non est malum, so God he knows evil, yet this
knowledge is not evil; so Scire be^^um, non est bonum: Philosophers make this
distinction between the understanding and the will; the understanding draws
the object to it self, but the will is drawn by the object to it, so if I
understand any thing, I am not in a moral sense that I understand, but if I
will any thing, or love any thing, I am what I love, Anima ubi ama^, not ubi
anima.

Knowledge merely speculative will not save, because Religion lies most in the
affective part: Knowledge is desired as a prerequisite, but the power and
sweetness of it lies in the hearty embracing of what we know. Hence Divines
say, our eternal happiness in heaven is initially and radically in the
understanding, but formally and completely in the will: Oh then know that all
the while Religion is but in thy head, and thou have it out of books, and by
hearsay, thou have but the shadow of it, the substance and sweetness of it
lies in the cordial imbracements and enjoying what we know.

Knowledge without the effects of it is so far from saving, that it
condemns the more. He that knew his masters will and did it not, was beaten
with more stripes, Luke 12.48. What makes the condemnation of those Christ
preached to greater then of the Sodomites the worst of men, but because they
sinned against more knowledge?

Use of Instruction, Use.
How vain a thing it is to boast of knowledge and learning, if an holy life
does not follow it: As Absalom was hung by the hair of his head he gloried in,
so will the knowledge of thy head damn thee. Austin said, such knowing men go
quick to hell; oh there are too many such, that have much knowledge, but no
grace, that know the Scripture speaking against gross sins, yet they wallow in
them. The hottest flames in hell are for a knowing wicked man.

Use of Exhortation, to put all thy knowledge into practice: If I know what
faith is, let me exercise faith: If I know what Christ is, let me obey him; All
knowledge that makes thee not more godly, that brings thee not into nearer
communion with God, is to be suspected; if it puff thee up, if it make thee
conceited, then 1 Cor. 8. Paul says, Thou know nothing as thou ought to
know. Be not a Gnostick; oh that it might be said, Ye know God, or rather are
known of God, Gal. 4.9.

SERMON XVII. Of the Knowledge and Worship of the One true God: And the
contrary thereto, viz. Idolatry.
JOH. 17.3. To Know thee the Only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have
sent.
WE have finished that duty which is said to be the Means to Eternal Life; We
come to the Object, which is twofold:

1. The true God, and thus Heathens and Pagans are excluded.

2. Christ Jesus, and thus the Jews, who though they know the true God, yet
because they deny Christ, are out of the way to heaven; and so some Heretics
also, who deny Christ to be our Mediator.

Let us consider the first Object, To know thee the only true God; by this we
see that Opinion, which asserts the possibility of the Heathens salvation, to
fall to the ground, because they are wholly ignorant of the true God: It Is
Christ that says thus, therefore our understandings must be captivated.

Observe. There is one true God only to be known and served by men.

Explicatory considerations.


Obs. That there is one true God only, to be known and served by man. Although
to us Christians this may seem a needless point, yet as the Scripture has
recorded this as most useful to the Church, so all Christians may find much
necessity in the opening of it, and great practical use. Consider then these
particulars.

1. There are made and constituted many gods by man's vanity, and there is one
only true God indeed. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.4, 5. has given us this
distinction, I. Though many Gods constituted by man's vanity, yet there is but
one true God.
where having asserted, that an Idol is nothing, viz. formaliter, though it be
made of wood or stone, and have rich ornaments, yet the thing signified is
nothing. Though there are Sun and Stars, yet as made Gods, so there is no
such thing: Though there were such men as Saturn and Jupiter, yet relatively as
Idols representing a God, they were a nonentity. He brings this verse in by
way of accusation to answer the objection: There are, says he, (...), there
are many that are called Gods: The whole world is full of such; they have their
Celestes, Acrii, Terrestes, Marini, as many Gods as creatures almost; but to
us, viz. Believers, there is one only true God the Father: So that you see
there is one real existent true God, and there are many fictitious and
constituted Gods made by man, which the Scripture calls Idols, and that by very
significant names: Sometimes by a word that signifies nothing, sometimes by a
lie and vanity, sometimes by dung and dirt that is rolled up and down,
sometimes by scar-crows, or terricula muta, and very often by abomination. The
beginning and progress of this Idolatry is handled by Learned men, and Learned
Tractates are written de Diis Syris, de Diis Romanorum and Germanorum, in all
which we may mourn over that horrible blindness and folly which does seize
upon all men by nature, and we may bless God for the Christian Religion, which
has made us to cast off all those abominable Idolatries.

2. We come to have knowledge of the only true God three ways, II. God is
known three ways.


By the book of nature, which is called implanted or ingrafted knowledge. No
man is or can be a natural Atheist; in affections he may be, wishing there
were no God, but in judgment he cannot, till by accumulated sins he has
given himself up to all stupidity.

By the book of the creatures; and this is called acquired knowledge. The
Apostle, Romans 1. mentions both these: This later is obtained by the
consideration of the world, insomuch that the most Atheistical men, when they
have considered the greater world, and especially man in all his curious parts,
have been forced to acknowledge some wise and supreme power the maker of these
things, as it is said of Galen.

There is the book of Gods Word; and by this we have a revealed knowledge, and
this only does direct in the true way to serve him acceptably. Therefore all
the world is said to lie in darkness, and light comes only by the Scripture.
This is the great mercy of God to manifest from heaven what he is, and how he
will be worshipped.

3. Consider that our knowledge even at the highest is very imperfect; III. Our
knowledge of God is very imperfect.
it is but apprehensive, not comprehensive, which made an ancient say, De Deo
etiam vera dicere periculosum est, because we are subject to such ignorance and
blindness, God himself does only comprehend himself; we know him obscurely,
and therefore he is said to dwell in light inaccessible, 1 Timothy 6.16. As the
eye cannot penetrate into the glorious nature of the Sun, no more can we
search into the deep things of God. Therefore Divines say we have a twofold way
of knowing God, the one is affirmative and positive, when those perfections we
see in creatures we attribute to God in a supereminent manner: Thus we say he
is wise, he is just, he knows, he wills, but after a more transcendent way
of perfection then man does. The second way is by negation, or removing
imperfections from him, and this indeed is commended as a better way then the
former: We can more easily describe God, by saying what he is not, then what he
is; he is not a body, and when we say a Spirit, then we run to a negative
again, not a finite limited Spirit. In this life every man's knowledge is
imperfect, we know but in part, Paul said so, that was wrapped up into the
third heavens, 1 Cor. 13. And although in heaven our knowledge shall be
perfected, described by that expression, We shall see him face to face, yet
even then it cannot be comprehensive of the whole nature of God, there being no
proportion between a finite faculty and an infinite object.

In the fourth place, take notice that this expression, the true God, IV.
may be taken in a twofold sense, as truth is divided into veritas rei, and
veritas conceptus, the truth of the thing, and the truth of conceiving of it:
Now the Heathens when they worshipped Jupiter as the chiefest and highest God,
there was the truth of the thing, there was a supreme and a chief that they
intended, but there was no truth in their conceptions and apprehensions about
him; therefore they added many other gods to him: Such a distinction as this
the Apostle insinuates, Acts 17.23. where reproving them for their Idolatry,
and telling them of an Altar with this inscription, To the unknown God, whom
(says he) you ignorantly worship, we declare to you. It was a true God they
worshipped when they conceived of one supreme above the rest, but they had no
true or right thoughts about him. Hence what the Poet said of Jupiter, the
Apostle owneth as of the true God, for we are his offspring, Acts 17.28. Now
their thoughts were Idolatricall about the true God, as Romans 1. turning his
Image into the similitude of creatures; and then they superadded other Gods,
which made Tertullian say, Deus non erit Deus, nisi homini placuerit. The sum
of this particular is no more, then that even in their Polytheism and
multiplied Idolatry that the Heathens lived in, there was a general employed
assent that there was a God; so that although there was no truth at all in
their apprehensions, yet something there was in the object generally
considered, but not as it was particularly terminated upon any one thing.

V. The insufficiency of natural and acquired knowledge to guide us in the
worship of God and way to salvation.
5. The revealed knowledge of God only by the Word is able to guide us in the
worship of God, and in the way to salvation. All natural knowledge and
acquired is altogether insufficient, and that in these respects.

They fail of saving knowledge in the integrity of parts; for although
something may be known of God, yet that is very little in respect of the many
things they are grossly ignorant of; for if that knowledge we have here,
though by grace out of the Scripture, be so obscure, and but a childs
knowledge in respect of that we shall have in heaven, what a shadow of
knowledge then, rather then true knowledge, is that we have by nature? so that
it fails in many necessary particulars, it is lame in essential things.

This fails in the purity of it. Whatsoever knowledge the greatest naturalist
has, though never so heightened, yet it is mixed with much dross, it has many
absurd and erroneous intertextures with it; so that Romans 1. even those that
professed themselves wise, are said to be become vain in their imaginations:
There was great vanity and uncertainty, yea absurdities in their assertions;
the Greek word the Apostle applies to them (...), they became foolish, it is
applied to salt that has lost its seasoning, and then is it good for nothing.
Thus these were deprived of all right and sound judgment.

It fails in respect of clearness and evidence. Hence the whole world is
said to lie in darkness, 1 John 2.11. The Platoes, the Aristotle's of the
world, were like the Sodomites groping in the dark, that could not feel what
they sought for, but the Word of God, that is wonderfully commended for the
clearness and brightness of the light it brings with it.

It fails in respect of the efficacy: All that knowledge they had did not
serve to purify their lives, to cleanse them from their wickedness, but they
detained the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1. And if you say many Christians
that have great revealed knowledge are not yet cleansed from their impieties;
There is as much prophannesse, yea sometimes more then have been in Heathens:
Some Heathens would lose all they had rather then swear, they did so fear an
oath. Basil upbraideth Christians with this. Of another Heathen it was said,
You may sooner put the Sun out of its course, then make him do what is
unjust: As also of Cato, either drunkenness was not a sin, or Cato was not
drunk: but are there not thousands of Christians, and that with much knowledge,
great understanding in the Scripture and Religion, yet run into all this
excessive wickedness? It Is true, and woe be to those that make it true; but
then you must remember, that there is a mere barren brain knowledge, and a
gracious practical knowledge: Now where this later is, there is always a
clean and pure life; as for the other, it is not so much a knowledge, as a
profession of it; They profess they know God, but in works they deny him, Tit.
1.16. therefore the Scripture complains of such as not knowing God, The Ox
knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but Israel has not known me
says God, Isa. 1.6. We might add more things, but I shall spend the other
part by way of Use in practical corollaries of great use in our lives.

As in the first place we may be informed, Inferences.
How great and grievous a sin Idolatry is. No wonder if the Prophets are so
severe against it, The sinfulness of Idolatry.
and that it be made the chief cause of all the National calamities that come
upon a Nation; for in reference to this sin does the Scripture peculiarly
speak of Gods jealousy, nothing provokes God so much as that. Now this
Idolatry is of two sorts, either first, When we set up a false God for the
true; so did all the Heathens, when they worshipped the host of heaven, or
their other constituted Gods. Or secondly, When the true God is worshipped, but
after a false and unlawful manner. The first Commandment forbids the former
Idolatry; the second, the later. God forbad the Israelites to worship him under
any representation whatsoever, so that though it were the true God they
worshipped, yet if not after the same manner he commanded, this was idolatry.
Thus when the Israelites made a calf, they intended thereby a worship to the
true God, therefore they said, To morrow shall be a feast to Jehovah, Exodus
32.5. It was Jehovah the God of Israel they intended to worship, but they would
make such an Image or representation that they had seen in Egypt. And thus also
in Popery, all the water of Tyber cannot wash them clean from Idolatry; for
although their Learned men run to multitude of distinctions, sometimes
between an Idol and an Image, whereas they differ only as Greek and Latin,
(...) is maguncula, a diminutive of (...); sometimes about Religious worship
primary and secondary, as if we should say, a primary and secundary Deity, and
when they have disputed all they can, they confess ignorant people commit much
Idolatry, and that he must be very Metaphysicall that can in his worship make
such distinctions; yea they dispute, Whether it be not a dangerous and
offensive Proposition, to say, Imagines sunt adorando. Take we heed then of
this Idolatry, and the rather, because it is a sin all are prone unto:
Consider the Jews, though immediately trained up, and instructed by God about
his worship; though often and often grievously plagued for it, yet upon all
temptations they would run into it again: and the Heathens, Romans 1. even the
wisest of them, were most absurd in their Idolatry: Rome had a Temple called
(...), wherein they would have all kind of Gods, and there was nothing so much
as love to Idolatry, that made men so opposite to the Christian Religion, yea
though the Prophet describes the bruitishnesse of the Idolater, that with one
piece of wood makes an Idol, with another makes a fire: Well does the Scripture
compare Idolaters unto the Idols themselves, they are nothing, empty, they do
not understand; and the more subtle and specious idolatry is, as in Popery, be
thou the more afraid of it. It Is a bold and unheard of expression of Valentia
the Jesuit, that says, There is a lawful Idolatry. What will not men say,
rather then come out of Egypt?

2. Is God the only true God, then observe the first Commandment, Use 2.
Let us have no other Gods besides him; for not only the Heathen that worships
Stock and Stone, is an Idolater, but every Christian that puts this hope and
confidence in any creature, that places the chiefest of his affections and
desires otherwise then on God, he is a spiritual Idoloter. Thus covetousness
is called Idolatry, Col. 3.5. Charge them that are rich, that they trust not in
uncertain riches, but in the living God, says Paul, 1 Timothy 6.17. If I have
made gold my hope, says Job, chap. 31.24. There is no earthly covetous man
that places his affections and trust in wealth, but he renounceth the only
true God, and yet how hard is it to have wealth, and not to put confidence in
it; for whereas our Evangelist says, It Is as hard for a rich man to be saved,
as a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, another says, for a rich man
that trusts in his riches: Take heed then of this subtle spiritual sin; Is
thy heart inwardly supported? Do thy spirits rise because of thy wealth? this
is Idolatry. So likewise the voluptuous man, he makes his pleasures, his
lusts, a God; Whose belly is their God, Phil. 3.9. Yea no godly man can with
such hearty affections and joy constantly serve God, as the voluptuous man does
his lusts; so that whatsoever a man's heart does inordinately run out upon,
that creature he loves more then God, this makes him an Idolater: As he said
of Baal, Why halt ye between two, If God be God serve him? If Baal be God serve
him? So we may say, Why halt ye between God and the creature? If God be the
only true God, let him have the only true love and joy of thy soul? If riches
and lusts be God, then let them have all thy heart.

As there is practical Idolatry, so there is doctrinall Idolatry, viz. When we
attribute that to our own power or free will which belongs only to God. Thus
all those proud and arrogant opinions which advance free will, make it able to
work with God in conversion, this is to derogate from God, he shall not then be
the God from whom every good and perfect gift does proceed. The Apostle, 1 Cor.
8.2. says, To us there is but one God, the Father, from whom are all things,
and to him are all things, so that God is there made the first cause of all the
good things we have, and the ultimate end to which we do refer all. Certainly
if it be a forsaking of God to set up any Authors for temporal mercies and
temporal salvations, then much more for spiritual; for which is greater, the
work of nature or the work of grace? Therefore let us walk humbly, and because
he is the only true God, from whom are all things, and to whom, let us say,
Not to our own power, but thy grace, be all glory given.

Use 3.
3. Is God the only true God? Then let those that know him and obey him, walk
with all comfort and encouragement: He is the true God, and so will never fail
thee; he has a twofold truth, first, a truth of his essence, he is God and
none else beside him; and opposite to this an Idol is called a lie, and
nothing: How should this support us, that the God whom we serve is God indeed!
How often did the Prophets bid the Idolaters fly to their Idols, pray to their
Idols, and see if they could help them? As he is thus true in his Essence,
called therefore the living God, so he is also true in his Promise, in his
Word; and this the Scripture speaks of often: and although his Promise be of it
self true that we need not doubt, yet he added his Oath also, that so we might
not be shaken in our mind. Though it be said of man, he is a liar, and there
is no trust to be put in the great one of the world, yet in God there is no
change, or shadow of change. Though therefore the Olive tree fail, and the Fig
tree do not blossom, Hab. 3.17. though every thing in this world lies and
proves false, yet thou may put confidence in God.

Use 4.
4. Is God the only true God? Then what cause have we, who are called to the
true knowledge of him, to bless and praise his Name, that he suffered us not
to perish in our black and horrible darkness; for what are we more then all
those Heathens and Pagans that sit in darkness, and have no light? Why should
God cause the Sun to shine on thee, to pity thee, and suffer others to walk and
stumble in their darkness? What cause have we Christians to honor God! How
great will our condemnation be if we neglect so great salvation! Our Savior
would have affected the people of Capernaum, Mat. 11.23. and other places with
this mercy. He was the light that came into the world, and men love darkness
rather then light, John 1. Now in these respects we shall be found very guilty
and sinful.

1. If we do not highly prize and esteem the knowledge of the true God, if the
means of this heavenly wisdom be not more then any other mercy whatsoever: But
oh how great is our condemnation in this particular! The more and the longer we
have enjoyed the light of Gods Word, the more we have despised it and contemned
it. This will provoke God to do with us, as he did to the Jews, and to other
Churches who are now made waste and become a wilderness, he will take the
light away, and carry it to a people sitting in darkness, that will make
better use of it.

2. Our condemnation will be great, if we do not come to the knowledge of God,
when we have the means. Some have not the knowledge of God, says Paul, I speak
it to your shame, 1 Cor. 15. Oh, to how many persons, to how many families may
we say you have not the knowledge of God! What, shall thou be in the School of
Christ, and yet know no more then an Heathen, how inexcusable is it?

3. This also will greatly condemn, if we do not live according to the
knowledge of this true God. If our lives are full of Atheism, full of
ungodliness, how shall we be able to appear at the dreadful judgment seat!
when God shall say, You were no Heathens, you were no Pagans, you cannot plead,
Lord, we have not known thee, we have not heard of thee; Oh how should our
hearts bleed within us to think, it will go worse with us then Jews or
Heathens, because we have enjoyed more.

5. Is God the true God, Use 5.
Then how great and heinous a sin is it to have any communion or commerce
with the devil or his instruments, and yet this is a sin too commonly
practiced. If men have lost any thing, if they be in any pain or disease, then
they presently run to such as they call wise men, though they be indeed the
devils fools: What is this but to renounce God and to renounce your baptism?
If you have lost your goods, you will go and lose your souls to: We read of
Ahaziah, 2 King. 1.6. when his child was sick, he would go to Baal, to know
whether his child should recover or no; but with what a dreadful message does
Gods Prophet entertain him, telling him, his child should die, withal saying,
Is it because there is not a God in Israel that thou do so? May not we say
so, when you go to the devils instruments, witches, wise men and sorcerers, Is
it because there is not a true God in heaven? Some have questioned whether such
as compact with the devil, and use familiar spirits can possibly repent and be
saved, they doubt whether they are in a capacity of ever having eternal life;
but that is too rigid, for we read of Manasses, a great sinner in this kind,
one that was given to witchcraft, and used a familiar spirit, yet he prayed and
humbled himself, and God accepted of him: So we read of some converted by the
Apostles preaching, that brought in all their conjuring books and burnt them,
Act. 19.19. Though therefore no doubt is to be made but upon their repentance
God will forgive, yet it is a great and a grievous sin, it is a renouncing of
God and your Baptism. Take heed then of ever doing so, and if thy heart has
been so graceless and wicked heretofore, oh abhor thy self, let thy
conscience cry out, I have committed a great and abominable sin, thou art the
chiefest sinner of many thousands. We ought to have no communion with the
devil, though he had power to foretell and so do good to thee, as he has not
any further then God may reveal to him. When the devils confessed Christ was
the true Son of God, he rebuked them, and would not own such a confession: So
Paul also, Act. 16.16. would not own a confession though true, because by one
possessed by the devil. Be ashamed of the name of a Christian, and renounce thy
baptism if thou should over do such sins again.

SERMON XVIII. The Necessity of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus as well as of God
the Father.
JOH. 17.3. And Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
WE now come to the second Object of this knowledge necessary to salvation, and
that is Christ. This latter Object is added because of the Jews, and some
Heretics, who though they acknowledge the only true God, yet because they are
eirher ignorant of, or deny Christ, therefore they are not in the way to
salvation; The object to be known is described, 1. By his proper Name. 2. By
his appellative or name of office. 3. From the Original and Cause of it.


His proper name is Jesus, Though some learned men have affected to go out of
the ordinary way in giving the true root of this word, yet certainly the most
common derivation of it is most true, viz. that it comes from the word (...) to
save, as the Angel plainly interprets it, his Name shall be called Jesus,
because he shall save his people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. It Is the same
with Joshua, who was so called, because he delivered the people out of their
temporal miseries, and brought them into Canaan, being herein a Type of Christ.

2. His Name of office Christ, as much as anointed, I shall not say much of
this word now, Though the word be attributed to others, yet Jesus is properly
called the Messiah, he is the Vnctus unctorum, the anointed of the anointed,
and this does especially demonstrate the Priestly and the Kingly office of
Christ,

3. There is the Original or Fountain of this office, It Is from God the Father,
Now when the Father is said to send him, it is not to be understood as if it
were against Christ's will, no, but he voluntarily and readily undertook this
Office likewise, so that if we did know and acknowledge such a person as was
called Jesus, yet if we did not also acknowledge him to be the Christ, the
Mediator appointed by God, our knowledge would be insufficient.

Observe. The knowledge of the true God is not enough to salvation without the
knowledge of Christ.
Obs. That the knowledge of one true God is not enough to salvatian, without the
knowledge of Christ also; They are both put together, and none may separate
them: Hence it is so often in Scripture commanded that we should believe in
Christ, That be who believes shall not enter into judgment, and our Savior
makes the knowledge of him and the Father inseparably joined together, Ioh. 8.19.

To open the Doctrine Consider,

Cornelius the Centurion whom they instance in, the first Heathen converted and
baptized under the New Testament, it is plain that he had a knowledge of
Christ, though imperfect; Neither is that expression of Peter upon Cornelius
his admission, Act. 10.35. where he says, God is no accepter of persons, but
in every Nation he that fears him and works righteousness shall be saved,
any ways favoring salvation without Christ; For now the partition wall being
broken down, and the Gospel to be preached to all Nations, which was
represented in the vision of a sheet full of clean and unclean beasts, the
Knowledge of Christ was likewise therewith to be propagated: It Is true the
Apostle says, they that sin without the Law shall be judged without the Law,
Romans 2. God will not judge them by that they knew not, and so they that sin
without the knowledge of the Gospel, they shall not be judged for not believing
in Christ, and not receiving of him to whom he was never tendered, but then they
have a law of conscience within them, by which they shall be condemned, so that
by the Scripture we cannot say there is any other way of salvation but by the
Name of Christ, and Faith in his Name, yea, that Text Act. 4.12. is plainly
excluding any other way of salvation, There is no other Name under Heaven
whereby we must be saved; Howsoever men may tropically explain and say, how can
we think so merciful a God can suffer so many thousands and thousands who never
heard of Christ to perish? yea, their poor Infants, who committed no actual
sin; We must submit to the Scripture, otherwise we may take up Origens
opinion, and say, how does it stand with the goodness of God and his pity to
let so many Angels and men be damned, and not save them all at last; But when
the Word of God speaks man must be silent and hold his tongue.

The Reasons of the Point.
hating all sin, and punishing it where he finds it; Now in this
consideration he is a consuming fire, there is a great gulf between him and us;
The devils and damned in hell may as well hope for mercy as we, if there were
no Christ; The heathens therefore who hoped for pardon they ignorantly thought
to satisfy God, as if he could be satisfied by any finite thing, as Luther
said, It Is not Deus absolutus but relativus, not God considered absolutely but
relatively as a Father in Covenant, through Christ that is the ground of all
our hope and comfort; This knowledge would only terrify and drive to despair,
as you see in Adam till he was comforted with the promise. 2. On our part, It Is
necessary to know Christ as well as God, because without Christ there is no
foundation for any duty; We cannot pray, we cannot approach near to him; As he
is a consuming fire, so we are combustible stubble, Whatsoever ye shall ask in
my Name, says Christ, shall be given you; It must be through that Name our
duties are accepted: Can two walk together unless they be agreed? What concord
or agreement can there be between a righteous God and a corrupted sinner? For
this cause it is that the most holy men have prayed that God would not enter
into strict judgment with them, Psa. 143.2, If men sanctified dare not appear
at the Tribunal of God in their own persons, much less may sinners; It Is
necessary then because of that contrariety between God and sinful man, there
should be a Mediator, an advocate, one that should stand between justice and
us, the condemning power of the Law and us; Who is not afraid of justice? Who
has so much purity that the Law cannot find any fault with him? So that if we
consider of these two particulars we shall see great reason that we have to
know Christ and God also.

That a Knowledge or belief that there is a Messiah, is not enough, unless we
believe that person called Jesus, to be Christ; For he does not say, This is
Eternal Life to believe a Christ, but that Jesus is Christ; The Jews to this
day believe there will be a Messiah, all their hope and expectation is for such
an one, but yet the Apostle says, they are cast off by God for the present,
that they are branches broken off from the Olive, Romans 11. and why? because
they err in two particulars: 1. They deny that Jesus born of the Virgin Mary
to be the Messiah, Therefore they will not believe the promises to be
fullfilled in him. And 2. They look for a temporal Messiah, who shall restore
them from bodily captivity, not for a Savior in a spiritual sense. Indeed
before Christ came into the flesh, then a belief and expectation of a Messiah
was enough, as appears by Simeons Song, Luke 2.34. who was one of the
expectants for Christ, and when he saw him then desired to depart in peace, but
now since he is come, it is necessary to salvation to believe that Person born
of the Virgin Mary, and crucified by the Jews under Pilate, was the true and
promised Messiah, Therefore a great part of the Apostles Ministry was to prove
that Jesus was the Christ.

the Papists are horribly presumptuous, who add a third thing necessary to
Eternal Life, which is Subesse Romano Pontifici, To acknowledge the Pope to be
head of the Church, and to submit to him, This is de necessitate salutis says
Bellarmine. But they have never yet been able to make this out that there is
such an universal visible and infallible head of the Church: Yea, Gregory one
of the Popes said, Whosoever should arrogate to himself the Title of Universal
Bishop, he was the Forerunner of Antichrist; For the great Antichristianism
described by the Apostles, lies not so much in doctrines; Though they be
Antichrists also that deny Christ to be come in the flesh, 1 John 2.16. yet the
great Antichrist is described by the Church Power, and universal dominion; he
shall take to himself in the Church, exalting himself above every thing that is
called God, 2 These. 2.4. Therefore howsoever they pronounce such dreadful
sentences upon all the Reformed Churches, that have cast off the Popes power,
as if they were not in a way to Eternal Life, yet this Scripture may abundantly
encourage, where there is a true knowledge of God and Christ, there is a
possibility of Eternal Life.



1. That he is really and truly God, for how can he be a spiritual Savior if
he be not God? Is it not God only that can raise from the dead? Could mere man
satisfy the justice of God, destroy the works of the devil? It Is not my
purpose here to confirm that main Article of Religion, I only inform you that
he who truly knows Christ must know him to be God the only begotten of the
Father, else he cannot know him as a Jesus, as a Savior; Therefore howsoever
Arians and Socinians talk much of Christ, dispute much of him, yea, mention him
in their prayers and Petitions, yet they do not truly know Christ, if the
Apostle makes it so great a sin to deny Christ to be come in the flesh, to be
man, that he says, he is Antichrist that does so, 1 John 2.18. then it must
needs be a greater sin to deny him to be God, for as he does a man a greater
wrong that denies him a rational soul, then that denies a mortal body to
him, so he does in a greater manner dishonor Christ that denies him to be God
then to be man: Shall Christ himself Phil. 2. think it no robbery to be equal
with God, and will they make Christ guilty of such robbery? for he assumed to
himself both the Title and reality of God.

2. To know Jesus Christ is to acknowledge him man as well as God, for this was
his name given him by the Angel, when he was born, so that he only knows
Christ who acknowledges him both God and man, as the Scripture sometimes calls
him the only begotten Son of God, so sometimes the Son of man, and many places
in Scripture speak of both his natures, Romans 9.5. who concerning the flesh, was
of the Seed of Abraham, and yet he is God for evermore, concerning the flesh,
that is spoken oppositely to his divine nature, so that to deny the humane
nature of Christ, though we should affirm he was God, yet this is not to know
Christ, Therefore the Marcionists and some Anabaptists who said he had not a
true real body, that he was only in the appearance of a man, They do not know
Christ.

3. To know Jesus Christ implies also that we have some understanding of his
Offices; Of his anointing with all sufficiency and fullness, to be a Mediator
for us; He that says he knows Christ, and does not acknowledge him anointed by
God, with all fullness to be a Mediator for us, says, he knows not what;
Now the ignorance of Christ's Office, and his fullness therein does wonderfully
abound in Popery; The devil in former times opposed the natures of Christ, when
he could no longer succeed that way, then he opposes the Offices of Christ,
all those doctrines of merits, indulgencies, and satisfactions do oppose the
Offices of Christ, for if Christ be the Messiah, if he be the full Mediator,
to what purpose are all these? Although therefore in Popery there is the true
doctrine retained about Christ's Natures, he is acknowledged to be God and man,
yet in respect of his Offices there is a total burying of him in silence:
Angels and Saints merits and indulgencies have even almost put out the very
Name of Christ amongst them, so then all acknowledging that Christ is not
enough, it must be a Scripture-confessing of him; We must give him his full
due, not make him half a Mediator, half a Savior, and joyn' our selves or
others in this great work.

4. To know Christ implies also that we acknowledge the great love of the
Father in sending his only Son thus to mediate for us: Therefore it is added,
whom thou have sent, and for this reason it is said, he that knows and
honors the Son, must know and honor the Father also, Joh. 5.23. For from
the Father comes the Spring of all this love, He so loved the world that he
gave his only Son, Joh. 3. and certainly this is of great consequence to know
the Father sent Christ into the world, for hereby we may be assured that all
the obedience and sufferings of Christ shall be accepted of by the Father; We
need not fear it or doubt of it, for the Father did make the first motion as it
were to the Son, Though the Son also did readily and voluntarily undertake
it; Now how great a matter was this, for God the Father to do? Was not Christ
the only begotten and beloved of the Father? Did he not come out of his Fathers
bosom to the Cross, and shall not this make us return all thankfulness and
obedience unto him.

Lastly, This must necessarily imply a knowledge of our misery and damnable
condition by sin: For if we were not lost what need had we of a Savior? If
we were not sinners what need of a Mediator? So that the acknowledging of a
Christ sent into the world to be a Mediator is the believing also of man by
nature to be the child of wrath, the Enemy of God, one who may not come into
his presence, or expect the least hope of mercy, till an Advocate and
Intercessour come and plead his cause, so that this Knowledge of a Christ
should be accompanied with great affections and workings of heart, it should
breed shame, fear, and confusion in us, it should breed an hungring and
thirsting after Christ, an esteem of him as the only Remedy; In Christ only is
our fullness, our sins would undo us, were it not for his righteousness, our
iniquities would overthrow us; Did not be intercede, blessed art thou then when
this Knowledge is like fire in thy bosom, kindling holy flames within thee:
Now here may be some Questions made:

Obj.
1. Does not this exclude all that lived under the Old Testament dispensation
from Salvation? For howsoever they might know the true God, yet was there any
discovery or Knowledge of Christ in those days, This is so great a matter that
some have looked upon all the Jews as knowing only temporal promises; That
they knew nothing of heaven but an earthly Canaan was their heaven: That they
had no Knowledge of Christ but thought by the blood of Sacrifices to appease
God:

Answ.
But to answer this: 1. No doubt but the common and ordinary sort of them was
greatly ignorant of Christ, and therefore rested in their Sacrifices, and the
knowledge of the Law, as the only thing that made them acceptable; This is
plain by the Apostles Arguments in his Epistle to the Galatians, and we see by
the Prophets they so relied upon these external services, that they thought
themselves beloved of God, though abounding in all wickedness: And no wonder
they did so, for under the Gospel how many rest on their duties, and have no
faith in Christ.

But 2. Those that were holy and godly, they looked upon all their bodily
Sacrifices as Types of Christ; It was Christ's blood they put confidence in; The
Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews shows, that God intended Christ by those
Sacrifices, and that the blood of Rams and Goats could never cleanse away sin,
as this was Gods meaning, so the Priests and Prophets they explained the
meaning thereof to the people, and sometimes they have clear promises of a
Savior, a Messiah to come to them, who shall be a Prince of Peace, and shall
bear their sins for them, as Isaiah speaks like an Evangelist to this
purpose, which made the Apostle say that the Prophets did bear witness of
Christ; Abraham he saw Christ's day and rejoiced, Act. 10.43. Now all the godly
have the same faith Abraham had, therefore he is made the Father of the
Faithful, so that what was covered in the Old Testament is revealed in the
New; Christ they had, and Mediation they had, though the Knowledge of it was
more obscure: Hence the Gospel is said to rise like the Light of the Sun.

Obj.
2. It may be demanded, why the Knowledge of the holy Ghost is not there said to
be Eternal Life, as well as of the Father and the Son, for without the Spirit
of God efficiently enabling us, we cannot do any holy duty as well as without
Christ's merits, we cannot be accepted: Christ is the meritorious cause, and the
Spirit of God the applying cause.

Answ.
To this we may say, that the Knowledge of the Spirit is necessarily implied in
the Knowledge of Christ; For he was in respect of his humane nature conceived
by the holy Ghost, when he was to leave his Apostles bodily, he promises his
Spirit to supply his presence, So that none can know Christ as a Mediator,
that does not also know the holy Ghost: Hence be is called, the Spirit of
Christ.

And in the 2d place we may say it is not necessary that this Text should speak
of all things necessary to Salvation, It Is enough that other places do
sufficiently testify it; Now that the knowledge of the holy Ghost is also
requisite to Eternal Life appears, in that we are baptized into his Name, so
that it is a principle and Foundation to be instructed about the holy Ghost, as
well as the Father and the Son. We read that the Apostle does in most of his
Salutations pray for grace and peace from God the Father and the Lod Jesus
Christ, yet none may from thence gather the Spirit is excluded, for 2 Cor.
1.13, 14. There is the communion of the Spirit added to the love of God and the
grace of Jesus Christ.

3. You may demand, If the Knowledge of those things be enough to eternal
Life, what then needs the Ministry or Preaching to a man that knows these: If
a man have these, is he not above Ordinances and the Ministry; This indeed some
have arrogantly thought.

But 1. There is no man knows as much about God and Christ as may be known;
The Apostle that was lifted up to the third heavens, yet he says, We know but
in part, 1 Cor. 13. If Paul then knew but in part, what must others do? We see
the Angels themselves desire to have the Mystery of Christ made more known to
them, Ephesians. 3. so that it is a foolish conceit to think thou know enough
already, for though our knowledge shall be perfected in heaven, yet even there
we cannot know God as much as he is known, for the infinite object cannot be
comprehended by a finite faculty.

2. Suppose thou could not grow in knowledge, which yet is impossible, yet
the Ministry is necessary for thy heart and affections; The devils know more
then any man, but there will is obdurate and hardened in wickedness; So thou
may have great knowledge and understanding, yet thy heart may need much
quickening, much mollifying, and for this end the Ministry is appointed.

3, If thou did not find a need of them either for understanding or heart,
which yet is more impossible then the former; yet God having appointed such a
way, thou art only for obedience sake, and to testify thy submission to God to
do it; Christ needed not to be baptized, for he wanted not the grace signified,
viz. remission of sins: Yet to show his obedience he did it, Adam though
created in a state of integrity, yet had a command of trial, to manifest his
obedience, and so though never so perfect, yet thou can not be exempted from
obedience to Gods commands.

Use of Instruction to the full self-righteous man that is not burdened and
loaded with the sense of his sins, whatsoever knowledge thou may have, Use.
yet thou can not know any thing in a saving manner about Christ; Till thou
be affected with thy misery and the remedy, thou art not yet a knowing man in
Christ's School, or to those who labor and are greatly affected with their
sin, They know sin, They know the Law, They know the terrors of an angry God,
but they know not Christ: Consider how Paal was affected herein, he knew
nothing but Christ crucified, 2 Cor. 2.2. All things were accounted dung and
dross for the excellency of this knowledge, Phil. 3.8. Consider Eternal life
is as well in knowing of Christ as in knowing of sin, or what duties God
requires of thee.

SERMON XIX. Shows how a Godly Life (though it merit no good) is a Ground of
Comfort at the hour of Death.
JOH. 17.4 I have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished the work thou gave
me to do.
IN this Verse our Savior adds a new argument for that Petition mention
mentioned v. 1. Glorify me. Why? because I have glorified thee on earth, I
have finished my work: Now his work is done, he expects his reward; These words
our Savior does not speak out of ostentation and boasting, but to show the
order God appointed, that by his sufferings when perfected he should enter into
glory.

In the words we have Christ's profession of the end he intended in all things,
I have glorified thee on earth.

2. The manner how, or the means by which, I have finished the work thou gave
me to do. I have glorified thee, though Christ as God had all divine glory due
to him, yet as Mediator in the state of humiliation, so he was inferior to
the Father, and in this sense he did glorify him.

To glorify is either when really that glory is exhibited, which was not
before, and so God glorifieth us, or else when we celebrate, acknowledge, and
declare that glory which is already possessed, and thus we glorify God; For
when we glorify God, we add nothing to him, we do not make him more glorious
then he is indeed, We cannot advantage him but our selves by serving of him, as
a man by seeing does not profit the Sun but himself, nor the thirsty Traveller
by drinking refresh the Fountain but himself; Christ then being by the state of
humiliation made lower then God, yea, lower then Angels, had this purity of
intention in all that he did and all that he suffered, to glorify God.

Obj.
Q. If you say, Was not the redemption and salvation of these the Father gave
him his end, how then is the glory of God his end?

Answ.
A. The Answer is, the ultimate and chief end is Gods glory, The proxime and
immediate was the salvation of man, and therefore in respect of the chief end
this is the manner or the means of glorifying of God, and this is intended when
he says, He had finished his work.

2. Consider the restriction or limitation of this glorifying of God, from the
place where, I have glorified thee on earth: That is mentioned, because here
only on the earth was he to be in a state of debasement, here only he was to
work, in heaven he was to receive his glory; The Schoolmen use to call a man
while he was in this life the way to heaven, viator, and when he is possessed
of glory, they call him comprehensor: Now they say, That Christ was both viator
and comprehensor together, but if they mean, that in this life he possessed all
that glory which he should have in heaven, that is false, for we see him here
praying for it, and other places God promises it as a reward of his obedience
and sufferings: Indeed the humane nature of Christ was always united
personally to the godhead, but there was a suspension of that glorious
influance and happiness while on the earth.

3. Consider the time when Christ makes this profession, at the end of his
days, when he is to go out of this world; This was the ground of his
confidence in his Petition; Now although we are not able in the same degree and
perfection to say as he did, yet for the main we ought to be like him in this,
when Death comes, when our days are to be finished, to be able to say, Lord,
we have glorified thee, we have finished the work thou gave us to do, and of
this particular I shall treat.

Obs. Doct. It Is a blessed thing at death truly to say, Lord, I have glorified
thee.
That it is a blessed and most happy thing to be able at the time of death
truly to say, Lord, I have glorified thee in my life, I have finished all the
work I was to do. This Subject will be very profitable and necessary, you
cannot expect health and life always in this world, your time is running, your
days are decaying, you are hasting to the grave, who knows how soon God will
put a period to thy life in this world? What then should be more in your hearts
and thoughts then this, Whether have I lived to Gods glory? whether have I
faithfully discharged the work put upon me? It Is not riches, wealth,
greatness, or any earthly advantages will then do you good; This or nothing
will then be a reviving to you; We have two pregnant examples for this, 2 Kin.
20.3. When that sad message was brought to Hezekiah, that he must set his house
in order, for he must die and not live; What is a comfort and a cordial to him
under this bitter news, Remember O Lord that I have walked before thee With an
upright heart, and done what was good in thy sight; Hezekiah had great outward
prosperity, he had many earthly delights as a King, but see how every earthly
comfort vanishes away, That he had served God in the uprightness of his heart
comforted him more then all earthly honor or greatness. The other Instance is
in Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, a
Crown of glory is laid up for me; If all the glory of the world had been given
Paul, would it have comforted him like this Testimony of a godly conversation?
Oh how many dying men may say, I have served the devil, I have fullfilled his
lusts, and now I go to my everlasting torments.

To quicken and affect you in this Point take notice of these Introductory
particulars.

First, That there is a day of Judgment when God will call every man to
account; Consider
We are not to live here as we list, and to do all things without control; No,
I. There is a day of judgment when God will call every man to account.
God has appointed a time when every man shall appear before him, and he must
give an account of all his time, all his Talents, all his actions, all his
thoughts, of all things in this world that have been his; The Scripture is very
clear in this formidable Truth, 2 Cor. 5. We must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ to give an account for what has been done in the
flesh, Mat. 12.36. yea, of every idle word we must give an account, yea, of
every secret thing, Eccl. 12.16. The Parable of the Talents Mat. 25.15. where
the man with ten, with five, with two, are called to give an account of their
improvement does evidently show, that there is no good thing we have, let it be
health, wealth, riches, but we as Stewards must be reckoned with concerning the
good improvement of them; Oh beloved, what an overwhelming consideration is
this, to think the time is coming when every thought, every word, every hour,
every day, every opportunity, every penny, every thing I have had will be
called for, who can hear these things and not tremble? Never think all thy sins
are forgotten, no, the Scripture attributes a Book to God, God writes down
every thing, and those Books will be opened, what manner of persons should we
be who believe these things? Rev. 20.11. Is it for you to live riotously, to
follow all vain pleasures and delights, or not rather to pray and mourn, and
bethink your selves what is to be done at this time.

II. The meanest persons have Talents to improve as well as the greatest.
2. Take notice That there is no man or woman though never so inconsiderable,
but they have their several Talents: They have their peculiar work to do, and
their proper relations to serve God in; There is none but they have their
course to finish, they have the work of God to do, and therefore let no man
think it may be for Magistrates, for Ministers, for great men, for rich men, to
look to those things, but not such inferior persons as they: No, he that had
but one Talent, that is the least ability and opportunity to glorify God, yet
because he was negligent, he is called an unprofitable servant, and is cast
out, where there is weeping, and gnashing of teeth; So then barrenness and
unprofitablenesse in our places and relations, will be a damning sin, yet who
considers this? Do I promote the glory of God? Is God honored by me in my
place and calling? Do not I hide my talent in a Napkin? Am I able to answer for
my great neglect? For thy health, who can speak for that? For time and many
days given to repent, who can speak for that? These things will be fire in
your bones, They will be thunder in your ears, and arrows in your heart, though
for the present thou do not matter them.

III. None are perfect discharges of their duty.
Thirdly, Though it be the duty upon all thus to glorify God, and do our work
commanded, yet none is able to be perfect in this; None ever lived that could
challenge a Crown of glory for his perfect service; Indeed Christ he being God
and man did all these things without sin, therefore he was a full Mediator
for us, God had nothing, the Law had nothing to object against him, but every
mere man has a woe belonging to his best life, to his best duties, if God
judge him in strict justice^ Hence David prays, that God would not enter into
judgment with him, that he would not mark every thing done amiss; Why?
because in thy sight no flesh shall be justified, Psa. 143.2. So David does not
only exclude himself, for he had murder and adultery, and many other things
amiss in his life, but no flesh shall be justified; None though preserved from
such falls. And Paul whom you have heard acknowledging the good fight he had
fought, and looking for a Crown of glory, yet does not challenge any
perfection, for at another time he accounts all things dung and dross, and
would be found in Christ, Phil. 3. having the righteousness by faith, so that
all doctrines of perfection, and a possibility to be without sin in this life
are but the proud dreams of carnal men.

IV. No merit or causality of salvation in the best work.
Therefore Fourthly, No service or works that we have done are any ways
meritorious, or have any causal influence upon our Salvation: It Is very hard to
preach the necessity of all holy and good works, and not presently to look on
them as merits and causes of Salvation; but we see the Scripture does both, and
therefore we are to reconcile them in our practice; To be zealous of good
works, yet to rely only on Christ's merits; It Is not my purpose here to give you
several grounds why the best holy action we do comes short of all kind of
merit; It Is enough to inform you Romans 4. that believing and working are
opposed, and so works and grace, and indeed to hold the fullness of Christ's
merits, and yet to plead our own, is to think that the light of the Sun is not
able to make perfect day, unless we light a candle also; There cannot be any
more two meritorious causes of salvation, then there can be two Suns in the
Orb; Christ will not have a copartner under any distinction whatsoever in the
work of our Redemption; As for the doctrine or thoughts of perfection, let
those be abandoned, Let us walk humbly, and lowly under our imperfections, yet
breathing after perfection.

Fifthly, Because no works we do can be perfect, hence at the end of our days,
V.
when we look over all our former life, we may not put any trust or confidence
in what we have done; Paul that knew nothing by himself, yet was not thereby
justified: The Pharisees are condemned for this, that they trusted in their own
righteousness, yea, the whole Nation of the Jews, that they went about to
establish their own righteousness, and would not submit to the righteousness
of Christ, Romans 10. Though self-righteousnesse be not a gross scandalous
sin, making men abominable and no^some in the world, yet it is as damnable
and as dangerous as those sins, yea, more damnable, partly because it
overthrows all the principles of being cured, None being more miserable then
those who are so, yet do not feel or think so; This is like the Psalmists arrow
that destroieth at midday, and then partly because it does so immediately
oppose Christ revealed as a Mediator and Savior, for they that trust in their
own righteousness are a Christ, are a Savior to themselves.

Lastly, Though all this be true, our godliness is no merit, VI.
no ground of confidence, yet a faithful zealous performing of those duties God
has required of us may as a sign and evidence wonderfully comfort and imbolden
our hearts: As the Rainbow is not a cause but a sign that God will never
destroy the world more by water, so this tenderness and diligence of thine in
all the ways of God are not a cause but a sure sign that Gods eternal love is
placed on thee, and that thou art in the number of those who are prepared for
glory, our rejoicing is this, says Paul, the testimony of a good conscience, 2
Cor. 1.12. and 1 John 3.21. Hereby we are sure he hears us, if our hearts
condemn us not; Hezekiah and Paul did not mention their good life, as a cause
or means; Neither did they put confidence in them, only they took this as a
comfortable sign they were in the favor of God, and they looked upon these
things as inseparable qualifications; Even as Rahabs thread hanging out of the
window was not a cause but a sign that she was in the number of those who were
exempted from destruction, and in this sense we maintain the doctrine, That
it is a blessed thing at the end of our days to have this testimony, this
cordial in our hearts.

Let us consider the grounds of this blessedness. Grounds of this blessedness


At the time of death, all our earthly comforts they vanish away, they continue
with us no longer; Now if thou think how rich thou have been, At death all
comforts vanish.
what pleasures and delights thou have had, this is so far from comforting
that it torments the more, but a drop of this heavenly assurance of our
endeavor to please God, will be more precious then all the world, Oh foolish
people and unwise that do no more consider your latter end, Can you but look on
your body and say, this face, these arms, this body will one day moulder in the
dust: Can you but look on your houses and habitations, and say, These dwellings
will know me no more, must every thing break thy heart, thou look upon thy
husband, thy Children, thy friends mourning by thee, must there be such a sad
and doleful time, and do thou provide no comfort, no hopes to encourage
thee? The Psalmist says not as the horse and mule, without understanding,
whose mouth must be held in by a Bridle, Psa. 31.9. Alas, thou art worse, here
is a bridle put on thee to keep thee from rushing upon sin any more, and yet
it will not stop thee; If then all these earthly comforts will fail thee, and
thou shall look back upon thy life, and that torment thee, that torture thee
also, thou art twice and thrice miserable.

2. It Is a blessed thing to have this Testimony and Seal upon our hearts, that
we have glorified God and done his work, Then if ever Conscience is awakened,
and the devil is most busy to tempt and trouble.
because Conscience if ever is then awakened, and the devil he is most busy to
tempt and trouble; He that formerly showed only the pleasant bait of sin,
will now manifest the hook, He that before said you should not be damned, now
makes it necessary, he that made pardon easy, now makes it impossible, and as
the devil is thus a roaring Lion, so conscience is a roaring witness within;
Thou have stopped the mouth of it, and muzled it a long time, but now 'twill
speak, and thou can not make it quiet; Indeed too many die like beasts rather
then men; They think not of their sins, they consider not Eternity but drop
into hell, before they consider any thing, but yet when death comes commonly
there is some terror and trembling upon the conscience, and if ever any sin
did formerly sting, it will then: Oh then how blessed a thing is it to have
such an argument in our mouths that shall quiet conscience and confound the
devil, when they tell thee there is no hope, thou have been an hypocrite, thou
can bring this testimony out of thy bosom; O Lord, thou know though I was
overtaken by many infirmities, yet my heart was set to glorify thee; I was
tender and careful to discharge all my work, though I failed in many things,
this will make thee like Adamant and marble, how much did the consciousnesse of
the integrity which Job had, strengthen him under those powerful storms and
blasts that fell upon him.

It Is a blessed thing to be able to say thus upon just grounds, because of the
terror of death to flesh and blood; We cannot be willing and ready to die, all
the while the worms of conscience are gnawing the soul, before worms be gnawing
the body; When Simeon had seen Christ, and taken him in his arms, then he
says, Lord, let thy Servant depart in thy Peace, Luke 2. When Paul has thus
discharged his trust, then I have fought a good fight, and there is laid up for
me a Crown of glory; It has been the case of many good men to have
uncomfortable sicknesses, and an uncomfortable death, and what makes it
sometimes so but want of this assurance this good testimony about themselves,
oh their life troubles them, such sins and such barrenesse; They know not what
to do; Their hearts are within them, They think of death, and their soul is
troubled, so that it is a most desirable thing to have this in thy heart when
thou art dying; Oh thou think, Would I might have such a Minister, such a
Friend by me when I am dying, I tell thee this is the best friend: It was
Augustus his wish, that he might have an (...) a quiet easy death, without
pangs and torment, but this is the easiest, the comfortablest, the best dying;
Oh that we should prefer any thing before that; Oh that thou should not cry
out of every sin, This will trouble me when I am dying.

It Is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.3. And
now I am falling into Gods hands, either the hands of a merciful Father, or
provoked enemy; Well then, while thou art in these conflicts and agonies, what
support is it to have this sure evidence; O Lord, in my life time I lived for
thee, and to thee, now I come to live with thee: O Lord, In my life time I knew
thee, I did thy work, but I was at a vast distance; now I come to the immediate
enjoying of thee.

Its a blessed thing to have this evidence, because it is of that good which
will be eternal: Can thou truly say thus? then it is an immortal Crown of
Glory that is laid up for thee, no more deaths, no more changes, no more fears
or tears, thou art made for ever: But of this heretofore.

Use of Admonition, Use.
Let every one attend and give all diligence to get this evidence. Oh the
terror and horror that must take hold on thee, if thou have been dishonouring
of God all thy life long, if thou have been doing the work that sin and Satan
tempted thee to, why art thou so devoid of all understanding, will thy health
and strength always hold? Art thou exempted from the stroke of death? Is not
thy time running on? sit down then and consider what thoughts will at thy death
possess thee, What testimony have I, that I have done the work of the Lord? Oh
does not thy life accuse thee! Is it not all over bloody? Can thou think of
what thou have been with any content? Is thy life at present such that thou
can say, O Lord I am doing thy work? Oh the amazement and astonishment that
should take hold on such men!

SERMON XX. Shows who they are that cannot at the close of their days take
comfort in this, That they have finished the work God gave them to do: As also
what things, if not avoided, will much diminish the comfort of the Godly ones
at that day.
JOH. 17.4. I have glorified thee on earth, etc.
THe Doctrine observed was, That it is a most blessed and happy thing in the
close of our days to be able to say upon good grounds, We have finished the
work God gave us to do. You have heard particulars illustrating it, and the
grounds of the point: I shall now amplify this, and in the first place show,
Who they are that cannot with any comfort, or very little be able to say thus:
For although this truth in the general be very terrible, Who they are that
cannot take comfort in this, that they have finished the work God gave them to
do.
yet in the particular it loses its edge, because every man is a
self-flatterer: Every one is apt to think, I have done Gods work, and therefore
it will be well with me. If therefore it be possible, my endeavor shall be
that this arrow of Gods truth may enter in at the joints of thy armor, seeing
it cannot any where else. Consider then who they are that may say they are dogs
and not children, so that this bread does not belong to them.

1. Such whose conversation is wicked.
And first, All those who daily and constantly are doing the clean contrary work
to what God requires; such whose conversation is a perpetual reproach and
dishonor to God, these do not at all glorify God: These have cause to tremble
and quake when death approaches, and their accounts must be made; and is not
this the condition of most? Look generally upon men's lives, are they not doing
the devils works? are they not dishonouring God all the day long by their
ungodly conversation? If there be any that are tender and conscientious, are
they not like gleanings after a Vintage? here a man, and there a woman;
otherwise for most men, you would think they thought hell and the day of
judgment to be but fables, and such a truth as this to be a mere bugbear: But
God will not be mocked, neither can man's greatness or atheism, or profane
scoffings put off these things. Oh then be at last persuaded that that life
thou live will be little comfort to thee one day: Oh how speechless and
confounded will thou be, when God shall enquire into all thy words, into all
thy actions, and there is nothing but sin appears, when every thing will be
turned into blood, as the Egyptian punishment was, into the blood of thy soul:
When God looked over all his works he had done, he saw them exceeding good, and
so blessed the seventh day; but thou will look over all thou have done, and
find it exceeding evil, and curse both the day of thy birth and the day of thy
death. Oh that men would be wise, that they would consider their later end:
What will thou do, when God, when thy conscience, when the law, when devils
will accuse thee? Where will thou hide thy self? Remember Jacob, Genesis 32.13.
when his brother Esau was to meet him, who was enraged and provoked against
him, how careful he was by Presents and humble deprecations to mitigate his
anger. Remember the unjust Steward, Luke 16.8. who knowing he must be called to
account, takes all the subtle ways he can to make himself friends, when he
shall be cast out of his office: our Savior speaks that parable to this
purpose, That when God shall say to every one of us, Thou shall be no long or
steward, in this relation, in that condition I will have an account of all,
that then we manage all things so, that we may be able to have some comfortable
refuge.

2. Those whose works are (though not contrary, yet) differing from the command.
2. Those have nothing of this texts comfort, who though they do not contrary
work, yet do different non-required work. It Is (...), not (...), though they do
not male, yet they do aliud agere, a servant, though he do not contrary to his
Masters work, yet if he do not the same he is commanded, he is obnoxious to his
Masters wrath: And this is very considerable, for the Pharisee at the close of
his life may strive to say, Lord, I have fasted twice a week, I washed my
hands, my house, my pots, etc. thus I have glorified thee, but what says
Christ, In vain do ye worship me, Mat. 16.9. and who has required these things
at your hands? Thus the Papist, if he say, I have gone a Pilgrimage, I have
made such penal satisfactions, I have said so many Ave Mary's, I have done
penance, I have received extreme unction. Now because this is not required or
commanded work, therefore it will have no reward: So then it is not enough to
see thy work be not contrary to Gods will, but look that it be according, that
it have Gods superscription, and the stamp of his command upon it: Though it be
not malum, yet it is aliud; though it be not contra, yet it is preter, and
indeed what is preter, because not secundum, must needs be contra. It Is
contrary to Gods will, whatsoever is not commanded.

3. The slothful and negligent.
3. They cannot have the texts comfort at all, who are slothful and negligent,
though they do not contrary or different, yet they are sluggish, and so will
not work at all in Gods Vineyard. This is represented by the Parable of him who
had but one Talent, yet because he did not improve it, he is cast into utter
darkness; Cast that unprofitable servant, Mat. 25.30. He did not spend the
Talent, he brought it sure and safe to his Master, but he is unprofitable, and
must be cast into utter darkness: So the tree that brings forth no fruit,
though it did not bad fruit, must be cut down and cast into the fire. Oh how
greatly is this to be considered, for whose life does not appear to him, as
Bernards did, aut peccatum, aut sterilitas, either the boggy mire of sin, or
the parched wilderness of barrenness; and if that be so great a sin, Christ
be so ready to curse it, no wonder if the most holy have sad thoughts about
their death, and the day of their accounts. It Is not then a negative Religion
that will truly comfort thee, but a positive fruitful one. It will be no solid
joy of conscience to say, and no more, Lord, I have been no drunkard, no
adulterer, no profane person, for God looks for a zealous, active, fruitful
way in all holiness; yet how does the mere negation of sin make many have
strong confidence of their excellent condition; whereas if they did consider
the positive fruitful part of godliness, and see how far they are off it,
horror would overwhelm them. Consider then how fruitful are thy duties, are
thy hours for God, may thou not cry out many times, hodie diem perdidi?
do thou put that of the Apostle in practice, to redeem the time? Ephesians.
5.16. Heaven would not be heaven, if it were only a negation of torment, not a
positive affluence of all happiness; so neither is that godliness which is a
bare absence of sin, not a fruitful abounding in the ways of holiness.

4. There cannot be any solid comfort at the time of account, 4. The lukewarm.
where there is a prevailing lukewarmnesse and formality, though the work God
requires be done outwardly. Eli cannot give a good account of reproving his
sons, though he did reprove them, because there was remissness and coldness
in it; a partial coldness and dullness is in the best service we do. Paul
having found the relics of corruption rebelling against grace, and contra
vitia pugnamus non ut vincamus sed ne vincamus, Jebusites will abide in the
land, but we speak of a total plenary lukewarmnesse, such which Christ
condemns, Revel. 2. when he wishes she were either hot or cold, but being
lukewarm, God would spew her out of his mouth: That expression is to show how
noisome and intolerable such persons, and such duties are to God. Never then
think a mere formal and customary way of Religious duties will ever be any
comfort to thee, no, God will say, Thy heart was not in these, thou did not
serve me as the world, as thy lusts; and hereupon thou will wish, Oh that my
duties had been more spiritual, more fervent, more heavenly: These very duties
thou put thy trust in, will run like sharp points into thy very heart. Thus
you have heard what persons cannot have any comfort at all.

Now we shall show you, What things even to the godly, What things will much
diminish the joy and comfort of the godly at the end of their days.
though they may have comfort for the main, yet will greatly dishearten and
diminish their joy then. There will be fears against hope, doubts against
faith, agonies against joy: That even as nature and death will in a terrible
manner conflict together, so will their hopes and fears: Yet this is not to be
understood, but that even a Christian walking most tenderly and circumspectly,
may at his death have no joy and assurance: God for many just and wise ends
does sometimes dispense it so, that he who lived very holily, may yet die very
uncomfortably. It was so with Christ, though there was a peculiar reason, and
why not with his members? only when God deals so, they are mere exercises to
increase their Crown of glory; they are not so properly afflictions for sin,
as Job had those extraordinary trials, not for sin, though he was not without
sin, but trial, and thereby to make him more glorious. But I shall speak of
such particulars, as in their own nature tend to make our end very sad and
heavy; and therefore let him who would look on death, as Jacob did on his son
Joseph's Chariot, not with grief, but with joy, as a convoy to eternal
happiness, 1. Immoderate affection to worldly things.
take heed of these things as so many dangerous works: And

1. Immoderate affections to lawful things, they do so dead the heart and clog
the soul, that when a man comes to die, these earthly things lie upon the
heart, as too much undigested meat upon the stomach, making thee extreme sick
and full of pain. The Apostle then, 1 Cor. 7. prescribes a comfortable way to
dye joyfully, where he says, those that buy must be as if they bought not;
they that marry as if they married not: The greener the wood is, the harder to
be consumed; the more lively and active thy worldly affections are, there must
be the greater opposition to leave all and be with God. The ripe aple falls
from the tree very easily: the godly man dying is compared to ripe corn, so
that if these earthy and worldly affections be not dried up in thee, it will
much hinder thy joy, this green wood will make a great smoke. Hezekiah, though
he had this comfortable evidence, yet says the Text, He wept soar; some
attribute that to the Old Testament dispensation, where earthly and worldly
happiness was more generally promised then under the New, and therefore death
being a privation of that, did more affect them: howsoever this is sure, an
heart not weaned from the world, and yet must be parted from, is like a tooth
not cut from the flesh, which will cause great pain in the pulling out. If
therefore thou would with much peace and joy make up thy account, sit loose
from all earthly things; these are good, but God is better; to have God would
be a gain to thee, these are thorns and thorns in thy side, they do not only
choke our duty, but our comforts.

2. Formality and slothfulness.
2. This will diminish thy comfort much, though thou have for the main been
holy, when too much formality and slothfulness has been upon thee. The want
of zeal and fervency will greatly abate of thy joy: Therefore the Apostle, 1
Pet. 1. says, Give all diligence to make your calling sure, as if he had said,
as long as you live slothfully and negligently, you can never come to any
assurance: the more lazy and cold thou art, the greater will thy fears and
doubtings be: Oh then let this be a goad in thy side, to do what thou do
with all thy might, love God, serve God, pray to God with all thy might; I tell
thee it will be a great grief and breaking of heart to think of all thy family
duties and public duties, done in a mere customary way, if thou do them
not as a dying man, as a man going immediately to give his account to God, thou
come not up to thy duty. Rev. 2. see how severe God is there to the Church, I
have something against thee, because thy works are not perfect, filled works:
They were good works, but they were not filled with inward life and the
substance of grace; therefore he exhorts them to strengthen the things that
were ready to die: Oh then do thou pray, that a constant fire may burn upon the
altar of thy heart, take heed of grievings and tormenting fears, because thou
were so barren so superficial and unhearty in the work of God; though this
will not break thy anchor, yet it will toss thy ship up and down very
violently; though it will not raze thy foundation, yet it will cause great
heartquakes and trembling within thee.

3. The not zealously improving opportunities.
3. This will much weaken, though not quite destroy thy comfort, when thou have
not been careful and active to improve all the opportunities and prizes God
put into thy hand. To think, this I might have done, there was this excellent
occasion, and I neglected it! These thoughts will be so many drops of gall in
thy honey: Therefore the Apostle presses that duty to redeem the time, Ephesians.
4.16. to take all the occasions and opportunities before thee: We are commanded
to learn of the unreasonable creatures, that know their times and seasons.
Christ's tears over Jerusalem, Luke 19.41. were because she did not know her
day; God does give many gracious occasions, which it may be will never be
enjoyed more. Now as those that did not go out early to gather Manna, could not
have any afterward, though they would have labored many hours; and as those
that did not step into the Pool, while the Angel descended, could not upon any
terms have the benefit afterward, so it is here, if thou take not the
opportunity, the season God offers, it may never come again. It Is true, there
is no man dying, but may be greatly afflicted for misspent opportunities,
therefore you heard no man could put any confidence in the best improved life
that can be, only he is happy that has less worms gnawing upon his conscience
then others: Oh then take this home with thee, thou godly soul, when Christ
knocks at the door there is an opportunity of doing or receiving good, take
heed with the Church, thou do not make excuses, and so make Christ depart, thou
may afterward search for him in the anguish of thy heart, and not find him.

4. 4. The doing Gods work upon constraint, and not from filial and voluntary
principles.
This will allay our comfortable account, when though we have done the work of
God, yet we did it upon constraint and slavish fears, not from filial and
voluntary principles. As the heart has been free and willing, so commonly will
thy joys be. When the people offered so willingly about the Temple, how
joyful and glad is David, blessing God, Who are we that we should be able to
offer thus willingly, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. and Lord keep this always in their
hearts; so that a ready willing mind God does accept of and fills with
consolation, He has not sowed sparingly, and therefore shall not reap
sparingly. Woe is me, says Paul, if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. If I
preach the Gospel willingly, I have a reward, but if not, the dispensation of
the Gospel is committed to me, As if be had said, If I preach the Gospel and do
my duty from a ready willing mind, I shall have an overflowing reward; but if
not, there is a necessity laid upon me, it is my duty, I cannot put it off, God
will require his trust; Oh then do not lose the comfort of all thy duties, to
do from constraint, from fear, because of a slavish conscience, this will not
produce that consolation, which a voluntary free spirit will; therefore as the
Apostle spoke concerning Ministers, Heb. 3.17. people should obey them, that
they might give their account with joy and not with grief, the same is to be
applied by every one; oh let me with delight and willingness do Gods work,
that I may lift up my head when death appears! He that is haled to his duty,
will be haled to his account, in neither will he have any joy, I did such
things indeed, but it was mere fear of hell and torment, I had no delight in
God or approaches to him.

5. Though we do the work God requires, 5. The more hypocrisy the less
comfort.
yet so much insincerity and hypocrisy as there is, so much will our comfort
abate. This I have done indeed, this zeal, this activity I had, but it was not
purely for God; there were self-respects, self-considerations, and these will
be so many thorns by thy roses, if it had not been for such ingredients thy
heart had been more serene and calm. This was Paul's evidence, not simply that
he preached the Gospel, but that he did it as of God, and to God, 2 Cor. 2. The
Pharisees in all the duties they did, could have no true comfort, because their
ends were naught: Jehu and Judas these will give no comfortable account, so
that purity of intention and rectitude of aims, will only comfort thee at thy
death; should thou abound in the most Angelical duties that are, be admired
of all, yet if in all these things thou have not been purely fixed, thy hopes
will fail; insincerity is accompanied with sad doubts and uncertainties.

6. Ignorance, 6. Ignorance or mistake in some points of Divinity.
or a mistake in some things may make us give our account with great fear. As

If we look for perfection in our lives, being resolved like Rachel to mourn
and take no comfort, unless our life appear a garden to us without any weeds at
all, but that is reserved only for heaven: If none might dye comfortably, but
he that has lived perfectly, then every man must go out of the world with
despair; yea there is no man but his failings are more then his duties, there
is more corruption then grace; so that if there be sincerity, though
imperfection, we may say, Lord we have finished the work thou gave us to do.
Indeed humility is required because of our imperfections, but not diffidence:
To doubt and to refuse the comfort God offers is not humility, but
disobedience, like that of Peter's, who would not let Christ wash his feet.

about the nature of true faith and hope, as if we were to divide between
Christ and our selves, and so from both conjoined together gather our
assurance; even as the Papists define spes hope, to be partim a gratia, partim
a meritis nostris proveniens, but those that go thus to divide, must needs
divide themselves from comfort, for the object of our faith and trust must be
Christ only. We may joyfully take those evidences of grace we see in our
selves, but to put confidence in them, would be to make our selves our own
saviors.

This mistake may breed much disconsolatenesse when we limit our assurance and
evidence to the time of our death, that if God give us it not then, we give up
our case as desperate. Indeed it is a most blessed thing, and a mercy much to be
prayed for, that as Simeon, so we having seen Christ in our hearts and lives,
may then depart in peace: It Is the haven after all the tempests we have had
here, but yet God may deny us this cordial, even the best of Gods children
have found, that God has not kept the best wine for the last; but God does
sometime to his, as they did to Christ, give him gall and vinegar to drink: For
as the wicked ungodly man, who the next moment is to drop into eternal flames,
may yet die with great carnal presumption that God is his God, that Christ is
his Mediator in whom he will trust, and so fears not, quakes not at the
doleful judgment coming upon him, so the godly man, though ready to be
crowned with Immortal Glory, and there is but a moment between him and
everlasting happiness, yet may think his case doubtful, if not desperate, may
seem to have no hopes, no joy, yea be so tempted, that he shall think all he
did was but in hypocrisy and falsehood, that there was no truth in him, this
may be: Therefore let the godly not limit God to that time of death.

Use.
Use of Admonition to awaken your selves at this truth, Think how nearly it
concerns you, Do thou live in such a way, as that thou art able to make this
glorious profession? Is not God, is not his word, is not thy own conscience
against thee? How speechless and confounded will thou be, when God shall bid
thee give an account of all thy talents! Oh that men should not lay this later
end no more to heart! that none says, O my soul, now all is well, now thou
take thy mirth, but what a change will the hour of death make! With what
comfort will thou look upon the devils work, and sins work, which thou have
been doing all thy life time? especially take heed of unprofitablenesse and
decayings in the way of godliness; thou that have looked toward heaven, but
art turned out of the way, be sure thy end will be miserable, It had been
better for thee, says the Apostle, never to have known the way of
righteousness. You may have desires, may have breakings of heart, and yet
return to sin again; oh think with what a violent flood these thoughts will
come upon thee! Oh me wretched and undone sinner, I have no refuge, no hope!
many resolutions I had, but they vanished away, and now I must live no longer,
my time is expired, my course is finished: Oh that God would add, as to
Hezekiah, some years to my life! Oh that I could bid the Sun stand still, or
time go no further, till I were at peace with God, but these are vain wishes:
Let not then this truth go, before it has left a sting in thy very heart; O
Lord nothing troubles me, but that I did not think or mind these things
sooner: Meditate on these things your night is coming upon you; Will you
always delay, or else be secure, and not matter these things; many have done
foolishly and dropped in a moment into hell, do not thou be so overtaken. May we
not conclude, that the auditor with whom this truth will not avail, may fear he
is delivered up to an impenitent heart.

SERMON XXI. Of Gods being Glorified by Man's Salvation; That Christ's chief end
in what he did for man, was the Glory of God, which bespeaks both our Imitation
and unspeakable Consolation.
JOH. 17.4. I have glorified thee on earth.
THe cirumstance of this holy profession which Christ made being considered,
Let us proceed to the Profession it self, and that is, He had glorified God on
earth.

Christ in the state of humiliation was inferior to God, and so he did refer
all things to his Fathers glory, so that in this profession we may consider, 1.
What is the matter or object whereby God is glorified. 2. The end or final
cause that moved Christ therein.


The matter is our salvation, and that redemption Christ purchased for us: The
end which Christ looked at in all this was chiefly the glory of God: Indeed he
looked also at his own glory and our glory, but the ultimate and chiefest of
all was Gods glory, So that from hence we may observe,

That our redemption and salvation obtained by Christ is a glorifying of God,
Doct. That our Redemption obtained by Christ is a glorifying of God^ etc.
Wherein God was glorified by Christ's Mediation for us.
and Christ did thereby chiefly aim at Gods glory; We put both the matter of
Gods glory and Christ's end together; and certainly this Truth discovered will
be like that sweet box of perfume which opened, caused such a fragrant smell.

And 1. Let us see how or wherein God was thus glorified by Christ's Mediation
for us: It being of infinite comfort to know this, for how many times are we
apt to be cast down? What are we that God should regard our salvation? who are
we that God should crown us with glory? God does not need us, he is happy
without us; Now this may exceedingly encourage, Though we be not worthy to be
saved, God is worthy to be glorified; If there were nothing but our good and
happiness involved in Christ's death, who would think it probable Christ should
suffer merely and ultimately for us, but there is also the glory of God deeply
concerned, which is more worth then all the world, yea, then all our souls, for
though one soul be more worth then a world, yet Gods glory is more worth then
all our souls and their salvation; So that a Christian fixing his faith and
meditation here may be in a transfiguration, and say, It is good to be here;
God does not lose by thy Salvation, If Gods honor were to be impaired, if his
truth broken, if his justice violated, then who dare open his mouth for
salvation? but God is a gainer as well as thou art; It Is no wrong or loss to
God if he give pardon to thee, yea, thou art able to make it out of Scripture
grounds, that God is more glorified hereby, and so when the salvation of our
souls shall prove Gods interest more then ours, this must needs greatly
encourage.

The grace, mercy and goodness of God is by our redemption through Christ
admirably exalted: Now Gods goodness and his mercy is that which does highly
exalt him; When Moses desired to see the glory of God Exo. 34.6. then God made
this Proclamation, that he was merciful, long-suffering, ready to forgive;
Those attributes that declare his mercy, they make him glorious; Now there
never was or can be such an Instance of Gods grace, love, and goodness, as in
our salvation by Christ; God never did any thing by which he can have such a
Name for mercy as in this; The Church of God has had many deliverances and
great external favors, for which she has been much in praising and glorifying
of God, but God never exalted himself and made himself so glorious as by this;
The Church was greatly affected, Psa. 136. with the goodness of God, when
enumerating the several Instances of Gods mercy, she adds in every verse,
For his mercy endures for ever, For his mercy endures for ever; Oh but how
may thou go over all those things, Christ did for thee, adding, His mercy
endures for ever; He died and rose again for the remission of thy sins, for
his mercy endures for ever, he obtained the sanctification of thy nature, For
his mercy endures for ever, And in those temporal deliverances, though Gods
mercy as an attribure in him endured for ever, yet the effect of his mercy did
not, for both these mercies, and they themselves perished, but here the effects
of his mercy will endure for ever; So then seeing God does all things for his
glory and his name, insomuch that Joshua urged this as a great argument with
God, Josh. 7.9. What will thou do unto thy great Name? It cannot be but that
our redemption by Christ must needs be acceptable to him, because his Name is
most exalted thereby, we may say Gods thoughts, his heart and delight was more
upon this then any thing else he ever did; These attributes of God, his
goodness, his love, his long-suffering, his grace, Divines makes a distinction
of them, but in our salvation through Christ, they were all conjoined; There
they were all in their highest glory, Gods love is that whereby he wills good to
the creature, now in his creation or preservation he does not will that good,
which he does in our redemption, Gods goodness is that whereby though full in
himself and sufficient, yet he would communicate unto the creature; Now in
nothing did God ever communicate as in this; in other things, he gives
creatures, here he gives himself: In other things he vouchsafes fading,
decaying comforts, here is eternal; In other things he gives but drops and
crumbs, here he gives the ocean, he fills us up with happiness, that the soul
says it has enough, especially Gods grace is seen in no thing but this, the
Creation of the world, and bestowing other mercies, is never attributed to
grace; this is peculiar for our salvation, Oh then what hope is here when we
shall consider, there never was, there never can be any thing wherein God may
be so glorified as in our salvation by Christ, urge this duty at the Throne of
grace, O Lord, It is not my cause but thy cause; The devil opposes not so much
my salvation as thy glory thereby: As they said to David, Thou shall not go
with us, Thou art worth ten thousand of us; Do thou urge, Let not thy glory be
in danger that is worth all our souls.

The wisdom of God is greatly glorified by Christ's Mediation for us, 1 Cor.
1.24. We preach Christ the wisodom of God, why so? Because never was the
wisdom so discovered as in finding out and procuring such a remedy for undone
man as he has through Christ, if you do regard by the remedy it self Christ
God and man, the use of this remedy by faith only excluding all works, we may
then cry out, Oh the unsearchable depths of the manifold wisdom of God; The
Apostle calls it (...); Even as in a curious work of Tapestry, there are several
expressions of arts; David is affected with Gods wisdom in making every part
of him; Thou did curiously work me in my Mothers womb, as so much choice
Needle Work, Psa. 139.15. but far more wisdom was seen in redeeming and
saving, especially the wisdom of God was herein wonderful, that whereas upon
man fallen his estate seemed desperate and incurable, on one side Mercy was
willing to help and releeve, but on the other side Justice did interpose, and
said it could not; Now the wisdom of God found out such an excellent
temperament, that mercy might plentifully demonstrate it self, yet Justice be
satisfied; so that in man's salvation there was a merciful justice, and a just
mercy cooperant together, Solomon's wisdom was greatly admired for deciding
that hard controversy about the living child, but here was a greater instance
of wisdom to find, out a way for our salvation; We read of an excellent
temperament found out by one Lawgiver, who having made a Law that every
adulterer should have both his eyes boared out, it so happened that the
Lawgivers own Son was taken in Adultery, Now mercy on one side moved the
Father to spare him, yet Justice on the other side hindered; The Father
therefore commanded one of his Sons eyes should be put out, and yielded that
one of his eyes should be put out for the other eye of his Sons. Here the Law
and Justice was satisfied, as also the mercy of the Father discovered; This is
greatly applauded in histories, though hardly is the fact justifiable, but it
is a mere shadow to this excellent temperament the wisdom of God found out, Oh
that ever any soul under any perplexity whatsoever should be cast down or say,
how can I be delivered in this? how shall this ever tend to my good? for what
is it greater then to find out a way to save thee? yet God has done that.

The power of God is hereby glorified; We read of many instances wherein God
has revealed his power to the world, That all the world has been forced to
say, Great is the might and Majecty of God: Who is a God like the true God
doing great and wonderful things? But this of our salvation by Christ
transcends all, Therefore 1 Cor. 1.14. Christ is called the power of God, for
by this means a greater power then any earthly power is subdued, even the
principalities and powers of hell; Now says Christ when he was to suffer, the
Prince of this world is judged, Joh. 16.11. By the blowing of Rams horns the
walls of Jericho fell down, but here by contemptible and weak things, the gates
of hell fall to the ground; The devil that had power over men's hearts, and kept
men captive in their lusts, is wholly conquered; Alas all the power done in
temporal deliverances cannot be compared to this redemption; It Is true, the eye
of faith and not of the body must admire this.

God is glorified in his Justice, and that more then the heart of man can
conceive, for although in respect of us there be nothing but grace, and all
that we have and receive is mercy, yet in respect of Christ there was exact
justice, God laid our sins upon him, he became a Surety in our stead, he
undergoeth that wrath, that curse that did belong to us, God did not abate of
any thing that Christ could suffer without sin, so that we have not the
pardon of our sins upon any unjust and unlawful terms; The Law and Justice
cannot complain: Gods justice then against sin is abundantly seen in that,
though Christ was the only beloved of the Father, yet he is not spared but must
be made a curse, and endure the wrath due unto us, so that if a man would
consider what arguments should keep him from sin, if he would be affected
with Gods wrath against it, let him look on Christ crucified, oh how can it be
that sin should be so pleasing and delightful unto thee which was so bitter
and full of wrath to Christ: Would not God spare his own Children, but his
justice must be satisfied through Christ, then what may wicked men expect? Are
they able to conflict with Gods wrath? Can they satisfy his justice? This
blood of Christ though it speak better things then that of Abel to the godly,
yet it is more terrible then that to the wicked, for thereby it testifies that
God will have blood, he must have an atonement for sin, and that cannot be by
thy sufferings though in hell: Therefore Gods justice is more glorified by
Christ then by the damned in hell, for there they are never able completely to
satisfy, therefore they are kept in those chains to all Eternity: The debt is
never paid, but Christ discharged all to the utmost, and therefore the grave
could not contain him; Thus you see how in every respect God is glorified by
our salvation through Christ; Though to us a Son be given, and to us a child
was born, Isa. 9.6. (He was a Savior and Mediator in respect of us not
himself,) yet all this did at last refer to Gods glory; That was the Ocean in
which this stream did empty it self; Thus you have heard wherein God was
glorified by Christ.

In the next place consider the end that Christ did propound in all his doings
and sufferings, I mean the ultimate and chief end not the proxime or immediate
end, and that also was to glorify God, his chiefest end was not either to
glorify himself or us, these were subordinate ends.

1. Not himself, hence Joh. 8. I seek not my own glory but the glory of him
that sent me; It Is true, he is said to have an eye to the end of his
sufferings, Heb. 11. and the Scripture makes his exaltation a consequent of his
humiliation, yet this was not chiefest in his thoughts: The name and glory God
gave him exalting him above every great thing, was not principally regarded by
him, but the glory of God: So that by this we see how precious the glory of God
should be to us, how deer in our esteem; When we see Christ preferring it above
his own glory; The aim that Christ had did arise from that love and zeal he had
to God, for none can refer all things to Gods glory who do not love him above
all things, who do not give him the preheminency in every thing: One said, Fiat
justitia and ruat mundus, Let the glory of God be exalted though the whole
world be ruined thereby, as love to God, so purity of intentions, and an
excellent rectitude of the heart is requisite, else self-love and self-respect
will be more prevalent then Gods glory.

2. As Christ did not principally intend his own glory, so neither our
happiness, but only as the means to glorify God; Because Gods glory is so
deeply interessed in our salvation, therefore did he procure it; He did not
glorify God that we might be saved, but he saved us that thereby God might be
glorified, yet this does not at all derogate from the Love of Christ to us,
neither does it make us the less beholding to him though he would not have
saved us, had it not been for Gods glory; But hereby he demonstrated both his
love to us, and God at the same time, he loved our souls and salvation, yet not
above the glory of God, That would have been unlawful; Therefore at the same
time he did demonstrate both his love to us and to God, and yet kept the due
order that ought to be in his love first to God, and then next to us.

Reasons.
Now the ground and reason why Christ did refer all his obedience both active
and passive to Gods glory, is,

Because God himself makes all his own actions to the glory of his Name; The
end of Creation, of Redemption, of Christ's coming into the world; All these
were ordered by God for his own glory, so that as the work was imposed on
Christ, which he was to aim at, was also required by God; Had it been possible
(for we may suppose impossibilities for illustration sake) for Christ, to have
procured our salvation for other ends then to glorify God, it had been sin
in him, for if God be so jealous of his glory that he will not have it
attributed to any other beside himself, how much would his jealousy have been
provoked if this matter wherein his glory is most visible, should have been
given to any other, Gods glory then is the supreme and universal end to which
all are to subordinate themselves.

The glory of God is more noble and has greater worth in it then any thing
else; Therefore that which is most noble must be the end, as the less noble
the means; Seeing then the glory of God is of infinite excellency, even like
God himself, no wonder if Christ did refer our Salvation to that most high
end, and by this we are to see that it is our duty to prize the glory of God
above our salvation, for our salvation is but the good of a creature, but the
glory of God is infinite even as God himself; We are to judge of and rejoice in
the glory of God as more excellent then our own happiness, yet this is not so
to be understood as if a man were to be willing to be damned that God might be
honored, For it is our duty to will our salvation, we are to seek for
immortality and glory, and Romans 2 It Is not lawful to be willing absolutely,
for Paul spoke conditionally, I could wish to be separated from the presence of
God: If it be not lawfully to will our bodily death, much less our eternal
damnation; Neither is it possible that thy salvation and Gods glory should be
divided, so that howsoever some Writers speak of such things, yet they command
that to be done which is both unlawful and impossible, only this is certain the
glory of God is a greater good then our own salvation, and as Christ so we are
to desire our salvation, that thereby God may be glorified, and certainly if
our Salvation it self be to be referred to Gods glory, how much rather all the
temporal mercies we have; We are not to desire health, strength, parts, any
outward comforts, but thereby to glorify God: Certainly this glory of God is
not apprehended by us so noble and excellent a thing as it ought to be? Oh how
often do we desire these outward mercies for our own ease, our own benefit, and
not thereby to glorify God; Shall Christ look beyond all these great acts he
did to the glory of God? and shall not thou look beyond thy health, wealth, and
all outward greatness to the glory of God? Oh where will they appear that by
all things they have dishonor and blaspheme God.

But excellent Use may be made of this Doctrine; Use.
Is our redemption by Christ and Salvation in the nature of it a glorifying of
God, then what excellent arguments and strong encouragements does this put into
the mouth of the godly; Who art thou that art full of doubts and dejections? Oh
thou have many arguments to think God will never justify or save such a one as
thou art; Thou think thy Objections are so great they never can be answered,
but see if this doctrine will not remove all, for first, Thou may plead God
will be glorified by thy pardon, by thy salvation, God will be no loser, here
will be no wrong done to him, May thou not use this divine Rhetoric? O Lord.
did I beg my Salvation upon such terms as were not consistent with thy honor
and glory? Were my Salvation and thy honor incompatible, then I might justly
be accused, then my mouth might presently be stopped, but thou will be exalted
by my happiness: Neither thy justice, or thy truth will be impaired; The
devils cannot plead after this manner, Justice will presently put a bar
against them; Seeing they have no Mediator God cannot be glorified in their
Salvation, for though mercy might be exalted, yet how can justice be satisfied?
Thus thou have an unanswerable argument put into thy mouth. 2. The glory of God
will be more magnified in thy justification then in thy condemnation; Thou
may truly say, Lord, if thou cast me out of thy presence, If I be adjudged to
eternal flames, thou will lose of thy glory and honor, Thy Name will not be so
much exalted; and how prevailing must this be? Now Gods glory must be less in
thy condemnation then in thy salvation for a twofold respect, 1. As you heard,
The attributes of God are not made so glorious in one as in the other; That the
goodness, mercy, and grace of God is not so illustrious none can deny, and as
for his justice and power which might claim the pre-eminence in man's
condemnation, yet they are not so celebrated, for Gods justice is but in fieri,
It Is not completed, They lie in the prison of hell but are never able to pay
the debt; The penal sufferings of a creature cannot recompense that honor and
glory to God, which the voluntary sufferings of him who was both God and man
did, so that justice is far more conspicuous, and as for Gods power that also
is visibly more noble, for to be able to save one is more glorious then to damn
many; It Is harder to save then to condemn. 2. The glory of God is more
magnified in our salvation, because those that are saved are affected with this
infinite goodness of God; They speak of it, they aggravate it, as Hezekiah
said, Isa. 38.19. Do the dead praise thee? The living, the living they will
speak of thy goodness; Thus it is here; Do the damned in hell glorify God? Do
they praise him? Do they sing out their Allelujahs? No, they rather rage and
blaspheme God; Oh then how strong is this in thy prayer: O Lord if thou lay my
sins upon me, if they press me into hell, shall I then love thee? Shall I then
glorify thee? Do not the justified, the sanctified, the saved speak of thy
praises all the day long. 3 In that God is thus glorified by thy salvation,
thou may make it Gods cause, his interest, O Lord, I have sins enough to damn
me, I am worthy to be thrown into hell, but though I am unworthy to be saved,
thou art worthy to be honored; O Lord, because I have deserved hell, does thy
Name deserve to be dishonored? Observe how the people of God in all their
miseries still engaged Gods Name in their help, for his Names sake, as if they
had said, O Lord, though we are unworthy to be delivered, yet thy Name is
worthy to be honored; It Is no matter for us Lord, but what will become of thy
great Name, O Lord the dishonor will redound more to thee then the loss to
us; Oh this is strong and comfortable to consider, how Gods glory is interested
in thy happiness, so that it is Gods cause more then thine, yea, and why do the
devils thus desire to draw thee into sin and hell? Is it not chiefly because of
their enmity against God? It Is not so much thy damnation as the dishonor to
God they look at; Though they hate both, yet they hate God most, and thus thou
have unanswerable arguments in this particular. And if you say, Obj.
it being thus, Why are not all saved, would not God have the more glory? Answ.
I answer, God does not need any glory from the creature, he needs not the
glory that Angels and Saints give him; If he therefore for just and wise
grounds known to himself justifies some and condemns others, even in this he
is to be acknowledged a glorious God needing no creature, so that though he may
do as he please, yet we must urge the arguments he puts in our mouths.

Use 2. Is Gods glory and our Salvation thus linked together? Is he so good
that he inseparably does join these together? Then do thou likewise, join all
thy profit, all thy comforts and his glory together; Say, oh it is not enough
that I am eased or am advantaged, unless I see also God be glorified.

SERMON XXII. Of Christ's finishing the work he undertook, with the End and
Properties of it, and the great comfort of it to Believers.
JOH. 17.4. I have finished the work thou gave me to do.
THE former part, which contained Christ's holy profession of the end he had in
all that he did and suffered on earth, has been dispatched. We now come to
consider the Means wherein, or by which, and that in the later part. And herein
consider the means or manner it self, expressed under this notion, Work. Christ
came not into the world to have his ease and pleasure and outward glory, but to
Work: This obedience of his it was both active and passive. 2. Here is the
description of the nature or quality of this work, that which was given him by
the Father to do, so that in all this there was a stipulation and an agreement
with the Father. 3. There is his discharge of it, I have finished it: He did
not leave it half done, there is nothing more can be required of Christ: This
is a comfortable truth, for woe be to us, if Christ had not discharged all, if
there had been any supply to be made by us.

If you say, How could Christ say he had finished his work, Quest.
when yet the dregs of the cup were to be drunk up, the worst seemed to be
behind, viz. all that agony and sorrow he was to suffer?

First Austin answers it, by reading it in the future tense, I will finish thy
work: Answ.
but that cannot be. The best answer is, that Christ thus speaks, because all
was now at hand to be finished, he was in a prepared and ready disposition to
consummate all, as we read he said a little before his death, It Is finished,
consummatum est. Now the Scripture accounts that as done, which is immediately
to be done, and the man is ready to do it: Thus Abraham, Heb. 11. is said to
offer up his son Isaac, and to receive him from the dead, when yet actually
he did not offer him, but he was immediately fitted for it.

Obs. Christ did fully and perfectly finish that work the Father gave him to
do. Observe. That Christ did fully and perfectly finish that work the Father
gave him to do.
John 4.34. see what a notable expression our Savior uses to this purpose, My
meat is to do the will of him that sent me; My meat, i. e. my joy, my
refreshing; never any hungry man was more refreshed by food, then I am in doing
my Fathers will, and what was that will, to obtain pardon and salvation for a
poor humbled sinner. Oh why should the godly soul be dejected with doubts,
whether Christ will receive him or no, it is his meat to be communicating grace
and mercy to thee; Thou can not so much desire him as he does thee: Again he
adds, To do my Fathers will and to finish his work; for if Christ had begun it
and not completed it, we had been still in our sins, and without all hope;
this is the fountain of all our hope and joy, Christ finished his work, he did
not leave any thing for me to do. Indeed duties are required of us, but not as
additaments or suppliments to his mediation, but as qualifications fitting us
to partake of the fruit of it. Observe these particulars. 1.
Let us dive into the Divinity of this Point; And

1.
1. Consider, That Christ might have come into the world, as a glorious Lord and
Lawgiver, only to rule and to give Laws, but coming into the world as a
Mediator and a Surety, it behoved him to be under a Law, and to discharge that
work he undertook. That Christ might have been in the world not subject to the
Law, or obliged to do any thing for our good is plain, because his Incarnation
was not necessary, he was not compelled to it, he might have chosen whether he
would thus undertake for man or no; therefore the Scripture says, Phil. 2. He
made himself of no reputation, and He became obedient to the death of the
cross. It was wholly at his own good pleasure; but suppose this will and
purpose of his, then there was a duty and charge laid upon him to perform all
he was betrusted with, he would have been found unfaithful, had he not done
every thing to the uttermost.

2. A Covenant between God the Father and the Son.
2. There was a holy and admirable agreement between God the Father and the
Son, to be a Mediator for those his Father had given him. Hence it is that he
says so often his Father had sent him, and I came to do the will of him that
sent me. Although the Covenant of grace be made with believers, yet there was a
previous and antecedent Covenant or agreement between the Father and the Son
to be a Mediator, and the agreement was, that if Christ would lay down his life
for such, then the Father would give them to him as his seed and glorify them,
as also reward him with all honor and glory. That Christ was rewarded with all
honor, appears, Phil. 2. and in other places, and that because of his work
done as a Mediator; and that he had a seed given him, appears, in that it is
said, he should see of his seed and be satisfied, Isa. 53.11. The Arminian
doctrine therefore that holds an Universal Redemption in imputation only, and
not application, makes it possible that his soul might be in all that travel,
and yet he not be satisfied, for not one might be saved. There was then this
admirable agreement between the Father and the Son transacted in heaven, they
were purposing good to believers, even before they had a being, or could have
any desires for their own good.

3. Christ's work truiy and properly obedience.
3. From this Covenant and agreement it is that Christ's work is truly and
properly obedience: for it may be asked, How could Christ be said to obey,
seeing he could not but do Gods will? there was an inward necessity from the
Hypostaticall union, and as we do not say, the service that Angels and Saints
do in heaven is properly obedience, for then that should be rewarded with a new
heaven, Quest.
and so in infinitum, Why then can it be said, that Christ's doing and suffering
is obedience? Answ.
To this we Answer, The Scripture does expressly call it obedience, and such an
obedience as has a reward annexed to it: Hence John 10.8. Christ calls it the
Commandment which he had received from his Father. And whereas it is said,
Christ necessarily obeyed, and so it could not be otherwise, it is true,
supposing his will to be a Mediator, then such was his holiness, that he could
not but be faithful, yet this was not a natural necessity, as the fire
burns, but a necessity of immutability, arising from the perfection of his
nature, neither is to sin, of the essence of liberty, but it is a defect, and
does accompany only a mutable liberty in what is good. Let it therefore be
firmly believed, that all which Christ did, 4. Christ's obedience was meriting
obedience.
it was truly and properly obedience to the Law of God, Romans 5.19. By the
obedience of one, etc.

4. This was not merely obedience, but a meriting obedience; so that our
salvation and his glory was not due to him merely as such, by virtue of a
promise, or by congruity, but from condignity; although concerning the later,
viz. meriting his own glory, many sound Divines think otherwise. There was an
intrinsecall worth and excellency in Christ's obedience answering to our
salvation. Hence though we have our Justification and Salvation of grace and
mere grace, yet in respect of Christ it was of justice and debt, so that in
Christ the Covenant of works was fulfilled, though in us the Covenant of grace;
and this consideration lays a firm and sure foundation for our peace and
comfort. For our salvation is not grounded upon our works, but Christ's works;
it is not upon any perfection or fullness in us, but on Christ: Though therefore
our sins and frailties may humble us, yet they may not drive us from our
anchor of hope in Christ.

5. This work Christ was to do, it was in it self very heavy and grievous, 5.
Christ's work heavy and grievous.
though his readiness made it easy. If we consider the particulars of his
work, viz. to obey the Law of God, and to suffer all the wrath that was due for
our sins, we may easily then conclude, that Christ had a bitter cup to drink
off: And those prayers and agonies which he poured out, saying, If it be
possible let this cup pass away, Matthew. 26.39. abundantly show that to the
humane nature it was a very hard and difficult task, yet for all this his love
and desire of our salvation was so great, that at another time he says, I have
a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till I come? and when
Peter advised him to save himself, with what indignation does he refuse it,
Matthew. 16.23. so that we should with serious and affectionate hearts hear of
this work of Christ, oh how full of agonies and conflicts was he, insomuch that
an Angel from heaven came to comfort him, yet all this was his meat, his
refreshment in respect of our good. Do not thou then say of any duty he
commands, if it be to pull out thy right eye, to cut off thy right hand, to
part with thy dearest lusts and comforts for his sake: This is hard work, who
can do it? for did not Christ willingly and joyfully do harder for thee.

6. This work he finished and completed, as you hear in the text; 6. He
finished his work.
it is the end that Crowned this great work; Now his finishing of this work was
in these particulars:

1. He did it wholly and universally, there was not one Iota or tittle of the
Law, which he did not accomplish, though all our obedience be imperfect, and we
fail in many things, this we omit, and that we omit, yet Christ left nothing
undone: Oh what blessed and comfortable doctrine is this to the loaded and
burdened soul, that sits mourning like deflowred Tamar, and I whither shall I
go? if the Lord enquire about this duty, and about that command, thou can not
answer, thy omissions are too palpable, thou can not hide them from thy own
eyes, yet remember Christ failed in nothing: Cursed is he that abides not in
all things, so the Law runs; if thou were able to do all the Law requires,
and yet fail but in one word, in one thought, that matters not all thy other
duties, for this one thing it will condemn thee, and therefore the Law brings
every man under condemnation, it makes the most holy of men see their damnable
condition, but Christ answers the Law to the utmost: As Christ said to his
enemies, Which of you can charge me with sin? so he may say to greater then
they, even to the Law, even to the justice of God, wherein can you find any
spot in me, demand to the utmost farthing, abate nothing, I am ready to
discharge all.

2. He finished it universally for parts, and not only so, but fully for
degrees: He did not only do every duty the Law required, but every duty in
every degrees: he did not only love God, but he loved him as much as the Law
required. The Law was possible to him, though to us it be impossible; all that
he did was so fully done, that there wanted not the least degree of grace in
any duty. As he had not the Spirit in measure, so neither was his obedience in
measure, thus far as is with us, to whom God gives not such a measure of
grace, as to be able perfectly to conform to the Law in this life; and here
again the godly heart may lift up it self and be comforted, for what though
thou come short many degrees of what the Law requires, yet Christ did not:
What though all thou do may be better, yet Christ did all things so, that
they could not be better, Perfectum est cui nihil deest: Now nothing was
wanting to Christ's obedience, otherwise Christ himself would have needed a
Mediator as well as we; if he had failed in his trust he had been guilty of
sin, and so needing of pardon; now it were blasphemy to say so of Christ, for
the Apostle, Heb. 7.27. aggravateth and prefers Christ our Highpriest above
the legal Highpriest in this, because such an one was to offer for his own
sins, as well as the sins of the people. Oh then it is no wonder if Paul be
thus affected with Christ, and his righteousness, seeing all fullness and
perfection is in it.

3. Christ finished his work, because he had not only an objective perfection
in parts and degrees, but also a subjective perfection, all within him was
thoroughly and perfectly holy; so that whereas we are both originally and
actually polluted, he was originally and actually holy, so that the Law had no
fault to find with him; for his original and native holiness, it is plain,
because he was not born of man in an ordinary way, but the holy Ghost
overshadowed the Virgin Mary, and therefore he is called (...), that holy thing
which was to be born of her, Luke 1.35. and thus the Apostle, It behoved us to
have an Highpriest, holy and separated from sinners, Heb. 7.26. and indeed this
is the foundation and root of all, for the tree must be good, before the fruit
can; the fountain must be clean, ere the streams, and so the nature must be
holy ere the actions are. Christ then had an holy and pure nature, wherein was
not the least spot or wrincle of sin, and then his actual holiness did fill
up the faculties of his soul, as he had a soul and the natural properties
thereof, an understanding and a will, so these were sanctified to the highest;
we speak not of the holiness of his Divine nature, as he was God, for so it
was infinite, even as God himself, but of his humane nature, habitually and
actually. Hence the Apostle, He knew no sin, 1 Cor. 5. and he was made like
unto us, sin only excepted, Heb. 4.15. Now here also the godly may rejoice,
for those relics and remainders of sin are such as prove thorns in the side
of the godly: The experimental sense of this made Paul cry out, Oh miserable
man that I am! Well though in thee there be the stubs of sin, yet in Christ
there are none, and now God deals not with us in our persons, but as in
Christ, being found in him, says the Apostle, as the malefactor was in the
City of refuge, Phil. 3.

4. Christ finished his work in respect of duration, for even the Law required
continuance, though there were perfection of parts and degrees, and subjective
perfection also, yet Cursed is he that does not continue therein, Gal. 3.10. as
you see Adam did not, but Christ from the beginning to the end of his days
held it out, yea his love did most appear at the later end, for then was the
greatest and hardest parts of his work to undergo, but though in all that
reproach, contempt and scorn, yet he was not weary, he did not give over his
work, he did not fail or faint in the later end: Thus Christ was our David
fighting against Goliath, and in his conquest we did overcome.

Lastly, He so finished it, that he has left nothing to be done either by
Angels or men, in that way and kind as he did. Therefore all these doctrines
that maintain free will, that hold the mediation and intercession of Saints in
heaven, that maintain merits and satisfactions, all these blaspheam the
sufficiency of Christ, and say, Christ has not finished his work, for either
Christ was a total and perfect Mediator, or else a partial; if a total and
perfect, then there needs no more, one Sun is sufficient, all things added
are superfluous, if a partial Mediator, then he did not finish his work, then
he did it by halves, and so Angels and Men are to share with him in his glory;
It Is true they have many distinctions to mince the matter, but these fig leaves
cannot cover Adams nakedness, and it is made the sinful property of man fallen,
to seek out many inventions; God made man upright, but they have sought ^ut
many inventions, Eccl. 7.29. They have many colors and pretenses, many
distinctions and excuses to cover their sins with; But you will say, If Christ
has done all, Obj.
and we are to do nothing, then what need we be diligent and zealous in the
ways of godliness? Sin or not sin, it will be all one; Christ has done all,
therefore we may eat and drink, and rise up to all excess of riot; No, that is
a Non sequitur? Answ.
For our duties are not required to that end which Christ's was, but yet they
are necessarily commanded for other ends; Though Christ did work and finish his
work, yet thou must work and endeavor to finish thy work too; But how? It Is
good to understand this, for here Popery and the true Religion part, here they
oppose one another: We plead the necessity, the presence, the command of good
and holy works as well as they, only we differ in the end; They press them for
such an end as Christ did his work for us, for merit, for justification, for
our salvation; This we say is to derogate from Christ; This is to make Christ
of no effect, whosoever repents, believes, does any holy duty for this end, is
guilty of spiritual Idolatry, he makes another Christ to himself, besides the
true Christ, but then there are other ends for which we do these duties, partly
because God has commanded them as the way to walk in, if ever we will be
saved, so that though our holy life deserve not heaven, yet our wicked and
ungodly life deserves hell, and then partly to glorify God, and to testify
our thankfulness and love to him, yea, there is an inseparable connection
between a man interested in Christ and a holy life, as there is in the fire
with heat and light.

In the next place Consider the properties of this work Christ ^^^nished. The
properties of the work which Christ finished.


And 1. It was a work of infinite value and worth; whatsoever Christ did it had
a transcendent excellency because he was God as well as man, so that we are not
to consider those works he did as of a mere man, 1. Of infinite value.
though never so holy but as one of a divine nature.

2. They were Mediatory works, all that he did and suffered tended to a
propitiation and reconciliation with God, 2. Mediatory.
so that as the nature of them was infinite, so the end of them was precious
and admirable, what should man have done if Christ had not done thus.

3. It was not only his work but our work, 3. His works are our works.
Alas Christ was not obliged to these duties for his own sake, but it was for
our sake, so that the godly with great affection may consider of these works of
Christ, for they concern thee; They are our works both impetrative they merit
for us, they procure good for us, and imputative we are made the righteousness
of God, as our sins were accounted his.

4. The necessity of this working, and working so perfectly, and that does
appear from the justice of God and purity of the Law, and partly from our
impotency, 4. Consider the necessity of his work.
from the justice of God, for that being infinite nothing could satisfy him
but what was of infinite worth; It would have been injustice in God to have
given us heaven otherwise, and then partly from the holiness of the Law, that
admits of no works but perfect, pure, and holy; Therefore to say God accepts of
imperfect holiness, and accounts that as complete which is not so, is to
attribute false judgment unto God, and lastly our own impotency proclaims
the necessity of Christ's perfection, for take us as we are in our selves, so we
are nothing but sin and a curse; In stead of working Gods work we do the
devils, and take us as regenerated then though we be partakers of Gods grace,
yet the remnant of corruption within us does stain and infect all that we do.

5. The visibility of it.
Lastly, Here is the glorious visibility of Christ's perfect working in his
resurrection, ascension, and now sitting at the right hand of God in glory,
which could not have been had not Christ perfected his work, for what is the
reason the devils and damned in hell are detained to Eternity in those prisons
of darkness; Is it not because of their insufficiency to perfect their
sufferings, to make them adequate to Gods justice, to bring as great glory to
God as ever sin did evil or dishonor; In that therefore Christ has overcome
the grave and the bonds of death, we have an infallible evidence of his perfect
working.

Use.
Use of Instruction, how dangerous all those doctrines are which proclaim
free will, merit, under any notion whatsoever; As they give that to man which
belongs not to him, so they take that from Christ which is due, yet this is a
most natural sin in all, either in whole or in part to take off from Christ,
not to be beholding to him only, God has commanded us to come out of our sins
by repentance, and our own works by faith, and the Apostle does not only
exclude sins, but even working also from Abraham's Justification, Romans 4. There
is a danger of being a Pharisee when thou ceasest being a Publican.

Use 2. of great Consolation to the brokenhearted sinner; This is the glad
tidings of the Gospel to those who sit under the sentence of eternal death;
Christ's works will abundantly answer all the temptations about thy own works;
Two things lie like two Mountains upon the godly, The weakness of their graces,
and the strength of their corruptions: If neither of these were to bow their
souls down, with what joy and gladness could they live and die: Now Christ's
works have a two fold remedy to this twofold grievance; His works have a
satisfaction in them, and therefore whatsoever failings and corruptions there
are if humbled for and endeavoring to be reformed, they are sufficiently
conquered, and his works have a meriting nature in them, and therefore though
thy work be weak his work was perfect and complete, say not then who shall go
up to heaven? this is to bring Christ back; It is an excellent place, Romans
10.7. where the believer is forbid to doubt or say in his heart, Is Christ
ascended? or was he made a curse for us? or how shall we be able to ascend to
heaven, or to be delivered from hell.

Use 3. Did Christ perfect and finish his work? Do thou imitate and follow him,
Christ's working excludes ours for justification, but not for a duty and way to
heaven; None but doers and workers shall have heaven, though not for their
works: Now thy work is first as a Christian, so the Law of God in the purity
and exactness of it is a rule of all thy works, What the Law bids thee do,
do, though not to have life by it, 2. The work of thy relation as a
Magistrate, Minister, Husband or Wife, finish this work; It Is not enough to be
good in the general, unless good in relation. 3. The work of thy condition as a
rich man, as a poor man, when the Master gave talents to all, this was his
command, Work ye, trade ye, be in constant improvement.

SERMON XXIII. Of a Holy Working Life, the Excellency, Equity, and Necessity
thereof in order to Glory.
JOH. 17.5. And now O Father glorify me with thy own self, etc.
THis fifth Verse contains a repetition of the matter prayed for, v. 1. and
enforced by diverse arguments in the former Verses, wherein observe,

1. The object matter of Christ's Petition, Glorify thou me, I shall not
consider that because spoken to before; Only in that we see our Savior twice
within so little a space praying for this glory, though appointed and promised
to him.

We may observe two particulars.

1. That all repetition and ingemination of the same matter in prayer is not
unlawful, but sometimes is useful and necessary.

2. That even those things that God has appointed and promised to his people,
must yet be obtained by prayer.

In the next place we have the description of this glory.

1. It must be an heavenly glory, such as God approves of, Glorify thou me
with thy own self; This may be spoken exclusively to all humane glory which he
regarded not, or else in opposition to his work, he had done, I have finished
thy work on earth, and now let me have my reward in heaven: 3. From an external
adjunct, It Is the glory which he had before the world was; That admits of some
difficulty to be dispatched in its proper place. Lastly, There is the causall
inference from what was said before, and now Father glorify me; this is a
causall conclusion from the work finished by Christ, and of this because first
in order at this time; And now glorify me, as if he had said, Hitherto I have
been finishing my work, all the while I was doing that I looked for no reward,
I expected no glory, but now all is completed, I pray for and expect the glory
due unto me, From whence observe,

That as Christ, so all the people of God when they have finished their work,
Observe. None may look for glory until they have finished their work.

Consider the Point in reference


and not till then, may look for and desire the glory prepared for them, 2 Timothy
4.8. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Glory; Henceforth he expects, now
his fight is over but not before.

Let us consider this briefly in Christ and then in our selves.

First, Concerning Christ, God had so ordained and appointed, That he should
first be eminent in doing and suffering, and then should have a reward; It
behoved him first to suffer and so to enter into glory, Luke 24.26. I. To
Christ.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things? There was a debt and duty upon
Christ to wear the Crown of thorns before he put on the Crown of glory; To be
debased more then all before he was exalted above all, so that the stipulation
and agreement which the Father made with the Son, contained in it both duty
to be done by Christ, and a reward to be vouchsafed to him; He was to drink of
the brook, and so to lift up his head, Psa. 110.7. This was the order that God
had indispensably commanded, and nothing could hinder it, though all this was
supposing Christ's willingness to undergo the office of a Mediator; for
otherwise though he had become man, yet he might always have kept up the
manifestation of his divine glory, and hence it is that the Scripture says, he
ought to have suffered; There was a necessity from the justice of God which
will punish sin in the offender or in the Surety, and he ought to do it,
because of his own faithfulness and trust, he should not discharge that which
had undertaken unless he became thus obedient.

2. The order that is between Christ's work and reward is far different from
ours, and of another nature, for that is an order of merit and causality, but
ours only of antecedency, Glory the reward of Christ's merit.
and by a promise: Therefore when Christ looks for his glory it is upon far
other grounds then when Paul expects his Crown of glory; for Christ looks for
his glory upon his work, as a cause and a merit, it being fully perfect, and
more then he was bound unto, if absolutely considered, though when once he
became our Surety it behoved him to perform all, so that Christ had his glory
by the Title of justice and desert, though in respect of the personal Union he
had always a right to all glory; But Paul and all the godly have it by mere
grace and favor, for when the Children of God have done all they can, yet such
is their imperfection that they need a pardon, and so their salvation and glory
is of mere grace; Therefore though there be a similitude between Christ's work
and his glory, and ours, yet there is not an equality, The one is of justice
and merit, the other of grace and favor; The more inexcusable then are all
these Popish doctrines that would puff up a man to such a conceit of himself
and Christ together, of his free will and grace together* not Christ and grace
alone, that hence they will plead their Title to heaven, Christ's merits and
their own.

II. Consider the doctrine as true in our selves.
In the next place let us consider this doctrine as true in our selves, for
hereby our security and carelessness, especially our profaneness, shall be
greatly confounded, when we shall know that without our working there cannot be
glory, we must look to labor in the Vineyard before we come to have our wages.

1. God has appointed this order.
And 1. God the Father who appointed such an order for Christ has also decreed
the like for us; Heaven and eternal glory cannot be had without much working
and suffering, Romans 8.17. If we suffer with him we shall also be glorified with
him. Hence are those commands and expressions, Strive to enter in at the strait
gate, Mat. 7. Be in an agony: The violent take the Kingdom of heaven, That the
righteous is scarcely saved, Be not weary in well-doing, because we shall have
a recompense, if we faint not, Gal. 6.9, That implies such labor and
discouragements in the way to heaven, that it is very hard not to faint, not to
be weary, to give over all; As the people of Israel in the wilderness murmured
and wished themselves in Egypt again, because they found it so difficult to get
into Canaan; Hence Heaven is called a rest, Heb. 4.9. There remains a rest,
What does that imply but here in this world we are toiling and troubled and
never have any rest, but in heaven there is rest, that also denotes how sweet
and excellent a place heaven is, and how much we while in this world should
desire it and pray for it: Whereas our desire to be in this world is as if a
man should be willing to lie in a bed full of thorns pricking and ga^ling of
him; Thus has God appointed a Fight before the Crown, labor before our wages,
tempests and storms before the haven, wearisomnesse before a rest.

Therefore in the 2d place Every Christian must up and be doing, that does
expect Salvation; Sluggishnesse and laziness will deprive of this glory; Oh
when such shall see themselves shut out of all happiness and tormented for
ever in those eternal flames, then how will they cry out of their lukewarmnesse
and unprofitablenesse? what a terrible sentence is pronounced upon the
unprofitable Servant? Mat. 25.30. He is to be cast into utter darkness where
there is weeping and gnashing of teeth; If Christ himself must first work and
then look for a reward, let not the Servant think to be above his Master, We
must not think to have heavenly glory, as our Savior says, Mat. 5. The
Lillies of the Field have a greater glory then of Solomon's, yet they spin not,
they labor not; No, but the Scripture cries out aloud to every one, To work
out his Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. Oh then that the
consideration that Christianity is a work, No work no glory, would make us
shake off slothfulness and negligence; Do not think God will provide heaven
for thee as he did a Wife for Adam, in a deep sleep, he thought of nothing, he
took no care about any such thing: They that say, Let us eat and drink for to
morrow we shall die, little think of the way and the work God requires before
happiness: Those that like Dives fare deliciously every day, that live in ease
and security, let them think this Calm will breed a great Storm, as they say,
before Earthquakes, there is a wonderful stillness and calmnesse, So all their
pleasure, ease, and delight is but the forerunner of unspeakable torments and
misery.

3. Hence we see, That good works and an holy active life is not forbidden but
commanded by the Scripture; To preach Christ, or faith, or grace, or the
benefit of the Sacraments so, as that a godly, exact, and diligent walking and
working is excluded, is to preach another Christ, another Gospel then we have
received; Our Savior by those Parables of diverse talents, as also of the
foolish Virgins, and of the unjust steward, Mat. 25. of hiring Laborers into
the Vineyard, did hereby commend the necessity of working, Paul fought a good
fight, and all the godly Worthies commended by him, Heb. 11. had an active
laborious faith, and they are accounted blessed that die in the Lord: Why?
because their works follow them, Rev. 14.13. yea, at the day of judgment that
judicial process will be according to the works we have done, or we have not
done, for omission of duties, though there be no commission of sin, the
sentence of condemnation will be pronounced; so that concerning this duty of
working there have been errors on both sides, sometimes Satan has so
prevailed as to persuade men against working, to fancy a kind of notional
faith that will not purify or cleanse the heart, a painted fire that will not
burn: Sometimes again when he could not prevail that ways, then he has set up
working to overthrow believing to make Christ and his grace ineffectuall, Take
we heed then that we split not our selves at either of these rocks, but conform
our selves to Christ, who was never idle, but like a careful Shepherd went up
and down seeking the lost Sheep; This is the devils great temptation, to tempt
thee not to work, or if thou workest to puff thee up with confidence about it,
and so to make thee ^un in vain: The Popish Doctrines they have so infected men
about works, teaching them to put confidence therein, that it was an infinite
mercy to the Church when the true doctrine about Christ and the grace of the
Gospel be^a^e to be published, and by reason of some expressions there arose up
the Antinomians and others, who cried down working as if that were to bring the
Law in again for justification, but both these miss the mark, both the
Pharisee with confidence in his works, and the Publican without his works, are
excluded this place of glory.

4. There is therefore a necessity for many considerations, The necessity of
continual working^
while we are in our journey to heaven, that we should be working, all which
are good to be laid to heart, that so we may avoid all unprofitablenesse, and
at last to be able to say, and now my work is done, O Father, glorify me.

I. From Gods command.
The first is from the command and will of God, Every Page in the Bible presses
doing Gods will, yea, we are to be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. So that if there were no other motive to
excite us, the command of God might be greatly provoking; He who has a command
and a Sovereignty over all; That commands the very inanimate creatures, and
they obey, how much rather should we yield obedience to his will, and the
rather because whatsoever work he commands as it is good in it self, so it is
good to us; It Is good in it self, When the devil and sin tempt to that which
is evil, thou presently give up thy self, and shall God require that which is
good, and thou refusest it? Besides, It Is good for thee as well as good in it
self; It Is a work thou will never repent of, it will never be matter of grief
to thee, Whereas for all other works of the flesh and the devil, they will
prove thorns in thy side, There will be a horror upon thy Spirit for them,
making thee to cry out, Oh that I had never done this or that; sin is called
dead works, Heb. 6.1. because they argue a man dead, and devoid of spiritual
life, and so they also carry to eternal death, but these works of God they are
living works, partly because they proceed from a life of grace, and partly
because they will live for ever, they will go to the grave with thee, to heaven
with thee, they will never forsake thee.

II. God has made them the necessary way to walk in if we will be saved.
2. It Is our duty to work because God has made them the necessary way to walk
in, if we will be saved; Without holiness no man shall see God; Labor for the
meat that perishes not: Hence if we consider every gracious work of patience,
love, meekness, we shall see blessedness is promised to them, Not that these
justify, only the person justified cannot be without them; They are the media
ordinata, ordained mean, in the use whereof we are to arrive at eternal
happiness; It Is faith only that receives Christ and his righteousness, yet
this faith cannot be separated from an holy walking: It Is the eye only that
sees, yet the eye cannot be separated from the other parts of the body, and
thus the Apostle does immediately oppose Romans 4. believing, working grace, and
works in respect of Justification, yet he does at the same time press the
Children of God to all holiness and the fruits of righteousness.

III. Necessary by way of gratitude.
3. Working is necessary by way of gratitude and thankfulness to God and
Christ, If there were nothing else but this, this might pour coals of fire upon
thee, for how many works of Gods grace have thou been partaker of? If Gods
grace did not work all the day long for thee, thou could not be a moment
preserved out of hell, and as for Christ's working, read the History of his
Life, he was always finishing the work of thy Redemption and Salvation, he had
nothing to do for himself, all was in reference to thee; Oh then how unworthy
will thou show thy self of all that love and kindness which God and Christ
have done for thee; If thou like the Sluggard let the Field of thy Soul grow
full of briars and thorns; Oh how can thy heart be so cold and slothful, When
thou considerest grace is working for thee all the day long, if Christ had no
more zealously and earnestly wrought my peace for me then I do perform his
duties, my soul had perished irrecoverably.

IV. Because we have so long time spent our selves in the way of Satan.
Lastly, Therefore it is necessary we should work Gods work, because we have for
a long time spent our selves in the Service of Satan, and doing the works of
the devil: Oh this should be a perpetual goad in thy side, this should be fire
in thy bosom to consider that there was no hour, no day, no season, but thou
did take the opportunity to satisfy thy lusts; Thou never could have
enough of sin; No thirsty man did more greedily swallow down water then thou
did sin, yea, how active to draw on others, to infect others with the same
plague thou had, I tell you this will lie heavy upon the godly soul, If I
were to live Methusalems age it would not be time enough to do God service for
the dishonor I have put upon him, Thy time is short, and thou have much to do
because thou have undone so much.

In the next place Consider, It Is lawful for the people of God in all they do
for God, to encourage themselves that eternal glory is laid up for them.
That it is lawful for the people of God in all the work they do for God, to
encourage themselves with this, that there is an everlasting glory laid up for
them: Even as Christ had an eye to this glory, so it is lawful for us; Thus
Moses had an eye to the recompense of the reward, Heb. 11. The godly Romans 2.
are said to be such as seek for immortality and glory, Romans 5.2. They rejoice
in hope of the glory of God, and Paul accounted all these sufferings but light
in respect of that eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Indeed Gods glory is
to be sought in the first place, and then our glory; so that it is a shame, if
in all our doings and sufferings for God we are not full of joy, because of
that unspeakable glory apprehended by faith, Faith makes it present as if we
already were partakers of it; So that whatsoever temptations and
discouragements are in the work of the Lord, this glory will abundantly make
amends for it; Are there reproaches and disgrace in the world? All the while
thou did sin and the devils work, thou had the love and good will of the
world, but since thou have betaken thy self to the service of God, thou art the
scoff and reproach of all; O think of the glory God will crown thee with before
all the world; Again, are all the works of God painful, difficult, and contrary
to flesh and blood thou must strive and wrestle much in prayer, be always in a
combat and conflict, Remember this everlasting glory, yea, God therefore does
many times put his Children upon all exercises and sad temptations, which make
them ache at the very heart, and all is to increase their glory the more; Thus
Job, thus Paul, they had extraordinary trials that they might have
extraordinary glory: Furthermore is there self-denial required in Gods work?
Must thou part with thy pleasures, with thy profit, thy delights? still
remember, this glory will make thee no loser, for alas what proportion is there
between these petty things thou leavest, and those everlasting treasures God
has provided for thee.

In the sixth place, That the glory of Gods people may be full, he gives them
time and large opportunities of working for him, and keeps thee in this world,
not for any earthly and outward advancement of thy self, but to serve him in
thy generation, as it is said, David served God in his generation, Act. 13.36.
and God calls Moses his servant; Whatsoever thy relation, thy place, thy
office be, God has appointed thee to work, and therefore he prolongs thy life
till thy work be done; This is a comfortable consideration which all the godly
may take, that death shall not seize on them while they have work to do for
God, and when that is finished then this summons to everlasting glory. As for
Infants this Truth reaches not to them, and if any like the Thief on the
Cross are called at the last hour, and so are not able to work in the
Vineyard, yet even such have an habitual prepared heart for it, if they had the
opportunity; But for others whose days are prolonged they are thus to think
with themselves, I have this day, this week, longer to add to my work God has
for me to do; Take heed of misspent time, take heed of losing days and weeks,
The night is coming when none can work.

Use 1. How much comfort and joy the godly may take at the hour of death; Their
work is done, now they have nothing but the Robes of glory to put on, That
fullness of glory they are immediately to possess should swallow up the fears
of death, and the love of the world; With what joy should they cry out,
Farewell Friends, Wife and Children, welcome God, welcome eternal glory: Alas,
thou have no glory here, Thy body is a vile body, thy soul a sinful soul, the
world is the valley of death, an Hospital of diseased men, and therefore thou
art to rejoice at this approaching glory; Hence it is that the righteous is
said to have hope in his death, to be blessed in his death, for all his old
things pass away, a new place, new company, new happiness, new joy, but yet
here are cautions to the godly dying man that has done his work.

1. Not to put confidence in his works; Sibi isti fidere, non est fidei, sed
perfidia, said Bernard; Oh Lord, All that I have done is an effect and
testimony of thy grace, not a merit of eternal glory; Thou crownest thy gifts
not my merits, if I have been able to work, it was of thy grace, so the more I
have done the more I am obliged to thee, and the reason why there cannot be any
hope or confidence put in the works we do, is from the imperfection and
insufficiency of them; Enter not into judgment with thy Servant, says David,
Psa. 143.2. I would be found not having mine own righteousness, but that by
faith in Christ, says Paul, Phil. 3.

2. Therefore after all his works though it were Martyrdom it self, he is to
look for glory by virtue of Gods promise as a mere gift; Upon this tenure thou
art to plead for it, The gift of God is eternal life, for though we had done
all, yet God might deny us eternal life, Though we had perfectly done all our
duty, yet God might annihilate us and there be at an end; Therefore it is wholly
of his grace to make a promise of eternal life, for by this means though he be
not a debtor to us, yet he is to himself, he is faithful and cannot deny his
own words, and for this reason as it is called a gift, so sometimes a reward,
not as if there were any proportion between our work and this glory, but
because God has appointed this as a sure consequent upon doing what is well;
Therefore Ambrose distinguished well of a reward, there is merces
liberalitatis, as if an whole Kingdom should be given a man for lifting up a
straw, and there it merces debiti, of debt and strict justice, but that cannot
be between the creature and the Creator, much less the creature fallen and
corrupted.

Use 2. Of terror and woe to wicked men, who having done the devils work have
nothing to do but to take the reward of devils; The same hell, the same
torments, that are prepared for the devil and his Angels are for thee; Oh that
the name of death, the thoughts of death should not fill thee with all fear and
amazement, oh that this should not be like a sword at thy heart, whose work am
I doing? whom have I served? and now I am a dying man, whose wages am I to
receive? Oh that thou should not mourn and pray, and get all others to mourn
and pray for thee, if God will deliver thee out of this gall and wormwood,
Blessed are they that die in the Lord, their works follow them; Cursed are they
that die in their sins, for their works shall follow them, though your bodies
are put in the grave, yet your sins cannot be buried there.

SERMON XXIV. Of vain Tautology in Prayer; And what Repetitions in Prayer are
such, and what not; Showing also what things are absolutely necessary to a good
Prayer.
JOH. 17.5. And now O Father glorify thou me with thy own self, with the glory
I had before the world began.
IN these words have been considered the matter of the Petition, described by
the nature and external adjunct thereof, as also the causal inference.

In the matter of the Petition we shall not take notice of the matter it self
because handled before.

But 1. Whereas our Savior within so little a space, does repeat the same
Petition twice, We observe,

That Repetition of the same matter in a Prayer is not always a sinful
Tautology, Doct. That Repetition of the same matter in prayer is not always
sinful Tautology but very necessary. To open the Point consider these things.
but is sometimes lawful, yea, useful and necessary: None can think that our
Savior in whom is the Treasure of Wisdom, and who is the essential Word of
God, who also gives the gifts of prayer to the Church, that he himself should
be straightened either for matter or words, but this ingemination proceeds from
some other excellent ground.

To open this Point Consider,

That the same matter may be repeated either insence only but in different
words, or else in the very same sense and words; When it is done the former way,
we say a man does (...), but not (...) In the latter way, unless there be some
grave and serious cause, it is a vain Tautology, for the former kind of
repetition, the Psalms which are accounted like the Stars in the Scripture
Firmament, are very frequent in it; Many verses being the ingemination of the
same sense, only in some different words, and this we do not so commonly call a
repetition of the same thing, because every new word the holy Ghost has does
represent some new notion to the understanding, so that it is like the same meat
under several dishings, that affords a peculiar taste, or like the Philasophers
matter, which they say is always the same, though under diverse forms; Now our
Savior in this prayer does not only use the same matter but the same words,
Father glorify thou me.

That in our prayers which are a communion with the great God, woe ought to have
a diligent attention to several things s Prayer is not slightly, formally, and
customarily to be hasted over, but being a divine worship of God, If ever a man
would be in an heavenly, holy, fervent and indistracted disposition, it ought
to be when he sets himself to this duty, Prayer is like that curious ointment
to be made by the High Priest, which consisted of many choice ingredients, You
may call most men's prayers no more prayers then an Ape a man, or a picture the
person it represents.

In prayer we must diligently attend to these things.
We must have a diligent attention to the matter that we pray for, That it be
lawful, good, and agreeable to Gods will; To ask of God any thing that is
unlawful and sinful would be to make God a Patron of sins as he in the Poet,
Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri Jupiter; So that this made Aquinas
say, It was hard to know what we are to pray for, because it is hard to know
what to desire; Hence Romans 8. we need the Spirit of God to enable us to know
what we pray for, Some Heathens have been admired for such a prayer as this,
that they entreated the gods to give them, not what they would have, but what
was good for them, whether they desired it or not, but we that are Christians
are not in such darkness, we have the Word of God to direct us, and his Spirit
to incline us; Look then that the matter thou praiest for be such as is
agreeable to Gods holy will.

We are to consider and attend to the order of our matter; That which is
absolutely necessary is to be preferred before what is convenient, only what
relates to Gods glory and our salvation is far to be preferred before any
temporal good thing, as we see by the direction in our Lords Prayer, and by
Christ's command, Seek ye first the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 6.33. It Is disputed
whether temporal mercies may be prayed for or no, it may seem a thing below
the heavenly Spirit of a Christian, but if it be lawful then it is disputed how
far whether absolutely or conditionally only, and it is resolved that because
temporal mercies are not promised by God absolutely, nor are they absolutely
necessary to our salvation; Therefore we may pray only with submission and
subordination, if it be Gods will, and so far as they may be a furtherance to
our spiritual good.

There must be an attention to the words we use in our prayer as well as to the
matter; That they be grave, decent and comely; That there be nothing of vanity,
affectation, or irreverence; Prayer is a worship of God; When Abraham was
admitted to a discourse with God, how greatly did he debase himself, he was but
dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27. and who was he that he should speak to God, Eccl.
5.2. There is a notable advice to look to our words when we have to do with
God, He is in heaven and thou on earth: That is a vast distance and great
disproportion, Therefore let thy words be few: The wiseman does not there
forbid a long prayer, for he himself made a very long one at the Dedication of
the Temple, and repeated this Petition very often, Then hear thou in heaven and
forgive, and heal this people, 1 Kin. 8. But that we should look to our words
that they be not idle, superfluous and vain; a long prayer in this sense may be
said to have few words, when the matter is pithy, and the words pertinent, as
he said of a Book, Non sunt longa, etc. That is not a long Book from which you
cannot well take away any thing, so that the length and shortness of a prayer
lies not so much in the quantity of time as in the matter; a prayer held out
for an hour without any savory matter or comely words is a long prayer: Look we
then to the matter in the first place, and then to words, but if we look
toward more then matter, and make an eloquent oration to God, rather then an
humble supplication, this is ridiculous and sinful.

We are to have our attention upon the object to whom we do pray, and that to
God himself: What preparations and perfumings were there to come into
Abashuerus his presence; If the Majesty of an earthly King strike such terror,
then what ought not the presence of so great a God? so that a diligent
attention to his greatness must greatly elevate and raise up the Spirit, must
unite and strengthen it to one object, how can distraction, and divisions enter
into thy heart when it is applying it self to such infinite greatness?

We are to be attentive to all those concomitant graces, without which Prayer
is like a Bird without wings, or a rusty Key; Zeal and fervency, and faith in
the promise and power of God are necessarily required, for Without faith it is
impossible to please God; Heb. 11. This is the life and soul of all, There must
be also heavenly mindedness, and a hatred of all sin, otherwise we are not fit
to have any communion with God.

We are to attend to the end we have in our Prayer for lawful temporal things,
Jam. 4.7. You ask and have not because you ask amiss; You ask to spend on your
lusts, and this is very difficult, to ask health, life, and strength for no
other end, but thereby to glorify God and promote his Kingdom; Thus briefly
because not principally intended, to declare how great a matter it is to pray.

Vocal prayer or the use of the tongue in prayer is not for information of God,
as if thereby we would discover to him that which he did not know before; Nor
if we use repetition in prayer, is it to move God, Why we must use our tongue
in prayer.
as importunity may a Judge; If it were so then no wonder if we did double and
treble the same thing over and over again, but partly because we consisting of
a soul and body are thereby to glorify God and honor him with both; Hence not
only the heart but the tongue is called upon to glorify God, and that is
called the glory of a man, Though some expound it of the soul, and partly
because the voice and exercise thereof does stir up and move the affections,
there being a reciprocal efficacy one upon another, and a circular causality:
Even as vapors make the clouds which distilling in rain do make vapors again,
so out of the heart come affectionate expressions in prayer, and these again do
increase heat in the heart.

These things premised let us consider, When Repetitions of the same matter in
prayer may be useful.
When Repetitions or ingeminations of the same matter in Prayer may be useful
and necessary, and we shall speak of such a vocal Prayer as is public,
wherein not only the Petitions but the edification of others is greatly to be
respected, for this you must know, and it may serve for a fourth particular to
preface this matter, That in public prayer wherein many join together, he
that prays is not only to attend to all the forementioned particulars, but to
them that are assembled also, to consider what Petitions, what confessions are
fit for them to be stirred up unto, and that is 1 Cor. 14. The reason why the
Apostle so much pleads against prayer among other duties in an unknown
tongue, because it will not edify those that are conjoined with us, and so
some expound that, I will pray in the Spirit, that is for his own particular,
and I will pray in the understanding also, that is in respect of others to
advantage and benefit them, so that in our public, whether as a Minister, as
a Master of a Family, or otherwise; We must consider the persons with us what
they need what things most concern them, and this is a particular way to affect
them, it being here as with a Sermon, the closer it comes to the heart, the
more good it does, so with a prayer the more any Petition closes with another
man's heart, the more it does affect him and enlarge him, and therefore fit
words and fit matter are especially to be attended unto in such public
prayer, where not only supplication but edification is intended.

Let us then consider when the ground of repetition and ingemination is good.

When the matter is so exceeding necessary that our hearts are deeply sensible
of it; As when a burdened soul lies under the guilt of sin, sin is like a
Mountain upon him, it gnaweth and devoureth within, then to beg for pardon over
and over again, the soul cannot but do it; The necessity of it is so great,
that be cannot let it go, as Psa. 51. a Prayer made by David when overwhelmed
in his Spirit by the guilt of sin; How often does he repeat though in
different words a Petition for pardon, That God would have mercy on him; That
he would wash him, purge him, and blot out his sins: This he names twice,
for till he had obtained this pardon, there was no living for him; He could
take no pleasure in houses, friends, yea; in his kingdom and all outward
prosperity, so that the necessity of it makes him again and again repeat his
prayer for it, and thus our Savior when he was upon those agonies and
extremities, he prays, Father, if it be possible let this cup pass away, and
the Text says, he went thrice and said the same words, Mat. 26.44. Here the
necessity of that Prayer he prayed for made him say the same words, for as the
same earth or the same Sun we are not weary of, because of the necessity of it;
Thus neither is it to be accounted a vain tautology when again and again we
pray for that without which we cannot be.

When the matter is excellent then it may be repeated again, because by often
striking the same stroke at last the Instrument enters, sometimes a sudden
transient passage does not touch the heart, and so the excellency of it is not
discerned, but when once or twice it is spoken, then it may affect: It Is a
Rule, Pulchrasunt his dicenda, we cannot see the worth of a Jewel at the first
sight; and hence it is that there are some sentences of choice and excellent
virtue, that our Savior himself would use more then once, Such as that, Many
are called but few are chosen, and some Parables also are twice spoken to by
our Savior, yea, that Psalm which describes the grievous pollution of every
man by nature; The Apostle Romans 3. does repeat at large, it being such an
excellent choice Truth that every one is to be affected with, and till that
foundation be laid there cannot be any esteem or prizing of Christ.

When the affections are very fervent and zealous, then it cannot but they will
express the same thing again: It Is not want of matter but height of affection
and zeal that makes the tongue utter the same thing twice, as Gal. 4.6. it is
said The Spirit of God is sent into our hearts whereby we cry Abba Father; Here
is an Ingemination, we cry Father, Father, and why so? the Spirit of God does
so kindle and inflame the heart, that it is so sweetly and passionately
affected, that as he said pro dulcedine vix labris expedire possit, he is
unwilling to let this honey out of his mouth: As Peter when he was in the
Transfiguration said, It Is good to be here; So the heart of a godly man thus
filialized by the holy Ghost, cannot but utter the same dear relation over and
over; It Is usual with the Hebrews when they would express their earnest
affection and desire to a thing, to double it, and when Esau was in that great
extremity, and desired Jacobs pottage, he cries out, Give me of thy red
pottage, as it is in the Original; The heart that is strongly affected and
zealously drawn out is not contented with once naming of that, which he so much
desires, so that commonly cold and customary prayers have no ingeminations.

Repetition of the same matter may be when he would by faith persuade our heart
of the certainty of the thing we pray for; Thus that crying Abba Father, did
not only argue zeal but assurance and certainty: They were so fully persuaded
that they were bold to speak it again and again, and so also it is a Rule among
the Hebrews, to express the certainty of a thing by the ingemination of it:
Thus dying thou shall die, So when it is said Amen and Amen, that repetition is
to show their affection, that they would have it so, or that it is so, and thus
indeed those Petitions which God sets home with certainty upon the heart they
are again and again mentioned, The Lord will do them yea, he has done them.

There may be a repetition of some Petitions especially in public Prayer,
when the matter does greatly concern us; and so it is such as we ought to be
deeply affected with, for as it is with Preaching, that matter which does
greatly concern the hearer, it is lawful to mention it over and over again, as
the Apostle Peter did think fit to write the very same things which he had
formerly delivered, as also the Apostle Jude in his Epistle did; So it is in
public prayer, such sins as we would have the Congregation sensible of in
their confessions, such duties as we would have them diligently perform, it is
useful in prayer to mention these more then once, for how dull and distracted
are our thoughts, how hard and senseless are they? So that like Moses his
rock, till we be stricken over and over again, water cannot come forth, like
the Shunamites dead child; Till we be often rubbed over there cannot come any
spiritual heat into us; Do not then always look for new matter, but rather
desire thy heart may be affected with that which is old sometimes; It Is a great
sin in all, that they endeavor not to have their hearts affected in public
prayer, in our Congregations, we should all be like so many Jacobs wrestling
with God, We should be like so many Hezekiahs or Jonahs crying out of the
Whales belly, but oh how few when God takes notice does he find that have
spiritual mourning hearts, some sleeping, some roving, some weary and wishing
it over.

But you will say, Quest.
though this indeed prove that sometimes a doubling of the same Petition may be
useful, yet may there not be idle bablings and sinful repetitions in the same
Prayer? May there not be such Tautologies as may be offensive and distastful to
a godly heart?

Yes certainly, And this is expressly forbidden, Mat. 6.7. a notable place, Answ.
Use not vain repetitious, (...); Some derive it from that foolish man the Poet
speaks of, a Shepherd called Battus, sub illis montibus inquit, erant, and
erant sub montibus illis, Others more probably from the Hebrew word baetta,
that signifies to pour out froth, a blatero, and so Hesychius expounds it
(...), empty words of any sense or matter, when there are many words and no
true grave matter; Therefore our Savior calls it (...) much speaking, not that
he condemns long prayers, but to make many words without sense or the
affection of the heart; Hesychius expounds it also (...) unseasonable and
unbeseeming; So that then are Repetitions forbidden by our Savior,

When they arise either from want of judgment to prepare good matter, When
repetitions are forbidden.
or a dry senseless heart; For Prayer is a stream, and if there be not
fullness in these two Fountains that must needs be dried up; If repetitions
then come for want of judgment, they have not a good understanding to digest
and order their matter, this is not a seemly Sacrifice to offer to God; It Is a
strange position of some devout Papists, that this is the best Prayer, When a
man is so ravished that he knows not what he says, So when Repetition comes
for want of an affectionate heart, this is blameworthy, affections make
eloquent and copious, and heavenly affections do wonderfully enlarge the heart
in Prayer; This is the fire that makes the heart boil over, Prayer without the
heart in it, is like the body without the soul,

When repetitions are out of affectation and ostentation, thereby to lengthen
and protract their prayers, this is also vanity; For although there is a
necessity as occasion may serve of long prayers, especially when we intend
solemnly to humble our selves, and we have examples of such in Scripture, yet
out of ostentation to affect length, and thereby to come over with the same
things in a tedious and empty manner; This is not to perform the duty aright.

When Repetitions are so often iterated thereby thinking for the work-sake to
please God: To think God esteems of the length and so much said, rather then
the affections and heart therein; and this seemed to be the Heathens sin, our
Savior said, they thought by their (...) their many words, in that so much was
said, to have a good answer; And thus it is in Popery, The saying of so many
Paternosters, The mumbling over so many Ave-Maries, this is enough to expiate
sin; They regard the number, and when the number is done all is well, and
thus most people amongst us put their confidence in a prayer said, and never at
all consider with what heavenly affections and a spiritual heart they approach
unto God; Thus you have heard when a repetition in prayer is lawful and when
unlawful.

Use of Instruction, That to pray is such a solemn worship of God, that it
requires the whole man, the intellectual part, all our judgment, invention,
and memory is to be employed therein, as also the whole heart, the will and
affections, yea, and body also; and besides this there is also required the
Spirit of God to enlighten the mind, and to sanctify the heart for mere
judgment, and invention, without Gods Spirit enlivening of them, is like a
Sacrifice without fire; Oh then if all these things go together, may we not cry
out, Who is sufficient to pray? It Is a great work to be a Minister, and it is a
great work to be a private Christian, for every one is bound to be much in
Prayer, and yet how many requisites go to this? Oh therefore that we could
awaken three sorts of men by this: 1. The ignorant man that has his prayers
but without any understanding, any affection, and therefore prays while he is
doing other work, or sluggishly in his bed, yea, he knows not whether it be a
prayer or not, only he is told so, and therefore they think the Creed and the
Commandments a Prayer; Miserable blind people, what will become of them! 2.
Superstitious persons, who lay their whole ground of acceptance upon such* and
such prayers, or upon such a number, but as for the spiritual discharge of the
duty that they do not understand. 3. All formal and customary people who dare
not but pray publicly, and sometimes privately, yea, and in Families also, but
no stone is colder then their hearts; Oh what dead empty things are their
duties, with what anger does God look upon them when all is done: They rise up
and say, Now is all well; Oh but God is provoked by such formal lukewarm
duties; You have a better heart and more lively affections, and why then put
you God off with the worst? Does not the Prophet say, He is cursed that has a
Male in his Flock, and yet offers the maimed; Thou have more masculine
affections to other things though they be not seen in Prayer.

SERMON XXV. Of the Promises, and of Prayer.
JOH. 17.5. And now O Father Glorify thou me with the glory I had before the
world was.
WE are treating on the Petition it self, and whereas we see our Savior
praying for that which was appointed and promised before the Petition for it,
we may observe,

That even those things God has promised and decreed to give to his people,
Doct. Things promised must be prayed for.
must yet be accomplished to them praying for it; Gods purposes and promises
require our Supplications; This is the order God has appointed, Ask and ye
shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you, Mat.
7. Thus when God had promised he would do such and such things for his Church
by his Prophet, he adds, Nevertheless he would be sought unto by the House
of Israel for those things, Ezekiel. 33.33.

There is much considerable matter in this Doctrine, and therefore it needs the
more diligent explication:

There have been two contrary errors about Prayer; Some have looked upon it as
necessary and strictly commanded that they thought we might do nothing but
pray; That we were to cast off all other employments and betake our selves to
that duty only; They were called the Euchetae, they were deluded from the
mistaking of these places, Pray always and Pray without ceasing: Others have
run into a contrary extremity, making prayer altogether useless and
unnecessary, and that because all things came about in an inevitable and fatal
manner, as they say, and therefore prayer does no good at all, but the several
commands of this duty, do show the impiety of that opinion; The Socinians
though they grant men did pray in the Old Testament, yet they say there was no
command for it till the Gospel Dispensation; They say, Christ required it as a
new duty, it not being a duty before, but this also is false; For does not the
Old Testament say, Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will hear thee, and
thou shall glorify me, Psa. 50.15. So that to pray is not an indifferent or
arbitrary thing, Neither may it be judged useless but of great power and
prevalency.

It cannot be denied but that if a man should pray with these thoughts, that he
should change Gods mind, and make him alter his will, such a man has false
and sinful thoughts of God; and yet how many are plunged into such falsehoods;
They conceive they have to do with God, as with a man who is mutable, and
therefore by entreaties and importunities we make him change his resolutions,
and do those things he never purposed to do, as we see in the importunate Widow
with the unjust Judge; If therefore thou in thy Prayers to God should go with
these thoughts, as if by thy prayers thou could provoke God to will that at
the present which he did not will before from all Eternity; or that when he had
purposed one thing, by thy prayers he should be persuaded to do another thing;
In this case thou have sinful and dishonorable thoughts of God; Thou think
of him as a man like thy own self, and the ground why such apprehensions are
ungodly and unbeseeming the Majesty of God, is because he is immutable and
unchangeable in his nature: There is no ground of change or alteration in him,
because there is no ignorance in his understanding, he foreknoweth all things,
no mutability in hi^ will, therefore thy prayers though they are necessary and
useful, yet they have no such influence upon God as to change his mind, or to
make him of unwilling, willing.

There are some things so absolutely promised that do not suppose any condition
of Prayer on our parts; As the initiall workings of grace, The beginning^ of
our conversion, especially that promise, Zech. 12, that God will pour on us the
Spirit of prayer and supplication; The fullfilling of this promise cannot be by
way of prayer, for it is a promise to enable us to pray, and so we could not
make it self to be a condition for it self; Indeed we may pray for the Spirit
of prayer, but that is to be understood in regard of a further measure of this
Spirit; As we may exercise Faith in the promise for a further degree of Faith,
we may believe that God thereby may increase our faith, and make it more
strong: Thus the promise of sending Christ into the world, and giving him to be
a Savior to his people, does not suppose our prayer, but rather prayer is a
gift from this; We therefore pray viz. acceptably, because we are united to
Christ, and have his Spirit dwelling in us: Thus God also in the conversion of
his people comes in with his grace upon them, before they desire or seek after
him, at least in a right manner, I was found of those that sought me not, said
Christ, Isa. 65.1. Therefore this is not to be understood universally of every
good thing that God has promsed, but for the most part of those things which
do suppose us already godly, and put into a capacity and spiritual ability of
prayer, Then God will not do for us, till we seek unto him: As the Mother does
not expect the child that cannot yet speak, should ask for such a thing at her
hands.

God has required Prayer as a constant duty to be performed by all,
notwithstanding any purposes or promises made by him; I say as a constant duty
required of all, and therefore that is an unjustifiable position of some, That
it is not lawful, or a duty, for wicked men to pray: But when our Savior
speaks so universally Ask and ye shall have, and Gods wrath is to be poured
upon the Families of the earth, because they call not upon God; It Is plain,
it is their sin, that they do not pray, and although God will not hear the
Prayer of sinners, but it is an abomination to God, yet for all that it is their
duty to pray, not indeed to pray sinfully, not to keep up their sins and their
prayers together, but to empty themselves of their poison, to lay aside their
superfluity of naughtiness, and so to come with pure hearts and pure hands to
God, as David, I will wash my hands in innocence, so will I compass thy Altar,
Psa. 26.6. It Is therefore a duty enjoined all and that indispensably to pray
unto God; Again I say, It Is a constant duty required of all, not as if there
were to be no intermission, but when the time and season does require it, as
they are called constant Sacrifices, which were offered every day, though not
all the day long, and this overthrows that opinion of some who think it no
duty to pray, unless when they feel some motion or impulse of the Spirit of
God upon them, so that if they are a day, a month, a year without this, they
will not pray; This is not according to the Rule: Again it is a constant duty
required of all, Therefore it is a presumptuous conceit of those who apprehend
themselves above Petitions; They will do nothing but sing praises to God, and
give him thanks, as if they were Angels in heaven, but as for Petitions and
Confessions they are so perfect they are above them, Why do not such men refuse
to eat and drink, saying, they have such perfect bodies they need no
sustenance? Does not Christ himself here importunately and fervently put up his
Petitions to the Father?

Though God will not perform the good things he promises without our prayers,
yet our Prayers are not meritorious; They deserve not at Gods hand: Though we
cannot have the promised blessing without Prayer, yet not for our Prayer;
Therefore it is not only arrogant but an irrational doctrine in Popery, to
assert Prayer to be a meritorious work. Does the beggar deserve an alms,
because he asks? Who would not rather say that prayer is a plain profession
of our beggary, emptiness, and utter impotency; Thereby we proclaim that of
our selves, we are not able to procure the least mercy; Therefore when we come
to God, take heed of trusting in Prayer, of idolizing thy duties, It Is a sin we
are prone too, but as they say of clothes, Pride of them is an extreme vanity,
because the very putting them on should put us in mind of our sin that made
nakedness a shame, so our very prayer should make us abhor our selves and
set up God as the only fountain of all hope and comfort, if we could help our
selves why pray we to him?

Therefore it is disputed whether God does require Prayer for the mercies sake.
or give the mercy for Prayers sake; As for example God has promised increase
of grace, sanctification of all afflictions, if we rightly pray to him; Now the
Question is whether he gives this mercy for prayer sake, or not rather because
he will give such a mercy, therefore he enableth us to pray, and certainly this
latter way is the truth, God gives us not the mercy because we pray, but
because he will vouchsafe such a mercy, therefore he quickneth us up to pray;
The mercy is not referred to prayer, but prayer to the mercy.

As long as God keeps up our heart in a praying way so long there is hope of
the accomplishment of the mercy we pray for: Thou preparest the heart and
hear with the ear, says David, Psa. 10.17. Not but that in some temporal
mercies the soul may be kept long in a praying waiting frame, and yet the mercy
it self be never given us, but then it will be with us as with Paul, My grace
is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12. So that still God is good to thee though
thou have not that thou praiest for, if a praying frame of heart be on thee; on
the other side, it is an heavy defection not to be able or willing to pray: I
speak not of a tempted Christian, who prays even while he says he does not,
he cannot pray, but of those who by their sins have made themselves as a barren
Wilderness, and the heavens like brass.

In the next place let us consider why God who has purposed and promised to do
such things, Reasons.
yet requires our prayers for the accomplishment of them.

And the first may be general from the goodness of God who loves to
communicate himself, I. General and common.
and therefore though he could do all things without second causes and means,
yet he is pleased to use them, not from indigence but indulgence; So that as we
see in all natural effects that are produced, God does not those things
immediately himself but has second causes and means whereby they are
completed, So it is here; God in the wonderful things he has predestined
or promised for his people, has appointed means for the performance of them;
Hence as he converts by the Word, so he bestows his mercy upon a praying
people; This reason is common with all other his works in the world, II. More
proper and peculiar Reasons.
but then the more proper and peculiar Reasons for prayer are,

God will be sought to because hereby he is acknowledged the author and
fountain of all the good we have; Did we not pray, were we not commanded to
come to him, it might be doubted whether he was the cause of the good things we
desire, and this is the reason why we may not pray to Angels or Saints, but God
only, because he alone and none else is the Author of all good things, Jam. 1.
From him comes every good and perfect gift, So that if we take prayer away, we
do in effect take God away; He that lives without prayer, lives as if there
were no God, as if all things came by a natural necessity or uncertain chance,
and not from a wise God, so that to pray is to give a solemn Testimony unto the
world, that we believe there is a God who governs in the world, with whom are
the treasures of all good things, and that there is not the least mercy we want
we can have a supply of, but from him; That as the Scripture says he has the
Key of the Heavens, he shuts and no man can open, so he keeps the Key of all
other mercies, No wonder then that though God will give us good things, yet we
must earnestly pray for them, for otherwise God would not be owned, there would
not that glory be given to him as is due.

As God has appointed this for his honor, so likewise for our honor, that we
may be admitted into his presence, and have holy Communion with him; It Is the
greatest honor that we are capable of, that we are allowed at all times to
make our requests known to him, For Prayer is an heavenly commerce with God,
God and man cannot meet together unless they be agreed, how can the consuming
fire and stubble be near one another? Might not God say to all, which he does
to some, What have thou to do to take my words into thy mouth? Psalm. 50. As
Christ rebuked the devils, and would not own their confession of him though it
was true, so might God abhor our Petitions, and account it a dishonor for us
to come near him, yea, and that though we had no sin, because we are but
finite creatures, and so not able to do any thing sutably to his great Majesty:
Oh then let us not look upon a prayer as a burden, as a task, far be it from
us to be haled and pulled to it, when any such listlisnesse and unwillingnesse
is on thee, Oh consider can there be more glory and honor put on me? Did Haman
grudge to come in Ahashuerus his presence, and to the Royal Banquet? Did he
not rather glory of it to his Wife and Friends?

God will have us pray because Prayer is an appointed means by him as well as
Faith and Repentance; Now Gods purposes and promises they must never be opposed
to, or separated from the means, so that as God promises pardon of sin and
salvation, but it is if we repent and believe, so likewise it is, if we
earnestly pray and seek to him, and this is the very reason why Divines say
that though God has absolutely decreed and promised such mercies, yet Prayer
is not useless and unnecessary, because God has decreed and promised prayer
as well as other things, so that it is a profane cavil to say, What need I
pray, I cannot alter Gods purposes what he has purposed, shall be, whether I
pray or no; This is false reasoning; For as God has appointed such mercies, so
also such means whereof Prayer is the chief, without which they cannot be had,
as Austin said, If Steven had not prayed for his Persecutors, the Church had
never had such a glorious Doctor as Paul was.

God has appointed Prayer not only for our honor but also for our spiritual
advantage and profit; By praying fervently the heart is raised up, made more
heavenly, and lifted up even into the third Heavens; If there were no other end
of Prayer but this, it were precious, that hereby the soul is put into a
glorious transfiguration; That as it was with Christ while he was praying, his
countenance was changed, and there was great glory fell upon him; So it might
be with us, did we in a right manner draw nigh to God; as it was with Moses, we
see upon his talking with God his face did shine, and Saul when he came among
the Prophets, the Spirit of Prophecy fell upon him, so when we come into Gods
presence and pray effectually, a divine Spirit, an heavenly frame of heart may
come upon us, we shall go from Prayer ravished with the Church, saying, My
Beloved is the chiefest of ten thousand; It will be like the food that Eliah
had from the Angel, enabling him to go a long journey; How patient in
afflictions, how heavenly in worldly employments: We see those we company with
in the world we love and admire, we are apt to imitate them, and become like
them; By going in the Sun, we get the color of the Sun; By going where
ointment is, we get the sweet smell of it; May we not say the profane, earthly
and carnal life of most men, argue they have not Communion with God, They are
not often in his presence?

God will have us pray because hereby we must testify our desire and high
esteem we have of the mercy prayed for; Do we not say that is little worth
which is not worth asking? Now then should God do all our good things for us,
and we not pray, the desire and esteem of the mercy would not be expressed;
Hence it is that God loves wrestling and fervent prayers, God loves
importunity and an holy violence, as we see by the Parable of the unjust Judge,
yea, the fervent prayer of the righteous, and that only avails much, Jam.
5.16. Now why does God delight in such prayers of agony, only because hereby we
discover our earnest desires, hereby we show our strong affections, and hence
it is that prayer does not draw God to us, but our hearts to God; In our
earnest Petitions we do not bring Gods will to ours but ours to him; Prayer is
a golden chain that reaches from heaven to earth, and although we think to
move God to us, yet we move our selves to him, as the Ship that is fastened
with the Cable, does not bring the haven to it, but it is self to the haven, so
that the change prayer makes is not on God, but on our selves.

Prayer is necessary because hereby. Faith is drawn out in all the choice and
excellent effects of it; Prayer without faith is like the musical Instrument
without an hand to make a sound melodious; It Is like a picture without life,
but of this more in the qualifications of a prayer. The demand then may be,
Quest.
What is that Prayer, and how must it be accomplished, that is a fruitful
Prayer, such a prayer as will bring about what we desire.

And 1. It must be the prayer of a righteous man, such who washes himself from
his sins, for sins they have a tongue, and they cry for vengeance, Answ.
and will quickly cry louder then our prayers; Hence a wicked man's prayer is
said to be an abomination to the Lord, Pro. 28.9. and the blind man could see
and say this, God hears not the prayers of a sinner; There is a twofold
sinner, a sinner wilfully going on in his wickedness, and such God will not
hear, but then there is a sinner praying, mourning and repenting, as the
Publican, who said, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, and such sins God does
hear; Nay, all men are sinners in this respect, and thus God should hear no
prayer at all, if he did not hear such; But for other kind of sins, of which
all places are full, those God does loath and their duties; David has
expressed it fully, If I regard iniquity in my heart God will not hear me, Psa.
66.18. Oh then look to thy self and thy life when thou go to pray; If the
tongue that prays be a cursing, swearing tongue, If the eyes lifted up to
heaven be full of wantonness and adultery, If the hands held out toward
heaven be full of violence, fraud, and injustice, God is of purer eyes then to
behold such,

2. They must be fervent, zealous prayers; The effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much, Jam. 5. He must be righteous, but many a righteous
godly man's prayer may have no success, if it be full of dullness, distractions
and lukewarmnesse; Therefore it must be fervent; We must be Jacobs wrestling
with God, ere we can be Isreal's prevailing with God; Prayer is compared to
Incense, and it is the fruit of Gods Spirit, which is compared to fire, Romans 8.
They are said to be groans unutterable; It Is not then enough to pray, unless
it be fervently and zealously, otherwise they are like a Bird without wings, or
a Messenger without feet.

5. They must be believing prayers; Let him ask in faith nothing doubting; For
he that doubts is to conclude he shall not receive any thing; in spiritual
things that are necessary, our faith is to be absolute, in other things our
fiducial faith is to be guided by our doctrinal faith, so far as those things
make for our good and Gods glory, our faith is to conclude of them. This is the
grace that crowns our prayers, This grace God highly honors, insomuch that
Without faith it is said it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. Now though
presumption be a weed that comes up of it self, yet Faith is a gift of Gods own
planting, and great opposition great difficulty there is to put this forth.

Lastly, It must be persevering and constant Prayer, our Savior spoke that
Parable of the unjust Judge, that we should pray incessantly, not give God over
till we obtain the blessing, not to be discouraged though we meet with many
delays and great discouragements, like that Woman of Canaan, whose Prayers had
an holy kind of impudency and pertinacy in this, to take no denial.

Use of Exhortation To be a people much in prayer, that it may be said of thee
as of Paul, Behold he prays, and of thy house as of Gods Temple, an house of
Prayer; Oh what shall those profane persons and profane Families expect but
Gods dreadful vengeance, who rise and go to bed without such fervent, zealous
prayers? never expect good from that man or Family that is not tender and
constant in this duty, he is like a Tree in the barren Wilderness that cannot
bring forth any fruit, and do not say, I have no time to pray, this and that
business puts it out, Would thou have time to receive mercies from God, and
no time to go by prayer to God? Shall the Sluggard sit still, neither plow, or
sow, or take pains, and yet expect his ground should yield a plentiful crop? oh
what hope would there be that God would bless the Ministry, work conversion by
it, If ye were more diligent in this duty; But how greatly is it neglected by
most, and those that do it, how formal and customary are they, so that it
brings no good at all to the soul. Think of these things more and tremble under
them.

SERMON XXVI. Of Heavenly Glory as opposed to Earthly; And how the hopes
thereof earnestly sought and prayed for will comfort a man against the fear and
in the midst, of all Trials and Afflictions.
JOH. 17.5. And now O Father glorify thou me with thy own self, with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was.
THE next thing in order to be pursued is the nature of that glory which Christ
prayed for; For Christ being near the bitterest part of his Cross, and seeing
nothing but gall for him to drink, he comfort and encourages himself with
that glory which is provided for him, and this makes him so earnest in prayer
for it, where by the way we may see the arrogant presumption of those who hold
they are above Prayer; They will give thanks to God as Angels do, but their
perfection is such that they need not present Petitions in Prayer, what a
Diabolical delusion is this, for Christ himself though he confessed no sin in
Prayer, yet was not above Petitions, as we see in this Chapter, and if it were
granted, which cannot be that they were so pure as to be without sin, yet
they have not as yet glorified bodies, and therefore for that glory in heaven
they ought to pray, but why do we meddle with these who indeed need prayer
most, and that to see themselves deluded, and to be in a far more dangerous
estate, then many other persons.

We come 1. to the description of this glory prayed for from the nature or
inherent property of it; It Is a glory with Gods own self, Glorify me with thy
own self; This as you heard is spoken partly oppositely to humane glory and the
honor of the world, for as Christ despised the shame, and was not troubled at
the reproach he had in the world, so neither was he lifted up with the glory
and honor he had here, and then partly in reference to his work done on earth,
for on earth he did his work, in heaven he expects his reward.

I shall not handle this peculiarly as it relates to Christ, but take in all
the Children of God, for herein Christ and all his members are alike: In the
midst of their afflictions and trials they are to support themselves with hope,
Observe. That all Gods people are earnestly to pray for their glory above all
earthly glory.
and pour forth earnest prayers, for the glory God has prepared for them; So
that the Observation is,

That all the Children of God like Christ himself are earnestly to pray for
their glory with God, above all earthly honor or glory; Christ prayed not with
such imperfections as the godly do, as is in time more largely to be showed,
only both he and the godly agree in the matter prayed for viz. glory in the
general, though Christ's glory is not of the same nature with theirs; This
glory is the center in which the several lines of their desires and prayers are
to meet; This should be the cordial in all their temptations and exercises;
though poor here, though miserable here, though despised here, yet my eye is
fastened upon the glory hereafter, oh that our Auditors were so spiritual as
to be affected with this eternal Crown of glory, for none but the heavenly and
truly godly man can desire to hear of this; The other sort of men had rather
have their barly-corn then this Pearl; Their Garlic then this Manna, Their
husks then this fatted Calf.

But to open this Doctrine, there are three particulars implied in it.

1. The nature of this glory.

2. It Is earnestly to be prayed for.

3. It Is to be the comfort and support of the godly in this valley of tears and
death; Things implied in the doctrine.
Did we not expect glory to come we should look upon our selves as most
miserable.

I. The nature of this glory, viz. with God himself, which implies,
But of the first The nature of this glory, and that is expressed first in the
Text, a glory with Gods own self, and that does imply these particulars.

1. That it is a glory in the hand of God, to dispose and give to him whom he
pleases; You see Christ himself beggeth for this at Gods hand: None can
violently invade this glory or break into those heavenly mansions whether God
will or no, all heavenly glory is with God, who is therefore called the God of
glory, 1. It is in the hands of God.
or glorious; not only because he is glorious in himself, but because he is the
bountiful author and dispenser of all glory, as the Sun is the Fountain of
all light, so then it is not in the power of any earthly Potentate to make men
thus glorious; Though Ahashuerus could make Haman and Mordecai outwardly
glorious, yet for this heavenly glory the greatest powers of the world need it
from God as well as the poorest beggar.

2. God is the object of this glory.
2. It is a glory with God, because he is the object of this glory; In him it is
that we have all our happiness and glory; Even in this life we are forbidden
to glory in riches, in honors and greatness, but let him that glories, glory
in this, that he knows God, 1 Cor. 1.31. and then much more in heaven, it is
our glory that we enjoy God; So that all the happiness, excellency and glory
which is said to be in heaven is reductively in this, that we are made
partakers of God, with God, and in God is only glory, and seeing that glory and
our utmost happiness are all one in this Point, of what great concernment is
it, for every one to consider, what that is in which he places his happiness;
Do thou not think thy self happy, if thou have the good things and the great
things of this world? Art thou not of the Serpents breed and not the woman's
seed, in that thou lickest up the dust of the earth? It is that that all men
miscarry in; They do not consider what that is which if obtained would make a
man happy; Whereas the Scripture is plain and clear informing that it is in
having God for our God; and then not only happy here but happy hereafter.

3. It Is a glory which God likes and approves of.
3. In that this glory is said to be with God, it implies, that it is such
which God approves of, and likes off; It Is not an appearance of glory, but
true real glory; The Hebrew word Canod for glory signifies weight; As the
Apostle distinguishes between Circumcision of the Letter and the Spirit, which
latter he says has its praise of God and not of men, Romans 2. ult. That is,
glorious before God, so the glory in heaven has its praise from God: What will
it avail to affect glory and praise from men, when God will abhor and
dishonor, will despise and curse thee; That which is highly esteemed amongst
men, is abominable before God, Luke 18. Think it not enough to live so, that
thy self and others do applaud thee, no though they be good men, for God
judges the heart, Oh then again and again say, Is this glory such as God
accounts of? Does the Lord say this is happiness that I have? The rich man bid
his soul take his ease, but did God bid him do so also?

4. This phrase does imply the glory that is in heaven, as oppositely to the
work we do on earth; This is that all the Children of God should look after, 4.
Opposite to earthly glory.
a glory in heaven; This made them long for and hasten the coming of Christ,
this made them judge themselves but Pilgrims here, and so to seek out for a
better City; Take we heed then that we be not in the Number of those who mind
earthly things, that judge nothing glorious but what seems in this world full
of greatness and admiration, The state of men living here is a condition of
misery and calamity, which made Job say that man who is born of a woman is born
for sorrow, as the sparks fly upwards, Job 5.7. So that we may say God makes
this life so bitter, that the glory in heaven may be sweeter; Therefore he
keeps us a while in this wilderness, that Canaan may be the more prized.

This is the nature of this glory as implied in that phrase, with thy own self;
More properties of this glory.
but there are other properties of it also, that may raise our expectations
after it. As

It Is an everlasting and eternal glory; There is no dust or ashes in heaven;
There is no mortality or corruptibility, but every thing is then made like God
to abide for ever; The Scripture does often mention this incorruptible Crown
and eternal glory; and certainly were we heavenly and holy, this would greatly
enlarge our hearts, but these two things are wanting that would put us highly
to esteem it, There are few that have a spiritual nature: Few are born of God,
and so seek after such a glorious privilege; What cares a Swine for the
pearl, no more does a natural man for this heavenly glory, he calls for that
which may satisfy his carnal appetite, his lustful heart; Thus they eat and
drink and go down quick to hell. The second thing is faith, and herein the
godly themselves are greatly to be blamed; They do not often in private
Meditation and by faith inflame their hearts with the thoughts of glory: No
wonder if they be so ready to faint and swoon under distresses; They have not
this water of life to drink of, They think, They speak, They are affected, as
if all their hopes were in this life only; Oh what a shame is it that when the
earthly man can day and night comfort himself in his great treasures and
abundance of wealth, that this eternal glory should not raise thee up, There is
nothing will make thee a Christian of an excellent and heroical Spirit, but
faith about this eternal glory; Shall the thoughts of a Crown, or of a great
Inheritance keep up the heart of worldly men, and shall not the thoughts of
eternal glory keep thee from sinking in the waters of affliction?

a full substantial glory; It Is called the weight of glory by the Apostle, 2
Cor. 3. It Is so full that the heart of man cannot speak or conceive about it;
As humane glory is compared to all the empty things that are vapors and
bubbles, and a mere breath, a shadow without any substance: So this glory in
heaven is a massy weighty glory, it has all fullness in it, There is fullness
of holiness, We are made pure and without the least spot, There is fullness of
peace and joy, The Sea is not fuller of waters then their hearts and souls of
eternal comforts; There is fullness of all thy desires and expectations; Here
we have the dropsy disposition, we have and still we ask, yea, we can sit down
and fancy golden Mountains; Oh what complete conditions and happiness may men
in their thoughts make to themselves, and their thoughts are wide, but the
matter is nothing at all, but here this glory is above our thoughts, above our
desires, above our wishes, we cannot desire better then what we have.

The second part implied in the Doctrine, is, That this glory is to be
earnestly prayed for by the Children of God.

And the grounds of this are.

II. The second part of the Point is, that this glory is to be earnestly prayed
for, For
First, Because as you heard God will not vouchsafe this mercy but to a praying
people, Romans 2. To those that seek for immortality and honor; Hence this is
directed to in that Petition, Thy Kingdom come, and certainly if Christ himself
who was thus unquestionably assured of this glory, and had merited it at Gods
hands, does yet pray for it, how much more ought we to have it solely of mere
grace; Some have put it as a doubt whether it be not a mercenary disposition
too unworthy the child of God, 1. Without seeking God will not bestow it.
to pray for glory; Yea, it is disputed by Papists against Protestants, that
it is lawful in all our godly actions to have an eye to this reward of glory,
but they fight with a shadow; The Protestants do acknowledge it not only
lawful but a duty to seek after and pray for this crown of glory, only we say,
The love to Gods glory should be preferred before ours; We are to desire his
glory principally, and our salvation as subordinate; Oh then let the profane
and wicked men of the world tremble at their death, when their night
approaches, for how can thou look for glory who never did pray for it? how
can thou think to be partaker of it who wast never much in seeking after it?

2. Thereby our desires after it will be more enflamed.
2. We are to pray for it because hereby our desires and esteem of it will be
more kindled and enflamed; Prayer is nothing but the desire of the soul
expressed by a strong inclination of heart; Hence it is, That where there are
cold desires; there are cold prayers, where there are importunate desires,
there are importunate prayers, and for this reason it is that even natural men
can put up hearty prayers to God for earthly mercies, as they are their
desires, because of the sutablenesse therein, but as for spiritual mercies
they are like dead men in the grave, not at all affected, so then by earnest
prayer for this eternal glory we demonstrate our heavenly desires of it, and
also our desires are thereby more quickened and enlarged after it; Oh what a
shame is it that we should pray for health of body, freedom from pain, pardon
of sin and increase of grace, and not pray for this which contains it all,
for everlasting glory is all mercy.

3.
3. By earnest praying for it our hope of it is much strengthened and confirmed;
Now a divine hope of this glory is rhat which makes us bear all afflictions,
endure all chastisements; This is the Oil to keep our Lamps up, It Is the anchor
to the Ship, It Is that only which keeps the heart from breaking: The Scripture
calls it the lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. all worldly hopes are dead and fading, but
this hope is in the power and promise of God; Now there is no way to blow up
these sparks of hope into a flame so much as by prayer, for prayer if rightly
discharged being a prayer of faith, it must needs beget a lively hope; Oh then
that we had this hope of eternal glory reigning in us more; Thou have carnal
hope, worldly hope, all the day long is spent in hoping after some earthly
comfort or other, but this divine hope is a stranger to thee.

III. The third part of the doctrine That this glory prayed for will be a
cordial against all affliction. Because
In the third place let us consider how this glory earnestly prayed for will be
a cordial against all temptations, will be a reviving to the dry bones in all
afflictions, yea, our whole life in all the changes of it is to be maintained
and supported by this hope of glory: It Is as necessary the Meditation of this
is, as the very air we live in, as we cannot breath without it, so neither can
we live without this hope, so that the things we hope for in heaven should be
the bread we feed on, the treasure we enrich our selves by, And

1. Because this glory with God is an universal medicine to all our diseases;
It Is a full treasury for all our wants; 1. It Is an universal Medicine.
The Pool of Bethesda was only for one kind of mercy, he that being diseased
stepped in, was healed of his bodily infirmity, but it did not cure all other
grievances, it did not make a poor man rich, nor a grieved man cheerful, or a
mortal man immortal, but eternal glory does all things, Thou art a Lazarus in
soul and body, all over full of sores; Thou want all soul-mercies, and all
body-mercies, here is glory that will do all for thee, This is the Ocean, other
are but shelves; This is the Sun, other are but Stars; In praying for glory
thou praiest for all things together in one, this one word glory has every
thing in it, to say Lord glorify me there is all things comprehended in it.

2. This is the most suitable mercy to a gracious and spiritual heart; To be
glorified is to be put out of a state of sin into pure and perfect holiness,
2. It Is the most suitable mercy to a gracioas heart.
It Is from seeing God in a glass and obscurely to see him face to face; Oh
then how enamoured and ravished is the soul with the enjoying of this, if the
glimpse of this glory, If the branches of this Canaan be so goodly, what is
Canaan it self? If the Church prayed so earnestly, Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1. What then would the total and full enjoyment of
God be, never to be divided or separated more? Glory is not only the advantage
and welfare of a godly man, the preservation of him from hell and misery, or
giving him happiness, but it is the ordering of him with all graces more
glorious then the Sun; Hence the godly are compared to the Sun and Stars
in the Firmament, for the great luster God puts on them.

3. 3. Because of the insufficiency of all other things to satisfy the heart.
This must needs be a great support because of the emptiness and insufficiency
in all these things here below, to fill and satiate the heart. The eye is not
satisfied with seeing, or the heart with wishing in this world; but in the
world to come, there the faculties of the soul and all the parts of the body
are fully replenished, There is no want, no desire, no wish for more then they
have; It Is no wonder if Solomon who took all ways possible to satisfy his
mind and to find out happiness in this life, yet instead of happiness found
nothing but briars, and therefore wrote upon all, Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity; For it cannot be otherwise, Can an hungry man fill his belly with empty
air? Can a cold man warm himself at a painted fire? Could these birds fill
themselves that fled to Zeuxes painted grapes, taking them for true ones, no
more can any thing in this world satisfy man; No, it is only in the world to
come that can fill up every corner of the soul.

Lastly, Glory with God must needs be the only support, 4. Because the way to
heaven is full of briars and thorns.
because the way to heaven is full of briars and thorns; Great are the
afflictions and tribulations which abide all that go in this way to glory; Were
it not then that the heart is full of hopes in this matter, it would soon be
discouraged, it would presently give over, saying, Why should I deny such
pleasures and comforts as others take; Do I not wrong my self? Am I not a
defrauder of my own comforts? No; says this hope of eternal glory, hold thy
tongue from all grudgings and repinings; There is glory coming will make amends
for all, Heaven in reversion is better then all the world in actual possession,
know then if at any time thy soul be dejected or cast down within thee, if at
any time thou art impatient and discontented; It Is because this hope of glory
does not fill the heart

In the last place this is far to be desired above all humane glory, 5. It
exceeds all earthly glory.
and that although it be the Idol adored by the world, if we consider how most
men refer all their actions to this; We may presently judge that description
of man to be true; That he is animal gloriae vanissimum, all those actions the
Heathens did were dedicated to honor; Even as the Romans consecrated a Temple
to it, yea, which is the highest degree of vanity, men have made all their
Religious actions to serve this Goddess; The Pharisees in all their alms,
fastings and prayers did all to be seen of men, as our Savior who knew their
hearts condemned them, Mat. 6.2. It went so far with some that they placed the
chiefest happiness of a man to be in honor, and how prone this is to keep in
the hearts even of godly men, appears in the often prohibitions of it in the
Scripture, and our Saviors advice about private Prayer and alms; This is the
Pirate that many times surpriseth the Ship which is come richly laden to the
very haven, it depriveth us of our duties, and the benefit by them; Well, as
glorious as it is, yet it is no more comparable to this eternal glory, then a
straw to a Pearl; 1. Earthly glory is but a puff.
For 1. It Is but the puff and breath of men whose breath is in their nostrils;
There is no solidity in it, it brings no true solid joy and peace to the
conscience: What if men applaud thee abroad, and thy conscience condemns thee
at home; No doubt but the Pharisees humored and flattered Judas to betray his
Master, but what could that help him when he roared out, I have sinned in
betraying the innocent blood, Gal. 5. Let every man prove his own work, so
shall he have rejoicing in himself, and not in another, That is terrible of
Austin, Many are praised of men who lie tormented in hell.

2. It will not avail us at death
2. All humane glory will not avail us if at our death God finds us in our
sins; To be praised by men and reproached by God, to be blessed by men and
cursed by God, this will be little case; Oh that men would look to this who
look only to have the good words of men; Alas can man save thee, can man
deliver thee from those eternal flames, Gal. 1. If I should please men I should
not be a Servant of Christ: What an unworthy thing is this to pray, to profess
Religion for vainglory and not for glory with God: Our Savior speaks it as a
great curse to have a man's ends satisfied in that way, Verily I say unto you
they have their reward.

Use,
Use of Exhortation so to live and so to walk, as that you may be prepared for
this eternal glory: Oh what a glory will it be when God at the day of judgment
shall say, Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you:
When God and Angels shall put honor upon you, why should not the faith of
these things raise up your spirits, why should it no more affect you? and that
you may obtain this take heed of what will totally deprive you of it, or else
greatly weaken your thoughts and hopes about it: That which totally depriveth
is a constant wilful continuance in gross sins, Be not deceived, neither
whoremonger or drunkards, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9.
and without the heavenly Jerusalem are said to be dogs, Rev. 22.15. The
Scripture calls all wicked men such who lick up the vomit of their sin; Oh then
the hopeless and damnable condition of most people. Does not the Land in every
place mourn for the whoredoms, and drunkenness, and oaths that are every
where? if God say, the Lord shall spue out such Inhabitants, God thinks the
earth too good for them, will he bestow heaven on them?

And then 2. The godly who have a right and interest to this glory, they weaken
their hopes and entreat their fears, when they walk negligently, when they are
earthly or dejected through diffidence, you might have this glory here on
earth, and be in heaven before you are in heaven, were you not wanting to your
selves.

SERMON XXVII. The Eternal Deity of Christ proved; And whence it comes to
pass that there are any so vile as to deny it; Showed also what sins do
much provoke God to give them up to such Blasphemy.
JOH. 17.5. And now O Father glorify thou me with thy own self, with the glory
I had before the world began.
WE are now arrived to the last clause in this Verse, which contains a second
description of the glory Christ prayed for, viz. From the external efficiency
of it, it was a glory provided for him before the world was. So that in this
description there are two Propositions.

1. That the world had a beginning; It was not as Aristotle and other
Philosophers thought ab aeterno: This is to be handled in its time.

The other Proposition is,

That Christ had the glory he prayed for with the Father before the world was.
Observe. That Christ had the glory he prayed for with the Father before the
world was.
Of this at this time.

In the Greek it is (...), not in a Grammatical construction, for it is (...),
that glory which I had; as also there is a trajection of (...), before the
world was, (...), So in the Original; But our Translators do well interpose it,
where the sense is to be made up; Now as was hinted the great doubt is, In what
sense Christ is said to have this glory with the Father before the world was:
The Arians and Socinians who deny the eternal Deity of Christ, do most readily
interpret it of Gods decree, and his inward purpose of mind, as if the meaning
were, that the Father would glorify him with that glory which God the Father
had decreed for him before the world was, and it cannot be denied but that
sometimes a thing is said to be before the world was, because it was in Gods
purpose: Thus Rev. 7. Christ is said to be a Lamb slain from the beginning of
the world, So 2 Timothy 1.9. The grace of God is said to be given us in Jesus
Christ before the world began, that is, in respect of decree, Thus some expound
that phrase so often used in this Chapter ( Those thou have given me) viz. in
his decree. Hence it is that some Divines though Orthodox and fully believing
the eternal Deity of Christ, do make this the sense of it, and indeed when we
have other places that do fully assert a divine doctrine, we need not be
vehement to force every Text to speak it also; Because Calvin did not approve
of every Text that was usually brought to prove the Trinity, though he
vindicated those that were clear and pregnant against the Anti-Trinitarians,
Hunnius a Lutheran wrote a Book calling i^ Calvinus Judaizans, as if he turned
Jew; Whereas indeed none do more wrong divine Truth then those that will heap
Texts of Scripture, which yet do not fully prove the thing questioned, and
truly why we must in part at least explain this of Gods purpose and decree,
this is a strong reason, because Christ here prays for his Mediatory glory,
which was given him by God upon the performance of his Mediatorship, viz. to be
exalted above all Principalities as head of his Church; Now this Mediatory
glory he had not with God before the world was, unless in Gods purpose, so
that I say this must needs be part of the sense: But in the second place Christ
does not only pray for his Mediatory glory but his divine glory in respect of
the manifestation of it, viz. that now it might be discovered to all the world,
that he was not only man but God also, eternal, blessed for evermore, and in
this sense the Text does strongly maintain the Eternal Deity of Christ, for he
prays for the manifestation of that divine and essential glory he had with
the Father before the world was; Insomuch that Christ being in the Text said to
have this before the world was, it does suppose a subsistence of his divine
nature, for although the Scripture says, the godly are Elected before the
foundation of the world, yet it never says, they had this before the world
was, for that would suppose them to be existent in nature, So that if the Text
had said no more then Glorify me with the glory prepared for me before the
world was, as it speaks of the godly, then it would not have proved strongly
against those heretics; But when he says, Which I had with thee, This does
necessarily suppose such a thing as cannot be communicated to a mere creature;
None but one eternal can say so. So that both these Expositions may go on as
parts to make the complete sense of the Text, and this remain a thunderbolt
against the Arians; Take we then the first particular as it supposes the
Eternity of Christ, That Christ had a being before he was born of the Virgin
Mary, even a divine being as a God: No creature can say as Christ here* They
have such a glory with God before the world was, for it would be a
contradiction to any creature to say so, for it would imply him to have a being
before he has a being: Hence the godly though they are said to be elected and
predestined from Eternity, yet that does not suppose them to be abaeterno,
because Predestinatio ect actio immanens, and nihil ponit in esse; It Is a mere
immanent action in God, and puts no real thing in the creature: Now that
Christ had an Eternal being is plain; Besides those Texts of Scripture, 1 Cor.
10. where the Israelites in the Wilderness are said to tempt Christ, and Heb.
11. Moses in his days accounted the reproach of Christ above the Treasures of
Egypt: And 1 Pet. 1.11. The Spirit of God is said to be in the Prophets of old:
Which places could not be true if Christ had not then a subsistency, which was
long before his birth of the Virgin Mary: Besides this I say it is plain,

Because by him all things were created, Joh. 1. In the beginning was the Word,
That Christ had an eternal being.
and the Word was with God, and was God; By him all things were created, and
without him nothing was made that was made; Observe, whatsoever was made was
made by him so that if Christ were not the Eternal God he should make himself,
for says the Text Without him was made nothing that was made: The same thing
is affirmed also, Col. 2. That all things in heaven or earth, visible and
invisible were made by him, So that he who was before all things made them and
gave them a being, must needs be Eternal, but thus it is plain by Scripture
Christ was.

It Is plain he was from all Eternity in that he is truly God, and so has all
the essential attributes of God, whereof eternity and immutability are very
choice ones; That Christ is God is not now my Subject, in time we may show the
proper and incommunicable Name of Jehovah is given to him, and that directly
which is not in all the Scripture attributed directly to any creature, Angel or
man, All the divine attributes of God, All the peculiar and proper operations
of God, which only God can do, are given to him, and therefore in being God he
must needs be from Eternity, and for Christ's Immutability you have a full
place, Heb. 13.18. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever;
By yesterday according to the Scriptures use is meant all time past, so that
although the Officers in the Church die, and there are such in one age that are
not in another, yet here Christ the head he abides for ever; This is spoken by
way of consolation, and certainly Christ's Eternity is a foundation of
unspeakable joy to the people of God.

There are plain Texts of Scripture which inform us of the eternal being of
Christ, as Joh. 8.55. Before Abraham was I am; What man could say so, I do not
say, Before Abraham was, I was, for so every Angel might say, but I am, to
signify there is no succession or difference of time in his being as he was
God, It Is an allusion to that name God takes to himself when he bid Moses say,
I AM has sent thee, Exo. 3.14. and this is the more fully confirmed, Rev. 1.7.
where Christ is said to be Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, who is,
and was, and is to come; That very attribute which v. 3. is given to God the
Father, is here given to God the Son, called also omnipotent, who would think
any should be so wilfully blind as not to see light out of this Text.

Consider in that Christ was thus God from all Eternity, when he became man, he
did not cease to be God, for although the Scripture says, Phi. 2. That he
humbled himself, and emptied himself, yet it does not say he ceased to be God,
even in the midst of all his Infirmities, and therefore Christ's blood is called
the blood of God, Act. 25. not that he suffered in his divine nature, but that
he who suffered in his humane nature was also God, and it is no wonder he did
not cease to be God, for it is impossible that God should cease to be God, all
creatures if they are not corruptible, yet they are annihilable, if they have
no principle of dissolution, yet they have stronger power without, that is able
to turn them into nothing: Therefore God alone is said to have Immortality, 1 Timothy 6.15. So then he does not pray for glory, as if he had lost it, but only
the outward manifestation of it was suppressed for a time, and therefore it is
that he now prays the Cloud may be withdrawn, that so the Sun may appear in
its full glory.

In that Christ had an eternal being it is plain that even before his
Incarntion, he did many things tending to the Reconciliation of his people;
It Is true indeed he is a Mediator in respect of both his Natures, and it is
clear he could not make propitiation for our sins by his blood, till he was
made man, he could not be as a Priest to his Church, but then even before his
Incarnation, he might be as a Prophet and a King to his people; As a Prophet
revealing Gods will, and inspiring the Prophets of the Old Testament, yea, It Is
maintained by the learned that he was the Angel, that guided the Church of
Israel, and therefore the people in the Wilderness are said to tempt Christ,
as was said; So as a King (though not incarnated) he might govern spiritually.

Because this is not the intended Subject I come to what Uses may be made of
it. Is Christ thus of an Eternal being, Use.
then Woe be to those Doctrines and heretics that endeavor to spoil him of
it; That deny it to him making him but a creature only of an higher rank, What
creature can take the proper Name of God to him? What creature can create the
world? What creature can be called God blessed for evermore as he is? Romans 9.5.
What creature can say he is, and was, and was to come? Rev. 1.7. If so be that
opposing the members of Christ be so great a sin, that Paul from heaven is
reproved for it, and it is called kicking against the pricks, Men do not hurt
Gods Children but themselves; how much greater is it immediately to oppose
Christ himself, Jews and Heathens, and several heretics have risen up against
him, and said there was a time when he was not, but yet still he is God in
heaven, and the faith of Christians is firmly fixed on this; No wonder if as
the devil of old, so of late he would destroy this Article, for if this be
denied, what is Christianity but a mere humane Religion, we worship a man, We
believe in a man, Take this away, and all satisfaction for sin, all
reconciliation by his blood is removed, Take this away and the devils Kingdom
will be promoted by Christianity as well as by Paganism; For here will be (...)
the honor due unto God will be taken from him and given to a creature: And
indeed in the Infancy of the Church it was no wonder if this darkness spread
it self; But in these latter times after so much light of the Gospel, that any
should let such poisonous Snakes as these lodge in their breasts, may make us
cry out, O the depth of man's presumption and Gods severity!

Quest. Whence is it that any deny Christ to be the eternal God.
But you may say how can it come about that any under the Gospel light should
deny Christ to be the Eternal God? truly it may arise several ways.

1. When men will bring down matters of Faith to humane Reason, They will be no
longer believers but Rationalists, Their Maxim in Religion is not God has
said so, but this we can demonstrate: Now it is true indeed there is nothing in
Religion contrary to sound and rectified reason, Answ.
for truth cannot be contrary to truth, but yet there are many things above our
reason, Though we have sufficient testimony by faith to believe such things,
yet not capacity of reason to comprehend them, insomuch that the Scripture is
said to bring into captivity the understanding of man, 2 Cor. 10.5. and it is
called the obedience of faith, Romans 16.26. and therefore for a man to come to
the things of Religion with the same disposition as to humane Sciences, hoping
by his natural abilities to dive to the bottom of them, is to think to hold
the Sea in an Oistershell, or to put the Sun under a Bushel; Why are they
called Mysteries, and said to be revealed by God If Reason could find them
out? Therefore lay aside all those cavils and arguments of reason where
Scripture asserts these things.

2. Many come to maintain such horrid and blasphemous things by the just
judgment of God upon them for their sins they are guilty of; For as Romans 1. we
see God as a just Judge delivering up men partly to vile affections, to
Idolatry, to change the Image of God into the likeness of an Ox; How should
men become thus brutish to worship that as a God which they themselves made;
That they should have no more understanding; The Lord gave them up, and as it
was with the Jews, though our Savior did all those wonderful miracles amongst
them, yet they did not see with their eyes, or understand with their hearts;
Why? The Lord had put this Veil upon their eyes, and thus the Apostle plainly
says, 2 These 2.11. God shall send them strong delusions to believe a lie, a
woeful curse, when God sends this abroad, when men shall be so strongly
deluded, that that which is a very notorious lie and falsehood, What sins do
chiefly provoke God to give men up to strong delusions.
yet they shall believe it, so that you are to walk with all fear and trembling
lest God deliver you up to such strong delusions, and these sins do much
provoke God.

1. Pride and self-conceit, this undid the devil at first, and this draws
many into the like condemnation, The humble and the meek he will teach his way;
Psa. 25. 1. Pride.
See you a man proud, conceited, never look for good from him, he is not a fit
Scholar for Christ; It Is pride that lifts up so many to such high Pinacles of
dangerous opinions, from which they fall headlong, God resists the proud, and
gives grace to the humble man, Jam. 4.6. He resists the proud by not giving
grace to him; The proud man has no grace to fear and tremble lest he be
carried away with the errors of the wicked, he thinks not, O Lord, Am not I
swallowing down poison now? Will not this infect me for ever.

2. Unfruitfulness under the Gospel, 2. Unfruitfulness
Oh when men live wantonly under the Light, They love not the Truths of God,
They do not conform to the practical power of them, this seduceth likewise; The
Apostle in that mentioned place instanceth in this as the cause of that strong
delusion; Oh wonder not if the Spirit of giddiness and error fall upon many,
for they never had any true love to the Word of God; They never had any saving
delight in the ways of God, so far as they could carnally advantage themselves
by the knowledge of Christ, have esteem and applause, so long as they could be
fed with loaves, they followed Christ.

3, A neglect of the godly and learned Ministry which God has appointed, 3
Neglect of the godly learn^d Ministry.
he runs into the Whales belly of all errors, that runs from the
Ministry God appoints, and dislikes that; The Scripture is plain, Ephesians 4. He
has set Pastors and Teachers in his Church; Why? That henceforth we should not
be carried with diverse errors; Therefore they are called guides and salt, and
Heb. 13. twice in one Chapter they are commanded to obey them that rule over
them: This is so plain Scripture that it is wonder men dare go against it, but
yet it is no wonder, for some deny the Scripture, they say, How can you prove
Scripture? Thus do men wilfully run from the light into darkness, from denying
one truth and another, till at last they deny Christ and the Scripture.

Use 2. Has Christ thus an eternal being, Use 2.
then here we see his immutable and unchangeable affections to those that are
his: He is not as man subject to changes and alterations, loving and then
casting off again; As God is immutable so also is Christ, and therefore though
the people of God be subject to many changes and variable affections, yet they
are to comfort themselves in Christ, who is yesterday, and to day, and the same
for ever; Though thou art not the same, yet Christ is the same; Thou art
sometimes believing, sometimes again cast down, sometimes thou enjoyest Christ,
and sometimes thou losest him, and know not where to find him; O but Christ
is always in the same love, in the same care over thee, and this should
provoke thee at last to get to the same disposition, To be like Christ
whatsoever changes, conditions, or alterations go over thy head, still to be
the same, as the rock in the Sea, the Sun in the heavens.

3. Is Christ Eternal? then in the midst of all changes and alterarions here is
ground of faith: Though Instruments die, though Ministers die, Use 3.
though all supports of thy spiritual comfort fail, yet Christ abides ever;
Thus Christ promised his disciples, he would be with them to the end of the
world, Mat. 28. How apt are we to think that the death of such Magistrates or
such Ministers will wholly ruin the Church of God, not considering that the
Church has an eternal head: The people of God have always preferred the
welfare of the Church above their own particular; Thus David preferred
Jerusalem above all his joy, Psa. 137.6. and the remembrancers of the Lord are
to give him no rest till he has made Jerusalem a praise upon the earth, Isa.
62.7. As Nehemiah was afflicted, though he had all personal honor and
advantages while Jerusalem lay waste; The affairs of the Church have always
affected upon the most eminent in godliness: When godly learned men have died,
they have cried as he did to the Prophet, The horsemen and charets of Israel,
but this should support under all, Christ is eternal; Though the Ship of Christ
seem to be overwhelmed, yet because Christ is in it, it cannot suffer
shipwreck; Though outward violence should increase, Though heresies and errors
overflow, yet Christ is where he was, he is the same, he lives, and so the
Church cannot lose her Pilot: In what sad exigences were the disciples cast
when Christ spoke of bodily leaving them, but as for his spiritual presence, he
will never forsake them, and this is the reason why the Church of God has been
preserved though the whole world has combined against it, had they not had
this eternal head in heaven, it could not have been supported: Hence he is
called Isa. 9. the eternal Father, because he always has a spiritual seed.

Use 4.
Use 4. Is Christ thus an Eternal God? then let those wicked men that despise
his Law, and disobey his Commandments, tremble and be afraid; All those Jews
and Pharisees that refused him to be their Savior, and all wicked men who do
so in their lives, they will find they had to do with an eternal God, Psa. 2.
It Is said, he will break the Nations with a rod of Iron, as easily as men do an
earthen vessel: You apprehend nothing but meekness and mercy in him, but
though a Lamb, yet the ungodly are brought in crying to the Mountains to cover
them from the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6.16. Though he be thus a glorious God,
yet there are men that despise his Word, that crample under their feet his
blood, that will not have Christ reign over them, that say, Let us break his
bonds, O such shall know to their terror, that Christ is an eternal God.

Use 5.
Lastly, Here is a Use of Exhortation, Is Christ thus Eternal? then get him for
thy self, for thy children, for thy self because he will bring thee to an
Eternity; Thy body shall be eternal, thy life he will make an eternal life;
Can thou say of an earthly comfort or help, that it is like an eternal God?
Again, for thy Children, thou many times think what will become of them when
thou art dead in the grave, Thou think thou have no friend in the world will
be a Father to them, still remember that Christ is Eternal, if they be his
spiritual seed, he will be an Eternal Father; Oh that expression is full of
comfort, when you can say to your Children, You have a mortal Father, and a
mortal mother, but there is an eternal Father, bring them up for Christ, give
them up to Christ, then have you provided well for them if Christ be for them.

SERMON XXVIII. Proves, That the world was not from Eternity, but had its
beginning in time; And reduces that Consideration into Practice.
JOH. 17.5. Glorify me with the glory I had before the world began.
WE come to the last particular observable in the Text, Before the world began.

Here is briefly laid down that position which the great and wise Philosophers
of the world did boldly gainsay, for it tells us, This great Universe had a
beginning, The world was not from Eternity; This Truth will tend much to
particular Edification, for I shall not handle it in a mere speculative and
metaphysicall way, as some Philosophers do, while they debate this Point.

Obs. That the world was not from Eternity, but had its beginning in time; The
Sun and Stars though such glorious creatures, yet began to be in time, yea,
Observe. That the world was not from Eternity.
those glorious Angels, which have no principle of corruption within them, they
were also made in time, although it was the general opinion of most of the
Ancients, that the Angels were made long before this visible and corporeal
world, but that is not so consonant to Scripture.

For the proof of this Point we might allege the first Chapter of Genesis,
Proved from Scripture.
where there is not only a relation of the worlds Creation, but an exact
description of the manner how, and also all the effects of this Creation, so
that that Chapter has more divinity and philosophy in it then all the books of
the wisest Heathens put together, and indeed whatsoever the Heathens have of
Antiquity they have it from Moses, though they have added thereunto many
foolish Fables; I shall add one pregnant Text to confirm this, Heb. 11.3.
where the Apostle intending to commend faith in all the several effects of it,
begins with this as the foundation, By faith we understand the worlds were
made; There is much spoken by the Apostle in few words, 1. He says, By faith
we understand the world was made, for howsoever some Philosophers held the
world was not from Eternity, yet those that did hold it was made, did grossly
and foolishly mistake about the manner of it, and though by true Philosophy we
may prove the world could not be from Eternity, yet the Word of God affirming
this is the best Argument; Therefore faith is better then all reason and
philosophy in this matter: Again he says, By faith we understand, (...), so
that you see Faith has knowledge in it, and is not as the Papists would have
it to be defined by Ignorance, He that believes knows, Therefore ignorant
people have no faith because no knowledge* Hence it is (...) faith and
knowledge are so often put for one another. 3. He says, We understand the
worlds, (...) in the plural number; Not that there are many worlds, but it is
usual in Scripture to describe the world in the plural number, because of the
many ages and revolutions that are in the world, one generation passing and
another succeeding: 4. He says were framed, This denotes the excellent
wisdom of God ordering all things therein, called therefore (...) mundus. 5.
The manner how, not as Artificers make a house by handy labor but by the Word
of his mouth only. And lastly, here is the matter of which, of things that did
not appear, that is either of nothing, or else it is an allusion to Genesis 1.2.
where the earth is said to be without form and void, darkness covered it;
Thus, here is a noble description of the Original of the world.

This being fully confirmed let us open the Doctrine. And

1. Consider, That the Christian faith does only clearly and fully inform us of
the beginning of the world; It Is an expression the Scripture has often, Before
the foundations of the earth were laid; As for those Philosophers called
Peripateticks, whose Master was Aristotle, they generally affirmed the world
was from Eternity, indeed it is doubted what Aristotle's mind was, but it is
plain in his Topics, he makes this Proposition, whether the world be eternal,
only a dialecticall Problem, a Proposition that might be disputed either way,
as having no certainty in it, and indeed how can it be otherwise, for that is a
received Maxim with them, Ex nihilo nihil fit; This is the foundation of all
their Philosophy, and therefore grant this, then the world could not be made,
but how ignorant were the great and learned men in the world of Gods power,
that which the least babe almost in Christianity does know; As for those
disputes of some, who though they acknowledge de facto, that the world was
created in time, yet question whether it was possible that it might have been
from the beginning; It Is a needless and unprofitable Question, What cause then
have we to bless God for Scripture Light, when the great learning of the
world, was wholly in darkness in this respect.

2. Although Scripture be the surest and choicest argument, yet there are many
convictions from reason likewise, 2. From Reason.
that may convince men that it had a beginning.

As in the first place, If it had been from Eternity so many thousands and
thousands years would have been past, that we should have had some relics at
least of some things done so long ago; whereas it is observed by the learned
that even in all the heathen Antiquities, though they brag much yet they record
nothing, that was done before the Flood; The utmost of their antiquity reaches
but to persons and things that were done since the Flood, and therefore Moses
his History has the most antiquity in it, Now if the world had been so many
millions of years before, how comes there to be such a deep silence of all
things done formerly, as for that of the Egyptians who speak of things done an
hundred thousand years ago; Besides the fabulousnesse of that people, it is
thought they accounted a year, but for a month, because the course of the Sun
was not perfectly understood.

2. This may convince the world had a beginning, because it could not make it
self, and God was not a natural Agent necessitated to make it; For upon these
two supposed grounds it might be thought, that the world had no beginning, and
as for making it self that is plain, it could not, no more then an house, or a
musical Instrument, or a Book; Hence it is that the Apostle Romans 1. makes these
creatures the Looking glass to represent the wisdom and power of God, and
certainly the world had it made it self, would have given a more glorious being
to all the parts thereof, so that it is plain it was limited in its nature and
parts, as the author thereof pleased, and in the next place, God was not
necessitated to make it; As the fire cannot but burn, as the Be necessarily
makes it is curious honeycomb, so that although some have said, that as soon as
the Sun is, so necessarily and immediately the Sun beams will be also, so as
soon as God is, there must necessarily be a world, yet we must not conceive a
less perfection in God then is in man, who is a free Agent, and works his
effects of art, when he pleases; The Artificer is not necessitated to make a
house, or a garment, then certainly much more must be allowed to God himself,
who does in heaven and in earth what he pleases, and this should satisfy
those curious Questions why God made the world no sooner, what he did in that
long imaginary time before the world was, the freedom of God and his absolute
Sovereignty, with his infinite wisdom, may easily stop such mouths.

3. To be from Eternity is the property of God, God only is eternal, and
therefore no finite limited thing can thus be without a beginning; The world is
finite in its number, it is but one world, whereas God might create more worlds
as well as one; It Is finite in nature, It Is finite in its parts, It Is finite in
its use, and it is finite in duration; Hence all the Nations of the world
comparatively to God are laid to be but as a drop, and as a little light dust,
Isa. 40 15. Seeing therefore the world is not infinite, but is every way
limited, it cannot be eternal; and this is the reason why we Christians should
lift our hearts above the world, which had a beginning unto God, who is God
from everlasting to everlasting.

4. The world was not without beginning, but made in time, because it is
corruptible; It Is subject to a dissolution, Now what is without a beginning is
without an end; If it had a beginn^ng it is subject to an end, though God indeed
may perpetuate it, as we see he does Angels and Men; Now that the world is
subject to destruction some have proved it from this, because there is a decay
in nature; They say the very Sun and heavens have not that power and influence
they had formerly, but I find learned men utterly disavowing such a Position,
and they maintain that nature is still the same, and is as constant and
powerful in operation as ever. Therefore from the Scripture we see clearly the
corruptibility of it, Romans 8. The whole Creation is said to be subject unto
vanity and corruption, so that it groaneth for a freedom, and 2 Pet. 3. We
have there a large description of the Funerals of the whole world, The heavens
shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements with a burning heat, etc.
Indeed the learned do dispute whether the world in all the choice parts of it
shall suffer an utter abolition, or only a perfective alteration; But
whatsoever it be, a wonderful change shall be made of it, and therefore the
Apostle from this amazing dissolution, infers, Seeing these things shall be,
what manner of persons ought we to be; (...) not (...), even to admiration; So
that the consideration of the worlds beginning, and so by consequence its end
is not a cold bitten Subject, You may not sit, and run, or sleep, or wander in
your hearts, but excellent practical Uses may be made thereof, and so we
proceed to them, As

and blessed, though he never had created any world, for by what reason he
staid so long and did not make the world, he might have stayed always; So that
this serves to magnify the glorious nature of God, that all the world with
all the creatures therein make not at all to his happiness; They add not to
him; All the obedience of Angels and men does not profit God, This should teach
us great humility even under our best and rarest duties: Think with thy self if
God had never created me, if he had never given me any being, he would have
been glorious howsoever, What then is my drop to this Ocean?

then how might this raise us up to be with God, and set our hearts upon him
that has all this perfection eminently in him; Oh how unreasonable is it that
we should delight in the world and not in God the Author of the world, if
there be so much excellency in the creatures, what in the Creator? Therefore
when the Psalmist speaks of all the Creatures in the world, he calls upon them
to bless God; How foolish and vain did the wise men of the world become in
their imaginations, when they robbed God of his divine glory, and gave it to
the Sun and Stars, and such Idolatry do we commit in our affections, when we
place them principally upon the creature and not on God himself: Oh check thy
self, and say, Who gave this delight, this comfort, this usefulness to the
creature, did not God? What delight then must be in the fountain or Ocean, if
there be so much in a stream.

Did God create and make the world? then it is blasphemy and impudency to
quarrel and repine at the things which are in the world; This has been a
great Objection with many, If God made the world, why are there any evil or
troublesome things in it? How comes it to be such a miserable wicked world?
This made the Manichees hold there were two eternal principles, The one good,
from which comes all good things; The other bad, from which comes all the
sins and miseries that are in the world, but you must know that the word
world is used diverse ways in Scripture, by which this Objection may be
answered, Sometimes for the Fabric of the Universe with all the parts thereof,
Sometimes for the wickedness that is, in the world, and for wicked men,
because they are the greater part of the world: Now if we speak of the world in
the latter sense, God did not make it so, Man wilfully sinning made it a wicked
world, so that the wickedness of the world is not of God, but by man, as also
death and hell is of man, God only inflicts them as just punishments upon
ungodly offenders: And thus likewise all the miseries, pains and diseases that
are in the world are by sin; The Ground was not cursed to bring forth nothing
but briars and thorns till man had sinned; So that the Principles of evil were
the Apostate Angels and Apostate man: Otherwise take we the world in an
innocent sense, for the Fabric of it, with the Creatures therein, So it is
wholly good and of God: Therefore Genesis 1. God is said to look over all that he
had made, and they were very good: Every days work was good, when they were
put altogether, then they were very good, so that we are not to judge of every
particular thing in the world by it self, but in its Harmony and Union, and so
the world is like a curious piece of Arras or Tapestry, admirably showing the
wisdom of the Creator: Basil thought that before Adam fell the Rose did grow
without any pricks, and that there was no enmity between the creatures: The
Wolf and the Sheep, the Lion and the Lamb, and the Leopard and the Kid did
dwell together, etc. But whether this be so or no is yet disputed: Take heed of
saying The world might have been better, and this thing or that might have been
made more completely, this is to reproach God the Maker of it: As that wretched
Alphonsus King of Spain, who said, That had he been at the Creation of the
world, he would have ordered it better then now it is.

Is God the Maker of the world? then it follows also he is the Preserver and
governor of the world: This must necessarily follow, for the same power is
required to preserve and govern as is to create; And as it is gross Athiesm to
own any other Maker of the world but God, so also any other Governor or Ruler:
Hence it is that God is so often, called the Judge of the world, that he is
said to Reign, that the hearts of Kings even the chiefest powers in the world
are in his hand, he can order them as he pleases; That it is not as men think,
as they will or purpose, but as the Judge of the world; Faith in this Point
while we live in this world is necessary; The Lord reigns, let the world
rejoice, Psa. 97.1. said David: And again, The Lord reigns, let the world
tremble, Psa. 99.1. There is matter of joy and matter of trembling because God
governs; Matter of joy to the godly, for he is a Supreme Ruler, who is their
God, whose eye runs up and down in their behalf, who keeps up the world for
their sake, who takes care of every godly man so fully as if there were no
creature else but he: And it is also of terror to wicked men, for God rules
all, who is an holy, just, and righteous God, so that they must not think
always to hold up their heads; They must not think God will be mocked, but he
will do righteously in the world; For want of faith in this Point, we see
David, Jeremiah, and Habakkuk, staggering exceedingly, ready to commend the
ways of wickedness, because they seem more prosperous in the world.

Then let us make that use of this world for which God created it; As he had
his holy and wise ends, so do thou aim at them:

Now Gods ends in creating the world were such as these,

1. To demonstrate his own glory, Thus Psa. 19. The heavens show forth the
glory of God, They discover his wisdom, his power, his goodness, and so there
is not any one creature, though never so little but we are to admire the
Creator in it; As a Chamber hung round about with Looking-glasses, represents
the face upon every turn, Thus all the world does the mercy and the bounty of
God; Though that be visible, yet it discovers an invisible God and his
invisible properties.

2. God made this world so richly furnished for man's use; And therefore man is
to be enlarged in the consideration of this matter; Think with thy self how
comes there to be such a glorious Sun to wait on thee every day; How comes the
earth every Spring to be so richly clothed for thy advantage; Is not all this
of Gods appointing? He made a Summer and winter, he has given the appointed
works of the harvest, so that the world is nothing but Gods storehouse, and
great Granary that he has given to man; This is so great a matter that the
Psalmist cried out, Lord, what is man that thou art so mindeful of him? Psa.
144.3. Thus Paul speaking of God the Creator of the world, Act. 17. amplifieth
it in this, That he gives us richly to enjoy all things.

3. God made this world not for a d^elling place for thee, Thou art not to
abide here for ever; He made the world as the Wilderness to the Israelites,
They were to be Pilgrims in it, and to seek after Canaan: As Adam by his fault
continued not in Paradise, so neither by reason of death was he long in the
world; Therefore the Apostle says, We have here no abiding City, Heb. 12. Oh
then that we could remember to what end God made this world, not to place our
hopes and utmost desires here, but to look upon this as the way, and heaven as
our journeys end; But oh how much faith and heavenly mindedness is required of
every one to perform this!

Use 6. Did God lay the Foundations of the world, and that in time, how greatly
then are the people of God to be affected with his love in electing of them?
for God chose them before the Foundations of the world, he loved them before
the world was; This shows the freeness of Gods love, This manifests his
absolute tender bowels to his Children; Alas his love to thee was not from
yesterday, or so many years, but from Eternity: Doubt not then of the efficacy
of this love in all the effects of it, He that has chosen thee from Eternity,
will call thee, will justify thee, will glorify thee, not that these are done
from Eternity, only God purposed to do them in time: David would remember the
kindenesses of the Lord that were of old, but how old is this goodness of God
in choosing thee to eternal glory?

to depend on God in all public straights of the Church, or all thy Personal
Temptations; What a foolish thing was it in the people of Israel to say, Can
God provide a Table in the Wilderness? Cannot he that made this great world of
nothing do a less matter? This should be seriously thought of by thee when
thou art dejected and overwhelmed, saying, How can this be, and how can that
be? Say, O Lord, what low, unworthy thoughts have I of thee? Did not thou
create a world? and shall I say, How shall God help me in this distress? and
for this reason is it that in the Psalms and Prophets Gods creating the world
is often brought in as an argument to support the Children of God under all
miseries, Fear not, God made the world.

SERMON XXIX. Of Divine Knowledge, its Excellency and Rarity; Showing, That God
is truly and properly known only by the Godly; And wherein their Knowledge of
God differs from the Knowledge that others have of him.
JOH. 17.6. I have manifested thy Name unto the men thou gave me out of the
world, etc.
THis sixth Verse begins the second main general part of Christ's Petition, for
whereas before he had prayed for himself, now he begins to pray for his
Disciples, as they were in a peculiar manner given to him, as afterward he
prays for all believers in the general, so that the words are a beginning of
Christ's Petition in a peculiar manner, for the Apostles, for they needed much
prayer and assistance who were to undertake so great a duty; These were set in
the forefront of the Battle, These were called to labor in the heat of the
day, therefore there is a peculiar prayer for them: Now that our Saviors
Petition may prevail, he first declares what he had done to them, and 2. Their
obedience to him in all things, what he had done to them is partly related in
these words, I have manifested thy Name: wherein first observe the person or
efficient cause spoken of, Christ manifested Gods Name to his Diseiples,
Therefore he was (...): Christ is not to be considered only as a Mediator, in
which none can imitate him but as a Minister or Prophet, The chief Shepherd,
Heb. 13.20. as the Scripture calls him, and herein he discharged his duty in
that he manifested and made known God to the world, which lay in ignorance, So
that the Ministers duty is to bring people to know God, but of that in its
time. 2. There is the action it self, of this person or efficient, I have
manifested.

There is a twofold manifestation,

1. Objective, only in the external offer and proposal of the grace of God,
not only to believers but to all the unbeleeving Jews, but of this
manifestation Christ does not speak.

2. There is a powerful effectual manifestation, such as begets knowledge of
God and obedience unto his Word, and of this Christ speaks, and as for the
former many have Christ and God outwardly manifested to them in the preaching
of the Gospel, but they have no eyes to see; as the Sun though it shines
never so gloriously, yet the blind man receives no benefit by it.

3. Here is the Object of this action, Thy Name; By Name is not meant the words
or Titles given to God, as Adonai, Elohim, Jehovah, as the Rabbis call God
Leohem, the Name; but by Gods Name is meant his nature, his properties, and
those relations, especially whereby he becomes a gracious Father through Christ
to an humbled sinner.

Lastly, Here is the Subject to whom Christ does thus manifest God, and these
are described,

1. By their original and descent, Gods gracious good will and pleasure, Whom
thou gave me.

2. From the state or term out of which God then gave them, Out of the world.

I shall put Christ's action and the Subject together at this time; Whereas then
we see though Christ preached God and his properties to all that heard him, yet
to none was God manifested but to believers: From whence we observe,

Observe. That God is only and properly known by the godly.
That God is only truly and properly known by the godly; Let men have never
such parts, knowledge, or understanding, and that in the Scriptures and
Divinity, yet none know God, God is not manifested to any but to the godly;
This may seem Paradoxall and incredible, but yet the Scripture is very clear,
at v. 25. The world has not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have
known thou have sent me: Hence Joh. 14.21. you may see Christ's manifesting of
himself is a privilege bestowed only upon those that love God, He that loves
me shall be loved of my Father, and I will manifest my self to him: This does
so affect one of the Disciples, that out of a sense of Gods great goodness and
grace to them rather then the world, he says, Lord, how is it that thou will
manifest thy self to us rather then the world; What are we more then others;
The world heard Christ preached, They saw his Miracles, but Christ was not
manifested to them. Christ likewise Joh. 8.55. tells the Pharisees who
believed the Scriptures, and acknowledged one God Creator of the world, yea,
and said, God was their God, that they did not know God; so that this truth
will stand good, that men may have much knowledge in the Scriptures in
Religion, and yet no^ know God.

Some knowledge of God may be had several ways.
To open this Consider, that several ways we may come to have some knowledge of
God,

By inward light of a natural conscience, There are imbred notions and dictates
about a God, which all the wicked affections and lusts of men cannot wholly
obscure, as the blackest clouds cannot quite darken the Sun; The Apostle Romans
1. says, God has manifested this in them; There is then a natural
manifestation of God in the consciences of men, whereby there is an horror and
trembling upon them upon the committing of some evil, especially when the
stroke of death is upon them: Oh the quakings, oh the confusions that are
sometimes upon men, what will become of them? what shall they do? All this
comes from some general knowledge of a God.

Men come to some knowledge of a God by tradition, education, and hearsay;
There being no Nation so fierce and barbarous, but have told their Children of
a God, and the Socinians who deny any inward light of nature about a God, do
make this the only ground of such an apprehension, an universal tradition that
is upon all; Now although this consent of all Nations be a great Testimony, yet
the other is not to be excluded: If then all do acknowledge that there is a
God, though there be different Religions, different opinions, yet both Heathen,
Turk, Jew and Christian agree in this, the more inexcusable will all wicked men
be who live in rebellion and disobedience to him.

3. We come to know God by the Creatures; All that consider the world aright
must needs argue some divine hand made it: The Apostle Romans 1. instanceth in
this also: Men by reason and science may argue from the effect to the cause, we
see one man did not make himself, but he had a Father, and so that Father, a
Father, and because there cannot be an infinite progress we must stay at one
first cause, only you must know this Knowledge by the world is insufficient to
salvation; Therefore it is a pernicious assertion of Venator the Remonstrant,
that the Heathens they had the Light as it were of the Stars, The Jews of the
Moon, The Christians of the Sun, and all might be saved by their respective
Lights.

4. God is manifested by the Scriptures in a common way of Light, Many men by
an Historical faith believing the Scriptures, must also believe a God, for
there is no such clear evidence any way as by that, and thus we may judge of
most Christians, they know there is a God, they believe him to be, because the
Word does so fully affirm it.

Lastly, There is a knowledge of God in a practical obedient way, so to know
him as to fear him, to obey his Commandments, to walk humbly before him, Of
true saving knowledge peculiar to the godly.
and to depend upon him, and this is the manifestation or knowledge the truly
godly only have, and the number of these is very few, so that if you set aside
those who know God only upon a natural conscience, or by education, or by a
general historical Faith: The residue who know him by special illumination and
sanctification, are like the gleaning after harvest, so that we may hence
conclude that whatsoever parts, learning, understanding, men have in Religion,
yet till inwardly sanctified they know not God; They are wholly estranged from
him, They live without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. God is not in their thoughts,
in their hearts, neither have they any enjoyment of him, Oh that we could make
every Auditor sensible of this, I live in the world, I know much, I have great
acquaintance, but yet am a stranger to God.

Now these following particulars will plainly discover that the godly only do
truly know God. Though many have some kind of knowledge of God. yet the godly
only do truly know him.


Because though men have this speculative knowledge, yet they do not love him,
and delight in him above all things; It Is Gods command that we should love him
with all our heart, our minds and strength, yea, above Father, Mother, life,
and every thing that is dear, Insomuch that the Scripture says, Whosoever
loves the world the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. Now whence
is it that we love these poor empty comforts more then God, Is it not because
we do not know God? Had we clear manifestations of the goodness, excellency,
and fullness that is in God, our whole heart would be ravished with him. As it
is with the glorified Saints in heaven, they have an immediate vision of God,
They behold him in this glorious beauty, and hence it is that they cannot
sin, The understanding sees such infinite perfection in God, that they
abhor all things that would divert from him; As the eye dazzled with the
Beam-light of the Sun, cannot behold any thing else; As he that has eaten
honey finds all things else unsavory: As the Saints in heaven do thus, so
the Saints on earth do in part, and in some good measure, They beholding the
Image of God, 2 Cor. 4. are transformed into the same Image; The more we know
God as revealed in the word, the more our hearts pant after him, as you see
David often manifesting the breaking of his heart after God; Well then by this
you see that few know God, if they did, how could they leave the Ocean for a
drop, how could they part with God for every fading creature? thy lusts, thy
sins are more then God in thy thoughts and affections; Oh pray for a knowledge
of God in Christ; The blind man does not admire the glory of the Sun,
because he cannot see it, ignoti nulla cupido.

Isa. 10. O thou King of Nations, for to thee it appertains, and sanctify
the Lord God, let him be your dread: Our Savior likewise, Fear not them that
can kill the body, Mat. 10.28. but I tell you whom you shall fear, etc. You see
then that if we did rightly know God, how pure and just he is, how full of
wrath and vengeance against impenitent sinners, we would cry out with Joseph
upon every temptation, How can I do this and sin against God? I cannot, I
dare not; Thus Paul, Knowing the terror of the Lord we persuade men, 2 Cor.
5.11. Did men know the greatness and the terror of God, the power and Majesty
he is clothed with, That no sinner though never so great can stand before him
any more then the stubble before the fire, That he can immediately raise hellish
torments in thy conscience, That he can bid thee go out of this Church, a
trembling Cain, a despairing Judas, Did (I say) People know this God to be so
great, how could they riot it in all excess as they do? as our Savior told
the Woman, Joh. 4. If thou had known who it is that asked water of thee, thou
would have given him, Had you or did you know that the God whom you offend
all the day long, is so great and terrible in Majesty, it would have been a
stop to all thy bold impieties, but men know not God.

are careful to obey his Commandments, and to walk in the way he requires; 1 John 2. If we say we know him, and keep not his Commandments, we are liars, and
abide not in the Truth: Their knowledge of God and a careful obedience to his
commands cannot be separated; The Apostle says, all others are but liars and
hypocrites; Do thou boast of knowledge and yet break his Sabbath, wallow in
the lusts of the flesh, Thou art a liar, thou do not know God; Hence it
follows in my Text, I have manifested thy Name to my Disciples, and they have
kept thy Word; Oh then never talk of thy knowledge, never speak of what thou
read, or what thou understandest, unless also thy obedience to Gods will be
as manifest, so that when we see any profane, wicked man endued with great
parts, you may say, Lo, there is such an one, though he knows all Points in
Religion; though he knows every Chapter in the Bible, yet he knows nothing
of God, for whereas God says, Be not drunk with wine, etc. and Woe be to those
that are strong to drink, yet every week if not every day he is drunk; Though
God says, Swear not at all, yet some cannot speak without an Oath scarce, Oh
that these things might enter into you; If you know God you would obey him, you
would say, I dare not, I must not do this or that, God whom I know and serve
commands the contrary; Therefore the Prophet Hosea when he speaks of much
wickedness in a Land, swearing, and whoring, and injustice, he says, There is
no Knowledge of God in the Land, Hos. 4.1.

The godly man only knows God because he only has these gracious effects of
Gods grace upon his heart, he plainly feels God working in him; The wicked
man knows God by the creatures and his works abroad but the godly knows him
by the new creature and works of grace upon his heart, and this is the most
excellent knowledge, when he knows God by the regeneration and sanctification
of his nature, by his heavenly and gracious quicknings to holy duties, and
against sin; If in regard of out natural life, we live, and move, and have
our being in God, how much more in our supernatural life? Those know God indeed
that feel those divine workings upon their souls; As Job before when God had
humbled him said, I have heard of thee by the ear, but now my eye sees thee,
Job 42.5. So says the godly, I have heard many Sermons of God but I never felt
him till now, or as the Queen of Sheba who had heard much of the fame of
Solomon, but when she came to be an eyewitness of it, then she was astonished
and judged all her former apprehensions nothing; Thus it is with the truly
sanctified, though you tell him what good parts, what Scripture understanding,
what abilities in duties he had, Oh says he, all that time I did not know God,
I never knew him till these inward workings were upon me, I spoke of him as a
man will do of some strange Country he had often heard of but never saw.

The true godly man only knows God, because he only has communion and
fellowship with him, he only is admitted into Gods presence; All wicked men
though never so knowing are at a great distance from God, They know not the
light of his countenance, what it is to have the assurance of his favor, what
to have those experimental sweetnesses of heart which flow from the enjoying of
him, Therefore its added in that of Joh. 18. I will manifest my self to him and
come and sup with him; that is, God will give us a joyful cheerful familiar
fellowship with himself, he will make known himself, as Joseph did at last to
his brethren, God draws nigh to them, and they to God, and this indeed is a
choice way of knowing of God, when we know what it is to have his love shed in
our hearts, when we hear God speaking peace to us, when it is not duties nor any
religious performance, but God himself that the heart partakes of; Thus the
Psalmist inviteth to taste and see how good God is, Psa. 34.8. Oh have thou
ever had this tasting and seeing? then thou know God comfortably; Now the
ground of all this, is, because obedience, love, and fear are the end of all
knowledge, therefore that knowledge which does not obtain its end, is no
knowledge, and hence the Scripture says, If ye know these things happy are ye
if ye do them, Joh. 13.17. and generally the Scripture describes wicked men by
this, that they know not God, as Paul said of the Jews, If they had known
Christ to be the God of glory, they would never have crucified him, 1 Cor. 2.5.
Thus, did men know God as they ought, they could not think, and speak or live
as they do.

Use, Rest not in any kind of knowledge about God till it has these effects
on thee; Use.
Never judge thy self to know any thing of Religion till it has thus
transformed thee, till it be the acknowledgement of truth after godliness, but
alas where are the persons, where is the Family, where are the people that know
God? The ungodliness they live in, proclaim they know no such divine Majesty;
Oh consider that God knows not thee likewise, with a knowledge of
approbation, of omniscience he does, and that will be thy confusion, but not of
complacency; at the day of judgment he will say, Depart I know you not; Oh
that we were such of whom it may be said, Their obedience, their pure and holy
life, their delight and acquaintance with God manifests they know God, and then
you will not die with such terror, with such fear, I go to him I have known, I
go not to an unknown God.

SERMON XXX. The Great End of the Ministry; And what should be the end of both
Ministers and people in their Preaching and hearing.
JOH. 17.6. I have manifested thy Name to as many as thou have given me out of
the world.
WE have considered the action or efficacy of the person or efficient, spoken
of in the Text,

We now come to consider the person himself, and that is Christ, who says of
himself, I have manifested thy Name; Christ speaks in this as he is the great
Prophet, and chief Shepherd of our souls, for being entrusted with this office,
he did faithfully discharge it, whoever reads over Christ's life, and sees how
laborious and diligent he was to bring men to the knowledge of God, and to save
their souls, must needs say, The Lion of the Tribe of Judah went up and down
more earnestly to save then the roaring Lion of hell is busy to destroy, Hence
Joh. 4. while he is employed to bring home but one poor Sheep that was gone
astray, the Woman of Samaria, he is so earnest in it that he forgets to eat his
bread, and tells them his meat and drink was to do his Fathers will, which was
to declare the truth of God, and invite sinners to come in unto him, so then we
see here, an excellent President for all the Ministers of the Gospel to follow;
As Christ was wholly in this, to make people know God, so ought they to be; In
Christ's works of his Mediatorship, and of his Miracles, we may not imitate him,
we cannot, but in this of his labor and tender love to men's souls, we are
bound to follow him.

Observe.
Obs. That the end of the Ministry and Ministers should be to bring people to
the knowledge of God, to the saving knowledge of Christ; Thus Paul exceeded the
Heathen Hercules in his manifold labors to this purpose, especially see what a
divine profession he makes to them of Ephisus, Act. 20.26, 27. I take you to
record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men; Here we see there is
a soul-murder as well as a body, and the Ministers of the Gospel are to keep
themselves pure from that, for if the blood of Abels body cries aloud, what
outcries will the blood of peoples souls make? Now Paul kept himself thus pure
by declaring unto them all the Counsel of God, so that if we would do our
duty we must be Lights shining upon the understandings of men, that they may
know, believe in, and obey God; And so Paul again at large, 1 The. 2. There his
very heart flameth out into affectionate words for their salvation; The end
then of our Preaching and of your hearing should be to have God manifested to
your souls, how apt are both Ministers and people to fail of this great and
necessary end; To open the doctrine, you may take notice that as the Logicians
speak of a twofold end, Finis operis and Finis operantis, the end of the
worker, and the end of the works, as the end of the house built, is to dwell in
it; The end of the Artificer who built is to have wherewith to maintain himself
and his Family, so it is in the Preaching of the Word, There is the end of the
Ministry it self as appointed by God, and of the Minister who preaches; Now
indeed there should be always the same end of both, The Minister should aim at
that end for which the Ministry is appointed, viz. to enlighten men, to bring
them to a saving knowledge of God, but such are men's corruptions that they many
times take the office only for ambition or earthly advantages; They preach that
they may live, they live not that they may preach; It Is therefore a dangerous
thing for a Minister of Christ to propound any other end principally at least
but what is the end of the Ministry, and that is wholly spiritual, to be able
to say, Behold here I am and the spiritual Children thou have given me.

2. As the end of the Ministry is thus to bring light in the world, so the end
of all people that enjoy a Ministry in all their hearing and coming to Church
ought to be thus likewise: As the Minister sins greatly if he preaches to
advance his parts, his Name, to humor people in their sins, so do the people
sin dangerously if they come out of formality and custom, or if they come to
have the ear and fancy pleased but attend not at all to the saving knowledge of
God; Oh thou foolish and vain man, thou make not a good use or improvement of
the Minister till it has thus wrought upon thee; Therefore the Ignorance and
profaneness of most men, proclaims that they never made a right use of one
Sabbath or one Sermon all their life time, though they have heard many; Oh then
that every Sabbath day you would put this quest^on, To what end am I going to
the public Assembly? Why go I to hear the Word preached? If I do not attain to
the end I lose my labor; Is it not the end of preaching and the end of hearing
to deliver me from my former Ignorance, my former lusts; how then comes it
about that I am still as I was? It is because I do not consider the end of
these things.

Now the grounds why the Ministers end should be in all Preaching to bring his
people to the saving knowledge of God, are very weighty. Why the Ministers end
in Preaching should be to bring his people to the saving knowledge of God.


First, From the necessity of this end, which is in diverse respects, We are to
press people to the right knowledge of God, because

All by nature are ignorant of God; They are in darkness, They have no
understanding to do good; Hence it is that Christ and the Word as also the
Ministers are called a light, because they like the Sun are able to remove
the night of Ignorance. Seeing then we are all by nature Bats and Owls not
enduring the Light of the Sun; Seeing then we have innate darkness, From the
necessity of it.
and much voluntary blindness upon our minds, oh how diligent should the
Ministers of the Gospel be to bring this light into peoples hearts; Therefore
our Savior makes this the condemnation, the great cause of condemnation, That
light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light, Joh. 3.
If then people did think they had a thick cloud upon their hearts, or a vail
upon their eyes, how careful would they be to attend upon the Word preached,
that they might of darkness become light in the Lord.

2. There is a necessity of attending to this end, if you consider the
averseness and unwillingnesse that is in men to get this knowledge; How many
say with those in Job, Let the knowledge of the most High depart from us, Job
21.14. that when they are invited have this lust or that sin, this or that
worldly advantage to look after; How many when wisdom cries aloud do yet with
the simple one pass by to their destruction; The Prophets and the Apostles all
along complained of this wretched disposition, that their hearers had a deaf
ear, a stiff neck, and a rebellious heart, and thus it will be to the worlds
end; Men whose ways are evil, and they delight in them, will hate the light,
will run from that Word which always speaks terrible things against them; Have
not then the Ministers of the Gospel need to stir up themselves, to use all
holy violence, when there is such a general contrariety in all people against
the saving knowledge of God and his way; That as the wild beasts hide
themselves in their dens, when the Sun begins to arise, So do wicked men cover
and shelter themselves, that the beams of the glorious Word of God may not
shine into their dark hearts; Men know that powerful Preaching and their
wicked lives cannot agree together, oh they know that God and his Word are
wholly against their conversation, Therefore they will not know or understand
lest they should be converted; All wicked men are as unwillingly brought out of
their sins as the Israelites out of Egypt, Lot out of Sodom, unless they be
even driven or forced out they will not move.

There is a necessity of pressing the Knowledge of God, because of the horrible
negligence and laziness that is in most men; There being very few that will
take pains to get the knowledge of God and his way; Though Solomon uses so
many arguments that we should seek and dig for this knowledge, more then for
silver or gold, Pro. 3* That we are to say unto her, She is our Mother and
Sister, yet the things of the world, the profits hereof do wholly divert; and
whereas Heathens have taken such excessive pains to get humane knowledge, we
stir not for divine knowledge; This sluggishnesse in men in Families, whereby
they will not take time that young and old may come to the knowledge of God, is
an universal reigning sin.

The necessity of pressing this arises in that there is no salvation or
eternal happiness without the knowledge of God; This is Eternal Life to know
thee the only true God; He would have all men to be saved and to come to the
knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. Oh then for people to come to the knowledge
of God is more necessary then to eat or to live, or to get any earthly profit;
Oh then that both Ministers and people might be more zealous in this work, for
both must work together; let the Minister of God, be never so laborious, so
active, yet if you are careless there cannot come any good; and if a people be
willing and ready, and yet they have blind guides, still the work is not done;
Therefore let both set their hands to this, Let Ministers teach, Let people
hear, Let Ministers instruct, Let people come with obedient ears, otherwise
though thou live under the glorious light of the Gospel, yet thy wickedness
and carelessness will make thee get no good; Thou will die and perish, though
the Prophets have been amongst you.

Because of the nature and properties of it.
because of the nature and property of it, which is wholly supernatural; The
Word is commanded to be preached not for any natural or civil ends, but
spiritual and supernatural; When they followed Christ because of the Loaves,
it was a low and unworthy motive; It should have been because of their souls,
and because of the bread of life to feed their souls; If thou regardest a
Ministry or come to hear, for any other end but divine and supernatural; If
it be for custom or to keep up thy good repute amongst men, this is to be
carnal; this is to be a worm and no Christian, for God has given these
Officers to the Church, and commanded a diligent dispensation therein for
sublime and holy ends, to enlighten thy mind, to soften thy heart, to
spiritualize thy affections, to reform thy life, even to polish and preserve
thee, that thou may be a stone of glory in the heavenly Jerusalem; Say then,
thou do nothing if this supernatural improvement be not made of it; Thus also
it is for the Preacher, if he preach to show his Learning, to make himself
admired, to satisfy any corrupt end, This is also low and unworthy; Malo ut me
reprehendant grammatici, quam non intelligant populi, yet oh how prone are
corrupt and insincere motives to creep in, few being able to say with Paul,
That they handle the Word of God sincerely as of God, and in the presence of
God; Let then the nature of the work raise up our hearts, it is sublime and
supernatural in its use; It Is holy merchandising or trading for men's souls, and
therefore so often called by that glorious Title.

because of the dignity and excellency of the work, To bring men to the saving
knowledge of God is a noble emploiment, a work for Angels to do; The great
Rulers and powers in the world they do but order the body and the outward man,
but this work is to enlighten the soul, and to make it fit for the enjoyment of
God; This made Paul so often rejoice in and bless God that he had chosen him a
vessel to make known the Name of God, We are a sweet savor unto God, says the
Apostle; We are the precious Apothecaries that open the sweet box of the
Gospel, Hence it is that the Apostle exhorts people to honor and to have the
Ministers of the Gospel in high esteem, and why? for their works sake; 1 The.
5.13. Their teaching and guiding of you in the way to heaven is that great work
for which you are to esteem them, if to direct a Traveller that is far out of
the way into a ready path, be so acceptable a work, what is it then to inform
people who are going securely and joyfully in the broad way to hell, of the
danger herein, and to direct to the way of life? If then it be so excellent,
mind this in the first place; Oh say, what a wretch am I who know the way to
my own house, but not to my long home! I know how to buy and sell, but I know
not how to enjoy God.

We are to insist on this end because of the difficulty and great opposition
that is in the work; For

1. The devil by his Instruments endeavors to keep men in darkness; All those
black cloudy times which have been upon the Church brought in Idolatrous
Superstition and profaneness, insomuch that the devil reigned almost within the
Church as much as without, his Kingdom was not more promoted by those without
then those within; No wonder then if such opposition has always been against
times of light and times of Reformation, because the bright shining of the
Gospel does immediately destroy Satan's dominion, as when our Savior sent his
Apostles to preach, he said, he saw Satan fall from heaven like lighening, Luke
10.18. and who can bewail that Ignorance which did overflow in the time of
Popery, The Sun of the Gospel being then in a constant eclipse, and howsoever
learning of it self is either used well or ill, as the Subject is who has it,
yet in the general, Learning is a special means to preserve and conveigh the
true knowledge of God, for the Apostle says, The unstable and unlearned wrest
the Scriptures to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.18. So that in some sense we
may take up that allegory of Philo, Sarah cannot have children without the help
of Hagar, i. e. The doctrine and knowledge of God is not propagated without the
help of humane Learning especially the tongues and arts; Therefore it is
required of the Minister of God, that he should rebuke with all doctrine, and
to be able to convince the gainsayers, and to divide the Word of God aright,
which can never be done without learning, so that you see the difficulty of it
in respect of the opposition.

2. The difficulty does arise in that the true doctrine and knowledge of God is
hardly obtained, for there must be constant study in the Word of God, daily
prayer unto God to be led into the Truth; There must be a godly use of all the
means God has appointed to get this knowledge; Hence the Scripture does
foretell of such as shall arise even from the Church, and shall speak perverse
things, men of corrupt minds, yea, many shall bring in damnable heresies, that
they shall have much craft, much seeming piety, that if it were possible they
would deceive the very Elect, Mat. 26. So that you see how difficult it is even
for the Ministers of the Gospel to find out the Truth* how many think they
teach you the way to heaven and lead you to hell? Does not the Papist, Does
not the Socinian, Does not every heretic say, None teaches with the true
knowledge of God as they do? yea, and they may be strongly persuaded of this,
for the Apostle speaks of many that are delivered up to believe a lie, 2 These.
2.11. So that it is of infinite concernment for people to have such guides that
do not give them poison in stead of food: Would the Scripture have said, Mar.
4.26. Take heed how you hear, and what you hear, if there had not been such
danger in hearing. 3. It Is difficult because of the hearers, Every man
naturally is so corrupt that he loves error, and will sooner close with any
false doctrine then the true; You see the Apostle complaining what applause the
false Teachers had, Oh says he, You suffer if a man smites you, 2 Cor. 11.20.
If a man wrong you, that is, if false Teachers were never so tyrannical, though
they did abuse them, and kept them under, yet they could like them well enough,
but they could not abide the Apostles carriage, though his severity was mingled
with much meekness, and thus it is always, any error, any false way, is more
pleasing to corrupt men then the truth; and hence it has many followers:
People will run out to see, to gaze, and hear some new thing; If a man be a
dwarf or a giant, every one will run to see him, but not the man of ordinary
stature:

Use, Is this the end of the Ministry, of all our labor and preaching, to
bring you to the saving knowledge of God? Oh then may we not take up the
Prophets complaint, That we labor in vain, the bellows is burnt, the lead is
consumed, but the reprobate silver is not purged away, Jer. 6.27. Do not many
Families and persons proclaim they know not God, for in this it is seen, that
they call not upon God, there are no Family Duties, no worshipping of him,
whereas our houses should be like the Temple of the Lord, they are slies of sin
rather: Christ is to come in flaming vengeance against those that know not God;
May not the Ministers of God cry with Isaiah, Isa. 6.5. Woe be to us we dwell
among men of polluted lips and lives: It Is a Woe to dwell there, Isaiah was much
affected with it.

SERMON XXXI. That Gods People are not of (though in) this world; Wherein is
also showed the vast difference between them and the men of the world.
JOH. 17.5. I have manifested thy Name to those that thou gave me out of the
world.
THE next thing considerable is, The description of the Subject, about which
Christ did thus employ himself, and they are set out

1. From their original descent, and heavenly rise, These God has given
Christ, but of this we have already treated, and shall say more before we come
to the end of the Chapter, it being often repeated.

2. From the term from which, they are given out of the world, They are given
to Christ out of the world.

The Scripture in this Chapter makes a distinction of being in the world, and
of the world; The people of God, even as Christ himself and his Kingdom are in
the world, but they are not of the world; As a Stranger in a foreign Country,
he is in that Country but not of it; he has not the nature, the Language, nor
does he accustom himself to the fashion of that place, Thus it is with the
godly, Though they are born and so live in the world, yet their natures and
affections, and conversations are not worldly; As the Fowls that were at first
created out of the water yet did not continue there but flew up to heaven and
continue for the most part there; As clouds though of the earth, yet are
carried about after the motions of the heavens; They are not then given out of
the world, so as if every good man were presently upon his godliness removed
out of this earth to heaven; but in respect of their nature, affections, and
conversation; The several significations of the word world in Scripture.
localiter they are not but in respect of heart and affections, in which sense
Paul said he was crucified to the world and the world to him, Gal. 6.14. Now
you must know that the word world has several significations in Scriptures,
Est mundus cujus Deus est creator, est mundus cujus Deus est redemptor, est
mundus cujus Satan est seductor; Sometimes it is taken for the whole Fabric
and Universe, with the parts thereof, as when the world is said to be made by
God, and Christ a Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8.
Sometimes it is taken for the greater part of the world, as they said all the
world did run after Christ, or the world said to be taxed by Augustus, Luke
2.1. Sometimes for the power, riches, pleasures and glory of the world, but
then most commonly fot the wicked men of the world; Thus often by John, The
world has not known thee, if ye were of the world the world would love you,
and now wicked men are called the world because their whole heart and desires
are fixed on worldly things; No worms, no Moles delighting more in earthly
things then they do, and therefore they are the Serpents seed which live on the
dust of the earth: And then they are called the world, because they are the
far greater visible and more flourishing part of the world; Alas take these
that are godly and they are but a despicable and contemptible handful to those
that ruffle it in the world.

Doct. That the people of God are called out of the world.
Obs. That the people of God they are called out of the world; He that is truly
godly is no more a man of this world, as we say of a dying man, he is not for
this world, his heart, his thoughts, his desires are quite taken off; Thus the
godly are said to be dead and crucified to the world, Gal. 6.14. They have not
those carnal worldly affections and dispositions as formerly, and from hence
the people of God are called Ecclesia, the Church, as much as persons called
out of the world, not bodily but in respect of their souls, and hence the world
and the Church is opposed, 1 Cor. 5.10. The Fornicators of this world, in
opposition to the Church, so that by this we see there is none in the Church of
God, but they should have renounced the ways, customs, and sins of the
world; To be a Christian and yet of the world is a contradiction, as if we
should say a black Sun; yet how is the garden of God made a Wilderness? how is
the Church become the world? So much profaneness, wickedness, and carnal
living as there is, so much of the world there is; Oh that men did consider
what an holy obligation their Christianity brings upon them, Art thou a
Christian, and yet the drunkard of the world? the fornicator of the world, the
proud, the earthly of the world, this ought not to be, no more then the Angel a
worm, no more then a Star a clod of earth; The Apostle calls those of the
world without, What have we to do to judge those that are without? 1 Cor. 5,
ult. but those of the Church within; Oh but how many ^^e^ within, according to
Christ's Rule ought to be turned out of Christ's sheepfold.

Demonstrations of the Point.
To illustrate this necessary Truth let us observe those demonstrations or
discoveries whereby it may appear that the godly are not of the world.

This makes it manifest because they have not the Spirit of the world but of
God, 1 Cor. 2.12.

They have not the Spirit of the world. The Spirit of the world what.
Now what is the Spirit of the world, even a judgment and wisdom to discern
only worldly things, to see the necessity of them, the excellency of them; To
be wholly affected with them, To meditate on them day and night; But the godly
they have received the Spirit of God whereby they savor and discern spiritual
things; They have hearts always depending upon God, and they have hearts
wholly fixed and placed upon God, They see incomparable excellency in heavenly
things above all earthly; They say with David, My soul breaks for the longing
it has to God at all times, Psa. 119.20. They cry out, As the Heart pants
after the waterbrooks, so do our souls after thee O God, Psa. 41.1. Thus when
God calls a man out of the world he gives him another Spirit, even an
heavenly heart, he was a beast before, now he is like an Angel; He did formerly
no more understand or discern spiritual things then the deaf ear does melodious
sounds; They were a wearisomnesse, a burden to him, but now they are his
delight.

They walk not after the rudiments of the world.
Secondly, They are not of this world because they walk not after the rudiments
or elements of the world, Col. 2.8, 20. The Apostle there shows how
inconsistent such a life is with an heavenly life, When we are risen with
Christ; Now what are those Elements of the world, Even all such principles of
Religion as men by humane and carnal wisdom take up to worship God by; He
calls them Elements or principles, because the Jews made their traditionall
worship, the very foundation and beginning of all, as if godliness were not
able to consist it, and Elements of the world, because men by humane wisdom
without the Scripture do press them and do not walk by the light of Gods Word;
This then is an excellent discovery that we are not of the world, when in the
matters of Religion especially in our worship of God, and the way of our
justification, we are not carried by the principles of a worldly Religion but
by divine direction, when we do not worship God according to custom, to
universality and such rudiments of the world as most do; The Pagan, the Papist
discovers a very worldly Spirit in his Religion, being able to say no more for
it then Heathens have done, and so in the matters of justification; They say
but very little more then Aristotle and the Philosophers of the world have done
about righteousness, whereas the righteousness and grace of the Gospel is
wholly different from such principles, manifest then by thy adoration of the
fullness of the Scripture, and sufficiency thereof, that thy religion, thy
worship, thy hopes of salvation are not merely upon worldly principles, and not
supernatural.

The godly man is discovered not to be of the world, by his constant life and
conversation; He does not live as one that takes this world for his home, He
lives not as others do.
They declare by their words and actions they seek for another Country, Heb.
11. As the Israelites were to manifest the Wilderness was not a place for them
to abide in but Canaan: Hence Romans 12.1. They are not conformed to the fashion
of this world, They are as Pilgrims and Strangers, They are in the world as
bright Stars in a dark night, so that this does necessarily imply a singularity
and exactness in the godly man's life comparatively to the world; Men of the
world are proud, earthly, brutish, running into all pleasures, and following
all excess of riot, but they dare not do so, so that there cannot be a surer
symptom that thou art still of the world then by speaking, doing, and living
as most in the world do, 2 Pet. 3.6, Even those that have but a common bare
profession of the Christian faith are said to escape the pollutions of the
world; Though Godliness should not have a deep impression on you, though it
should not go to the root and bottom, yet if it has made any impression at
all, if it has gone but to the skin, if you have heard of it but by the ear
only, it should make thee avoid such pollutions, Jam. 1.17. What says the
Apostle James, Pure Religion is to keep a man unspotted from the world; Pure
Religion; There is a generation of devils rather then men that mock and deride
at purity; Thus the Apostle says there must be a pure Religion, and this pure
Religion is to keep us unspotted from the world; That does imply the world to
be some loathsome noisome dunghill, that a man cannot be in it, but he is ready
to get soil and filth upon him; how many trust to sin, come and do as we do,
will you be so pure? but whether will you believe the Word of God or the devil
tempting by such beastly Instruments?

He is discovered not to be off the world because he is principally taken up
with heavenly privileges, Jam. 4.4. The friendship of this world is enmity
against God; and 1 John 2.15. If any man love the world the love of the Father
is not in him; It Is as impossible a man that is godly should be of the world in
this sense, as it is for Doves to be Moles, they cannot live by digging into
the earth; Hence the godly man is said to be born of God, he is said to be
heavenly, to be from above, to he risen with Christ, to sit in heavenly places,
to have his Conversation in heaven; These are the noble descriptions of the
godly man, so that though they use the world, and discharge their Relations
therein, yet they are not overcome by the world; They have the world, the world
has not them; Oh how close may this discovery be, for there are many who
escape the pollutions of the world, and yet are worldly: The third kind of
hearers did not only cast off all profaneness, but made some great progress in
obedience to the Word, but the love of the world and the cares about it choked
all; Did not Judas appear as eminently for Christ as any at first? but the love
of the world discovered his rottenness; Did not Demas get approbation, and
that by Paul himself? yet at last he did cleave to this present world, so that
not only profaneness but immoderate, earthly and worldly affections; These are
inconsistent with the power of grace; The world is not only the profaneness
thereof, but the immoderate and excessive affections to the lawful things of
the world; Our Savior does not say, He that loves his sins or his lusts more
then me, but he that loves his Father, wife, or life it self more then me is
not worthy of me, Mat. 10.37. See then the difficulty of grace and tremble
under it, Thou have with much ado quit thy former sins, but do not the
inordinate affections about lawful things still ensnare thee? Do thou buy as
if thou boughtst not? Do thou marry as if thou marriedst not? 1 Cor. 7. Art
thou rich as if thou were not? That is, thou usest these things as comforts
against thy necessities, not as Masters over thy affections.

In this it is apparent they are not of the world because the world hates them,
and is wholly opposite to them, Joh 17.14. Because they are not of the world
therefore that hates them, If they were of the world the world would love his
own; and 1 John 4.5. They that are of the world speak of the world, and the
world hears them; There cannot be a better discovery then this, The world
knows his own, Let a man be a wise worldly man that matters not religion,
that regards not the power of godliness, nor strictness; Such a man this
world adoreth; But if a man be never so wise, so excellent, yet if powerfully
godly will not conform to the evil ways of the world, this marreth all; This
makes him envied and hated; Who art thou then that have some desires to walk in
the way to heaven, but the opposition, the hatred and violence that is used
against that way makes thee draw back? Oh foolish and deluded wretch, was it
not thus with Christ, with his Apostles? Were they not told they should be
hated of all men for his Names sake? There cannot be a more comfortable sign of
thy grace then to have all the wicked men where thou live, either thy
hypocritical Friends, or thy open enemies; Jerome thanked God that he was
worthy to be such an one whom the world would hate; The Serpents Seed cannot
love the Woman's; Ismaell will persecute Isaac, glory therefore and boast in
this, if the malicious wicked man has his mouth always open against thee, If
he be always censuring and backbiting; For if thou would be profane,
dissolute, if thou would be a Minister to prostitute the Ordinances of God to
every profane man, thou would be as good as any in the world but now it is
not for thy infirmities but thy graces they malice thee.

They are not of this world because they are members of Christ and incorporated
into him; Now Christ himself was not of this world, nor was his Kingdom of this
world, Joh. 18.36. he came not with any earthly, worldly advantages; Now the
godly they are to be wholly conformed unto Christ; As Christ was so are they,
They bear the Image of the heavenly, so that what life, what actions were by
Christ the same they are exercised in, so that if we would follow the example
of Christ, make him our pattern, as our Christianity obliges us, then should we
overcome the world, not only in the persecuting part of it, but the enticing
part of it: The heart that is united to Christ finds more excellency and
sweetness in him then in all the pleasures of the world, as we see by Paul.

They are discovered not to be of the world because their life is a life of
faith; The Just shall live by Faith, Romans 1.17. We walk by faith and not by
sense, 2 Cor. 5.7. Now a worldly life is only by sense and carnal reason; It
moves only upon sensible grounds, coming as far short of faith as a beast does
of reason, but the godly man, he looks into the Word of God, he sees the
promises and embraces them; This life of faith is a mystery, it is a Riddle,
yea, it is a madness to the world, To part with all present advantages upon
faith for eternal, that are to come; this is to them extreme folly, and truly
herein a godly man is discovered exceedingly, Does he not live by his sensible
props but by the Promises? Does he overlook all creatures, and fix his heart
upon God, this is more then the world does?

If you ask the grounds why the people of God are out of the world though in
it; There are three pregnant Reasons in one verse, Gal. 1.4. Reasons.
Who gave himself for our sins that he might deliver us from this present evil
world: Observe first, it is an evil wicked world, The whole world lies in
wickedness says John, 1 John 5.19. There is nothing but the works of sin, and
the devil in it, therefore the devil is called the Prince of this world, Joh.
16.11. because he reigns in every man's heart; Now how can those whose natures
are made holy, who will and love what God wills and loves, come to agree with
sin? how can they who are sanctified by the Spirit of God be where the devil
rules? 2. It Is the present world; It Is but for the present, the profits are
present profits, the pleasures are present pleasures, whereas the godly man
looks to Eternity; D^mas cleaves to the present world, 2 Timothy 4.10. but Paul
to the eternal world, the world to come. 2. Christ died that we might be
delivered from it, This is a pregnant reason, one main reason of the death of
Christ was that thou should not be as the world is, if the shortness and
vanity of these things and their fading nature do not move thee, let the blood
and death of Christ prevail with thee; He was crucified that thou should be
crucified to the world, he died that thou should be dead to the world.

Use of Exhortation, To come out of the world in respect of your affections and
conversations, you cannot abide there no more then Lot in Sodom, and be saved,
yet, are not the greatest part of men, of the Church, thus of the world? Oh how
unworthy is this, that whereas thy Christianity, thy Religion engages thee not
to be of the world, thy conversation proves thou art; Well, as thou art of
this world, so shall thou perish with the judgments of the world; That lies
in darkness, and will be cast in utter darkness, this will be thy Portion,
and know thou must go out of the place of the world though thou will not out of
the wickedness of the world, the world cannot, will not hold thee always.

SERMON XXXII. Of the peculiar Propriety Gods People have in him and he in them.
JOH. 17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy
Word.
THE former part of this Verse related Christ's care and work to his Disciple,
This latter part gives a description of them, and all particulars therein are
very argumentative to prevail, that God should hear prayer for them:

Now here is a threefold description of them, wherein indeed is laid down
divinely the Cause of man's Salvation, with the effects flowing from it.

The two Causes are these,

1. The Eternal Election and absolute purpose of God to save such, Thine they
were.

2. The meritorious cause in and by which all the mercies they are elected to,
are obtained, and that is Christ, Thou have given them me, viz. as a Mediator.

3. The blessed effects of these causes, that are hidden, or at least every one
may pretend to them, but this is a discovering sign that excludes many, They
have kept thy Word.

At this time I shall treat only of the first cause, which indeed may be called
causa causae, the cause of all causes of our Salvation, and that is Gods
Election or gracious purpose to take some out of mankind, and to make them his
in a peculiar manner.

How many ways a people may be said to be Gods.
For a people may be said to be Gods diverse ways,

1. By right of Creation and dominion which he has thereby, and so all things
are his, Psa. 69.11. Both the reprobate and the godly are his in this sense,
it is impossible but that every creature should be his because he cannot
alienate his dominion and property

2. A people may be said to be his by an outward dispensation of the Covenant
of grace, Thus the people of the Jews are all of them called his people,
because they were under an outward administration of grace, when other Nations
of the world were not so.

Lastly, A people are his by Election and the gracious effects thereof, and so
only those that are the true Disciples of Christ are his, and in this sense
it is said, Thine they are and they have kept thy Word, which cannot be
understood of Judas, for he perfidiously forsook Christ.

Doct. That the truly godly are Gods people in a peculiar manner; Doct. That
the godly are Gods people in a peculiar manner.
They have an indeared propriety in God, They may say with David, Psa. 119.94.
I am thine, save me; This propriety is the ground of all comfort, of all
boldness at the Throne of grace; I am thine, pardon me; I am thine, sanctify
me; I am thine, leave me not.

Consider,
That we may be said to be the Lords, either generally by right of Creation and
his absolute Sovereignty; or 2. Peculiarly in a gracious manner: In the former
sense all mankind is said to be in Gods hand as the clay in the hand of the
Potter. so that if God from wise and most righteous ends have chosen some and
left others in their damnable estate, if we cannot say that all are by Gods
Election and Christ's by the execution of it, yet we have no cause to grudge or
repine, because all are Gods, to dispose of at his pleasure; For although his
holy and righteous nature is the cause that he cannot do any thing that is evil
or unjust, yet the dominion and sovereignty he has may make him dispose of all
things as he pleases, and if the Apostle in matters of Election and
Reprobation does urge this to stifle man's presumption, how much more may it
hold in inferior things, if God deny thee this or that mercy and gives it to
others, who art thou (O man) that arguest against God? We are his to be
disposed of as he pleases:

But 2. That which we are now to, speak to is the propriety and right God has
in some more then in others by his grace and mere love; Alas the former
propriety argues no comfort, the damned in hell, yea, the very devils may
plead the former; Lord, we are thine by creation and dominion, but that is no
ground of comfort, only this latter is an unanswerable argument, God himself
cannot deny this, when we can pray, Lord, we are thine by thy peculiar grace
and purpose of love, We did not of our selves become thus, it was thy goodness
to make us thy own; It was free for thee to have done with us as thou please,
but now we are thine, it belongs to thee to save thy own.

This right and propriety is mutually reciprocal; God is theirs and they are
Gods, only Gods propriety in them is the cause of their propriety in God, You
have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, says Christ, Joh. 15.16. So that
this is very comfortable to observe, that this right is mutual, God is their
God, and they are his people, God challenges them as his, and they may claim
God as theirs* as you see the Covenant of grace runs reciprocally, I will be
their God and they shall be my people, Jer. 31.33. this is expressed under
those similitudes of a Vine and a branch, of an husband and a Wife; The wife
has power over and right to her husband as well as the Husband to the Wife,
The Vine has a relation to the branches as well as the branches to the Vine,
only as the good of the branch lies in being in the Vine, but the Vine does
not fetch succor from the branch; So it is here, we are the Lords and the Lord
is ours, only the Lord has no advantage, nor has he any good in that we are
his, but the cause of our happiness is that he is ours, so then let the people
of God know, that the ground and rise of all their spiritual advantage is
because God has a propriety in them, not so much because they have a propriety
in God; It Is because God loves them, God will not loose what is his, that they
are preserved from sin and hell; Indeed till we be actually Gods by
believing, though we be his by Election, yet we cannot make use of our
Interest; That is hidden and secret; Paul though he was the Lords by Election
before the foundations of the world, yet till brought home, till believing, he
cannot say, the Lord is his, Therefore till God be ours both by Election and
the saving effects of it, we cannot say, I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is
mine, Cant. 2.16.

Our comfort and joy lies in the discovery of our propriety and interest in
God; for though we be his, yet if we believe it not, it is as if we did not
belong to him; It Is said, David encouraged himself in his God, 1 Samuel 30.6. The
evidence of his propriety was his encouragement, and Paul acknowledges an
appropiration, when speaking of Christ, he said, Who loved me and gave himself
for me, Gal. 2.20. Hence it is that our Savior upon his departure out of the
world does so fully inform his Disciples, that he will be theirs still though
he bodily leaves them; That the propriety and interest they have in him is not
taken away; Hence also it is that an elected man while unconverted, can take no
more comfort from God or his promise then a reprobate, because as yet his
propriety is not evidenced; As yet there is no ground of any claim or holy
boldness at the Throne of grace, Therefore it is a main duty of the people of
God to study this Point above all, viz. their propriety in God, Am I the Lords
or no? It Is not impossible to find out the truth of this, though Satan and our
hearts are very much tempting to the contrary; there are few that can escape
the storms and tempests that arise in this matter, and quietly anchor their
souls on God.

There are two special and eminent causes of our being the Lords treasure and
peculiar people; The one is the Lords power and might, the other his infinite
grace and love; That which is the Sun and gives heat and warmth more
especially, is the mercy and love of God, for we by sin though we could not
make our selves no creatures of his, so that he should not destroy or damn us,
yet we made our selves no children of his, we cast our selves out of his
favor, of a loving Father we made him an enraged enemy. and so accordingly we
pulled down all vengeance upon our heads, we forfeited every mercy we know not
the least drop of comfort that belongs unto us, but all the curses of God
threatened in his Law, this and no other could we expect, we ere no more the
Lords then the devils and damned in hell; Therefore it was the mere goodness
of God not to cast us off, but to make us his a second time upon better
Covenants of mercy, so that if any soul comes to know this, that he is now the
Lords, he has cause with astonishment and amazement to fall down and admite
the grace of God, we did not make our selves his, we could not become his
people of our own strength.

2. There was the power of God also greatly discovered, for seeing by sin we
become the devils, and he had a right to us, he is the god of the world, and he
rules in the hearts of those that are disobedient, Ephesians. 2. seeing I say he is
their Father and they are of him, and his works they do, it is impossible we
should be recovered out of his hands, till God who is stronger then he sets us
free; As our Savior implies in that Parable, when a strong man keeps the
house all things are quiet, till a stronger then he comes, Luke 11.22. It was
not then in the power of Man or Angels to expedite himself out of that bondage
and slavery, till God did wonderfully show his power, and as it was not in
their power, so neither in their will or heart; Though it be such an
unspeakable happ^nesse to be the Lords, yet no man naturally is willing to
this, he had rather be the devils and sins then the Lords, such cursed
wickedness is in every man's heart, and such enemies are we to our selves.

How many ways or upon how many Titles those that are godly are the Lords.
Fifthly; Though this expression be short [ Thine they are] yet it comprehends
very many precious and excellent particulars; For we are the Lords upon several
and various titles, therefore are we sure to continue his; It Is good the godly
man should know how many ways he is the Lords, that his heart may be enlarged
upon every particular.

He is the Lords by Election from all Eternity; Thou wast the Lords before thou
wast born, before thou had a being, when thou could have no thoughts of thy
self, he had thoughts of thee: The Scripture does often Ephesians. 1. Romans 9. comfort
the people of God, and quicken up their hearts with this particular, and
certainly it is a deep and overwhelming Meditation, Who am I Lord when in the
womb of nothing, or when born, yet wallowing in my blood, thinking, speaking,
and living against thee, and thou did from all Eternity know this, yet did
choose me to eternal life? Oh how many thousands are past by and I am chosen!
Was it not enough Lord not to have created me? It might have been mercy not to
have created me, that so I might not have been damned, but positively to
appoint me before the foundation of the world to such unspeakable glory, this
is that which astonisheth me; Oh my Soul and heart is too narrow if I had the
hearts of all the men in the world, they would be too little to conceive of
this goodness.

We are the Lords or Christ's, for I make this all one, by way of redemption and
conquest; We are bought with no less a price then the precious blood of
Christ, and, as the Apostle urges, are therefore no more our own, 1 Cor. 6.20.
Oh then consider how great a matter goes to make thee the Lords ere this
propriety could be attained, how dear did it cost Christ? he therefore became
man and did undergo all those evils and reproaches, that we might be his; It
cost him more to redeem us then to create us, so that it is no wonder if the
people of God may look upon themselves as the Lords peculiar, for there is a
good reason, They are bought at an high rate, Neither sin, or the devil, or the
world have done so much for thee; Oh then what shameful ingratitude is it to
live to them and not to God.

We are his new creature and a spiritual Creation; Thus he is said to create
us, and we are said to be his Children born of him; We are Gal. 2.10. called
his ^orkmanship created to good works, so that in this particular the people of
God are ramarkably his, They have his Image put upon them, They have a divi^^
nature bestowed upon them, It Is he that has made us not we our selves, even
(...) this sense Lev. 20.26. That ye should be mine severed from all other, oh
then know if there be no more in thee then what is in the world, or what thou
have by nature, thou art not yet the Lords; Does thy nature, thy frame of heart
discover an interest in God, then thou may take comfort, there are many who
desire to be the Lords by Redemption but not by Sanctification; They would have
Christ's blood theirs, but not his Spirit.

We are the Lords by Covenant and by Promise; and this is no mean foundation of
our propriety in him, The Promise runs, I will be their God and they shall
be my people, Jer. 31.33. We have Gods Word as well as his work causing us to
be his, and in this sense God is said to be the God of Abraham, and the God of
his Faithful Seed, viz. by a gracious promise; This is that which may bear up
the heart, how often do we by our sins and infirmities break off our propriety
and lose our interest as much as lies in us, If there were no gracious promise
of God, that for his Names sake and words sake we shall be his, then all those
uncomfortable Arminian Positions would take place, that we may be the Lords
people to day and the devils slaves to morrow; Thus our propriety would be
mutable every hour, and as our lives so our hopes and comforts would be like a
vapor and a bubble, but we are children of the promise, Gal. 3. And as that
gave Isaac life when the barren womb had no power, so it is the promise of God
begins and continues our spiritual life; It Is for his truths sake that sin and
Satan shall not quite overwhelm us, and how comfortable is this to plead,
Lord, we are thine, not by any merits of our own, not by any gracious works of
ours, but by thy promise; We do not believe, love thee, or persevere, and
therefore are thine, but because we are thine therefore we believe and
persevere.

We are the Lords by several peculiar relations, all which administer their
peculiar comfort; We are the Lords house in which he continually dwells and is
present; We are his Temple in a peculiar manner consecrated to him; We are his
branches and that denotes our intimate Union with him, as also our supply from
him; We are his Servants, we are his Children, we are his Wife, we are the
members of Christ's body; Oh these similitudes are full of worth, they
demonstrate not only the dignity but the blessedness of his people, and the
rich supply of comfort and grace from him; By these is signified that we are
the Lords in his most indeared affections, That no Father to a child, no
husband to a Wife is as God to us, Isa. 43.1. I have called thee by Name, thou
art mine.



First, It informs us that besides the general acts of faith a Christian
ought to have particular applicative ones; It Is not enough to believe in the
general, God is the God of those that fear him, that trust in him, but also in
particular with Thomas to say, My Lord, My God, Ioh. 20.28. Hence are those
expressions frequent, I am thy God, and the Lord your God; The child that
walks in darkness, having no light, is exhorted to trust in his God, Isa.
50.10. Oh it cannot be well with thee while thou art in generals only, if God
be a stranger to thee, if apprehended to be none of thy God, or if doubted of,
all this while thou art in a wilderness, not in the Land of Canaan, thou art
but in the porch not taken into the presence chamber; It Is a great sin of the
godly that they are not more particularly here, In other things you take no
delight unless it be yours, a pleasant garden if not yours, health if not
yours, makes no comfort, Propriety is the cause of joy; Oh then let not Satan,
nor the black doubts of thy own heart make thee keep at a distance from God,
Let not Popish or Arminian Doctrines that press no more then a general faith
any ways move thee, but as God is thine, so labor to believe and know he is
thine.

Use 2. Is God the godly man's God? May he say I am thine Lord, then what a
comfortable support is here? what enlargement of heart may this make several
ways.

1. It should cause holy boldness and earnest fervency in prayer; Thou art not
praying to God that is an adversary, a stranger, or unknown to thee; It may be
he will hear, it may be not; Oh such diffidence is very sinful, it is very
pleasing to God to pray to him in this propriety, because hereby thy hope to
speed will be greater, Thy thankfulness will be more, Thy delight and joy in
him will increase and flourish, and tormenting fears will be overcome.

2. It will uphold against all temptations within, in desertions, in blackness
of soul, yet if thou trustest on God as thy God, though thou do not feel him
to be so, this is good; O Lord, thou do but seem to withdraw thy self; O
Christ, thou art my brother Joseph though thou speak thus roughly.

3. In opposition from the world; O Lord, though all the world hate me, yet I
rejoice because I am thine; And why do the devils and wicked men hate me? Is it
not because I am thine* If I were one of theirs they would love me; Lord, am I
not thy treasure, thy Jewel, and if the devil or the world destroy me, is it
not thy loss as well as mine?

4, Contentation in every condition; Is God thy God? what need thou more? If
a man have the Sun, does he need the Stars? Oh our froward hearts in this
particular, If God deny not himself, will he deny other things necessary?

5. Here is a great argument to duty; If God be thine and thou his, Oh then
live to him, why is not thy heart Gods, thy tongue Gods? Would thou be the
Lords in counsel and not in duty? Oh think all I have is not mine but Gods.

Lastly, It Is terror to wicked men, this is the Fountain of all their calamity
and ruin, God is not their God, and then mercy is not their mercy, pardon is
not their pardon, heaven is not their heaven; Oh it is a beggarly thing to boast
in the wealth thou have, in the pleasures thou have, but as for God he is none
of thine: That Criples case was miserable, who when the Pool stirred had no man
to help him; Oh but thine is more miserable, that have no God to pity thee, no
God to pardon thee; The God you will cry to, the God you will pray to at death,
the God you must appear before is none of your God.

SERMON XXXIII. The truly Godly man only is obedient to Gods Word: Or, The
Great Character of a Christian.
JOH. 17.6. And they have kept thy Word.
WE pass over the second description which is Gods giving of some of mankind
to Christ as a Mediator, so that they are his trust, and it lies upon his
faithfulness to procure salvation for them, Only it is good to consider that
within six Verses he does thrice use this expression, They are given him by the
Father, for this lays the Axe to the very root of Arminianism; It Is not their
free will, nor their good improvement of the means of grace, but Gods gracious
giving of them to Christ that makes them have an Interest in salvation, and the
phrase does imply that there is a stint number and defined of such; There
cannot be more or less, so that the Arminian Dagon must needs fall before this
Ark, but this is spoken to already:

I therefore pass on to the effect of both these divine causes of our
Salvation; There was you heard the efficient cause Gods Election, the
meritorious cause Christ, and now we have the effect of these, which is by way
of sign to describe who they are that are the Lords, and thus given to Christ,
for they being hidden causes, and every one apt to pretend to them; This is the
differencing and evidencing mark, They keep the Word of God, So that by this we
see who are truly and indeed given of God to Christ, even such as keep his
Word; He does not say, that hears it or remembers it, or that understands it,
but that keeps it; The Scripture has equivalent expressions to this, sometimes
John 8.31. it is called continuing in his Word, because it is not enough for a
while to cleave to it unless we persevere; The Scripture gives sad Instances
of many that did not only hear but with joy for a season did receive Christ's
Word, yet they did not hold it fast to the end, they did not (...) as it is
Mat. 13. against all opposition whatsoever; The contrary to this is in the same
Chapter, v. 37. My Word has no place in you; Our Savior speaks it there as
the cause of all the wickedness that the Jews committed, because his Word had
no room in their hearts, You seek to kill me because my Word has no place in
you; This expression seems to denote such as are hardened and given up to a
reprobate sense, for the godly sometimes may not understand or delight, and
receive the Word, but that the Word should at no time find any place in a man's
heart, that is the mark of an hardened sinner, look to it then and tremble all
you who have many years lived under the Word preached, and yet to this day it
has had no place in your hearts, This is the dreadful condition of many
thousand hearers, sometimes this keeping of the Word is called hearing of the
Word, as in the same Chapter, v. 43. Ye cannot hear my Word because ye are not
of God, where hearing the Antecedent is put for the consequent obedience, and
the reason is because Faith and Obedience comes by hearing, and those that
delight and are swift to hear are commonly such as are ready to obey: Again
that which is here called keeping of the Word is in other places called keeping
the Commandments, only this is more sweet and kindly, for Word does properly
relate to him that is a Doctor or Teacher, Commandment to him that is a
Lawgiver; Now there is a great difference between the Imperious Sovereignty of
a Lawgiver and the benign condescension of a Teacher, but here we take it
largely for all that God has revealed to us, and our Savior says, they have
kept the Fathers Word, not his, because they looked upon Christ as the
Mediator sent from God, and so received not his Word as the word of a man but
as of God through and by him.

Doct.
Obs. That those only can plead a propriety and interest in God and Christ, who
are careful to keep his Word; All others do but cry Peace, Peace to themselves,
when demnation is at hand; So that this truth will do for the present as Christ
will do at the day of judgment, set the Goats on the left hand, and the sheep
on the right, It will be like the Fan in Christ's hand, it will winnow the
chaff from the wheat; Let us therefore consider how much is comprehended in
this phrase, to keep the Word of God.

What are the Ingredients of this duty?

And first, In that it is indefinitely spoken, They have kept thy Word, It Is
implied,

I.
1. They had a diligent respect to the Whole Word of God, he does not say, they
have kept part or some particulars, but thy Word; Now the word of God has
these parts: 1. It Is a word of doctrine to be understood and believed. 2. It Is
a word of commands to be obeyed. 3. It Is a word of threatening to be humbled at.


And lastly, It Is a word of promise and consolation to be rejoiced in, so that
he who keeps the Word of God keeps all these parts of it.

1.
1. There is the word of Doctrine to be understood and believed, and so to keep
his word, is to abhor all errors, all false doctrines, all unsound opinions,
Those that are Christ's Disciples are as tender about Gods truths as about his
commands, as they would not willingly transgress a command, so neither err
about the Truths of God; Hence Joh. 10. our Savior does at large show the true
character of his Sheep, They will not hear a strangers voice, They will flee
from a stranger, now who is a stranger? any one, though an Angel from heaven,
that shall bring any thing that is contrary to the Scripture, whosoever shall
obtrude that to be believed as a truth which is not in the word of God, this
man is a stranger, his doctrine is strange doctrine, the sheep of Christ will
not hear it; Oh then let the Disciples of Christ show their truth and solidity
of grace in this, that they dare not receive errors or heresies; Oh what pity
is it that thou who art tender about the commands of God would not commit a
sin for a world, sh^u^d^t be large and wanton in thy understanding about the
Truths of God, Remember it is his word, and so thou art to keep sound doctrine
by a pure faith as well as his Commandments by upright obedience, and the
reason is plain partly because the same God commands both, There is his
authority upon truths to be revealed as well as precepts to be obeyed; God
commands the captivity of your understanding as well as of your affections, and
partly because the true doctrine of God only is instrumental to holiness, a
man will never be godly by believing any error, Joh. 19. Sanctify them by thy
Truth thy Word is Truth, so that as in the use of Superstious customs, Popish
Sacraments, a man can never receive true grace because Gods promise and his
efficacy will go only together, thus, the more errors thou beleevest, the more
carnal thou will grow, God will never bless a lie, chafe and poison shall
never be true and good nourishing meat.

2. There is the Word of his Commandments, and often the Scripture says if ye
love me keep my Commandments, and neither may there be any doubt, 2. The word
of his Commandments.
but a true disciple of Christ will be careful herein, for how can he show his
Discipleship otherwise then by obedience to Gods precepts; It Is a plain mocking
of God outwardly to profess that we take him for our God, that we acknowledge
subjection to him, and yet disobey his commands, so that this particular cuts
off most hearers from being as yet at least in the number of those who can
truly plead a propriety in God, for does not their constant course of life
proclaim an open hostility against God; Is profaneness, pride, lusts, and
rioting the command of God? Has the Lord commanded thee to lie, swear, and
curse? Are they not rather the lusts of the devil? Oh that men should be so
foolish and senseless as to talk of God and Christ, and yet live in open
disobedience to them, D^dst thou belong to God, such would be thy love to him,
yea, such an heavenly nature would thou have, that Gods Law and thy heart
would have a sweet proportion and sutablenesse to one another, as David
professes often, it was sweeter then the honey and the honey comb; and Paul
delighted in the Law of God; The Law of sin in the unregenerate man does not
more please him then the Law of God does the regenerate man; There is not a
grievous burden in it; The holiness and spirituality of Gods cammand is that
which does exceedingly assure him.

3. There is the word of the eatning, and although in one sense we are not to
keep that, yet in another respect we are with trembling and fear to observe it;
3. The Word threatening.
Thus whatsoever God does forbid, threatening it either with temporal or eternal
judgments the godly have an holy awe of; They dare not displease God, How can
I do this and sin against God? says Joseph; Thus Josiah when the Law was read
his heart did melt and tremble, and therefore how graciously did God take
notice of that tender disposition in him; It Is a vain and erroneous conceit to
think the threatenings do not belong to the godly, or that they must not with
fear make use of them; For if so, why does the Scripture propound threatenings
even to the godly, and that very often, and who is there so godly that has not
the remainder of corruption in him, who needs not fear, as a bridle to curb
sin in him, especially when we see Adam though in the state of Integrity, was
yet threatened by God, if he did eat of the forbidden fruit? so that even then a
threatening had its proper use to Adam though altogether holy.

Lastly, There is the word of consolation or promise, 4. The word of
Consolation.
and that is worthy of all acceptance, as when a man takes a thing with both
his hands; It Is called embracing the Promises, Heb. 11. as gladly and
cheerfully as we do a dear Friend; Oh it is not enough in a dull cold manner to
think and hear of the promise, but thou art to run and embrace it as one
overjoyed, as Simeon did Christ in his arms, and then to think, thou even have
enough; This is fiducial recumbency on Christ, a holy boldness in God as a
Father, and herein the people of God are many times to be blamed, you receive
the true doctrine of God to believe it, his Commandments to obey them, his
threatenings you tremble under, but the promises by strong acts of faith you do
not embrace, you do not take him for your Mediator on whom you trust in the
midst of all your infirmities and weaknesses, yea, you rather doubt whether you
may or no lay hold on the promise, you say of it as Peter to Christ, Depart
from me for I am a sinner; you think Christ would be angry with you as that
woman thought If you touch the promise; Oh remember that the godly will keep
the word of promise, receive that as well as the command; They know it is a sin
of an high nature to refuse God comforting as well as commanding, yea in some
respects it is worse, for when you sin against the command of God, you sin
against his Soverraignty, but when against his promises you sin against his
love and goodness; That wherein he intends to get himself the greatest glory
by, oh then when Satan tempts and thy heart is cloudy, Thou puts off the
promise, think how can I do this and sin against God? If it were a command I
could not refuse it, and does not the same God urge faith to the promise.

II. Because it is Gods Word.
2. To keep his word does suppose that we keep it because it is his Word, Because
that God commands it; For no actions are holy till the motive be holy that
draws them out, and this we told you, is the reason why our Savior says,
They have kept thy Word, and not mine; They look upon him as the Mediator sent
by God; Thus the Thessalonians are commended because they received the Word
preached, Not as the word of man but as of God; This was the reason why God
would not take the wise men of the world, but contemptible Instruments, by whom
he wrought wonderful miracles, that so our faith might not be built on the
abilities or the wisdom of men; and hence it is that the Disciples Matthew and
others, who left all and followed Christ, did gloriously manifest their
obedience to God as God; It may fall out that the same things which God
commands we may do, as we see in Jehu, Judas, and others, but then not upon the
grounds, that God commands them; The Pharisee was commanded to fast and pray,
but not for vainglory and humane applause; Oh then if thou keep Gods Word look
it be because it is Gods Word, Let not any sinful or corrupt ingredients of thy
own mingle themselves, who would not have thought that Judas for a long while
kept Gods Word when he left all, wrought Miracles, and preached in the Name of
Christ, but he had an eye to the bag always* and that proved his undoing, This
will be a good touchstone to try thee.

3. He keeps Gods Word that receives it with his whole heart and soul; That
thinks it not enough to hear it, III. And receive it with the whole heart.
to remember it, to write it or repeat it, but to have it implanted in his
heart, and thereby to turn all his heart and affections into it; That he may be
a living Bible, or the Word of God in lively practice, as the Apostle says the
Corinthians were his Epistle to be read and seen of all men, 2 Cor. 3.2. so
should you be the Bible to be read and seen of all men; This is powerfully to
be pressed on you; That you be even the Bible of God to be read and seen of
men; This is the good and honest heart that retains the Word, for if the Word
be superficially received only, it will nor transform the whole man into its
likeness; The fire must have time, and then it will make even the hardest,
coldest Iron like it; This is represented by the Parable of the Leven, Mat.
13.33. hid in three pecks of meal, There must be time ere the Leven can diffuse
it is power; David expressed this well when he aid, He had hid the Word of God
in his heart, Psa. 119.11. Oh then if thou would have this propriety in God,
see how close and inward this Word is received into thee; If it be the bread of
life it is not enough to have it in the mouth, no, nor stomach, but it must be
digested, and so made the very flesh and blood of a man.

4. They keep the Word of God who make it a rule for their lives, that order
their conversation accordingly, for to hide it in the heart, IV. And make it a
Rule for their lives.
unless it be with David, that you may not transgress in your lives, is not
yet to attain to the due end; If ye know these things happy are ye if ye do
them; Many have Scripture in their hearts and memory but not in their lives;
David made this use of it, when he said, It was a Lamp and light to his feet,
and then he exhorts the young man so to attend it, Psa. 119 9. and thereby to
cleanse his ways: The Apostle James calls it a glass, Jam. 1.23. and then you
make use of it aright* when you thereby wash out all those spots that are in
thy life, and curest all thy wrinkles and deformities, look then to this, Does
the Word of God in thy mind and heart break out into thy life? Does it take
away the Leprosy there? certainly there is no other effectual means but this;
It Is the Word if any thing will forewarn thee of sin, neither mercies or
afflictions, nor thy own resolves and purposes, but the Word of God set home on
the heart that can make an holy change and alteration.

5. Then we keep the word of God when we have an high and choice esteem of it,
V. They that keep Gods Word have a high esteem of it.
when we can take more delight in that because of the spiritual effects of it,
then in any worldly pleasures or contents, as David does so often profess and
Job likewise, more then the honey or honeycomb, more then their appointed food;
Now the choice esteem of it must be.

1. For the spiritual effects of it, as David did, because it did enlighten his
mind, 1. For the spiritual effects of it.
forewarn him of sin, quicken him up to his duty, There may be a sinister and
corrupt end made of Gods Word, when we make it an argument only of dispute,
when we are diligent in it only to maintain opinions, in which sense Luther
said, it was the Heretics book, or when men read it only for the History of
it, or thereby to make notions, and to draw out some pleasing things to fancy;
Alas the Word of God was not given for this, no more then Manna was given to
satisfy curiosity, but to feed and nourish; Oh then take heed of spiritual
wantonness and luxury, to make the Bible the argument of thy opinions or
notions, thereby to get applause and esteem, No, thou are to prize it for the
spiritual effects of it; That it cures thee of thy blindness, spiritualizeth
thee against thy carnality quickens thee against thy formality.

2. We are to prize it for the necessity of it, because that contains the
words of eternal life, we cannot think a thought, or step a step, 2. Because
it is so necessary.
without the guidance of it; This is able to make thee wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. A man cannot have any wise thought or purpose toward heaven, but by
this; This made Job as you heard prize it more then his necessary food, for the
soul needs this bread of life as much as the body does material bread; If we
set up any other principle to walk by but this, we run our selves into the
mouth of hell.

3. For the usefulness of it, The Scripture is profitable for instruction, 3.
And so useful.
exhortation, and to make a man perfect for every good work, 2 Timothy 3. There is
no sin to be avoided, no duty to be done, but the Word of God will direct thee
therein; There is no temptation so subtle but this will discover it; If at any
time thou art unprepared and indisposed for such or such a duty, thou have no
heart to pray, no spirit to believe on the promise; Come to this and it will
quicken thee, for it is eyesalve to thy blindness; It Is an hammer against thy
corruptions, It Is fire to consume thy dross, It Is oil for thy wounds, It Is a
Catholicon, an universal Shop of all spiritual medicines; The rich man, the
poor man, the husband, the wife, all may learn from hence what to do.

4. The preciousnesse and dignity of it; 4. The Preciousnesse and dignity of it.
The Word of God is full of heavenly and supernatural excellency, especially
the Gospel, or the will of God revealed for the salvation of man, Oh how
welcome must these glad tidings be to the troubled sinner that has received
the sentence of condemnation upon his soul, Christ with his benefits discovered
are the only treasure to a tender broken heart; The Scriptures they are the
Mine wherein this treasure is to be found; They are the Field wherein this
pearl is hid, To you that believe Christ is precious, 1 Pet. 2.7. and it must
needs be so, for he is the Mediator between God and them, he has fullness for
all their wants and necessities; He is made wisdom, righteousness and
sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. It Is not what they are but what Christ is.

VI. They keep the Word who persevere in it notwithstanding all temptations.
Lastly, They keep the Word who persevere in it notwithstanding all the
temptations and difficulties; It Is both against the flesh and the devil for any
man to keep Christ's Word, and how many have begun well but at last have given
over to their great destruction, Therefore John says, If ye continue in my
word, and Mat. 13. The good ground is said to hold fast the Word, (...) the
word signifies so to hold as that many are striving to take it out of our
hearts again, and they are said to bring forth fruit in patience, because there
is great contrariety and opposition unto Gods Word, if possible, the fowls of
the air will take away this seed as soon as it is sown; The Apostle James
speaks of a forgetful hearer, Jam. 1.24. and therefore would have us abide
looking into the glass of the Word; Oh take we heed that we be not in the
number of those whose latter end is worse then the beginning; Take heed it be
not said, They are turned out or gone from us, because they were not of us.

Use of Instruction, what they may judge of themselves who though living long
under the means of grace find the Word has no place in their hearts, their
lives, their conversation proclaim to all, that they care not for Gods Word, Oh
what a sad Symptom is this of thy obstinate incurable condition, oh men to be
mourned over as dead and buried in the grave of sin! If ye were of God you
would hear his Word; It Is said of many, they did not hear the Word of God
because it was of the Lord to destroy them; O take heed this be not true of
thee.

Use of Exhortation to the godly, keep close to Gods Word, let your thoughts,
your affections, your actions be according to that, you never wound your
consciences, you never bring woe to your selves, you never are at a distance
from God but when you go astray from this rule; Keep to this as in an Ark, be
in all your relations by it, live by it, die by it, you are like a tree planted
by the waterside, while attending to this, and if you keep the Word of God
Gods Word will keep you. 1. In the hour of temptation that you sin not. 2. At
the hour of death that you sink not; It will be a tree of life to you, that we
through the Scriptures might have consolation, The Word that was your rule will
now be your comfort, it will speak nothing but consolation to thee, It will be
more then all friends, all comforters whatsoever. 3. It is everlasting, it will
abide for ever, the consolations of it will be eternal.

SERMON XXXIV. Of Growth in Grace, The Duty, Necessity, and Glory of it.
JOH. 17.7. Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou have given me
are of thee.
OUR Savior does still relate those commendable considerations that were in
his Disciples, that thereby God should hear his prayer for them; It was not for
worldly wicked sinners but such as knew and obeyed him that he prayed for; This
is the more to endear them to God.

Now as before he had commended them for their obedience, so here for their
faith in him as a Mediator, and this faith is necessary to all Christian
obedience; For without it a man by his Legal righteousness becomes a confident
presumer trusting in his works that he does, or else despaireth; Seeing it
impossible that ever he should attain to such a righteousness that is
required: Therefore when we have done all, and got up to the very pinnacle of
grace, we are in matter of Justification to leave our obedience and fly to
faith, so then we have the disciples Faith in Christ as a Mediator described
and commended.

1. By one main particular act which does synecdochically contain the whole,
They have known; By the next Verse it appears that believing and knowing are
all one.

2. There is the Object of their faith, which is twofold,

1. All things that the Father had given Christ.

2. That they were of him, the sense is, They knew whatsoever Christ had it was
given him of the Father, and that he had these things from him to be a
Mediator: Here then you see what an acceptable thing it is to God to believe
in Christ as sent by him; The poor humbled sinner he trembles and doubts
whether he may come to this Mediator or no; But you see it is a most pleasing
thing to God, for which he commends his disciples as much as their obedience,
that they did thus receive him.

In the next place consider the circumstance of time when this is affirmed of
them, Now they have known, etc. What is the sense of that? Did they not know
and believe in Christ before? Yes, but he speaks here of their proficiciency
and growth; Now they have known and believed more assuredly then ever; So that
it is not simply their faith but their growth and increase in faith, that our
Savior takes notice of; From whence observe,

That it is not enough for the people of God to have grace, Doct.
but they are to thrive and grow in it; It Is not enough for Gods people to have
grace but they must thrive and grow in it.
To be as the Disciples more assuredly believing, so as if they did not at all
believe before. Thou art so far to exceed thy self over what thou wast once,
that thou may say my faith, my heavenly-mindednesse, my love to God was none
at all comparatively to what it is now. This is a necessary Subject to preach
on, when you see so many withered Trees, so many sick of a consumption in
grace; Alas of how many may you say the contrary; They did once believe, they
were once zealous, but now you may say they have none of these respectively to
what they had; God is not satisfied with the truth of grace unless there be
also growth in grace; If thou have received a Talent, and can not say, Thy
five has gained a ten, there is a fearful curse against thee as an
unprofitable Servant, Joh. 15.2. See what quick work God makes, and how it is
growth he looks at, Every branch in him that brings not forth fruit he takes
away; God loves not slothfulness and unprofitablenesse no more then
profaneness; He does not say, If it bring forth poisonous fruit or wild
grapes, but if it bring forth no good fruit, and if any does fructify, then he
purges it that it may bring forth more fruit; See here the Husbandmans care is
still for more fruit; If thou art no better then thou wast, if thy faith, thy
love have not an increase Gods expectations are not answered; Hence Heb 6.
those that are babes in Christ are severely reproved, and they are to be
carried on to perfection; Not to grow is a kind of barrenness, yea, it is a
degree to Apostatize; Therefore the Apostle in that place threatens such Non
proficients with that dreadful sin of Apostasy, 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us perfect
holiness in the fear of God; It Is not enough to have holiness but we are to
perfect it, and he that has any fear of God will thus endeavor, and certainly
if the rich man would have more wealth, the great man more greatness, how much
rather the godly man, more godliness.

How many ways the graces of Gods people are to grow and thrive
To open this let us consider how many ways the graces of Gods people are to
grow and thrive,

And first In respect of their degrees and measure, The weak faith is to grow a
strong faith, their strong faith a stronger, and thus of their love of God;
Therefore love is required with all the soul and all the might; I. In respect
of degrees and measure.
Mat. 22. The duty of growth in grace is required of the highest Giant as well
as the lowest dwarf in grace, Phil 3. See how Paul stretches out himself to
run as if he were but a new beginner; There is not in the growth of grace as in
nature a term or stint, then they go no further; No, but as they say of the
Crocodile he grows as long as he lives, and when he cease to grow, he
cease to live; Thus it is in the work of grace, There is a necessity of
growing while any Christian life is in thee; Thy grace may be made better and
more confirmed grace; That man knows not what godliness is, that can say,
Soul, take thy ease, thou have godliness enough, No, they cry out, Their
leanness, their poverty, they are climbing up the hill, but cannot get to the
top; Let then the man that fears God study the improvement of his graces; Oh
say, There is a greater measure and further degrees yet to be had, I am ashamed
to see how short I come of what ^ought to be; I stagger and reel through doubts
and unbelief, My heart is divided between God and the creature; Oh how often is
my heart even as cold as a stone: There are no burning affections, (...) hot
zeal, I see a better way; Oh that I could attain unto it.

II. Depth and rooting.
Secondly, Their growth ought to be in depth and rooting of their graces; As the
Apostle speaks of the dimensions of Gods love, it has a depth, and a breath,
Ephesians. 1. Thus the love of the godly and all their graces have their spiritual
dimensions, and as before we spoke of their growth in height, so now of growth
downwards, in a better setl^ng and deeper radicating of their holiness within
them; Our Savior speaks of a foolish builder, who did not dig deep enough, nor
build on a rock, Mat. 7.26. and the three sort of hearers did all miscarry upon
this Point; There was not root rnough; What makes the backsliding Demas, the
apostate Judas, but neglect of rooting? Oh then look every day that thy
Repentance root it self more in the heart, That thy faith be more deeply
implanted in thee, otherwise when a temptation or storm arises, thou will be
plucked up by the roots, and certainly we may see this is the root of all evil
to professors; They measure their graces by the boughs and branches thereof,
not by the rooting; whereas we see in all trees the deeper the rooting is the
better they are enabled to spread abroad, sear then lest thy graces be not got
to the bottom of thy heart, fear lest something lie closer and deeper in thy
heart then grace does.

Thirdly, They may grow in the extension and kinds of all graces; III. In the
extension and kind of all graces.
It Is the Apostle bids them add virtue to temperance, and so chains graces
together, 1 Pet. 1. The people of God they sometimes are careful to avoid such
and such sins, but then there are others either that they are not convinced of
or do not attend unto, and there they sail frequently, but the god^y man is to
grow in extension, he is to avoid one sin as well as another; He is to
perform one duty as well as another; Oh then remember the work of grace is an
exact and circumspect thing; There go many things to make a man godly, we may
leave out many necessary ingredients and then mar the whole box of ointment;
David prayed to be cleansed from secret sins, Psa. 19.13. such as he did not
understand to be sins; Oh it is happy when the godly are thus growing that they
leave off many foolish customs they once practiced; That they set upon many
duties they once wholly omitted; These disciples how hardly were they drawn off
from many doctrines that they had been brought up in.

Fourthly, IV. In the means and Instruments of their graces.
They are to grow not only in their graces but in the means and instrument of
their graces; Thus prayer, hearing the Word, these are the means of growing in
grace, Receive the ingrafted Word of God that ye may grow thereby; They are to
pray better, to hear better, to sanctify the Sabbaths more spiritually, never
think of growing in grace, if thou art not more careful in the use of them,
for upon these depend thy spiritual increase, as upon good digestion bodily
growth; Wonder not then at thy leanness and barrenness if thou art not better
in performing of duties; Here begins the consumption; Hence are thy
languishings and decays, Heb. 10. The Apostle speaking of those who willingly
sin by a ^otal Apostasy, lays the foundation of this in that they forsook the
Assemblies; The way then to keep up the life and increase of grace is to keep
up duties in their power and vigor, formality and customarinesse in them will
make thee quickly like a withered branch; but oh the deep wounds and blows that
even the godly get in their consciences hereby; They pray no more fervently,
They hear no more affectionately, and accordingly in their lives they are so
many dry bones.

Fifthly, The people of God may grow by exciting and stirring up others to
grow; V. By exciting others to grow
And indeed it is a special means to quicken our selves by quickening up others,
2 These. 1.3. They are commended in that their faith did grow exceedingly, which
was not only true in the parts of their faith, but that also it did diffuse it
self to others; They brought on many others also to believe, Ephesians. 2.21. The
godly are said to grow up to an holy Temple, that implies, they do not only
grow singly in themselves but in an united manner; As live coals laid together
grow hotter by one another, so that this growth of grace respects the Church of
God as a community, as a Society, grace grows by heavenly and holy communion;
As the members of the body grow by a mutual assistance and a member separated
from the body cannot grow, so it is here; There is no such admirable speedy way
of growth as when the people of God speak often and exhort one another, when
they provoke one another, and certainly herein lies a great fault; The sheep
of God are scattered from one another what by difference of opinions, and what
by carnal suspicions, that thereby they cannot say, I have been an helper to
such a man's faith, to such a man's repentance; Thy tongue has not been a Tree
of life, as it should be; Thy light did not so shine, that others might
glorify God for thee; Oh then let the people of God put themselves on this way
of growth.

VI. In solidity and fortitude.
Sixthly, The people of God are to grow in the solidity and fortitude of their
graces, That thereby they may overcome such temptations which the babes of
Christ cannot; This solidity is seen in two things: 1. The soundness of their
Judgment. 2. The fortitude and heavenly hardship of their hearts: The
soundness of judgment, This is a special matter, for we see Romans 14. and Act.
15. what sad rents and dissentions the weak judgments of some brethren made in
the Church, insomuch that the Apostle gives many directions therein; Those
that are new Converts and have felt the power and guilt of sin, and the
sweetness of Gods favor have many times strong affections, but weak judgemens
and upon such the devil with his heretical instruments does commonly prevail;
A^ at first he began with Eve to beguil her, and by her to seduce her husband:
Oh then let the Children of God look to themselves in the day of their
espousals to Christ, when all is honey and ravishment; It Is hard for them to
consolidate and settle their judgments; Hence the Apostle blames those that
were children, and had not their senses exercised to discern between good and
evil, Heb 5.14. Oh then account it an especial matter in Religion, to grow in a
sound mind, to be more solid in judgment; This will make thee discern between
good and evil, between what is of God and what is of the devil: 2. In fortitude
of spirit; The Apostle 2 Timothy 2.3. bids Timothy endure hardship as a Soldier
of Christ, and in the Revelation c. 3. The promise is made to him that
overcomes, and our Savior says, Blessed is he that endures to the end, Mat.
26. many begin in the Spirit, and end in the flesh; Oh it is an admirable matter
to grow hardy in Religion, to be able to endure scoffs, reproaches, and the
loss of all dear comforts, as the Apostle said, You have not yet resisted to
blood, Heb. 12.4. The people of God are to account all conflicts and encounters
light till they come to blood it self, and even then to remember that he who
would have his life shall lose it; Our Savior did train up his Disciples at
the very beginning in this hard service; Hence it is that Christianity is
compared to a warfare, to running in a race, to fighting not only with flesh
and blood but even Prinoipalities in high places, so that thou art not to
expect a Bed of Roses in the way to heaven.

Grounds and motives.
Now the grounds and motives why the people of God are not to be contented with
the foundation and principles of grace, but still to proceed in it.

Because God accounts non-improvement an unprofitablenesse, He that hid his
talent though he did not imbezill it, yet is called an unprofitable servant,
Mat. 25.30. and he is to be cast into utter darkness; Oh this is terrible to
consider, that God is not only angry with thy sins, with thy profaneness, but
thy barrenness, thy impotent graces, That thou art not got to a higher form:
Is not the Father angry with his child though he diligently go to School, if
he thrive not, and be always in the same Lesson, Shall he be at all that cost
for no more, and thus shall God so patiently bear with thee? give thee all
opportunities and means of grace, and yet thou move on the same hinge; Oh ye
that are the Children of God, you would fain have comfort, you would have
assurance, How can it be when there is no growth? Is not God angry for those
weak graces, that still thou art a babe? Did he not tell the Church Rev. 2. he
had something against her, because her works were not perfect, were not filled
up? Oh here were many empty holes, oh what godly man may not tremble at this,
who has not much emptiness that needs to be filled up?

The end of the Ministry to the godly is for their growth and increase, Ephesians.
4.15. 1 Pet. 2.2. Alas, we preach not to thee for thy conversion, we come not
to persuade thee to come out of Egypt, that is done already; Now then consider
why has God appointed a Ministry and daily preaching, and that even to the
godly as well as others; Is it not to increase thy spiritual life and heat? Is
it not to be a goad in thy side to prick thee forward; You cannot give a good
account of any Sermon unless it has made thee grow; Every Sabbath day will be
a dreadful witness against thee unless it make thee grow; Thy work is not to
have grace but to grow in it, and for this end we preach, and you hear.

The end of all Gods afflictions and chastisements upon thee are to make thee
grow, Joh. 15. He purges it that it may bring forth more fruit; Thou wondrest
why Gods hand is so sore and continuing upon thee: Thou say what is the sin?
and oh that I could find it out; Is not thy slothfulness, thy
unprofitablenesse, an apparent sin? Does not God plainly aim at this to have
thy heart more heavenly, thy affections more quickened and enlivened, Is not
this fire to get out thy dross? Hence in heaven there shall be no Ministry, no
afflictions, because the godly are then come to the full measure of their
graces.

We are to grow because of the excellency and preciousnesse that is in grace:
The more we eat of this honey we cannot but desire to have more of it; If thou
have known what an excellent comfortable thing it is to walk holily; Oh how
unsatified will thy heart be to have still more and more of it, so that it is a
dishonor to God and his way when thou art negligent and slothful, what evil
have thou found? What hurt is there in godliness? What distaste does it give
thee? Oh what a shame is it that the rich man shall desire more wealth, still
he has not enough, but as riches increase, his affections increase, when yet
they are not able to make happy in a solid manner; and that thy heart should be
thus narrow and empty toward God!

Use, The woeful estate of those who in stead of growing more holy, Use.
grow more wicked and ungodly; They add sin to sin daily, once they had some
tremblings, some terrors of conscience, but now they are past all feeling,
These grow as the calves of the Stall grow, to destruction and damnation; and
this is the case of many that live under the Ministry, they grow more blind,
more obstinate, more wicked, This is a dreadful speech, Let him that is wicked
be wicked still, yea more wicked.

SERMON XXXV. Of Faith in Christ the Mediator sent of God, With the
Ingredients or Concomitant Acts, of it.
JOH. 17.7. Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou have given me
are of thee.
THE circumstance of time being dispatched which declared the Disciples growth
and proficiency.

We proceed to the Object of their faith and knowledge, That Christ had all
things from the Father; and so was the Messiah sent by him; The excellency and
dignity of this Faith is to be handled in the next verse.

We shall here take notice of the nature of it;

In the 2d verse of this Chapter it was made Eternal life to know Jesus Christ
as sent by the Father, and here our Savior affirms that his Disciples had
this knowledge, viz. That he was the true Messiah in whom alone salvation is to
be expected: That he was no false Prophet or Impostor, as his adversaries
accused, but they knew he came from God, and acknowledged every thing he had to
be of God, so that this expression may be parallelled with that confession
Peter made in the Name of the disciples, Joh. 6.69. We believe and are sure
that thou art that Christ the Son of the living God; Therefore they would not
leave him because he only had the words of eternal life.

Doct. It Is our duty to know and believe in Christ as the only Mediator sent by
God.
Obs. It Is our special duty to know and believe in Christ, as the only Mediator
sent by God; We are to know Christ is of God appointed to be our Savior; This
is the Faith so often required in the Gospel, and which is so powerful that he
who believes shall be saved, but he that does not the anger of God abides on
him; and indeed how can he deserve the Title and Name of a Christian that does
not thus know or believe, but upon search it will appear that there are few do
thus know Christ.

To open this Point, the Doctrine has three particulars;

First implied, That whatsoever Christ had as Mediator he had it not for
himself but in reference to us.

2. That this was wholly of Gods will and appointment that he should have for
us.

3. That it is our duty to believe in and receive him thus appointed by God, And
all these particulars will be accounted sweeter then the honeycomb to the empty
hungry soul, that finds it self undone without Christ; Though to those who are
full of their sins or their own righteousness this very honeycomb is loathsome;
Oh then that this Truth might overtake you that hear it, as David did the poor
fainting famished Amalekite, to whom those clusters of Raisins he gave were so
reviving, if with Jonathan you taste but a little of this honey, your eyes will
be enlightened.

First, The implied Truth is, That whatsoever Christ had or was, I. What Christ
had or was as Mediator was for us.
was not for himself but for us; His fullness was for our emptiness, his
atonement for our sins; Even as the full breasts are for suck to the child, or
as the efficacy and virtue of the head is for the parts of the body, and as the
fullness of the Fountain is for the streams; Thus Isa. 9. To us a Son is born,
to us a child is given, All that Christ had and was it was ours, it was for
our advantge; Therefore he was called Emmanuel, God with us, and 1 Cor. 1.30.
Christ is made of God unto us wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification, So
that it is plain Christ was not a Messiah, a Mediator, in reference to himself,
that is impossible, but to us: For if we take the main particulars in Christ,
we shall see how they all tend to believers, that had it not been for their
good, such things had never been.

1. His Incarnation and becoming man, This was of God for us, I. His
Incarnation.
To us a child is born, as you heard, not to Angels, nor for any other end,
There had not been such a truth in the Word as God to become man, but for the
godly man's necessity and salvation; This is more then to say, The world and all
the Creatures were made for man, and yet if the Psalmist was so affected that
all things in the earth were for man, how much more then that the Word is made
flesh for man, oh what an encouragement have the true Disciples of Christ from
this, was not such a glorious mystery performed for my sake, was it not for me
that God was made man? For this you must know, that if there had been but one
man of all mankind to be saved, Christ would have died, as Paul said, Who gave
himself for me, Gal. 2.20. and it was not the multitude of believers which made
Christ become man, for alas they are but gleanings in respect of all mankind,
but it was because such were given to him as a Mediator, and so he would be
faithful for one as well as for many.

2. All that Christ did it was not in reference to himself but for us; 2. All
that he did His Miracles.
All the Miracles he wrought it was for Believers, he did them not for his
glory and honor, as he speaks about Lazarus his being dead, Joh. 11. I was
glad for your sakes, because that Miracles might tend to their Confirmation in
the Faith.

Thus Christ became obedient to the Law, and fulfilled the righteousness
thereof for our sakes, Oh what an admirable overwhelming Point is this,
Obedience to the Law.
that all the labor and obedience which Christ performed, of which he said, It
was meat and drink to do his Fathers will, Joh. 4. That all this should not be
for himself, but in reference to us; How may this fill our hearts and mouths
with joy and confidence at the Throne of grace; O Lord, why did Christ fulfill
all righteousness? why did he perfectly obey the Law, So that no fault should
be found in him? Was not all this for me? Did he need this himself?

3. His sufferings and rendering up himself as an atonement and Sacrifice upon
the Cross, This also was wholly of God for us; His sufferings.
The Prophet Isaiah is affected with it, He laid upon him the iniquities of us
all, and by his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.5. Thus every where his death is
said to be for us, he died for us, he gave himself for us, and it must needs be
so, for in him was found nothing worthy of death; There was no sin or guile
found in him, he was not under that Sentence pronounced upon Adam and his
posterity: And here again, the people of God may lift up their heads wiih joy,
Christ died, he became a Sacrifice to the justice of God not because of himself
but of us; Hence it is said, His blood speaks better things then that of Abel
Heb. 12.24. Abels blood cried for vengeance, this for mercy, and if Abel though
dead speaks, how much more must Christ who though dead is risen again: May
not this be an Axe laid to the root of all thy unbelief? Shall the godly heart
be any more bowed down when he shall remember all those Agonies which Christ
did undergo were for us; Shall thy sins be accounted great, and Christ's death
not greater? Go thou troubled and grieved Soul, we will give thee leave to
aggravate thy sins to the highest; Let them be never so bloody, yea, had thou
committed more then thou have done, yea, all that all the wicked men of the
world have done, Were all their sins thine? yet here is the Red Sea to drown
that great Egyptian host; Oh that men could have as good cause to judge that
they are ingrafted in Christ, and are such to whom Christ belongs, as they may
conclude that if such, Christ's death does overcome all their sins; It was
nothing In Christ but in thee that made him a Curse upon the Cross.

The benefits of his Mediation.
4. The fruits and benefits of Christ's Mediation did not redound to him but to
thee; Justification and remission of sins, Sanctification of our natures,
Victory over lusts, assurance of Gods favor, all these come by Christ, but to
those only for whom he was appointed a Savior, he needed none of these
privileges, no more then the heavens where the Sun and Stars are do need
rain; Oh then set open the gates of thy Soul wide through faith, that thou
may be satisfied and made happy with these mercies; In this dead Lion thou
may find much honey for thy self; Oh Lord, why are all these privileges
annexed to thy death? Is it because thou have any want, or thou have any need
of them? No, but that my emptiness may be filled, my dark heart enlightened,
my naked soul covered: Thus you see what is implied.

II Christ Media^i^^ for us is of God the Father.
Secondly, The second particular is, That all this is of God the Father; It Is
his will and gracious appointment that Christ should do all these things for
his: They have known that all I have is of thee, and thou have sent me; So the
Apostle, It pleased the Father that in Christ all fullness should dwell, Col.
1.14. And here is admirable ground of hopes and confidence, for it is not
against the Fathers will, yea, all this is of his gracious appointment, that
Christ should be thus a Mediator for his Children; Doubt not then whether the
Father will accept of what Christ has done or not; Do not question whether he
will receive thee in Christ's Name, for the Father has manifested as great
willingness for thy Salvation as the Son; Say then, Oh holy Father, here is
sure a wonderful way for my acceptance at the Throne of grace, that I am
astonished at it, and it is of thy goodness and grace that such a way is
procured; Oh what then can hinder but that I be justified; The Father willing,
and the Son willing, yea, the Father loving Christ, because he laid down his
life for the Sheep, Joh. 10.17. All this makes for the encouragement of the
godly.

III. It Is the duty of all Gods people to believe this fullness in Christ for
them.

The ingredients or concomitants of Faith.


The third particular is, That it is the duty of all Gods Children to know and
believe this fullness in Christ for them, and to look upon Christ with all his
benefits as for them: Now faith thus fixed on Christ has these either
ingredient or concomitant acts and effects.

1. There is a knowledge and a sound discovery of this sufficiency in Christ;
You see here knowing and believing put together; Ignorance of this Point that
all in Christ is for the believer breeds much dispondency, and takes off the
wheels of thy Chariots: They look upon Christ as a Fountain sealed up, as a
garden enclosed, They apprehend it is not for every godly person to go and drink
of this fountain, 1.
unless attaining to such an high measure of grace; Whereas a true knowledge
of the end and use of Christ would quickly dispell all such black thoughts.

2. To believe does imply a relying and resting of the soul upon this fullness;
2. A relying and resting of the soul upon Christ's fullness
Christ with his righteousness is the center of his heart; He trusts and puts
his whole confidence in it; He need go out no further to seek, here is enough,
he fears no breaking, no shaking, as long as Christ will last and endure, so
long shall he; As a man that treads on the firm ground, he fears not as he that
walks on slippery Ice; Thus the godly man leans on a firm foundation, but he
that trusts in his own righteousness or works, melts as Ice before the Sun.

3. There is a full satisfaction of the soul in this believing; So that it
removes all cares and fears, Have I enough or no? Is it sufficient to carry me
out? 3. There is a full satisfaction of the soul in this believing.
He is therefore said to save to the uttermost, Heb. 5. and it is called The
riches of grace by Christ, the unsearchable riches; He therefore that believes
in Christ thus as sent of God, he may say, Return O my soul into thy Rest, for
the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee; what can satisfy if a Christ with
all his benefits cannot; yea, if a godly man were to desire a way for to put
him out of all doubts between God and his soul, what better way could he
require then this.

4. In believing there is a receiving, and a participation of all that Christ
has, 4. A receiving of what Christ has.
and hence receiving and believing is put for one another; It Is also
metaphorically expressed by eating and drinking, Joh 6. That as by those
actions we receive meat, and it becomes our very substance, so it is here, by
believing in him Christ is made ours, even all that he has is ours; Thus by
Faith we are said to be branches partaking of the fatness of the Olive, Romans
11. Oh then how excellent is this act of Faith, which is the hand to put on all
the glorious robes of Christ upon our soul; It being not enough to know there
is a Christ so qualified unless he become ours.

5. This believing works an holy confidence and boldness at the Throne of
grace; It makes our prayers and duties full of fervency and alacrity, Ephesians. 5. A
holy boldness at the Throne of grace.
3.12. We come with boldness through Faith; We see the Scepter is held out,
and so we may readily enter in, and Heb. 4.16. Let us come with boldness to
the Throne of grace; Oh how much should the broken hearted sinner live in the
Meditation of these things, God opens the way by his grace, and thou shuttest
it by thy unbelief; Through Christ the way to heaven is made a broad way, and
thy doubtings make it narrow: When Christ calls Peter to come to him, though
upon the waters, it is not presumption but disobedience if Peter refuse?

6. This is accompanied with large and vast thoughts of Christ; 6. Large and
vast thoughts of Christ.
This file their hearts and mouths with Christ, as you see the Apostle Paul in
every verse almost affectionately mentioning him, Phil. 3. with what disdain
does he renounce and throw away all things in comparison of Christ, The
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, and at another time, He would know
nothing but Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. He that does thus believe in Christ
so manifested, cannot but have his soul and all within him taken up this way;
Though there be many speak of Christ, and talk of Christ, yet none has him
indeed; and none do truly esteem him but such persons as these; Is then Christ
dearer and closer to thy heart then all earthly comforts and delights? Can
thou say, the thoughts of Christ are sweet, the meditations about him are my
meat and drink all the day long, this is precious.

Lastly, This purifieth the heart, and makes us an holy, heavenly people; 8.
Faith purifieth and makes holy.
If we be risen with Christ, we set our affections on things above, Col. 3.1,
2. and he that has this hope purifieth himself as God is pure, 1 John 3.3.
Act. 15 9. As the Sun brings heat and light where it is, so where faith is it
makes the heat active and operative, as Heb. 11. This is the beholding of God
as in a glass, whereby we are transformed into his Image from grace to grace;
Believing gets spiritual strength, even as eating and drinking does bodily;
Therefore while thou abatest in thy faith thou do not only lose thy comfort
but thy spiritual strength If thou cease to believe not only doubts and fears
but even lusts and sins will prevail over thee; Thus you see what it is to
believe in Christ thus manifested.

Why it is the duty of Gods people thus to know and believe on Christ.
Now the grounds why it is the duty of Gods people thus to know and believe are,

Because Christ would otherwise be in vain, he would not be of that use and
improvement God has appointed him for; If the child will not suck, the
breasts are filled in vain; If the Prodigal will not eat, the fatted Calf is in
vain provided; The Fountain runs in vain if none will drink of it; Oh then
consider this, if I do not by faith thus receive Christ, I do as much as lies
in me, make Christ of none effect; I do as much as lies in me make as if there
had never been such a person as Christ; If then the Apostle makes those false
Teachers in such a dangerous estate, that by corrupt opinions did make Christ
to die in vain, and his Cross of none effect, no less provoking must thy sin
of unbelief be, It takes Christ out of the world.

because in and through him God does magnify his glory: His attributes of
grace, mercy, and unspeakable bounty are exalted through Christ; If then we do
not thus receive Christ, we deprive God of all this intended glory; The
Creation of the world, and all the merciful wondrous works God has done for
his Church, were not intended to exalt God as Christ in all his benefits, and
therefore if it be so great a sin not to give God the glory in them, how
inexcusable will it be to fail in this.

The insufficiency of all other things to satisfy the broken and troubled
heart, may justly make the godly fly to this; So the disciples being to
acknowledge Christ as the Mediator, they say, Whither should we go, thou have
the words of Eternal life; If they run to their duties, to their graces, these
are too weak to lean upon, They are as Noah's Dove that finds the waters
covering all the Mountains and highest Trees; Seeing then we must have
something to fix all our hopes and affections upon, and all other things will
fail, how unwise are the godly if they keep a moment from Christ.

Our necessity may enforce us; And this flows from the forenamed
insufficiency in all other things; Does not thy own heart disquiet thee? Does
not the perfect Law trouble thee? Does not the devil accuse thee? and shall not
all this make thee seek out for that which will answer all; Paul tried all
other things but he found nothing like Christ, and thou art the rather to
improve this to the full, because there is not the least ability or privilege
in Christ, that thou can spare; Christ is all over bread and food; There is
nothing in Christ but is of special use; Oh then what folly is it that thou
should bour to know the fullness of any creature for thy wants, and not of
Christ; He is an Ocean, and not one drop in him but is of admirable efficacy;
He is a Pearl, and so the least of that must be very precious, if thou
continuest in fears and lusts, it is because thou do not improve all of
Chrsst; It Is not enough to touch the hemme of his garment, but thou must
receive whole Christ.

Use.
Use of Instruction, That all those sinners who love their sins and will not
depart from them, are wholly barred from all this comfort, stand aloof off, and
bewail thy Leprosy; Christ received not that fullness from his Father for thee
abiding and continuing in thy sins; Oh miserable and wretched though they live
in ease and pleasures, having all things their carnal appetites desire, one
thing is necessary, and that thou want: Oh that the Spirit of God would
convince such of their danger, their poverty and nakedness, though they think
they want nothing; I tell thee this good Samaritan as well as the Priest will
pass by thee, Christ as well as the Law speaks no comfort to thee, yea, the
blood of Christ speaks more terrible things then the blood of Abel, Thy
condemnation will be the greater, because Christ came (...) the world, because
he was crucified; All thy other sins have not that aggravation, as thy
rejecting of grace, of how much sorer punishment says the Apostle, shall such
an one be thought worthy.

Use 2. of direction to the people of God, if thou fittest mourning like
Rachel, and refusest to be comforted, blame thy own self; It Is thy ignorance
and folly, thy unbelief and doubts cause all this; What could God have done
more? What could Christ have done more then they have done, yet thou take no
comfort hereby; Oh that thou should only aggravate thy sin and thy
unworthiness, and not be as diligent to study and find out all the fullness
in Christ, Christ as a Mediator ordained by God should be the Book thou art to
read always, not a Page, not a word but thou should be acquainted with it;
Oh bewail thy self and say, how many comforts, how many privileges have I
bereaved my self of; I have kept my self in the dark, yea, in the Whales belly,
and thought of nothing but sin, and hell, and damation; Oh what little cause I
had to wrong my self and Christ so much: Oh think Christ bids thee, as the
Prophet did that Woman, bring as many cruses as thou can, I have Oil enough
to fill all, and thou art so froward thou will not; Oh think Christ says to
thee, Was it not enough that I lived for thee, I died for thee, but thou will
as much as lies in thee make me do all this in vain; Thou sit complaining
and bewailing, and Christ he complains of thee, Learn then at last that
heavenly prudence and Evangelicall skill to make use of whole Christ and all of
Christ for thy spiritual good.

SERMON XXXVI. Of Obedience to all the Commandments of God, Showing, That that
only is truly Obedience, And the Property of a Godly man.
JOH. 17.8. For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, And they
have received them, etc.
OUR Savior in this Verse does more largely amplify that to which he had in
the 7th Verse spoken more briefly, so that he does still continue in narrating
and commending the Disciples Obedience and Faith, which are the Jachin and the
Boaz, the two Pillars of practical Christianity; Their obedience is commended
in the former part,

1. By their readiness and willingness (...), They have received, as
willingly as men do food, or gold and silver; They put forth their hands to
take it with all delight, I mean the hands of their soul, viz. their affections
which are both the feet and the hands of the soul.

2. There is the Object, Thy words. Where

1. We see, That is only true and proper obedience which Gods Word requires;
Though we be never so diligent and industrious, yet if the Word of God commands
not such things; it is no obedience.

2. The Universality, Thy words, that is, collectively and universally, They
had an equal respect to all.

3. These words are described by the Original of them, The words thou gave
me, So that Christ though head of the Church, yet did not deliver any thing to
be believed or obeyed but what he had received of the Father, an excellent
President for all the Ministers of the Gospel; We see then every crum in this
bread of life is nourishing, and we will not lose any.

1. Whereas we see that Obedience does always relate to some Word of God, and
that we may not of our own heads choose to do what we please in matters of
Religion; We observe,

Doct. That only is proper obedience that has the Word of God requiring it.
That that only is proper and acceptable Obedience which has the Word of God
requiring it; We are apt to make Religion and godliness that which our own
humors fancy, yea, and sometimes our lusts do suggest; Hence every one is apt
to judge of another as religious and godly, not by the rule of the Word, but by
such principles as he has taken up for himself; Thus in Popery he is judged a
very pious and obedient man, who is most industriously diligent in all that
invented worship the Church of Rome abounded with; Though there be not one i^^a
or tittle for it in Gods Word, but as the Word of God is the rule of faith, so
is it of obedience, Faith and the Word must accompany one another, and so must
obedience and the word commanding* Therefore Christ tells the Pharisees their
devotion it was a vain devotion, because Who has required this at your hands?
Mat. 18.9 See a notable expression Isa 66.3. They have chosen their own ways,
I also will choose their delusions* You see Let a man have never such godly
intentions, never such pious purposes, yet if he choose a way of his own in
faith and obedience, God is greatly displeased, and therefore howsoever heresy
or an heretic which is as much as a chooser of his own way be by Scripture and
Ecclesiastical Writers limited to a way of faith, yet the Word may be extended
to any practical obedience, We may say Superstition is heresy, We may say
drunkenness, whoredom* are heresy, because they are ways chosen of men to
walk in contrary to Gods Word, so he who would have comfort in his obedience
must look to Gods command.

The grounds of this are,

First, From the Supremacy and Sovereignty of God, The grounds of this are
who alone is to prescribe to man his duty; He is our great Lord and Master, I.
From the Sovereignty of God^
so that as it would be very absurd in a Servant to do that work which he
thinks fit, and not what his Master enjoyneth, no less is it for men to
think that God will accept them in such and such ways, when yet they cannot
bring his Superscription and authority stamp^ upon it; Hence it is that the
Prophets do so often use this expression, Thus says the Lord; It Is not their
counsel, or their commands, but Gods: Oh then examine thy actions, thy ways,
thou put much confidence in them, Thou have much comfort from them, but are
they svch as God has required? Did not our Savior at one word throw to the
ground all that glistering golden Piety of the Pharisees? There is no command
for it; This is the foundation you must lay, else your building, though never
so glorious will have a terrible fall.

Secondly, Obedience must have Gods command, II. Gods promise is annexed only to
Gods command.
else it cannot enjoy Gods promise and blessing; Whatsoever God commands he
has annexed a gracious promise thereto for our encouragement and reward;
Therefore it is said. In vain do they worship me; There is no promise of
Gospel-priviledges or salvation to such actions; Now how sad a thing is it,
when the same Motto which Solomon puts upon all these fading things here below,
shall likewise be set upon thy Religion and devotion; Vanity of vanities, all
is vanity and vexatien of spirit; It Is the promise that a godly man embraces,
that he looks after, for even in holy actions truly, so it is not thy
performance, thy grace, but the promise that bears thee out; Therefore we are
all said to be Children of the Promise, Gal. 4.28. and heirs of the Promise,
and 2 Cor. 7.1. Having these Promises let us cleanse our selves; If then thou
art never so zealous, though thou should give thy body to the sire, and have
not a promise, it would profit thee nothing; Should thou give away all thou
have, Should thou endure all hardship, yet if thou have no promise to this
action thou art but a tinkling Cymbal; Oh then let the people of God in all
their acts of obedience mind the command for the lawfulness of them, and the
promise for the encouragement thereunto; if no command then no promise, God will
not water that plant, or give increase to it, which he has not planted; And
for this end Austin and others did condemn all those famous moral actions of
the heathens as glittering sins, because they had no promise belonging to
them of Eternal life: As they did them upon humane inferior motived, not
supreme and divine, so their recompense was but the cockleshels of this world,
not that weight of glory in heaven.

Thirdly, III. Because of the pollution that is upon man's understanding
Obedience must have a command because of the great corruption and pollution
which is upon man's understanding, so that it is impossible it should ever choose
or do that which is acceptable to God, Romans 8. They that are in the flesh
cannot please God, And the Heathens, even those that were judged most learned,
yet were darkened in their Imagination, Romans 1. They became vain, and the
Apostle calls it their foolish hearts; It is therefore a most absurd and
insufferable indignity offered unto God for thee to take upon thee how thou will worship him, how thou will serve him, and for this it is that the
Scripture so often complains, that they went after the imagination of their
own hearts; So that by this you may judge of what little consequence those
excuses are which some make for superstition, That they were done out of pious
Intentions, and a fervent zeal, for although such things may in some respects
excuse a tanto, yet not a toto. Hence Vzziah though out of a good intention
stopping the Ark not according to Gods order, is stricken dead; Paul
persecuting the Church of God though out of zeal, for he thought he was bound
to do what he did, yet was not thereby excused from being a blasphemer, a
persecutor, and the greatest of sinners; Nothing is to be added to Gods
precepts, Etiamsi vel bonum nobis videtur, said Ambrose; So that the right
understanding of our deep pollution, may justly make us afraid of any thing
which is ours, and has not Gods command; The Apostle Col. 3.2. condemns even
those things, because not of God, which yet had a show of humility and great
mortification.

IV. From the fullness of the Scripture.
Fourthly, Obedience must have a command, from the fullness and sufficiency of
the Scripture; It Is a perfect Rule, Whosoever walks according to this Rule;
Gal. 6.16. and David commends it for a Lanthorn and Light to his feet, Psalm.
119. So that if our obedience might run out in such things where there is no
word for it, the Word would not be an adequate Rule, It would be too narrow,
and then if once you grant a Rule besides that, you go in infinitum, yea, we
fall into manifest contradictions, for how many times does one man's spirit
think that best which is contrary to another man's; How comes that opposition in
matter of Religion, but that the word is not made the Rule, but either there
are reasons or lusts, or temporal interests, so that it is necessary we have the
Word for obedience, else the Enthusiastical Revelations and Popish Traditions
they will both plead a good Title for acceptableness with God.

V. Else obedient persons could never bear up their hearts against the
discouragements they meet with in Gods work.
Lastly, An Obedience must have a command, because else we can never bear up our
hearts in all the discouragements we meet with in doing Gods work; What
hardened the Prophets so that their foreheads were like brass and iron, but
only this that they knew God had commended them, and they went upon his
message; Shall Absalom use such an argument to the man when he had killed
Ammon, Be of good courage I have bid thee; How much rather then when God
commands, 1 Cor. 15. Be steadfast, immovable in the work of the Lord, knowing
your labor was not in vain: Let all the world oppose us when we know it is Gods
command, our hearts need not shrink within us; Thus the Apostles Whether it is
better to obey God or man judge ye, Act. 5.29.

Use.
Use 1. of Instruction, Of how terrible and dreadful a judgment are they
worthy of, who are so far from being obedient to Gods command, that they live
in open and professed disobedience to it, if the most devotionall and Religious
actions are refused by God, for want of a command; what shall become of those
which are in plain opposition to it; Such are all the works of the flesh, Such
are the works of most men, when thou have been wallowing in the mire of sin, to
which of Gods commands have thou been obedient? Nay sin has its command, the
devil has his commands, and thou give up thy self a Servant to them; Oh that
the eyes of men shall not yet be opened, nor their hearts yet mollified, who is
thy Father, thy Master, thy Lord, Is it not the devil? When God commands thee
who is the Lord of Hosts, who promises heaven and an eternal reward, that God
who has all sharp arrows of vengeance in his quiver to shoot immediately into
thy heart; That God though commanding thee thou refusest, and the devil while
he bids thee go and fulfill this lust and that lust, immediately thou go;
That devil who deludes and deceives thee, who is the known Enemy of thy soul,
and will be thy cruel tormentor to all Eternity: Oh then lay it closer to
heart, I am under command either of God or the devil, I am an obedient Servant
to one or the other, and thy works they quickly manifest it.

Use 2. of Direction to people, That they would be like those noble Bereans,
examine the ground of their faith and obedience, Do not offer a Sacrifice
without eyes? Blind obedience is contrary to that command, offer up your
selves a reasonable Sacrifice, or a Sacrifice according to the Word, as some
expound, Romans 12 1. There are dangerous Sirens that would in^ice you out of
this way, we are apt to judge that a duty that most do, not which God commands,
we think a multitude will dispense against a precept, when yet Gods express
charge is, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2. The very
heathen could say, Argumentum pessimi turba: Again, we are apt to judge of duty
by our interest and engagements, as our Education, Safety, and Profits lead
us; Whereas we should say to our hearts in such cases as Christ to Peter, Get
thee behind me Satan.

We come to the second Observation, the object of Obedience is described in the
plural number, Thy words thou have given me, They did not neglect or break any
wilfully, They looked upon all as precious gold wherein the least O^^e is not
to be lost.

Obs. That it is the property of godly men to have a respect to all Gods Word,
to look to all his commands; Herod's and Pharaohs they will do some things, Obs.
That it is the property of godly men to have respect to Gods Word.
but David's and Josiahs they only will regard all, and indeed doing many things
unless all will not save; There is a leak in the Ship that will overthrow all;
This one spark will set all on fire, as David implies, Psa. 119. Then shall I
not be confounded when I have respect to all thy Commandments; That man who
because he has done many things looks for heaven, will be in dreadful
confusion when he shall see one sin able to shut the door of heaven against
him, and mark the expression, when I have respect, he does not say obey, but
have respect, That does imply besides the outward obedience, an inward awe and
reverentiall eye toward every duty God requires; Thus James also does
severely reprove this partial mutilated obedience, and pronounces that heavy
doom, He that breaks one is guilty of all, Jam. 2.11. viz. because of the
vinculum formale, the authority of God, which is in one as well as in another:

To improve this consider,

That even the godly through Ignorance upon their minds, Proposition to clear
the Point.
or some importunate temptation, may be very diligent in some commands, and yet
not observe others, and this may be either from ignorance or provoking
temptations, from Ignorance, such may the education of the godly be, or they
may live in such dark times wherein error is common, and none make any
question of it, and then they may continue in the omission of many duties; So
some excuse the Patriarcks in their Polygamy; Though (say they) it was an
express sin against the first Institution of Marriage, How far godly men may
sail.
yet custom and Tradition had taken away the sense of sinning, and so in the
time of many good Kings, who made an exact Reformation, yet the high places
were not taken away, there was either non-attendance or sinful connivance at
that, and in the Infancy of the Christian Church, how many were so weak as not
to discern their Christian Liberty, but placed much obedience in the
observation of Jewish rites and Ceremonies; And thus also there may be some
provoking violent temptations; The Godly though they have an universal
Inclination to Gods will, yet are hurried aside; David was overtaken with
Adultery though his heart was sincere toward all the whole Law of God: We
distinguish then between temptations and an habitual custom in any sin; The
godly man may by the former be driven out of his faith, not by the latter, so
that even then there remains an inward seed that does virtually contain the
commands of God, and therefore is called the Law of God written in their hearts.

distinguish between gross sins, such as Tertullian says waste the
conscience; And those Relics of corruption which Austin says are of daily
incursion upon us; The one is a camel, the other is a gnat comparatively; Now
the godly do so keep all Gods commands, that they seldom or never, to be sure
not wilfully and habitually fall into these deep and foul pits; But as for the
latter we see by Paul's complaint they have not a full conquest over them, Romans
7. They may be possessors of Canaan, though they have some Jebusites alive to
humble them and keep them low.

Though the godly have a respect to all Gods Commadements, yet they acknowledge
an order amongst the commands, they know some are greater, and others less;
And therefore when there comes an indispensable omission of one, they pass by
the least, and the contrary to this is grand hypocrisy, which our Savior does
often condemn in the Pharisees; They omitted the great things of the Law, and
Judgment, and Mercy, but were very diligent in the inferior things; Saul lost
both a temporal and spiritual Kingdom in this respect; For Samuel tells him,
Obedience was better then Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22. and Rebellion is like the
sin of witchcraft; There is the great command of loving God with all our heart
and soul, to which all others must bow.

We must always distinguish between the Integrity of parts of our obedience,
and the intension of degrees; The godly though they reach to the former yet not
to the latter: It Is true by what reason we do any command in the integrity of
it, we are bound to the perfection of it; But God gives not such a measure of
grace in this life; It Is said of David and Zachary with his Wife, that they
walked in all the Commandments of God: Yet that cannot be understood perfectly,
for how often did David fail and Zachary for his unbelief was stricken dumb;
There is no such thing as a Popish perfection; The Fathers abhorred it, our
perfection is to acknowledge our imperfection, and then the Commandments are
by Gods grace accounted done, when what is not done is forgiven and pardoned;
These things premised let us consider why the godly are obedient to Gods
commands, they dare not omit known duties, or commit known sins.

Because the principle of Regeneration and seed of grace is universal, It does
seminally contain all kinds and parts of grace in it; As all seeds, even of an
Oak, or the tallest Trees, though never so little, yet virtually contain all
those great branches, and let them have time to grow, they will diffuse
themselves into a vast compass; Grace is the Image of God, and that infers
a resemblance in lineaments and parts, an hand, or a foot is not an Image, So
then seeing that in Regeneration there is infused the habit or principles of
all grace, no wonder if there be an Inclination to all, yet not so, but that
they may be carried out more readily and willing'y to some rather then other,
even as though all men by reason of original corruption have a Fountain of all
wickedness, yet one may be carried out more propensely to one sin rather
then another; The Sea may break out of one bank sooner then in another.

There is the same authority forbidding or commanding in all; As the Apostle
James argues, Jam. 2. He that said Thou shall not do thus, said also Thou
shall not do thus: If therefore the same God put forth his authority in every
Command, Who are thou that dare omit one and not another?

The motive is the same; For every sin because it is sin and a dishonor to
God, draws him out to hate it, and in duties good because it is good, does
move him; Now the least sin is sin, and we kill young Serpents as well as
old ones, and the least good is acceptable to God, and he will reward it.

In respect of the privative part, of the punishment of sin, all are equal,
which is the loss of God and Heaven; The least sin depriveth of the happy
Vision of God as well as the greatest, so that in this sense we may say there
is no little sin, no more then there is a little God, and so likewise for the
good of any duty; The least shall have heaven as well as the greatest, though
not such degrees; Even a cup of cold water does not lose its reward, Mat. 10.42.

Use, To discover that Hypocrisy and falsehood in many men, some sins they
avoid, others again they embrace; Is not all sin poison? Is there any good
sin? Were thy heart sound, those beloved and customary sins of thine could
have no more welcome in thy heart then toads in thy bosom.

SERMON XXXVII. Shows, That Gods People are ready and willing in Obedience,
Whence it is that they are so; Tending to rouse men up from dullness and
Formality in Gods service.
JOH. 17.8. For I have given them the words which thou gave me, and they have
received them.
THere remains two things more considerable in the description of the
Disciples Obedience.

The next thing to be considered is their readiness and willingness implied
in the word (...), They did not cavil or dispute, They did not draw back or
maliciously oppose, but they were like melted wax ready to receive any
impression, like white paper whereon Gods Will and Law might be immediately
written, and indeed if you observe the Disciples all along from their first
call to this present time there appeared much readiness in them; Christ did no
sooner speak the word commanding them to follow him, but immediately they leave
all and obey, though it was so much to their outward disadvantage, though it
was to fall in the Whales mouth, yet they readily resign themselves, and
although sometimes they showed dullness to believe, and unwillingnesse in his
service, yet our Savior excuses it saying, The spirit is willing but the
flesh is weak, and certainly had there not been a ready free spirit in the
Disciples to take Christ above all, and to cleave to him only, they could never
have devoured these troubles with so much patience as they did.

Doct. It Is a sure character of Gods people to be a willing people.
Obs. That it is a sure character and property of the children of God to be a
willing ready people in obedience; They are not as hypocrites kept from sin
by constraint, merely from a principle of fear within, but Psa. 110. They are
willingnesses in the day of Gods power.

To explain this a little,

I. The dullness in Gods people is not reigning but resisted and prayed against.
First, There may be the presence of dullness and unwillingnesse sometimes in
the Children of God, but this is not reigning, nor is it habitually consented
to, but resisted and with much agony prayed against; There is no garden but
has some of this weed in it; No gold but some of this dross; No godly man but
now and then has wearisomnesse and unwillingnesse to holy duties seizing upon
him; Thus we read the Church when Christ knocked at the door, though he had
stood all night, and his locks were wet with the dew, yet the Church out of a
dull sluggish humor does refuse to open to him, Cant. 5.2, 3. So Rev. 2. There
the Church is reproved for suffering her graces to decay, and that her duties
were not filled up with fervency and solidity; yea, we may read of the Church
complaining of this slothfulness and coldness, when she said, Draw us and we
will run after thee, Cant. 1.4. And at another time, Why have thou hardened our
hearts from thy fear? Isa 63.17. So that it is too manifest the people of God
have much coldness and negligence in them; What is that which fills their
hearts with so many complaints but this, what makes them so full of fears and
doubts about their spiritual condition, Is it not want of life, vigor, and
willingness? Oh they find their hearts can take delight and be willingly
drawn out in earthly affairs, but they are like so many lumps of earth in
heavenly things, when yet there is far more excellency, worth, and dignity in
holy things then in all the whole world to draw out the heart* so then let the
godly for their comfort distinguish between the presence of unwillingnesse and
the power of it; Between unwillingnesse in the command and power over the soul,
and the reluctance and striving against it; The Apostle speaks generally of
sin, Let it not reign in your mortal bodies; Romans 7. Non dixit, non sit, sed
ne regret.

This stumbling block removed let us consider why the people of God must needs
be so willing and ready in their obedience. Reasons.


And first, 1. The sense of guilt and misery.
The sense of their guilt and all the misery sin has brought upon them puts
them into a melting yielding frame; while men's hearts are hardened and they are
not apprehensive of the damnable estate they are in, while they are not in the
fire of Gods displeasure, they are stubborn and untractable, but when they are
kindly humbled for sin then they will do anything; Thus Paul, He that was mad
in his oppositions against Christ, no sooner did the Lord touch his heart with
the sense of his sins but he cries out, Lord, what will thou have me to do?
Thus David, when the Lord had humbled him, and used afflictions for his sin,
see how humbly and obediently he speaks, If he say, he has no delight in me,
behold, here I am let him do what he pleases, 2 Samuel 15.26. and the Church
Mic. 7. I will hear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him; Nothing then will so humble and mollify the heart to make a man do and be
any thing, as a deep sense of sin; Thus the cold, hard Iron is put into the
fire, and it may be beaten into any shape.

Secondly, As the sense of sin, 2. The sense of Gods mercy.
so the sense of Gods goodness and grace in being reconciled, notwithstanding
all our provocations, does much more enlarge the heart to thankfulness and
obedience; The love of Christ (says Paul) constrains us, We cannot hold, we
cannot keep in, as you may see David upon the apprehension of Gods goodness to
him, resolving to take the cup of salvation, and to praise God in the great
Congregation, Psa 116.13. Gospel grace does not in a filial spirit harden and
make wanton, but does more soften and inflame to an active obedience; This made
Paul run like the Sun in the Firmament; You see it is the grace of God which
lies kindling and warming of him: This is like the Spirit in Ezechiels wheels,
the dejected unbeleeving soul is not so readily obedient; An Evangelical frame
of heart assured of Gods love, carries out to filial fruitful obedience;
Nothing is too much, too great, too dear to part with for so gracious a God;
This breeds love, and we know love is an active fire, it cannot lie still,
but kindles all that it comes near.

Thirdly, They are active and willing because of that sanctified renewed nature
which they are partakers of; They are said to have the divine Nature, 1 Pet.
1.4. 3. The divine nature they are partakers of.
The Seed of God is said to abide in them, 1 John 1.3. And by this means they
are carried out voluntarily to divine actions, Thus in nature says Aristotle,
which is the inward principle of motion or rest; How readily do sparks fly
upward? The stones descend downward? And thus it is here; Those inward
principles of Sanctification they do so new mold a man that now the will of God
is his delight, the Law of God is written in the inward man; Nothing is so
connatural and suitable to him as those things that are also pleasing to God;
Indeed for the unregenerated man it is no wonder he must be haled and
constrained to what he does, That he like the Mill cannot move any longer then
the waters of affliction fall upon him, for there wants a principle within, but
it is otherwise with those that are born again; Their proper food, their proper
delight, their all in all is to be doing the will of God, as Christ professed,
Joh. 4. and David does often acknowledge those indeared affections he had to
the Word of God above Kingdoms and all other earthly advantages.

4. Because they were so willing heretofore to sin.
Fourthly, They are a willing people because in their former time of
unregeneracy they were so willing and ready to serve sin and Satan, and were
constantly obedient thereunto; Now says the Apostle, As they had given
themselves servants to sin, so now to righteousness, Romans 6.19. They readily
set themselves, as the word signifies, whenever lust bad them go, they did
go; Whatsoever was commanded, there was ready obedience; This by way of an holy
revenge, and to make a godly satisfaction, They are the more serviceable to
God, They grudge the devil had so much time, that so much of their choicest and
best affections were lessened in time; They therefore strive to redeem the
time, to recover all for God, They shame themselves saying, What, was I willing
and glad to do the works of the devil, and shall I not do the Will of God?

5. Because they know none but willing service is accepted.
Fifthly, They are willing because they know no Obedience is accepted of with
God, unless it be willing; It Is not thy faith, thy humiliation, thy zeal,
unless there be willingness and delight in it, that God accepts of, Isa.
1.29. If ye be willing and obedient, so God accepts of a willing mind: Woe be
to me (says Paul) if I preach the Gospel, and not willingly but of constraint,
1 Cor. 9.6. Though he did preach it yet if not willingly there is a Woe to him;
Oh then it is no wonder if the people of God are so glad and cheerful within
them in the work of the Lord, otherwise their work would lose their reward, and
they the Crown of Glory; Think of this then when you find the wheels of your
Chariots move heavily, Thou art happily thinking how to put off truth or duty,
or thou wishest it over, say this unwillingnesse marreth all, God will not
aceept of a Sacrifice unless offered in fire: Say upon all thy dead and formal
duties, these are not duties, God looks not upon them as so: Non operari and
non esse are all one before God in some respects.

6. Because of their great reward,
Sixthly, They must needs be a willing obedient people because of that eternal
glorious reward which is promised to every holy duty; What will put Wings to
the soul if not this? To think that God will assuredly put upon thee Robes of
Immortality and glory, for a duty though never so little, for a cup of cold
water, who may not admire the vast disproportion that is between our work and
Gods reward; If the Apostle spoke of the most extreme sufferings that could be
in this life, they were not worthy to be compared to that eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4, 17. How much more is it true of those good works we do, which
are but little in quantity, and defiled in quality; Well therefore may they
rejoice and work righteousness, Well may the godly labor even in the heat of
the day, with much gladness of heart, for the recompense of thy reward does
exceed all proportion; If the Kingdoms of the world should be given to a man
for lifting up a straw, it would not be so great a matter as when God and
Heaven became thy reward for every holy duty: No wonder if they are best when
they are thus doing; for how can they be better; There is no such profitable
and comfortable wotk as to be doing that of the Lords.

Lastly, Even in the very duty it self though there were no heaven hereafter,
7. Because of the joy and comfort that attends Obedience.
yet there is so much present comfort and joy attending it, that it is both
work, and meat, and drink also, Therefore we see how David was joyfully
affected herein, Who are we that we should be able to offer thus willingly; He
that does Gods service willingly and fervently, he has present pay in hand;
The very sense and feeling that he does it so readily, does afford great
comfort to him, Virtus est sibi ipsi praemium; A godly duty is accompanied with
honey and manna, he would not do otherwise for all the world; Oh then that
wicked men who though they have some pleasure in sin, yet find many wounds
and torments within them, would make an exchange, in stead of drunkenness put
on temperance, in stead of riot and wantonness live in all chastity, Thou
would find an heaven for a hell immediately: Oh how would thou bewail
thy time, that thou did not leave these husks no sooner! Oh what an enemy was
I to my own soul, when I lived in such lusts, and neglected such holiness!
Taste and see the difference: while you have this sinful distempered palate
upon you, it is no wonder if you love the Egyptian garlic above the heavenly
Manna.

Use of Instruction, How loathsome and unacceptable all that Obedience is to
God, which comes from any other principle then a renewed spirit; Use.
It Is the free and principal spirit David prayed for, Psa. 51. he saw all
obedience if constrained, if forced by the judgments of God, was condemned as
hypocrisy: Thus the Prophets complained of the Jews that in the time of their
distress and calamity they would pray to God. They would fast and humble
themselves, but says God, Oh that there were such a heart within them, Deuteronomy.
5.29. And hence it is that Repentance and contrition extorted by the fear of
death, and the judgments of God are not acceptable; Whatsoever is done is by
force, and this may be even death to many that hear it, for when art thou for
any good duty, When is thy heart or mouth for it but when some great judgments
of God are abroads, or when some eminent calamity comes near unto thee, Then
thou cryest out of sin, then thou speak well of godliness, but all this
is forced, It Is a Land-floud, It Is a Morning dew, why did thou not in thy
prosperity show forth willing affections to God.

Use 2. of Direction, Use 2.
To humble the people of God that though there be so eminent and pregnant
Reasons for their willing obedience, yet they should be so dead, so heartlesse,
so full of excuses as they are, Oh is not this the sin of every godly man?
May he not cry out of his slothfulness and barrenness? Are the things of God
and Heaven as operative and lively upon thee as the things of the earth? Oh how
hard is thy heart many times like the Mountains of Gilboa whereon no dew falls;
Oh how often do they keep the door shut even when Christ knocks; so that if
you ask wherein may the people of God fear their ruin most? It may be said, In
their unwillingnesse, in their deadness and coldness; Oh how many times are
we not so much as capable of that excuse our Savior gave the Disciples, The
spirit is willing but the flesh is weak, for how often is thy flesh weak and
thy Spirit unwilling also; For these things Gods children have cause to have
poverty and shame of spirit within them.

We come to the fourth and last observable particular, viz. That these words
are such as the Father gave Christ to communicate to his Disciples: so that
Christ himself did not take upon him any other doctrine, or preach any other
matter then what he had received: Hence he did so often say, Obs. The Ministers
of the Gospel are to preach Gods Word.
The doctrine was not his but his Fathers, Joh. 7.16. Neither did he speak of
himself but what he heard the Father.

Obs. That the Ministers of the Gospel are to preach that and only that, which
they have out of Gods Word; As Paul said, That which I have received of the
Lord, that I delivered unto you; And the Prophets Introduction is commonly Thus
says the Lord; If Pythagoras Disciples were satisfied with nothing but ipse
dixit, how much rather must the believer whose Faith in the very nature of it
does relate to some word or Testimony; Hence it is that they are called the
Ambassadors of God, 2 Cor. 4. And such must not go a word from their
Commission, We are to be Conduits not Fountains; The Word of God must exire per
te non a te, as Bernard; It Is the good thing committed to our trust, 2 Timothy
1.14. We must therefore give the same that is committed unto us, we have
received gold, we must not deliver copper; Thou art not author but custos
Religionis, not Res ingenii but doctrinae.

To open this Consider,

1. It Is their duty.
It Is first Their duty, So that they will be found guilty of high crimes if they
do otherwise; To mint false coin, or to forge a man's will are heinous faults
amongst men; Thine is greater for thou counterfeitest Gods Truth, yea, thou
putst a lie upon God, thou attributest that to him which belongs to thy
folly: The Apostle says, If it be a man's will, or Covenant, none may add to
it or disanull it, Gal. 3.15. how much rather should this be so in Gods Word?
Oh then consider, thou will be found guilty of high Treason against God, if
thou speak any thing but his Truth.

2. Their greatest honor.
2. As it is our duty, so it is our glory; It Is the greatest honor we are capable
of, to have such divine Mysteries committed to us, the Truths of God have only
Majesty in them, they only convince the Conscience and awe it; They only
breed reverence and admiration, so that although humane Learning and parts have
a subservient excellency, yet if the Word of God and the Truth of God be not
principal, there is no mastering of the Conscience and captivating of it:
Hence are those commands, to attend to their doctrine, 1 Timothy 3.13, 15, 16. and
to give themselves to reading, that so they may deliver only Gods will as it is
revealed in Gods Word. It Is their glory as well as their duty, for the glory of
a thing lies in the excellency of its due and proper perfection; The glory of
a King is a higher thing then the glory of a Peasant, and in another nature;
All arts and Offices have their peculiar Glory; Logic in disputing well,
Rhetoric in speaking well, and the Glory of Divinity lies in divine Arguments
and Motives, so that those who preach only humane or moral matter, they go
below the Majesty of Divinity; Those that study words and fancy-fall things
that may tickle the ear, these regard not the gravity of their office, nor of
their emploiment; But as in the Ecclesiastical History, the Heathen said all
the while a Christian argued with reason he could answer him, but when he
brought forth the Authority of the Word, Thus says the Lord, then he had no
more to reply, Thus it is here, all the while thou have strains of wit, and
preachest like an humane Orator, not as one speaking the Oracles of God; Men
will hear thee and applaud thee, but they will retain their lusts still, they
th^nk thou art not in earnest, That thou look more to an expression that may
please, then to an Argument that may wound the heart and conscience; It Is
therefore the glory of a Minister to be potent in divine Scripture Truths.

3. It Is his comfort and safety.
3. It Is his comfort and safety as well as his glory; His comfort because his
own heart tells him he has not dealt deceitfully, he has not purloined, he
has not corrupted or mixed the Word of God, to serve men's lusts and pleasures;
He did not like the False Prophet daub with untempered mortar; Paul found this
a great Testimony of Conscience to himself, 2 Cor. 3.17. Thou will have more
comfort in Preaching Gods Word powerfully, then in all the applause of hearers,
for thine own subtle Inventions: Now as it is their comfort so its their safety;
They are sure not to do hurt to their flock when they always break of the
Bread of Life, they may be sure this will nourish, but thy own thoughts are
many times poison and destruction.

Lastly, It Is most useful and profitable, For they are the Scriptures only
that are able to make us wise to Salvation, 1 Timothy 3. 4. Most useful and
profitable.
From this Brook we can only get stones that will kill the Goliath, The Word of
God is an Hammer, and a Fire, and a two-eged Sword, so that although to the
swelling proud fancy of the world it may seem dullness and plain simplicity,
yet to the good and honest heart it is the power and wisdom of God.

Use of Instruction To the Ministers of God, how narrowly they are to look to
their Commission: To preach Scripture-Truths such as will endure a fiery
Trial; For the Apostle says, Every man's work must be tried, and he that
builds hay and stubble shall suffer loss, and he himself with much ado shall
be saved.

Use of Admonition To hearers; for many times a vain people make vain
unprofitable Preaching; They have such wanton stomachs that they love nothing
that is solid and sound, give them words, rattles, and baby-clouts, these
things please them, but to convince the Conscience, to command the heart, to
make it tremble for sin, that they cannot abide.

SERMON XXXVIII. Of the Excellency and Necessity of Believing in Christ as a
Mediator; That it is acceptable to God as well as Obedience to a Command; Yet
withal shows the difficulty of it, and whence it comes to pass that the
Children of God, sensible of their sins. are so hardly brought to believe; As
also why ungodly men think it so easy a thing.
JOH. 17.8. And they have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have
believed that thou did send me.
OUR Savior commended their Obedience in the former part of this Verse; Now he
does the like for their Faith; For Obedience without faith is but a maimed and
lame Sacrifice; yea, there cannot be any acceptance of our Obedience because
of the imperfection of it, unless Faith cover it in Christ, and this our
Savior now undertakes, that the Disciples were not as the Pharisees and Jews
who trusted in the righteousness of their Obedience, but when they had done
all looked out for a Mediator to stand between Gods perfection, the Laws
perfection, and thine Imperfection: Their Faith is commended by our Savior, 1.
In the Acts. 2. The quality. 3. The object of it.


The Acts are one of them large and comprehensive, They have believed.

2. More narrow and particular, They have known; Here you see that Faith is not
a blind ignorant assent, but accompanied with a true and sure knowledge of
that we believe.

Secondly, There is the quality of their Faith, They have known surely, (...),
which may be opposed either to hypocrisy or false ends; They did unfeignedly
upon true grounds believe, not like those that are said to believe, yet our
Savior would not commit himself to them because they sought the glory of men
more then of God, Joh. 2. or else it may be opposed to doubting and staggering,
as our Translators seem to go; They did surely, overcoming all unbelief, and
doubts that might oppose them.

Lastly, Here is the object of their Faith, viz. That Christ came from the
Father, as sent to be a Mediator, working salvation for those that did receive
him; They looked upon him, not only in respect of his person, God and man, but
also in relation to his office, that he was the Jesus, and the anointed one to
save his people from their sins; Whereas then we see our Savior in many
words commending this faith of theirs as a most special consideration in them,
and which would be very acceptable to God, we may observe,

That Faith in Christ as a Mediator is acceptable and well pleasing as well as
Obedience to a command; It Is not Gods will that a child of his should be
always either thinking of sin or obedience, but also of believing or resting
the soul upon Christ, as in whom all fullness is, Doct. Faith in Christ as
Mediator is acceptable to God.
and though when God only becomes well-pleased with us, Joh. 6.29. when the
people asked, What they should do that they might do the works of God; Christ
answers, This is the work of God that ye believe in him; Faith is here called
the work of God,

1. Because it is wrought by him; We are not able of our selves to believe, but
in this sense it is not meant here.

2. By work of God is meant that which in a most eminent manner is acceptable
to him, that which he seems to delight in more then any other, and that is
faith, and indeed the people of God they are hardly persuaded of this; They
doubt rather whether it be a duty at all; Oh how long are they kept in the
uncertain wilderness of tears and dejections, ere they come to know the way of
believing; They still hope by something they do to be accepted, so that to the
humbled sinner there seems nothing more paradoxal and difficult* Whereas we
would think thus to believe in Christ and receive him as a Mediator would be
very easy for all; None would keep off; For it is to come and take comfort and
ease, and who will refuse this? But it is certain that the Children of God
sensible of their sins are a long while ere they are fully directed into this
way of believing; They do not presently understand how well-pleasing it is to
God that they should cast off their burden on Christ; That they should cover
themselves with his robes, and so come and appear before God.

The Grounds of such discouragements in Gods Children are, Why Gods Children
are so hardly brought to believe.


The real and bitter sense of their sins in the nature, frequency, and all
aggravations of them; So that while they are thus broken in heart nothing but
sin, sin does present it self in the guilt thereof; See it in David, Psa. 51.
His sins were always before him; His murder, his adultery, these were ever
in his eyes, and what a work is it to bring him to a joyful spirit in the
mercies of God; The godly therefore being many times attent to their sins, they
are careful that their repentance be real, bitter, and deep enough, and
withal seeing sins rising up in their hearts after one another, as one wave
after another; They grow wholly despondent, and all their thoughts and
Meditations are as if there were nothing but sin to be thought upon, Nothing
but sin to be meditated on, and this extremity of sorrow makes the ear deaf to
Christ, so that it refuses like Rachel to be comforted; Thus the Incestuous
person when he did feel the bitterness of his sin, was in danger of being
swallowed up with too much sorrow; He thinks not only the Priest and the
Levite, but even the good Samaritan will also pass him by and power no Oil in
his wounds; When one eye is intent downwards, the other cannot look upwards;
When the heart is greatly grieved from one object, it can hardly be prepared to
receive comfort from another.

There is an innate inbred principle of a Legal Justification or acceptance by
works that we do, and this makes Faith in the Mediator as a stranger, as an
absurd thing; and indeed this is the main reason why all the godly find it so
hard to believe, why they are so loath to be beholding to grace only to resign
every thing, and to be saved by Christ merely; Even that inbred principle of
being justified by what we do; See how all they that come to Christ propound
this, What shall we do that we may be saved? They look upon doing not
believing, Thus the Jews generally, they sought to establish the righteousness
of the Law, and, would not submit to the Righteousness of faith, Romans 10.3. Oh
it is a great matter to humble and empty the heart of a man so as that he will
submit to a Righteousness of Faith; yea, we see many of the Christian Teachers
and disciples were led away in this, as appears by the Epistle to the Romans
and Galatians; What a great task has the Apostle, to take all off from works
and the obedience to the Law, and to give all to Christ? They would give part
to Christ and part to their works, but not all to Christ, so that it is a very
hard thing to pull this weed out of our breast; We see all Popery and
Socinianisme goes this way also; To do something that they may be justified
thereby.

Thus they cannot think that it is so acceptable to believe in a Mediator,
because it is chiefly their comfort and their good thereby; so that they look
upon it as self-seeking and immoderately desiring their own good and peace, not
as any ways tending to the glory of God: But we shall show you that Faith in
the Mediator does not only bring comfort and joy to us, but admirable glory to
God, even more then Martyrdom, or the highest expressions of Obedience; Do not
therefore tempt thy self, and be a Satan to thy own peace; What though thy
comfort, thy salvation bound up in believing, yet if God will be honored and
glorified this way; Thou art rather joyfully to receive his grace then
frowardly to dispute against it, so that if this believing be a self-seeking,
it is such as God would have thee to do, and as he that will not eat or drink is
guilty of bodily murder, so he that will not believe on Christ which is called
eating and drinking, is guilty of soul-murder.

This is strange and difficult to the godly a long while, because our
justification and acceptance by him is wholly of supernatural Revelation; It Is
like the doctrine of the Trinity or of Christ's Incarnation; As humane reason
would never assent to such a Truth were it not for divine Revelation that
overpowers all, so that all our sins are pardoned through Faith in Christ's
blood, is likewise of mere divine manifestation; For see what nature does
incline us unto in all the heathens when they had sinned, so as their
Conscience condemned them, they went to some solemn sacrifice, or other
extraordinary work, thinking thereby to pacify the wrath of God: Adam was
created in a state of Righteousness, and so by his Obedience of works he was
to be justified; And upon his fall it became impossible that any should be
justified by what he did, unless sin could justify a man; Therefore when
God discovered a Christ, and Justification by faith in him, This is new
doctrine from heaven; Neither Men or Angels could have found out such a way, so
that it is no wonder if man be thus averse to this Faith in the Promise, because
it is a way that neither the state of Integrity or of man fallen was acquainted
with, insomuch that a godly man in the sense of his sins, must bring such a
faith in the Mediator as he does in other mysterious supernatural objects of
Faith, and his heart says, It Is unlikely such a sinner, such an offender
should find mercy, say, O my Soul, Are not the other supernatural Points of
Religion that I believe very unlikely also and incredible to flesh and blood?

Therefore this seems hard to the godly broken hearted sinner, because though
Faith in a Mediator be a duty, yet it is not to every one that live, that
wallow in their sins; Christ is not a Mediator whether men repent or not
repent; You are not to think that it is all one, godliness or no godliness;
If then such only may believe in a Mediator as do truly and sincerely repent
of sin; This will be hard to find out, for there are Ahabs tears and Judas's
tears for sin, and indeed upon this depends all; In this the godly are so
much plunged, Christ indeed bids those Come that are heavy laden, that hunger
and thirst after him, But I have great cause to question my self whether I do
thus or not.

In the second place, Why profane men think it so easy to believe in Christ
Why is it so that Profane and ungodly men think it so easy to believe in
Christ? And they say they do it with all their heart, when it is plain by the
Scripture they are not such to whom those glorious things of the Gospel do
belong.

They think it so easy because they take presumption for faith; They think
they believe when they presume; Now to presume is easy, because it is a work of
the flesh, it is suitable to our corruptions that the Jews though they committed
all lewdness, yet the Prophet complains they would come and lean themselves
upon the Lord, and trust in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, etc.
That is not faith which most of the world have; It Is presumption, it is
carnal-confidence, such as those had who said, Lord, have not we prophesied in
thy Name, Such as the foolish Virgins had, Mat. 25. Such as Paul had before his
Conversion, when he said, He was alive, Romans 7. Oh then tremble at that
security and confidence thou have, Thou may be sure it is a sin, and of the
devil, it is so easy, whereas Faith is very difficult.

2. They look upon Faith in Christ as easy, because they divide the Object,
they take some things of Christ not whole Christ; They think it is only
believing on him as a Savior for pardon of sin; They do not choose him as a
Lord to whom in all obedience they resign themselves; This is indeed the rock
that splits many, tell them of believing in Christ, and they think that is only
to rest for salvation, They attend not that it is the receiving of Christ for
all the ends and purposes God sent him into the world; Now one main end besides
our justification and salvation is our Sanctification; To redeem to himself a
people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. To communicate his Spirit for to make
holy as well as his merit to make happy.

Lastly, They think it easy because they never think on any qualifications
which are required in those who partake of Christ; It Is true, there are the
Antecedent Conditions of merit or worth, Let that Popery be abandoned, but yet
the Scripture tells who and what kind of persons they are that must claim an
Interest in Christ, They are blessed that hunger and thirst, for such shall be
satisfied, Mat. 5. Every one that is athirst is to Come, Rev. 22.17. Repent
that your sins may be blotted out, Act. 3.19. Now profane secure people they
never think of these qualifications, They say, God is merciful, They say Christ
is a Savior, but then they never consider of whom, They think not that many
are called but few chosen; They love not those places, The way to heaven is a
narrow and straight way, Not all that say Lord, Lord, shall find the gate of
heaven opened to them; If they thought seriously of these things, it would
cause an holy trembling in them.

These things premised Let us consider, Why believing in Christ is so
acceptable to God.
Why it is so well-pleasing to God that we should believe in Christ our
Mediator; It Is accepted of as well as our Repentance or love, or any other
obedience.

Because hereby God is exalted and magnified in his glory; We cannot glorify
God more otherwise; Now then if God aimed at his glory in the Creation of the
world, but much more in the redemption of his Children; There is not a way to
exalt his glory more then by believing; Thus Abraham in that of his concerning
a Seed, which did relate to Christ, it is said, he staggered not, but gave glory
to God, Romans 4.20. The glory of his power, of his goodness, he regarded not
the dead womb, nor any other difficulties; Thus it is here, when thou see
sin against thee, the Law against thee, Justice against thee, and that every
thing has a dead womb, yea, a damned womb for thee, to overlook all in Christ,
is an high degree to glorify God; Oh then ckeck thy unbeleeving thoughts, Say,
Is there any way in the world whereby I can glorify God like to the relying on
Christ and leaning upon his grace; So much dishonor as despair casts on God,
so much glory faith attributes to him, resist then all the buzzing temptations
of Satan, and say, What, shall I not glorify God? What, shall I not give God
honor?

frequent and constant commands that Christ gives about it; It Is true he
commands Repentance, Love, Self-denial, but above all he requires faith. The
question he propounded to most that came to him was, Do ye believe? This is so
great a duty in Christianity, that the Heathens abhorred our Religion as
irrational, saying, It Is only believed with them, whereupon they called them in
scorn Believers; But this is the grand and primary duty, Heb. 11.1. There is no
coming to God without this, and Eternal life is said to be in this, Above all
take the Shield of faith, Ephesians. 6.16. If then we see the Scripture so constantly
enjoining this above all, yea, and threatening with damnation if we do not
believe; How is it that the godly stand aloof of, and still are not resolved
whether they should believe or not; Thou do not so about Repentance; Thou
never questionest whether thou should grieve or mourn for thy sins, Thou
would think it high wickedness to do so; Why then should thou doubt whether
being burdened with sin thou should seek ease by faith in him, Is not the
command as indispensable for one as the other.

hereby Christ as a Mediator is improved for all these glorious ends he was
appointed by God, and thereby Christ is also glorified; What shall such
unsearchable riches of grace as are bound up in Christ be buried? Shall there
not be daily acknowledgements of him? Now consider, that if by Faith thou do
not receive him, thou declarest Christ lived in vain, and died in vain, by what
reason thou do not believe; for one effect thou must not for another, and so
for all; Thus it will be as if there had never been such a person as Christ; We
may in some sense call it thy Antichristian unbelief, He that denies Christ to
be come in the flesh is Antichrist, 2 John 7 Does not thy unbelief deny him?
For the denying of his office is by consequence the denying of his person; Thy
unbelief does that practically which the damnable heresies of Socinians do
doctrinally, make as if Christ were not a Mediator, and such who had satisfied
the wrath of God for us; Oh then know it is not all thy sins do so immediately
oppose Christ as a Mediator as thy unbelief does, which makes Divines say,
that in some sense only unbelief damneth, beeause that rejects the Mediator,
refuses the Savior, so that as we say, It Is not the disease but the neglect
of the medicine that kills.

It Is the most evacuating grace, It emptieth us wholly of our selves, God he
delights in humility, now nothing humbles us and takes us off all our seeming
worth, like faith in Christ, for therefore I wholly trust in him for
righteousness, because I have none of my own; If I had any rags that could
cover my nakedness, I would not be ashamed, but now being all over impure and
unclean, my Faith makes me catch hold on him; Thus Paul he counted all things
dung or dross Phil. 3. because of the righteousness which is by Faith in
Christ: Seeing then Faith gives all to God and Christ, makes us miserable,
wretched and hopeless in our selves; No wonder if God do so accept of it;
Consider therefore how it debaseth thee, and carries thee off every thing that
is thine, and then thou will say, this is the grace God loves, this makes me
nothing, and God all in all.

hereby we bring a righteousness into Gods presence which does best please
him, which satisfies him to the utmost, for Christ is made our Righteousness;
and the end of the Law to us, he became sin that we might become the
Righteousness of God through him, 2 Cor. 5. ul. Now then if we by Faith can
bring the Righteousness of Christ in all our duties and performances, we must
needs please him; This is to bring Benjamin with us, Oh what satisfying Reasons
does Faith in the Mediator bring; O Lord, It is not my Righteousness, nor the
Righteousness of Adam, nor the Righteousness of Angels but of Christ who is
infinite, that I bring before thee; O Lord, does not Christ please thee better
then I can; O Lord is not this obedience better then my Repentance; Oh then
that we should not be more sollicitous to believe in every duty, in every
approach to God, for that brings Christ, that presents not our persons or
duties but Christ; Thus Paul, he would be found in Christ not having his own
righteousn^sse, Phil. 3.9. Ye know not how righteous God is, nor the Law, nor
what God requires, that do not thus press to believe. Other grounds of this
excellent Evangelical Point, I defer and come to the

Use, which is of Direction to the people of God, Oh what joyful, comfortable
and blessed lives might you live if acquainted with this Truth; Art thou
dejected, filled with unbelieving thoughts, it is from thy ignorance of this
Truth; You would be more filial and Evangelical were you possessed with this
Truth more; The Devil labors to keep you off, as Saul did Jonathan, and the
people from eating honey; whereas if they had not forborne it their enemies had
been quite vanquished, he keeps thee from this honey, he knows if thou were
believing no sin or temptation could stand before thee, Heb. 5.13. The babe
Christian is said to be unskilful in the word of Righteousness, what is that,
he knows not Christ and the righteousness by him, Therefore the Spirit of
God is said to convince the world of Righteousness, Joh. 16.8. O what Enemies
are we to our selves because ignorant herein.

SERMON XXXIX. Further shows, How acceptable unto God it is to believe in
Christ the Mediator; And sets forth the dangerous Nature of Trusting in our
own Righteousness.
JOH. 17.8. And they have known assuredly I came from thee, and have believed
thou have sent me.
WE are prosecuting this Evangelical Point, That Faith in Christ as a Mediator
is acceptable unto God as well as obedience to a command; That as love is the
fullfilling of the Law, so Faith of the Gospel: Several Reasons have already
been laid down, we now proceed to give you more.

of the difficulty of and opposition to it; When we are seriously sensible of
sin, yet to rely on the love of God in Christ is like Esthers venturing into
Ahashuerus his presence, If I perish, I perish, or like the Lepers into their
enemies the Syrians Camp; Thus says the afflicted soul, If I lie despairing
under the burden of my sin I am sure to be undone, I cannot find any hope
within my self, It Is therefore venturing on Christ; It Is good to go to him, I
am like that woman of the bloody Issue, that had spent all she had on
Physicians, but yet could not be cured; I have run to every refuge, tried every
conclusion, but still my soul cannot have any safe bottom to stand upon: Let
me therefore by Faith fly to him as a Mediator; In the midst of these depths
and agonies of heart to trust in Christ is an high heroical disposition, like
that of Job, Though he kill me, I will trust in him, Job 13.15. Like that of
the Canaanitish woman, whose faith Christ so commended, Though she were put off
and called dog, and told the bread did not belong to her, Mat. 15.27. the
promises of grace and pardon were not her due, yet for all that she will hold
upon Christ and not let him go; Oh then consider that if thou like Peter wilt
venture to go though upon the waters to him, here is a special discovery of the
nobleness of thy Faith; That thou regardest Gods command and his promise more
then all Satan's temptations, and the sense or suggestions of thy own soul; As
it is with love to God when God does afflict and chastise us, yet to keep up a
tender fervent love to God argues the greatness and purity of thy love, so in
the midst of broken bones and trouble for sin to depend upon the grace of God
in Christ argues the excellency of Faith; Our Savior when he said, Blessed
are they that believe and see not, shows, that he who believes, Joh. 20 9.
when he has the least prop of sense and encouragement from outward things does
put forth the purer and nobler acts of Faith; Now for Abraham to believe though
Sarahs womb was a dead womb, argued stronger Faith then if she had been a
fruitful woman; Thus the difficulty and opposition in such temptations makes
faith the more acceptable.

there is great Obedience in Faith; For although Faith in Christ does not
justify us as it is an Obediential act, for then we should be justified by a
work, but as it is an Instrument receiving the Righteousness of Christ, an hand
to take that enriching Treasure, yet there is very great Obedience in every act
of believing, go over the several acts of it, knowledge, assent, and fiduciall
application, all these are therefore put forth by a believer, because God says
it; Hence it is called the Obedience of faith, Romans 10.26. And we are said to
captivate our understandings herein, 2 Cor. 10.5. For a man in believing
walks not by sense or humane reason, or principles of the world but the mere
revealed will of God so that whether we regard the doctrine to be believed, or
the promises to be embraced, we must conclude that faith is a spiritual
Martyrdom; It Is not reason but Gods Word moves thee, as we told you in the
Jews, They went about to establish their own righteousness, and would not
submit themselves to the Righteousness by Christ, Romans 10.3. You see by that
expressien how a man must be much humbled and captivated ere he can yield up
himself to Christ's Righteousness; Oh then think not that Faith is not an high
degree of Obedience; It Is a renouncing of all humane thoughts, apprehensions,
and whatsoever seeming worth or righteousness may be in us: Oh how deeply was
Paul humbled ere Phil. 3. he would come to account all things dung and dross,
and to be found not having his own righteousness, but that which is by Faith
in Christ; So that although Faith as it is a work does not justify, yet it is a
great work and that of pure and mere obedience; For whereas in all other moral
duties, Love and Patience, there is some ingrafted notions within that convince
of that; In believing there is nothing but the command of God and his promise,
that inviteth to this duty.

that only of all graces has a relative fitness to receive Christ and his
benefits, Romans 3.23. and in many other places, Remission of sin, and so the
Spirit of promise, and also Justification is still said to be by Faith, not by
Love or Zeal, or any other grace, because they are of an active nature, and go
out to God, This of a passive nature, and receives Christ, so that the
Scripture uses a peculiar phrase to express the nature of Faith, making it a
supernatural Instrument or organon to receive Christ, as the hand of all parts
of the body takes a Treasure when given, and thereby a man is enriched: It Is
true it is not for the dignity or merit of Faith that we are justified,
Therefore the Learned observe well, that it is never said (...) but (...), not
for Faith as a cause, but by Faith as an Instrument, so that it is not properly
Faith in Christ that justifies, but Christ apprehended by Faith, as it is not
the hand but the treasure taken by the hand that enricheth, or as the Scripture
excellently describes it; It was not the bare seeing of the brazen Serpent, or
any excellency in the eye, but the brazen Serpent that did heal: Seeing that
Faith has that aptitude of all other graces to apply Christ, and God makes use
of it, and appoints it for this end, no wonder if that be so well-pleasing to
him.

by this we also are enabled to all obedience, to all duties of mortification
and holiness, so that this Faith which receives Christ as a Mediator*
receives him in his fullness of grace as an head, and thereby we have strength
and ability to every thing that is holy, Act. 15. purifying their hearts by
Faith; That implies both our Justification and our Sanctification; Hence we
are said to be in the Olive Tree, viz. Christ. and to receive of the fatness
thereof by Faith, Romans 11. Thus all Believers they are branches in Christ the
Vine, Joh. 15. So that you see there is great reason why Faith in Christ as a
Mediator should be preserved, because that enableth to all lively and active
Obedience, Heb. 11. You see it was Faith that put all those Worthies upon such
notable Obedience; And when Christ prayed for Peter, he prayed that his Faith
might not fail him, Luke 22.32. why not his courage and boldness, but because
Faith is the root of all; So that in Christianity we by Faith in Christ come to
be holy and then believe in Christ, Per fidem venitur ad opera, non per opera,
ad fidem; Insomuch that it is a gross mistake in the people of God when they
think to attain to such a degree of Repentance and mortification, and then they
would believe in Christ, whereas by Faith in Christ and coming to him they
would have strength to such duties; Thou do as if the branch separated from
the Vine should think thereby to grow and flourish.

Faith in Christ is so well pleasing to Christ, because that only will put us
upon such a life and conversation as is acceptable to him, which is joy and
thankfulness; It Is very pleasing to God that those who are his would walk
cheerfully and thankfully, that all the world may see it is better to serve the
Lord then sin; Hence you see the Psalmist so often calling upon the
Righteous, to rejoice and be glad; yea, to shout for joy, and in the New
Testament* Rejoice, and again I say rejoice; Hence it is called Joy unspeakable
and full of glory; And for thankfulness we should have our hearts and mouths
filled with praises; Praise is comely for the upright, Psa. 33.1. It is very
fit, that he who is full of Gods love and his mercies should also be full of
Thanksgiving, In all things give thanks, 1 These. 5.18. So that you see joy and
thankfulness should be the constant life of a Christian, he cannot honor
Christ or the Gospel more, but how can these be unless there be faith in
Christ, Being justified by Faith we have peace with God, Romans 5.1. where there
is no peace, there is no joy, no thankfulness, and indeed all those bitrer
briars and thorns which the godly have, arise from that bitter root of
unbelief; Why is it that they go bowed down, and none seem farther from comfort
and thankfulness then they do, but because they exercise not this faith in
Christ; It Is more pleasing to God to be filled with heavenly joy, then
tormenting doubts, and this joy is the daughter of faith; If then all these
things be duly considered by the godly Convert he may be awakened, and wonder
how he indulged himself in such doubting, fearing, and unbeleeving thoughts, he
may cry out, what glory have I robbed Christ and the Gospel of? What heretics
and Papists with their corrupt doctrines have done against Christ the same did
my perplexing, inflaming fears do; I lived not as if I had received the Spirit
of Adoption, but of bondage and fear: Thou will then find the dark Cloud with
Lightning and Thunder to pass away, and the clear Sunshine to appear; Thou
that wast like the Disciples afraid of Christ, as if he had been some
formidable Spirit, wilt then know what Christ is, and how ready and willing to
receive afflicted sinners; Thou will then stand and wonder, how could I be so
injurious by my low and narrow thoughts of Christ? Was it for a light matter
that Christ should leave all his heavenly glory and come to endure all that
reproach and misery for our sakes.

But we proceed to some Uses, And

close, secret and unperceivable sin of trusting in our own Righteousness;
Let there be no secret depending upon thy good heart, thy good life, thy good
duties, for if contraries are known by contraries, then as faith renouncing all
we are and have to be found in Christ is of so great acceptance; Then to rely
upon any thing we do, to have inward restings upon our own actions is a sin
highly offending God; We can hardly commit a sin worse: The Publican in some
respects is better then the Pharisee, as those Diseases which are quickly
discerned are more curable then those that are not discovered, Ille morbus vix
est sanabilis qui sanitatem imitatur; Our Savior found this untoward
disposition in the Pharisees, as that which was plainly their mortal disease,
had not this besotted and benumbed them, they had sooner set open the gates of
their soul for the Prince of Glory to come; The Apostle makes this desire and
endeavor to set up their own Righteousness to be that which wholly undid
them, and our Savior himself looks upon this as the root of all bitterness,
and therefore laid the Axe to it, when he told them, They were such as
justified themselves, but what was highly esteemed amongst men was abomination
before God, Luk 18. So that not only profane and gross sins, but the civil
Pharisaical man who stands on his own bottom, and feels not the absolute
necessity of faith in Christ, is in a perishing condition; And because this
undoeth thousands as well as gross wickedness, Let us see whether we can
pierce the Scales of this Leviathan, whether we may remove this Mountain and
throw it into the Sea of Repentance and humiliation; The greatness therefore
of this sin is seen in the unperceivablenesse of it; A man may with (...)
whole might trust in himself, and yet think the clean contrary; Paul said (...)
alive once, he was at hearts ease, Rom 7. judged himself in a secure safe
condition because of his spiritual estate, but when his eyes were opened, and
he awakened by grace, those things that were once a gain and a privilege he
accounted dung and dross; But Paul while in that Pharisaical Righteousness
was as senceless of any such spiritual confidence in himself as any dead man of
the greatest burden upon him; Oh then what hopes have we to make such men see
the black dungeon they are in, and the cursed opposition they stand in to
Christ; For the principium is loesum, Christ came not to call the Righteous but
sinners to Repentance, Mat. 9.13. The Righteous are such as the Pharisees who
trusted in themselves, thought all well with them, Now such can never hunger
and thirst after Christ; They are full of themselves, as they say in
Philosophy, the sensible Object put upon the sense hinders all sensation, as in
the eye or ear; Thus it is also in Divinity, our own Righteousness, our own
good thoughts they cleave so close to us, and so we are not able to put forth
any spiritual sense; But as even the Ethiopians think the flattest nose and
the blackest color to be the best beauty, and the Persians the contrary, and
all because that they are so; It Is a National property, So it is here, because
our heart is ours, our works ours, our duties ours, therefore we think them
good, and so put secret hopes therein, and though in this high bloody sin,
yet our Consciences do not, cannot smite us, therefore fear Security more then
all despair and trouble of Conscience, for this is felt and discovered, and
thereby the better prevented, but the other is a secret Impostume never
manifesting it self but when immediately killing.

2. As it is a secret sin hardly perceived, so it is a deep radicated one;
It Is our very nature and essence almost: You see by these many disputes that
Paul had against those who would join the works of the Law with the Lord
Christ, that it is not only imbred in us to put confidence in them, but even to
plead for it and to justify this doctrine, and this was not only amongst the
unbelieving Jews, but even such as did acknowledge Christ also; The danger
therefore is, that when we can cast away other sins, yet this will cleave the
faster to us; The more we abstain from iniquities, the more trust we are apt to
put in our selves; This our Savior urged when he said, unless a man become
like a little child he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 18.4.
And when he spoke a Parable to this purpose, that when we had done all, we
should say, we were unprofitable Servants; Oh then take heed of this sweet
poison within thee; Do not say within thy heart Such and such sins I have
left, I am none of the profane ones of the world, I have a constant care about
all holy duties, for if thy heart be hereby confident in these things, it is
Idolatry; Though it be more subtle, yet he that falls down before a stock or
stone and worshipeth Idols is no greater an Idolater then thou art, for thou
make thy self a Savior, and say of thy duties as they did of the golden
Calf; These are the Gods that brought thee out of Egypt.

3, This trusting in our own Righteousness and not in Christ solely is a
Spiritual sin; It Is a sickness not of the body but of the soul, and so the
greater sin; All sins that are immediately subjected in the soul, have the
greater guilt and defilement, ceteris paribus, more then any bodily sins; As
the Schoolmens Rule is, The sins of the Spirit are maioris reatus, but bodily
sins maioris infamiae, We see it in the Devils, Their sins are wholly
sins of the Spirit, and are therefore called unclean spirits, yet they are
more sinful then men; Therefore they are called spiritual wickednesses in
high places, Ephesians. 6. Though then these sins of spiritual pride and secret
confidence in our selves do not make a noise in the world, and bring reproach
as bodily sins do, yet in other respects they may be of a crimson color
(...) ^loudy aggravation; They are a corruption of the best and choicest part
^hin thee, and therefore look not only to outward but inward heart-sins.

Lastly, The grievousnesse of this sin does appear in the immediate
contrariety and opposition it has to Christ and the Gospel of grace; There is
no sin does so formally and immediately reject Christ as a Mediator, as this
selffulnesse and self-righteousnesse, as we may see by our Savior and the
Pharisees; That which kept them from Christ was their self-justification; They
thought they had a Righteousness of their own which made our Savior call them
Blessed that did hunger and thirst after Righteousness, That were heavy laden
and burdened; And indeed Reason will tell us that a false Righteousness set
up against the true, is more dangerous then open and plain sins, and Christ
must needs be more jealous of such a person; Seeing therefore that God
requires a Righteousness there must be a Righteousness procured, and this of
Christ's can only be satisfactory, it is an high sin to set up thy Absalom
King instead of this David; Thou do in effect say, All that Christ did it was
needless, it was in vain, for thou have a Righteousness of thy own works thou will trust to, and never think to wash thy self from this sin, because by thy
words thou speak the clean contrary: There is none that professes Christ
will grossly and palpably own his works for Justification, but there is an
inward secret tickling of heart and confidence because of them, so that God
only can charge this sin upon men, for he knows and tries the hearts and
reins of men: But thus you will say, If this Self-righteousnesse and trusting
in what we do be in some sense worse then all the gross sins that are
committed, how should we become convinced of it, and so forsake it? Oh that we
could tell how to get this Ivy from cleaving thus to us, lest it consume all
that is within us: Now the ready and only way for a man to be driven out of
this self-righteousnesse is,

First, Seriously convince and inform thy Judgment of that Original pollution
which cleaves to thee as soon as ever thou have a Being: Remember those place
In iniquity did my Mother conceive me, Psalm. 51. The Imaginations of the
thoughts of the heart are only evil, and that continuly, Genesis 6. Who can bring
a clean thing out of an unclean? We are by nature the Children of wrath, Ephesians.
2.3. Oh the true apprehension of this loathsome contagion will quickly make us
cry out of our selves and any thing that is ours.

Secondly, Remember the purity and perfection of the Law, what it is that
requires even the perfect actings of all grace, so that if there be wanting
but one duty, yea, one degree of grace; The Law rejects all, and curses all:
There is no way but Hell and eternal damnation; N^^ the knowledge of this must
needs make a man cry out of himself because he fails in all things.

Thirdly, Consider the examples of those that have been most holy and godly,
how still they would go out of themselves; They would not have their own life
to be the Rule to be justified by: David that is so highly commended, and who
breaths out such divine affections to God, (...) says, If thou enter into
Judgment with thy Servant who can be Justified: Psalm. 133. Oh it is not for us
to stand upon our works and duties, when God calls to account, and Job, Though
he pleade^ his Integrity, yet he humbled himself under his imperfections
comparatively to God: Paul likewise would not be found in his own
Righteousness; It would be shame to (...) ^^d guilt to him to be found so.

Fourthly, The relics and remainders of corruption still cleave to us; Though
we be washed yet still we need our feet should be washed; Thus Paul Romans 7. and
Gal. 6. Seeing therefore in every duty there is such a combat and constict
between grace and sin; There is dross as well as Gold; It behooves us to
renounce all, and to say, Only Christ, Only Christ.

SERMON XL. Further sets forth the Excellency and Necessity of pressing the
Doctrine of Faith in Christ the Mediator, and of our being affected with it,
And invites the greatest Sinners to come unto him for Salvation.
JOH. 17.8. And have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have
believed that thou didss send me.
Marvel not if I am the third time upon this Subject, for we see our Savior
does again and again commend this Faith in his Disciples, and certainly this is
the Sum of the Gospel, the marrow and quintessence of Christianity; By this
we differ from Jews, Pagans, and Turks, yea, by this we are separated from
Papists, Socinians, and other Heretics, None of them allowing this imputed
Righteousness by a Mediator, which by Faith is to be received.

Therefore I shall proceed in exalting and pressing this Faith in a Mediator,
that at last we may come to have a spiritual and sound understanding herein;
For here are two great stones to be rolled out of the way.

1. Ignorance or misbeleef in this Point; There are very few that have been
Orthodox here; There are most in the world that have an erroneous persuasion in
this matter, under the guilt of sin they do not fly only to Christ as a
Mediator; They say, Lo here is Christ and Lo there is Christ; They have
something else they put a confidence in, and therefore what the Lord says in
another case, is also true here, He will reject their confidence, Jer. 2.37.
Never were the people of Israel more prone to lean on Egypt and Assyria for
outward help rather then on the Lord only, then we are in a spiritual manner
ready to rest upon some spiritual prop besides the Lord Christ, so that
ignorant people they know nothing of this, and knowing people are hardly
persuaded of the truth of it.

A second stone to be rolled out of the way, is that senselessness and
unsavourinesse on men's hearts, though it should be granted that they know and
rightly believe in this matter, for indeed none can prize or be affected with
this Subject, but such a spiritual heart that is sensible of his spiritual
disease and the spiritual Remedy; They must be Children of the Adoption, They
must be Evangelical hearers, such as have been in a spiritual Transfiguration
with Christ on the Mount as it were, That are refreshed with these Truths; It Is
not every hearer, It Is not every one that comes to the Assemblies that can
say, How welcome are the feet of those that bring glad tidings of the Gospel:
Therefore we desire your hearts as well as your heads, your tender affections
as well as solid understandings: This is a Truth that must be eaten, you will
not feel the sweetness of it till it be in your belly.

Now there are very good grounds why we should be thus insisting upon this
Subject.

For 1. It Is the main scope and end of the whole Scripture; If you ask why the
Word of God was written, the Answer is, That the chief principal end was, 1.
Faith in Christ the Mediator the main scope of the Scripture.
that man being convinced of his sin and of the utter impotency of any
righteousness in himself or other Creatures, should fly unto Christ's
Righteousness as the only Sanctuary; Thus John, These things are written that
believing you might have eternal life, All the Administrations in the Old
Testament were Types of Christ, as the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
does at large open their meaning; It was not their Sacrifices but Christ, It
was not the blood of Rams and Goats, but Christ's blood; Hence it is said that
Moses and the Prophets bear witness of Christ; It Is true the Scripture has
many other subordinate ends, but the chief is to direct us to Christ, to make
us see that nothing in the world can pacify God for our sins but Christ; Oh
then how necessary must that be which all the Penmen of the Scripture aimed at,
Moses, David, all the Prophets; They looked at this Messiah; And the New
Testament is wholly spent in describing his person and his Office, or the end
of his coming into the world; Oh then whatsoever thou may be ignorant of or
negligent in, yet give thy self to the studying, meditating, and believing of
this Subject.

2. The great work of the Spirit of God in the Ministry is to convince of this
Righteousness; It is to make us see that all humane Righteousness, 2. The
work of the Spirit in the Ministry is to convince of sin.
all moral duties, no, nor the graces God bestows on his people, are the
Righteousness God looks for, Joh. 16.9, 10. The Spirit of God is there said to
reprove or convince the world of sin, especially of that great sin of
Unbelief, and then of Righteousness, which Christ procures by going to his
Father, Observe that, It Is the work of Gods Spirit thus to convince, So that
all Moral Philosophy and the wisest directions of the most civil men will leave
us in a Wilderness; They cannot tell us what is true Righteousness, and how
we come to be accepted of by God; Therefore this is revealed by the Gospel
only; If we would know what is that Righteousness which we may trust to, which
may be as a Skreen between Gods justice and us; Neither Aristotle nor Plato
among the Heathens, no, nor Bellarmine and Suarez among the Papists will inform
us rightly; Because in the matter of Justification and the doctrine of
Righteousness they have too much consulted with Aristotle, as if the Scripture
spoke of such a Righteousness as the Heathens do; No, this tells us, It Is a
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us without works, this it does again and
again; Seeing then all natural reason would never persuade us herein, it must
necessarily be the Spirit of God that will convince us in this, and therefore
though you hear ten thousand Sermons of this Subject, your hearts will never be
convinced of your own sinfulness and Christ's Righteousness till you are
overpowerd by Gods Spirit; Oh then pray to God that he would make thy heart
readily to yield to it, yea, and rejoice in it.

3. The end of the Law and the preaching of that is wholly for this end, 3. Its
the end of the Law.
to discover Christ the Mediator; Those that would not have the Law preached
cannot have Christ preached truly and effectually, for Romans 10.4. Christ is the
end of the Law for righteousness; Can the end be obtained without the means?
It Is the Schoolmaster to bring to Christ; The disease must be discovered are we
will seek out for a Physician; The heart must be wounded ere we shall desire
oil; The Law then is to be preached in the exact purity of it, and in the
condemning power of it; That so when we see our selves wholly undone in that
Court; That there remains no hope for us, then we may fly to Christ; The Law
says, Do this and live, Do all things in the highest degree, else you cannot
live; Now into what horror and despair does this put men till we come to hear
that voice, Believe in Christ who has fullfilled the righteousness of the
Law; When therefore we preach the exactness of the Law and the severity of
Gods Justice, it is not that we should stay here; Alas, who can say It Is good
to be here? no, They will cry out as the People of Israel did at the giving of
the Law, when there was so much terror; But our aim is that by this commotion
and trouble upon you, you might lay hold upon Christ; We would burden you that
Christ might ease you.

4. It Is the essence and marrow of the Gospel.
4. This Doctrine is indeed the very essence and marrow of the Gospel; This is
the glad tidings that when we of our selves were eternally undone, Christ as a
Mediator reconcileth the offended God and offending sinner; It was this that
the very Angels though it did not so immediately concern them sang for joy,
Glory be to God on high, Good will to men, and peace on the Earth, Luke 2.14.
This is that which we find the Apostle Paul so magnifying every where, This is
a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15. Great is the
Mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3 16. Oh then we
should never be weary of this Subject, It Is eyes to the blind, It Is meat to
the hungry, Clothes to the naked, mercy to the sinner, grace to the afflicted
one; This is the fatted Calf, and the Robe for the distressed Prodigal; Truly
as he said he did not love to read, no, not Tully, because he did not find
the Name of Christ, so should all Sermons and Subjects be dull and tedious,
that do not directly or indirectly, mediately or immediately bring us to him;
All other Points are but accessory or preparatory, this is the Substance; It Is
such an excellent Subject that the Angels desire to be informed more in it, and
take infinite delight in the knowledge of it.

5. The devil in all ages has labored to obscure this Doctrine.
5. This is the more to be pressed because the devil in all ages has labored
to obscure this doctrine above others; Insomuch that Luther called this,
Articulus stantis and cadentis Ecclesiae, when the devil could neither
overthrow the humane or divine nature of Christ by Heretics; Then he labored
to overthrow his Office of being a Mediator; That if there must be a Christ,
yet he might be a needless and useless one, so that by this Point only we
differ not only from Jews and Pagans but all Heretics and Papists; The
righteousness of Christ our Mediator imputed to us is the Treasure in the
Church only; This Pearl is hid in this Field only, The excellency therefore and
dignity of this Point is seen by the devils opposition, and his Instruments
raised up to obscure and darken it; And then on the other side God has raised
up choice Instruments in his Church, to vindicate this Truth; Luther of all
Points was most affected with this, and God prepared him for it, by laying soul
exercises and heart temptations upon him, insomuch that he said he often wished
he had never been a man; Oh the trouble and darkness that was upon his soul,
and he used all the Remedies prescribed in Popery, to comfort himself, but
still his heart was as unquiet as ever, till at last he was by studying in
Scripture directed to believe in Christ the Mediator, and in particular to be
clothed with Christ's righteousness in stead of his own, and thus it is still,
the more spiritually tempted and exercised any man either Minister or private
Christian is; The more he walks in darkness and has no light: The more does
he come to prize and esteem this fullness in Christ; None love this honeycomb
but those who hunger after a righteousness that they cannot find in
themselves; These particulars discover the necessity of pressing this often and
often.

Therefore the second Use is to bring your hearts in relish with this
Doctrine; Vse^
Oh that thou were such an Auditour, that this Truth might breed a sweet
pleasure in thy spiritual appetite; If this be the Gospel, If this be the glad
Tidings, If this be the Pearl and the Treasure, be thou in the number of those
that will part with all to be partakers of it.

But you will say, How may we fit Subjects for this Truth? Quest.
how may we come to prize it more then the honey or the honeycomb.

Take these Directions. Answ. Directions showing how a man may come to prize
this doctrine.


Feel sin as a burden; as a weight let it be more to thee then all temporal
evils in the world, for so Mat. 11. Come to me ye that are heavy laden and I
will ease you; David Psalm. 32. when his sin was ready to overwhelm him, then
he cries out, Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes no sin; When Mary
Magdalene has her head and heart a Fountain of water because of her sins, then
she is greatly indeared in her affections to Christ; Those love much to whom
much is forgiven, as our Savior at large shows, Luke 7.46. If then thou art
not persuaded of thy debts, or if the thoughts of them do not afflict and
grieve thee, never think that Christ will be chief in thy heart; Oh then begin
here, lay this for a Foundation, saying, All these precious Truths will be
spilt like water upon the ground, until I be of a broken contrite heart for
sin; The Prodigal never regarded the bread and Fullness in his Fathers
House, till he comes to want even husks themselves: Joab would not come to
Absalom, till all his Corn was fired: Neither do we readily and willingly run
to Christ, till God has shot his arrow into us, tiill he has wounded us at
the heart, till we feel sin the greatest burden, and that because God is
dishonored and provoked, and indeed this may be a very good motive to
Repentance and humiliation, because there is such an excellent Remedy; Thou
need not fear going into the depths of this water because Christ will
preserve thee therein; No wonder if a man not believing or acquainted with this
Truth be afraid to think of his sins; That with Luther he hates the word
Repent, for there is nothing but despair and hopelesnesse about sin till this
Truth be discovered; Oh then be no longer afraid to have thy sins brought to
thy mind; Say not, They are a greater burden then can be born; for had Cain
believed in Christ, Had Judas believed in Christ, Their sick and wounded Souls
had quickly been healed; It Is not the greatness nor the multitude of thy
sins; It Is not the terrible aggravations of them may wholly overwhelm thee if
so be thou do but cast Anchor upon Christ.

If you would have an high esteem of this Point labor for a spiritual heavenly
heart; For as Christ in his Mediation is wholly spiritual, all his offices and
works are spiritual, so it is only the spiritual and heavenly heart that can
close with it; There must be a proportion between the Object and the faculty or
Subject; Supernatural will not agree with that which is natural; If therefore
thou art carnal, earthly, and wholly minding worldly Comforts, thou will
prefer every Thistle before this Jewel; To you that believe Christ is
precious, says Peter, 1 Peter 2.7. but to others he is not so; Oh then if thy
heart do not leap for Joy within thee, as John did in the womb at the Presence
of Christ, it is because thy heart is carnal and sensual; Thou know no
better good then what pleases sense: It Is not because the matter is empty, but
because thy heart is empty of heaven: What makes Paul desire to know nothing
but Christ and him crucified; Was it not the high spiritual Frame of his
heart? and it cannot be otherwise, for Christ is all that an heavenly heart can
desire; He is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; He is the Head, and the Vine,
He is the true Bread that came down from Heaven; He is made of God Wisdom,
Righteousness, and Sanctification: If then there were more Paul's, Christ in
his Mediatourship would be more magnified, but the general sort of people are
like the Gadarenes, they had rather that Christ should depart out of their
Country then that they should lose their Swine, Or like unto the Jews, that
desire to show more favor to Barabbas then to Jesus.

3. Would you be affected with this Truth? then pray earnestly for the Spirit
of Adoption, and an Evangelicall Frame of heart: An heart not under the Law in
a well-explained sense, but under Grace; Pray that ye may be led by the Spirit
of God, and so be as Sons; For by this means Christ will be all in all: It Is
our hard, unbeleeving, and distrustful thoughts of God that makes us keep at
such a distance from Christ, and so neglect him who is the Peacemaker and
Reconciler: Whereas an Evangelical disposition would make us draw nigh to God
as a Father in Christ; It would remove the great Gulf that is in the way: It
takes away the partition Wall; So that the longer we are kept in discouraging
Fears, the less Fellowship have we with the Father and the Son, and so the
less esteem and respect of him who is to create and work all this.

Acquaint your selves with the Imperfection of your graces, and the
insufficiency that is in you even when you have done the best; For by this
means you will find that every thing within fails you, Nothing will stand
sure enough, and thereby you will be necessitated to seek for a Mediator
without: Thus Paul Romans 7. when he discovered all that dross within himself,
That when he would do good evil was present with him, Yet what does this drive
him to at last; I thank God through Jesus Christ; And David upon the
apprehension of what defects did cleave to him, prays That God would not
enter into Judgment, for then no flesh should be justified, Psa. 133. Not any
one person in the world because he is flesh; Oh there is little cause for any
man to bear up his Head, though he did ten Thousand times more then he did,
though he were a Giant in Grace, whereas now he is but a Dwarf, because there
is so much Imperfection in the best Duty, that it needs pardon; Not only our
sins but our Righteousness needs the Righteousness of Chtist, as you see
Paul acknowledged, and the Church of old complained comparing them to a
menstruous Cloth, Isa. 64.6. Oh then if thou were settled in this, thou would
cry out, Christ he is all in all.

Use. An Invitation of the greatest sinners to come to Christ
Use 3. of Invitation, Even to great and grievous sinners to bewail their
Iniquities, and to come in to Christ; For even your case is not desperate;
Seeing we have such a Mediator, if Christ be truly apprehended what he is,
all our sins will be no more to him then the Earth to Heaven; It Is a long
while ere the Law has its due efficacy upon many sinners; They bless
themselves when God curses them, They acquit themselves when the Law
condemns them; But when once their hearts are mastered, and they feel the
wounds of sin whether they will or no; Then it is as hard to direct them to
this Mediator; Then they think their sins greater not only then they can
bear, but then Christ can or at least will bear; Then the thoughts of the
Multitude and bloody aggravations of them are so great that they see no way but
Hell and Damnation before them; Oh let such consider what this Mediator is,
who is sufficient to save to the uttermost; That he is more able to justify
then the first Adam to condemn; Let them remember how well-pleasing it is to
throw our selves into the Arms of Christ; That he will not in any wise cast out
those that come to him, That he will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the
smoking Flax.

But you will say, This Truth if preached publicly will do more hurt then
good, For the Profane ungodly Wretch he will go home in the hardness of his
heart, and when he can sin no longer, nor live no longer, then he will say,
Oh it is good to trust in the Mediator.

But first Consider That there is an Order and Method in our Trusting in
Christ; It Is not the first Duty we are to set upon; But as he that would get
the Fruit of some Tree must first pull away the Briars or thorns that happily
hang in the way, So it is here; Before thou art called to believe in him, thou
art called to Know thy Self and thy sins, how wretched and damnable thy
Estate is; Unto what wrath and vengeance threatened by the Law thou art
obnoxious; Thou must be lost in thy own self ere Christ will find thee, and
further thou art called to have strong desires even as hunger and thirst is
after Christ above all worldly and earthly things, so that none can bid thee
believe; and as for thy Repentance or thy love to thy sins that is no matter,
Christ will receive you howsoever: And then

Secondly, As you cannot come to Christ but this Preparation must be made, so
neither can you keep him as yours, but with a constant, holy, and earnest
endeavor to all Godliness, 2 Cor. 5.17. He that is in Christ is a New
Creature, and He that is Christ's has mortified the affections of sin; Never
think the Spirit of Christ will abide with wilful and obstinate wickedness.

SERMON XLI. Of Praying both for the Godly and the Wicked, With the Reasons and
Motives thereof.
JOH. 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world.
IN this Verse we see the End why Christ so largely commended the Faith and
Obedience of his Disciples; It is to show that they were such Subjects for whom
his Prayer was proper and peculiar: To have prayed for the Reprobate, and such
who did not, nor ever would give themselves up to Obedience had been either to
pray that God would alter his eternal purpose, or else the course of his
justice, but seeing they were both given to him by the Father; and did really
discover the Fruits of this gift in their lives, Therefore they were fit to be
recommended in Prayer.

So that the Text does describe the Subjects of Christ's Prayer; And again, For
whom he will not pray: It Is like that terrible Separation of the Sheep on the
right hand and the Goats on the left; It Is horrenda Sententia, as one Divine
calls it. What? not pray for the world, said another? I pray God none of the
world hear me:

Though this Text has some thorns of Controversy especially about Universal
Grace and Christ's death for all men, yet it likewise bears excellent
practical matter^

In the words let us Consider, 1. The Description of those Christ prays for,
2. The opposition for whom he will not pray.


Those that he does not pray for, are the world, who they are and the
controversal matter therein is in time to be dispatched.

Those he prays for are described, 1. By that relative particle Them, I pray
for them. 2. They are described by their Original descent, Those thou gave
me, for they are thine.


For the first part the Relative particle them, viz, They that have thus
obeyed, thus believed; From whence in the general observe,

First, That it is very hopeful and a good encouragement to pray for those that
are godly: We may learn it from the example of Christ, They are such and such
persons therefore I pray for them.

Observe. 2. That the people of God are under the fruit and benefit of Christ's
Prayer.

Of the First.

It Is good and comfortable praying for those that discover the signs of Grace
in them: Thus Paul, Pray for us, for we trust we have a good Conscience, Heb.
13.18. Doct. It Is very hopeful and encouraging to pray for those that discover
signs of grace in them.
That he makes an Argument, They should pray for him in his Apostolical work
and emploiment, because he did with all Truth and Faithfulness of Conscience
labor therein, and on the contrary when people were come to an high degree of
wickedness, The Prophet is forbid to pray for that People, Jeremy 7.16, 17.

To open this Point Consider this particular.

It Is not only our duty to pray for our selves but for others also; Consider
these particulars.
Some are said to Question Whether it be lawful to pray for any one man in
particular, because (say they) He that prays in the due qualifications of
speeding prayer, I. It Is not our duty only to pray for our selves but for
others also.
does as effectually succeed in tbat Duty, as if he had been praying for any
particular, But this can no ways hold, It Is a Duty sometimes to pray in
particular for some persons, as the Disciples did for Peter when he was in
prison; And Paul many times desires the prayers of the Church for his own
particular: A Prayer poured out for some particular person may have more love,
fervency, Quest. Whether it be lawful to pray for any man in particular.
and faith in it then when for the general, especially their particular
necessities are then commended to God, which would not be in the general.

This being cleared we go on to assert that forementioned Position, It Is the
duty of godly men to pray for others; Answ.
Our Savior does suppose that in his Form of Prayer, Our Father, and he
extends this, Mat. 5. even to our very Enemies that are Enemies for our
godliness sake, persecuting and reviling us, and that though continuing in
their wickedness; Thus Paul is thought to be converted by Stevens Prayer,
while he was consenting to the stoning of that first Martyr; Stephen was
praying that God would remove the stone from Paul's heart, yea, the Apostle 1 Timothy 2.1. exhorts, that supplications and prayers be put up for all men; That
is, for all sorts of men, as the distribution does evidence, yet this is no
contrariety to Christ's Example who would not pray for the world, for certainly
he would not, so neither may we in that sense.

Therefore Secondly, Though it be our duties to pray for others, II. Yet we may
not pray for Reprobates as such.

A twofold faith in prayer.


yet we may not in general pray for those that are reprobated, formalite as
they say; For that prayer could not be in Faith.

There is a twofold Faith required in our Prayer.

1. That it be according to Gods will, a dogmatical Faith.

2. A fiducial Faith, that it be with confidence in Gods Promise and Power: Now
he that should pray for Reprobates as Reprobates, could not pray in a
dogmatical Faith, for he did in effect desire that God would be mutable and
changeable; It Is as if we should pray that God would not create the world,
whenas he has done it already, yet this must be very warily understood; For



Joh. 5.16. speaks of a sin unto death, that we are not to pray for one
guilty of that; This has much troubled the Learned; The Ancients they thought
it was not an absolute prohibition of all to pray for such, but only that
eminent men might do it; They thought for an ordinary Christian to pray for
such sinners, it would be high presumption; As it is not for every one in the
Court to speak for some heinous offender but a special Favorite; When God
said, Though Noah, Job and Daniel Eze. 14.14. should pray for that people he
would not hear them; This implied that they were nearer to Gods ear, and might
prevail sooner then others; Though this Exposition be old, yet the Text seems
to be absolutely prohibitive; And so Austin said, that if we knew who had
sinned that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, we were no more to pray
for him, then for one damned in hell: Now whether such a sin as is unto death
be ordinarily committed, and what it is, and whether we may know when such do
commit it is worth the enquiring into, but is greatly extravagant unto my
matter.

To speak exactly, Gods Decree about Events is not the Rule of our Prayer, but
his Word is; And therefore though it should be revealed that God would not do
such or such things, yet it may be our duty to pray for them; As Austin
instanceth, If it should be revealed that my Father must die of such a disease,
yet I might lawfully, though with submission, pray for his life, because it is
my duty to use all means for my Fathers Life; Thus though Nathan the Prophet
had told David His Child should die, yet David humbles himself, and by
fasting seeks to God for his Childs life; So it is lawful to pray that God
would wholly mortify sin in us, yet God will not do it in this life; Thus
also though Christ told Peter he should deny him, yet Peter was bound to pray
for Faith and perseverance.

We are to distinguish between a simple affection expressed conditionally in
prayer and an absolute petition; It Is lawful even for all men, though
reprobated, and formaliter as so, to express our desires and affections with
this condition, if it were the Will of God; Even as Christ when he knew that it
was Gods decree he should suffer, and that he came into the world for that very
hour, yet conditionally he expresses himself, If it be possible let this Cup
pass away, Mat. 26.39. So ought we to express such a desire and love to the
salvation of all men, that we are to wish it, but with submission to Gods Will
and his glorious Wisdom: Thus Paul conditionally expressed his desire in
reference to the salvation of his Nation, Romans 9.3.

III Whether we may pray in faith for others as for our selves.
Thirdly, It Is debated, That although it be our duty to pray for others, yet
whether we can pray in such Faith for others as for our selves; Whether we may
with as much confidence pour out our hearts for the necessities of another as
for our selves, Some think not, because we cannot have such certain knowledge
of another as of our selves, but the contrary is true, for seeing the Promise
is Universal, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name believing, ye shall receive,
Matthew. 21.22. And this extends to others as well as our selves; Therefore we
may with as much Faith and Hope pray for others as for our selves, yea, it may
be, and it is our duty sometimes to think so, that God hears our Prayers not
so much for our sakes as those we pray for.

These things premised Let us consider why it is so hopeful to pray for those
that are godly and belong to Christ.

And first, Because then our prayers are likelier to have a powerful effect;
Now there is no man but heartily desires his Prayers may prosper, he would not
have them return empty into his own bosom; Then our prayers are liklier of a
powerful effect when we pray for the godly.
These returns of Prayer should be more prized by us then the Merchant does his
Return of Ships, So that the godly man is very careful that he may not do any
thing to blunt these Tools.

Now there are these Grounds of more probable speed,

Because Christ prays for them, and how greatly should we be encouraged to
pray for those, for whom Christ prays; We see his Example in this Verse: Now
his Prayer is a Mediatory Prayer, a Prayer that cannot but take effect; for the
love of the Father does not only move him, but Justice also, being he stands in
the Relation of a Surety; Oh then let us be more fervent and constant in this
duty of praying for others that are holy; Thou may think with thy self, What
I am doing for him on Earth, Christ is doing for him in Heaven: Shall Christ
regard the estate of such an one, and shall I forget him? It Is to be feared
that the godly do not look upon this, as so necessary a duty, and certainly
such are the dissentions and alienations from one another, that I doubt this
great duty of prayer for one another is greatly neglected.

Therefore it is like to be a speeding prayer because they are such as are
within the Promise and Covenant; Now when we have a promise from Gods Word when
he has obliged his fidelity to such, Then we have strong Arguments to plead
for such; Oh what a sad disheartening is it in prayer to think, I pray for such
an one, but I know no promise to apply to him; It Is true God is merciful and
his goodness that is a general Encouragement, but yet there must be some more
peculiar Encouragements from the Word of God, to be hopeful in prayer: Oh then
be not guilty of the neglect of so much help and comfort to the Children of
God, as to forget thy prayers for them, Thou may urge the promises of God for
them as well as for thy own self.

Therefore there is hope to speed because they are such Subjects who desire to
walk in such a way that they may put no stop to the proceedings of prayer; One
great and sure destruction of all prayer is to regard iniquity, when we pray
yet to do also service to sin; If I regard iniquity in my heart the Lord will
not hear my prayers, says David; Psalm. 66.18. And again, I will wash my hands
in innocence so will I compass thy Altar, Psalm. 26.6. He that prays and yet
is given to sin does benedicere Lingua, but maledicere Vita; As the strings of
an Instrument that are moistened are not fit for any Music, so neither is that
man's heart or life which is polluted with any foul and noisome lust; If
therefore thou praiest for the godly they are such who labor to keep hearts
and lives pure; And therefore the benefit of prayer will find no gulf to stop
it: It encourages the Physician to give Physic to him who by his disorderly
diet and Conversation will not go about to mar and destroy all.

4. There is hope to speed in praying for a godly man, because there is a good
Foundation already laid by God; God has begun with many hopeful dispensations
to those that are his, and we may not think he will have the reproach of the
unwise Builder that began to build and could not make an end; Thus the Apostle
encouraged himself, The Lord has delivered and will deliver from every evil
work, 2 Timothy 4.17. Let therefore the gracious workings of God upon those that
are his people, be so many strong Invitations to pour out thy prayers for them.

But you will say, Of praying for ungodly men.
May we then only pray for those that are already godly, must we like the
Priest and the Levite pass by all wicked men? God forbid; Though there be not
such comfort and hope in praying for them, yet it is our duty, 1 Timothy 2.7. to
pray for all men: Motives there unto.
There are no sorts of persons excepted but such as have sinned that sin unto
death; Indeed God is angry with Samuel for praying any more for Saul, and God
commands Jeremiah to pray no more for that people, Jerem. 7.6. but that was
chiefly in respect of temporal Mercies, Saul to have his Kingdom still; The
People of Israel to have their Judgments removed, but that could not be, God
had determined otherwise; It Is our duty to pray for the wicked though wallowing
in their sins, that they may be converted and brought home to God; Thus
Christ that would not pray for the world of the Reprobates, yet prayed for
wicked men, That God would forgive them for they knew not what they did; And
seeing that Christ was heard in what he prayed for, we may think all those were
converted; Those that knew not what they did, that were ignorant in their
crucifying Christ, or if not all yet many, for our Savior spoke indefinitely
not universally: Thus Steven converted Paul by his Prayer at the hour of his
Martyrdom; So Monica the Mother of Austin, by her daily prayers was a means of
converting Austin, So that we may say of the ungodly as Samuel concerning the
people of Israel, though a stubborn and wicked Nation, God forbid I should
cease to pray for you, And indeed if it be our duty to admonish and exhort
others, and with much patience to endure, if it be possible to bring them out
of the snares of sin, no doubt we are to pray that God would bless such
Reproofs, That he would prepare the heart to receive them; And again the very
miserable and wretched estate they are in through sin makes them fit Objects
of prayer: There is never a profane man that walloweth in his lusts, blessing
himself in his hearts desire, but he is an Object of great pity, Even as mad
men that think themselves Great Persons, when they are bound up in chains;
Seeing therefore they lie under such great misery and they feel not this, They
pity not, nor pray for themselves; This should make us that can pray to commend
their estate to God; And the rather because as Preaching of the Word, so Prayer
is appointed as a means of Conversion, but by the Word: Ask, and ye shall
receive; So that if I ask for Conversion, If I pray for the Reformation of
another, my prayer may be the Execution of Gods Election; It Is by prayer that
God will make good this promise; Oh how comfortable will it be to see thee a
Father answered in prayer for the conversion of thy Children, That they are the
Fruit of thy Prayers, So likewise what rejoicing is it to a Minister, when not
only his preaching but his praying for his people is answered; That it is not
all our duty to preach to you but pray for you as Christ did; And what a joy is
it if we see God answering our prayers in the conversion and reforming of one
man; It Is true there are some wicked men so highly profane and so wilfully
wicked that they greatly cool the heart of a godly man in Prayer: It Is said,
the Church shut Julian out of her prayers, and there could not a greater and
more sorer judgment befall him, for that was futuri judicii prejudicium.

Use 1. Is Prayer thus hopeful in the behalf of the godly? then this should
teach the godly to be more fervent and constant in this duty for one another:
Paul though so eminent in office and graces, yet again and again desires the
Churches prayers and he promises his prayers for them; He informs Philemon
in particular that he makes mention of him in his prayers always; Thus you see
what the godly have been used to do, If David Psalm. 119.4, when his Enemies
reviled him and reproached him, yet he gave himself to Prayer, and humbled
himself in Sackcloth for them, what then would he do for those that were godly,
Psalm. 72. It Is made a great blessing unto Solomon, that prayer shall be made
for him, and the fervent Prayer of a righteous man prevails much, Jam. 5.16.
If so, why do we not stir up our selves more to this duty; The Apostle James
bids us confess our sins and pray for one another in the same place;
Shall Christ pray for all his, and wilt not thou? Do not say It Is enough to
pray in the general for Gods Church, but thou art in particular to pray for
others as their conditions and necessities require, be moved hereunto.

First, From the common body and fellowship that ye are in; The Scripture
delights to resemble the Communion of the Church under the similitude of a
body, to show how near and conjoined they are together; If one member suffer
shall not the Tongue pray for it; If any part of thy own body be pained and
grieved, how much does it affect thee, thou should have the same affections
to those that are of the body of Christ.

Secondly, Prayers are an instituted help and means to procure the good of
others, so that it is a duty you owe, Phil. 1.19 Paul trusted that all the
opposition he had would turn to good by their prayers; So then, the
afflictions, the mercies that others are under prove good by Prayer: Oh how apt
is one to consume another! They are proud under such mercies, They are
impatient under such afflictions, but thou that art thus apt to find fault,
do thou or have thou prayed for them? It may be they are no better because
thou have not done thy duty: Thou little think how near their sins may
come to thee, Not that we are bound to mention by Name every godly man, for
that is infinite, but as occasion draws thee out, and thou art desired,
making as much Conscience of prayer for others as a debt thou owe, or as a
pledge thou art to restore.

Thirdly, Fervent Prayer for one another will take away all differences, all
jealousies and suspicions, it will make the Godly of one heart and one mind:
Oh who can bewail the divisions of Jacob, Not the garments but the body of
Christ is now rent: In former times it was said, Behold, how they love one
another, how they call one another Brethren, but now what differences in
opinion and other carnal contentions: There is no Love and communion, and there
is no greater cause then neglect of this duty, and it is also an excellent
remedy against all discontents: Art thou apt to receive unkindnesses, To think
this or that hard dealing, Go and pray for that man, Oh how immediately will it
quiet those winds and waves.

Use of Admonition To wicked men, to avoid all impiety, if not for other
Reasons yet for this, it makes other men's prayers the less effectual; It may
be though thou art so vile and naught, thou have a godly Father, or a godly
Friend praying for thee; Though thou art so ungodly, thou have a godly Minister
praying for thee: Oh do not raise so great a gulf between Heaven and their
prayers, as thy sins are; When Lazarus was dead and buried in the grave, Mary
gives it over as a desperate case: If thou had been here he had not died,
says she: So are we apt to say, Lord, Prayer for such before they come to be
thus obstinate, before they bave rebelled so much against the Light, might have
been hopeful; But now what hope is there? Take heed thou go not so far in
sinning that God says, Pray no more for this man.

SERMON XLII. The Excellency and Efficacy of Christ's Mediatory Prayer; Set
forth in many Aggravations of it for the Consolation of the Godly.
JOH. 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world.
THE Subject of Christ's Prayer is here described,

First, By the Relative particle them, and although he speak strictly of his
Disciples, yet in the end of this Chapter he joyneth all Believers unto them,
So that the 2d Observation is,

Doct. All Gods people are under Christ's Mediatory Prayer. Concerning which
consider
That all the Children of God are under Christ's Mediatory Prayer; Now the
Children of God which are also called his Sheep are of two sorts.

Joh. 10.16. Other Sheep I have that are not of this Fold, Them also I must
bring and they shall hear my voice; These are under Christt Mediatory Prayer,
for it is by virtue of his Mediation that they are brought home unto him, but
then there are others who are actually put into a possession of Christ, having
new Natures, The Children of God are of two sorts.
and so enjoying a Title and Right to him; These are much more under the
Mediatory power of Christ's Prayer, And therefore of such I shall treat.

That though Christ prayed on Earth as a Mediator, yet still he does in Heaven
make Intercession for his: He cease not praying though the manner be
different; His prayer while in his humiliation is accompanied with strong cries
and tears, with much humility and debasement, but his prayer in his Exaltation
is only a representing of those to God whom he died far, as also their
condition and necessity, willing that what he had purchased for them should be
actually applied to them; Hence in the Text it is (...); A Learned man
observes that that word is only applied to the Prayers of Christ in his
humiliation, and (...) to his Intercession, which he makes in heaven, so that
though Christ be now in heaven, yet we may not think he has laid aside those
compassionate bowels he had toward us, Heb. 4.15. when he was on the earth.

Israel, that thereby they might be in a continual memory as it were before
God, So under the New Testament Christ is the substance of that shadow, and he
is the real High Priest, who not only once offered up himself a perfect
Sacrifice for sin, but was earnest in Prayer for his people;

Now it is comfortable to consider in how many respects Christ is preferred by
the Apostle Heb. 7. and alibi above him in the Law. The Priesthood of Christ
exceeds the Priesthood of the Law.


Those Highpriests were mortal, and therefore whatsoever affections they
might have and compassions, yet those died with them, but now we have one who
is immortal, and therefore v. 25. He everliveth to make intercession for us;
Oh what a strong support is this, That there is an everliving Intercession for
us; Though Parents cannot pray always for their Children, nor Ministers for
their people, yet Christ's Prayer is eternal for us.

2. All other High Priests had sins of their own to offer for as well as
others, v. 27. They were compassed about with infirmities as well as other men,
but Christ who prays for us is holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from
sinners, so that Christ had no sin of his own to purge away, he offered not
up a Sacrifice for any infirmity he had, but it was for the sins of those who
are his Childrin; Therefore the people of God are in a transcendent
blessedness by reason of this Mediatory Intercession.

And that our hearts may be fully affected herein Let us consider the
aggravations of it, not naming what has been already said. The aggravations of
Christ's prayer.


This prayer and Intercession of Christ is ready at hand, immediately upon any
sin or fall the godly are cast into; We read of David that after his sin
committed he himself was a long while dead and stupefied in it, but Christ he
is presently sensible of what we have done; Oh how often do the People of God
either wholly forget or else not a long time after take notice of their
Infirmities; Their hearts do not always immediately strike them, but Christ
who prays for us he takes notice of every failing, and immediately becomes an
Advocate to plead for them, 1 John 1.1. If any man sin, viz. of the godly,
for he speaks to them, we have an Advocate with the Father; Oh what would
become of the godly man who falls seven times a day; If our Advocate did not
make up our breaches, every hour, every moment, we should be wholly estranged
from God. Were it not for Christ's Intercession; Not only great and gross
sins but even the very least sins, Millions whereof we are guilty do in
their own nature deserve hell, and so might make God abborre us, but it is
because of Christ's Intercession, This Communion is not dissolved, It Is not any
virtue or dignity in our prayer that can re-estate us into Gods favor, but it
must be Christ's Intercession for us: As Aaron when the wrath of God brake out,
presently stood up and offered incense, upon which the plague stayed; This does
Christ as it were all the day long.

This Mediatory prayer of Christ is the ground of all the acceptance of our
prayers; Our Prayers if not found in him are provocations rather then
appeasements; If a Godly man's Prayer avail much, it is because Christ's Prayer
avails much, He is the Altar upon which all the oblations are sanctified, and
from hence it is that the Incense of their Prayers are perfumed, so that God
finds a sweet savor in them: Alas, what is even in David's and Paul's prayers
but much infirmity; Their prayers need praying over again, when they have
ended, they are even to beg pardon of all their holy duties, so that herein we
may admire the advantage of being under Christ's Mediatory Prayer, in that by it
only our Persons and duties are accepted, our prayers live and move in his;
There could not be a crying tongue in them did not the Prayers of Christ speak
louder? And this may unspeakably support under sad Temptations, when thou can
not pray, thy heart is bound up, Thy affections are faint and cold, Thou criest
out, Oh the sins and infirmities of thy Prayers, yet Christ's Prayer is full
and fervent for thee, There is no Imperfection, no fault to be found with him;
Oh it is a good refuge to run unto, when thou art almost overwhelmed because of
thy dull, formal and distracted Prayers! If Christ's Prayer had no more dignity
and worth in it then mine has I were undone for ever.

This prayer of Christ for us is constant, perpetual, without ceasing; There
is not a moment wherein we may say Christ does not present thy cause to God,
Thus it is said in the present Tense, We have an Advocate, and Heb. 7.25. He
everliveth to make Intercession for us; Thus as he that keeps Israel neither
slumbreth nor sleeps, so neither does he that prays for his Church either
slumber or sleep, when Paul said He made mention of such always in his
Prayers, that is to be understood always when he prayed not that he prayed
always, so when we are commanded to pray always, to pray without ceasing;
That is when our duty is and the command requires, not that we should day and
night do nothing but pray; But when we speak of Christ's Intercession, it is
constant and never interrupted; There is no day or night that it cease;
Elisha scorned at the Priests of Baal, bidding them cry aloud. It may be they
were either sleeping or in a Journey, 1 Kin. 18.27. But the Lord Christ is
always attending and minding this very thing; Oh the unsearchable depths of
comfort that are in this, when thou art preaching, drinking, working, then
Christ is interceding for thee, when thou have no mind of thy self, do not
pray for thy self, yet even then Christ is commending thy case to his Father:
Oh the godly soul should cry out, I have enough, what can I desire more? If
this will not satisfy thy disquieted soul what will?

This Mediatory prayer comes from him who not only because of his worth does
merit, or because of his dear Relation, The Father cannat deny him as you
heard, but also from one whose affections and compassions are larger to thee
then any of thy dearest Friends can be; You heard, that he was one who was
touched with our infirmity, one who had gone under several Temptations that he
might know experimentally how to succor those that are tempted; Oh now it is
far better to have one praying for us that is experimentally tempted, or has
been, as we are, then ten thousand others; Non ignara mali miseris succurrere
disco; So that so far as any grief or temptation may go without sin, so far
Christ knows the meaning of it, and even for the guilt of sin and the
displeasure of God, that he did undergo in the height of it: Thus he that
intercedes for thee is one who knows the meaning of thy Temptations, of thy
desertions, what it is to fear God has forsaken thee.

A great aggravating consideration in this Mediatory prayer of Christ is the
potency and prevalency of it; It is an almighty and omniscient prayer; Luther
called the prayer of a Godly man so, how much rather may we say so of Christ
himself: God said to Moses, Let me alone, as if his Prayer hindered him from
doing what he would do: Jacob wrestled, and made Supplication, and prevailed
with God, how much more does Christ then prevail, and that upon two Titles: 1.
of Justice, his Prayer is satisfactory and compensatory to God. And then 2.
Because of Love, For he is the only begotten Son and welbeloved of his
Father: The prevalency of Christ's Mediatory Prayer is seen both for impetration
and application, for as it is with his oblation of himself, so it is with his
Intercession.

There are two special effects of it, 1. Impetration, 2. Application.


Impetration is that whereby he does obtain at Gods hands the right and claim
to all those prieiledges he has purchased for his people, Such are Remission,
Justification, Adoption, and Glorification; These transcendent mercies which
are not in the power of the world to bestow, are obtained by him, and indeed
had it not been for this his Mediatory power, there had been no such things in
rerum natura, Reconciliation and Peace with God had been a mere Ens rationis,
men might have imagined such a thing as they may golden Mountains, but there
had been no existency of them, so that it was of infinite concernment to
Believers, to obtain of God, that there might be such privileges, They cost
him dear; It was not only prayers with tears, but with blood also, but
Impetration is not enough, for if it had been as Arminians say, That Christ as
Mediator obtained only a possibility of Salvation, or made a way for such
mercies, but then the application to arise partly from man's freewill and power;
This would be to hold That Christ might have died in vain, That notwithstanding
all that love of God sending his Son into the world, and all the wrath that
he did undergo, Not one man might have been saved: This must needs be very
derogatory both to the Father and to the Son, but Christ's Prayer is for the
application and actual bestowing of all those benefits he has obtained, and
for this end he sends his Spirit into our hearts, Romans 8 and that is a Spirit
of prayer and supplication: So that we have a twofold bottom to stand upon,
Christ's Prayers and the Spirits Intercession in us; Oh the strong Consolations
that may be received hence! for the godly soul may think, Though Christ's prayer
be prevalent, yet I must pray also; He that asks not shall not receive: Now
my prayers are weak, dull, sinful; See therefore the goodness of Christ that
gives his Spirit to us, to help us against all the Infirmities of our prayers,
both to know what to pray and how to pray; It Is not then enough to hear that
Christ by his Prayer does obtain all good things at Gods hand, unless he
vouchsafe them to us, and make us partaker of them. Oh then let not the Godly
soul say, how can I ever be at peace with God, how can I ever have power over
such strong corruptions? This is to say, God will not regard or answer Christ's
Prayer.

The latitude and extensivenesse of Christ's prayer is also very full of
comfort, For it reaches as far as the effects of his death, so that for
whatsoever privilege Christ died, for the same he prays; So that as it is
said of the Lords Prayer, that it is the breviary and Summary of all things to
be pra^ed for; Thus it is in Christ's Prayer, There is nothing that the soul can
desire, no evil to be avoided, no good to be procured but this Mediatory prayer
extends unto it, Insomuch that it is the Treasury and stock out of which the
Godly soul is constantly replenished:

We may instance in some particulars.

1. Daily pardon for our daily sins and Infirmities; For though all our
former sins were wholly remitted, yet if we have not a constant remission,
every hour and moment our condition would be damnable; Therefore when we sin
he stands up as an Advocate: We see then what it is that may support our hearts
against all quotidian failings, The vain thoughts, the proud and unbeleeving
Imaginations, The dullness and formality of our duties, all these are done away
by Christ's prayer; We could not have any rest or peace in our consciences all
the day long, if we had not an Antidote against the daily poison we suck down;
Alas it is not thy Repentance, thy godly strict life thou may build on, for
the least vain thought deserves hell, and would mar all thy graces, But it is
the Intercession of a Mediator without us.

2. As pardon of sin so power against sin under the urgent and important
temptations thereunto; Oh this is of admirable concernment, That when thou art
even eating poison, when thou art within the hot flames of sin, yet to be
preserved; This is so great a matter that we are taught constantly to pray that
we may not be led into temptation; What sad bruises and wounds have the godly
got to themselves in a temptation; Thou little know what thou may be and
do, even the most abominable things that are if left to a Temptation; Now this
is a special thing in Christ's prayer to have present help of grace in such a
straight: Thus v. 15. I pray that thou should keep them from the evil of the
world; Not to be taken out of the world but to be preserved from the
sinfulness of it; and thus for Peter, Christ says, Satan had a desire to
winnow him, but he prayed that his faith might not fail, Luke 22.32. Had not
the fruit of this prayer intervened Peter and Judas might have been both alike:
Oh then the tender godly man that is obnoxious to overwhelming fears, if such
and such temptations should befall him, he should be undone that says one time
or other this or that affliction will break him; Let such consider that it is
not their strength but Christ's prayer is their support, he that prayed Peter's
faith might not fail has done the like for thee.

3. Perseverance in the way of grace against all oppositions and difficulties,
This his prayer extends to, v. 34. Father, I will they be where I am, and how
careful was he to keep them that none of them who were given him might perish;
The perseverance of Gods Children does not depend upon grace within, for Angels
and Adam lost it, but upon the promise of God and Christ's Intercession; Oh how
often do we break our Covenant with God on our parts, if we were left to our
selves we should be branches broken from the Vine, pulled from the root, we
should become Trees not twice but twenty times dead: But it is the prayer of
Christ that keeps up all life and vigor; It Is better with us then with the
People of Israel all the while Moses held up his hands he prevailed, but when
he was weary then their enemies prevailed: But it is not so here, Our
Intercessor never gives over, he does not intermit for a moment, so that as
long as Christ's Intercession shall abide, so long shall we be preserved.

4. Christ's prayer extends to their vivification and quickening up to holiness;
Sanctify them by thy Truth; They were already sanctified, but he prays for
increase and growth therein; The hearts and affections of the most holy are in
some degree polluted and unclean, therefore they need this further
Sanctification and preparation of them for what is holy.

Lastly, This prayer does extend to our communion and intimate Fellowship with
the Father, as is abundantly expressed; That they may be one as thou and I am
one, they in me and I in them; Man as he is a man is Animal sociale, and as a
Christian he desires fellowship which is not only with other members, but
chiefly with the head; And this Communion is the ground of all spiritual, and
heavenly joy, the fullness of it being that eternal glory in heaven.

The excellency and comfortablenesse of it is the more aggravated by the
contrary, viz. the devil who is the accuser of the Brethren, and he continually
brings in matter of accusation against us; If Joshua has rags on, Satan will
revile him, certainly he that is so great an Enemy to a godly man's prayer,
laboring either to hinder it, or distract it, or mar it, with some proud
self-confidence, how much rather if he could would he hinder the prayer and
intercession of Christ; Now though he can find much accusation against the
godly man's prayer, yet none against Christ's; Though he be an accuser of the
Brethren, yet not of Christ the head, The Prince of this world comes and
finds nothing in me, Joh. 14.30.

Use 1. of comfort to the Godly, behold we open to you Treasures of
consolation, when you cannot, do not, pray, yet even then is Intercession made
for you; We are apt to think as the Disciples did, If Christ were corporally
present with us, If he were visibly speaking to us as to that Woman, Be of good
comfort thy sins be forgiven; We should judge our selves happy, but it is better
for us, Christ appears for us in heaven: This is more advantageous then his
corporal presence can be; Oh then see what is thy staff to lean upon, not thy
prayers or duties but Christ's Intercession; Oh maintain this plea against the
devil and thy own troubled heart; Say, what condemnation or accusation can
there be of Christ? how can the Father refuse him pleading for us; O Lord, if I
had nothing but my prayers, my duties, I were not able to look up to heaven.

Use 2. To discover the woeful and damnable estate of wicked men; They have no
Intercessor for them; If they sin they have no Advocate; It was a dreadful
thing when God bid Jeremiah pray not for this people; Oh but when Christ shall
not pray there is no way or hope open for thee: Should all godly Ministers and
Friends pray for thee, yet if Christ intercede not, they can do thee no good;
The devil accuses thee, Justice arraigneth thee, and there is none to speak a
word for thee.

SERMON XLIII. Of the Extent of Christ's Mediatory Prayer, and of his Death;
That he Prayed and Died not for all and every one of mankind, but only for
the Elect; And that the Scripture-Expressions of Christ's Dying for all are to
be understood Indefinitely and not Universally.
JOH. 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world.
HAving handled the positive part I come to the exclusive.

The Subject that is shut out of Christ's prayers, and that is the world, I pray
not for the world.

The word world is as large in signification according to Scripture-use as it
is in comprehension, so that we may say it has a world of significations, Some
say, It Is not used at all in the Old Testament, but that is a mistake, The
several acceptations of the word World.
for in our Translations it is very frequent.

I shall instance in some choice ones.

It is used sometimes for this whole Universe in all the parts of it, as when
it is said, Before the Foundation of the world; Sometimes and that most
frequently for men who are the Inhabitants of the world, and it is observed by
the Learned, that John the Evangelist does use it in the most various
significations: The world when it signifies men the Inhabitants of it, either
is used ^niversally for all; or else Synechdochically for the greater part, for
all, as Joh. 3. God so loved the world, viz. mankind, he did more for that
then for Apostate Angels, Though Learned men expound that otherways, it is used
synechdochically for a greater part, but indefinitely good and bad, as when
it is said, the whole world went after Christ, but it is many times used
definitely for a certain kind of men; And that either the wicked and ungodly
who are the greater in quantity, and thus by our Evangelist often, The world
hates you, and I have overcome the world; Or else it is used for the better
part of the world, though the less, for the world of the Elect, and though
this be greatly controverted, yet there are places very probable, 2 Cor. 3. God
was in Christ reconciling the world, viz. of Elect; Thus Christ calls himself
the bread of the world, and the Lamb that takes away the sins of the world:
The doubt then is in what sense the world is here used, And

1. It cannot be the world of the Elect, for they are expressly prayed for,
because given of the Father to Christ; Neither can it be the world of wicked
men merely as so, for many wicked men that are so now, yet afterward are
converted, as v. 23. That the world may know thou have sent me, that is, those
who for the present are of the world, but afterward are converted to Faith and
Repentance.

World how to be taken in this place.
It remains therefore by the world must be understood those that are not
Elected, the world of Reprobates; And that this is the genuine Interpretation
is plain, because the world is opposed to that number of men who are given by
the Father to Christ, as the opposition manifests, Not for the world but
those thou have given me; Neither can it be evaded, as some would, I pray not
for the world is in the same sense, and for the same things as I do for
Believers, viz. perseverance and preservation from sin, because where the
Text does not limit or distinguish we must not; And besides he prays for
those Elected persons that were as yet actually of the world, that they might
know and believe in Christ, which prayer the Reprobates did most need, and
therefore if Christ had prayed at all for them, it would have been for that
which was most necessary: The sense then thus explained observe.

Doct. Christ's Mediatory Prayer and his Death is only for the Elect.
That Christ's Mediatory prayer, and so his Death is not for all the world but
only some certain persons who are given by the Father to Christ; Christ's prayer
and Death is not intended for all and every particular man, but for some only;
The Doctrine stands upon this bottom, Those that Christ would not pray for he
died not for, neither was he a Mediator for, but not for the world would he
pray, only some Elected by the Father, Therefore neither did he die for such.

This Point is controversall, and I have no Inclination to lanch in such deeps,
partly because plain practical matter is more profitable for the greater part
that hear; It Is bread and not a stone, fish and not a Serpent you ask for; and
then partly the Question is of so vast a comprehension, that not one hour or
many is sufficient to lead you into the very porch of it, much less all the
secret rooms of it, and then partly it has been agitated by the choicest men
of Learning, that the former or latter Ages of the Churches ever had, and
therefore should be handled in a Scholastical succinct manner, not popular and
humiletical, as our Sermons are. These things I say do discourage, but because
the doctrine of Universal grace and redemption is a gangreen, every where
spreading, and an Idol which flesh and blood does adore, and many specious
pretenses of Scripture are brought for it; Give me leave to say something; and
because the controversy like Moses his face shines gloriously, and is so
sublime that the common eye cannot endure to look on it; I will put a Vail upon
it, and condescend to the meanest capacity as much as the nature of the Truth
will bear, and shall make way to clear and state the Doctrine by several
Notandum's or particular Considerations, which will be to the main Truth as
John Baptist was to Christ.

And first, Considerations to clear the Point.
Consider there is a necessary connection between Christ's prayer or
Intercession, and his Death; They are of an equal latitude and extent, whom he
prays for, he dies for, whom he dies for, he prays for, Romans 8.34. I.
There is a necessary connection between Christ's Intercession and his death.
Christ's Death, Resurrection, and Intercession are all in a Chain together, and
applied to the same Subjects, And indeed it must needs be so because Christ's
prayer is one part of his Priestly office; The oblation of himself as a
Sacrifice for sin was the other; Christ then as the great High Priest did
partly pray and partly offer up himself in a Mediatory way for his people; We
might well therefore put both these in the Doctrine, prayer and his Death;
Though the Text speak but of prayer, because the one is necessarily joined to
the other, and this Prayer therefore is made upon the oblation of himself,
being to leave the world; As for that Prayer of Christ on the Cross. Father
forgive them for they know not what they do; It Is to be considered that seeing
the Scripture says, he was heard in what he prayed for, therefore all those
whom he intended in that Prayer had the forgiveness of their sins, and we
may be the rather induced so to think because he names only those that did they
knew not what in crucifying of him; Wherefore it is thought those three thousand
Jews converted by Peter's Sermon were most of those for whom Christ prayed on
the Cross, For the Apostle charge this upon them, that they had crucified
the Lord of glory ignorantly.

2. Though Christ in his prayer and death had special love and regard to some
of mankind and not all, II. Though Christ in his prayer and death had a
special regard to some of mankind, yet no man that is damned can blame any but
himself.
yet there is no man that is damned can lay the blame any where but upon
himself; That Rule is of perpetual Truth, O Israel thy destruction is of thy
self, Hos. 13.9. And thus the Scripture does every where make death and hell
the wages of sin; Therefore if any would from this doctrine infer such
Conclusions, That then a man is not to be found fault with; No blame is to be
laid upon him but upon non-Election, or the particularity of Christ's death; We
abhor such consequences, and say with Paul to some who gathered poison out of
that honey-doctrine he preached, God forbid; Let not then thy heart cavil
profanely in this Point, for there is no eminent doctrine in Religion, but if
a man let loose his carnal heart he may wrest wicked Conclusions from the best
premises; The true cause and ground of every man's damnation, is because of
Impenitency and hardness of heart in sin, with unbelief: Neither may we or
can we conceive a man able to say thus, O Lord, I was ready and prepared to
believe and repent, There was nothing of any good desires wanting in me, only
the death of Christ that was too much restrained to others but not to me, and
therefore not for my sin but merely for want of a latitude in Christ's death I
must perish; Such an Imagination as this is a mere Chimera; There never was or
can be any person able to plead so, so that if you take this along with you,
that no such absurdities and blasphemies follow from Christ's special love in
his death and Intercession you have taken away the Gorgons head that uses to
make it so terrible.

3. It Is good to take notice of that ordinary distinction, III. It Is good to
distinguish between the sufficiency of Christ's death and the effectual
application of i^.
The Sufficiency and worth of Christ's death in it self, and the effectual
application of it; For all do acknowledge that Christ's death in it self is of
value enough to redeem thousands of worlds, if there were so many, It cannot be
otherwise because it is the obedience to death of that person who is God as well
as man, and by reason of his Deity, there is such a merit and satisfaction upon
his death that all the sins of men and devils are not able to counterpoise it;
Therefore it is great Unbelief to be cast down as if the greatness of thy sins
exceeded the greatness of Christ's Sufferings; As the Heavens exceed the earth
in magnitude, so do Christ's merits our transgressions, but then if we speak of
the Intention and purpose of Christ in laying down his life, that is only for
his Sheep, Joh. 10. I lay down my life for my Sheep; And if that be true which
Truth it self speaks, Greater love then this can no man show, then to lay down
his life for another; Our Savior if he had died for others besides the Elect
had vouchsafed the greatest love that could be to them, and certainly to become
a Surety for another, to die in another stead, must needs be an high
expression: The Scripture uses two words when it speaks of Christ's death for
us, (...) and (...); Now although they may be used promiscuously, yet (...) is
a great deal more then (...), for (...) is vice alterius, in stead of another;
So that what generally he was to undergo, the Surety did it in his room, but
(...) is for the good of another, though not in his stead, as Paul said he
suffered his afflictions for the bodies sake or the Churches sake, Col. 1.24.
that was not in their stead, but for procuring of some good; It cannot be
denied but that all mankind even reprobates themselves, do obtain a world of
Mercies through Christ's Death, yet to say that Christ died for them, viz. in
their stead to suffer all that anger of God which was due to them, is to say
the highest mercy that can be: If we say that such are justified, such are
glorified, it is not so much as to say Christ died for them, as Romans 8. Christ's
death is made the foundation of all other mercies, and the Apostle argues from
the greater to the less, If he has given us Christ how shall he not with him
give us all things else; Therefore to say Christ died for all, is in effect to
say Christ will actually save and glorify all: We may as well say Universal
Salvation as Universal Redemption: For Christ's death is by the Scripture made
the highest and greatest expression of love, as also the cause of all other
privileges.

IV. Christ's special love to some rather then others is no ground of despair.
4. The special and particular love of Christ in his death, and Intercession to
some rather then others is no ground of despair; Nor no just cause for any
troubled conscience to be perplexed about his estate, but if a man will act
according to reason it is more hopeful then for a man to be left to such an
universal uncertain benefit of Christ's death, which yet they confess none may
be actually saved for all that, for this is acknowledged by some that hold
universal grace and redemption, That Christ by his death did obtain a
sufficiency of Salvation for all, but through man's corruptions it may fall out
that they refuse this fruit of Christ's death, and so have no actual
application of it at all: Now then Is it not more desirable to have such a
special love whereby to be sure some will be saved, then such a general one, by
which no man may receive salvation at all; But especially this is no ground of
despair, for we can give as large encouragements and comforts to any humbled
sinner as the adversaries can, For these Universalists do not so hold Christ
died for all, that whether all repented or not, believed or not, that still
they should be saved; No they hold these conditions necessary unless men
repent and believe, they cannot have any benefit by Christ's death: Now so all
the Orthodox say, If thou art a Believer, If thou repentest, question not but
that Christ's death extends to thee; It Is for such as hunger and thirst, and
therefore whatsoever soul lies under any burden of sin, and does desire the
grace of God through Christ, let him not stagger but confidently go unto him;
Therefore we can administer comfort to all those that are in a Gospel-manner
qualified, and the Vniversalists can do no more; So that here is no
dreadfulnesse nor terror in this Point, but rather much comfort and
encouragement to all those who find sin a burden, V. In this Point as in
all others we must not go according to our carnal affections but Scripture.
and as for others that love and delight in their sins, that doctrine cannot
be of God which would speak any comfort or peace to them.

5. In this Point of Religion as in all others we must not go according to our
carnal affections and desires, but the direction and revelation that is in the
Scripture; For the way of Salvation being wholly depending upon Gods Will; None
are able to judge of it but so far as he discovers his will therein;
Therefore the Gospel is said to be Light come into the world; The world had not
this Light of it self; We cannot say of the things of the Gospel as the Apostle
does of the things of the Law, that they do them by nature, and know them by
nature; No, it is necessary these things should be revealed from heaven,
therefore when thou go to study this Point, do as in all other Mysteries,
lay aside thy own thoughts, thy own imaginations, become an abrasa tabula, have
none of thy philosophical or natural principles within thee; This dust or
humor in the Eye will hinder thee from beholding perfectly this Object; It Is
true it is a very specious and taking doctrine that Christ died for all, that
grace is universal, but if a man would therefore embrace it because it is so
pleasing to flesh and blood, then there is that of Origens which goes further
and is much more pleasing; That all even devils and all shall be actually
saved. Therefore to hold universal grace or redemption is nothing so pleasing
as to hold universal Salvation; Alas, though men hold Christ died for all, yet
they grant the most of them are damned; Therefore that doctrine is nothing so
desirable as that which maintains the salvation of all; If then you say that is
too broad a way the Scripture gainsays that; Thus it follows also, If the
Scripture gainsay the other we are to attend to what that says, and not to
what our own hearts would have; Therefore throw away the head of the Sacrifice
as God commanded, all thy own thoughts and natural Imaginations in this matter.

6. It cannot be denied but that the Scripture when it mentions the Subject
for whom Christ died, speaks indefinitely of all; As all died by Adam, VI. That
the Scripture speaks indefinitely of All.
so all shall be made alive, Behold the Lamb that takes away the sins of the
world, 1 John 2. He is a propitiation not for our sins only but the sins of
the whole world; Thus in many other places the Scripture does expressly affirm
such an universality: Therefore the Question is, Whether this must be
understood so generally as that it shall reach to all, and every singular Man
and Nation, and that in all Ages, or only indefinitely, he died for all sorts;
So that now no Nation is excluded nor particular person, as it was among the
Jews, and certainly unless we will make Scripture both to contradict it self
and experience; We must take all those phrases indefinitely and not universally.

Because we see the Scripture expressly limiting Gods love and Christ's death to
some only; Why the expressions of Christ's dying for all is to be taken in
definitely and not universally.
So that those places could never be reconciled without this distinction, as
Joh. 10. I lay down my life for my Sheep. Romans 8. Upon Christ's death we are
justified and saved, and above all in this Chapter we see Christ often and
often again restraining all his prayer and Mediation to those that the Father
had given him; If he would not pour out a prayer, will he pour out his blood?
If he would not shed a tear, will he shed his blood for them? So that if we
will keep up other places with this, we must needs say, That Christ died for
all indefinitely not universally; Even as when we have to do with the
Anthropomorphites, Those that held God is a body: We grant that there are
innumerable places of Scripture which speak of Gods eyes, arms, and his hands,
yet we say that Scripture may not oppose Scripture; There are other places
though few which describe him to be a Spirit, therefore we are necessitated to
say the Scripture speaks so to our condescension, thus it is here: Though many
places of Scripture speak of Christ's death in such an universal sense, yet
other places do plainly limit is to certain persons who are Elected and given
by the Father to Christ.

2. We must needs interpret it so because those places which are brought for
this Universality speak of the actual benefit and fruit of his Death: Now it is
granted by all that none do actually partake of Christ's benefits but the godly,
as 1 John 2.2. He is a propitiation not for our sins only but the whole world;
He is a propitiation in an actual sense, and he is so a propitiation for the
sins of the whole world as the Apostle says He is for ours, viz. actual
believers; Now then if the whole world should extend to all makinde, it would
follow that all are actually pardoned and saved, so 1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam
all died, even so in Christ all shall be made alive; By being made alive is
plainly meant a Resurrection to glory, as the next Verse shows, Christ the
first fruits, Then they that are Christ's; So that if all be taken universally
it would follow all and every man should be raised to glory: So in that famous
place, The Lamb that takes away the sin of the world, that takes it away in
an actual sense, and therefore to say Christ died for all, and there is
universal Redemption, and yet to say all are not saved is to speak not only
false doctrine but mere contradiction; Indeed to say universal Redimibility by
Christ's death may have some color, but universal Redemption, and yet not all
actually redeemed; Universal Propitiation and yet not all have their sins
pardoned, is to say the Physician cured such a man, but yet he did not cure
him, or a Magistrate delivered such an one out of prison, yet the man was not
delivered.

Lastly, We are necessitated to limit such phrases because of experience; For
if Christ died for all men intentionally, how is it that in the Old Testament
excepting some few Proselites, the offer of grace was only to some few, and
though since Christ's time the Gospel be said to be preached to every creature,
yet how many Nations and much more particular persons have there been to whom
Christ with his benefits have never been offered; Now who can say that Christ
died for those to whom he never discovered so much as the very Name of his
death; It Is true, this should make us adore the goodness of God that gives us
to live where this Gospel Grace is plentifully offered, What are we more then
all those Heathens and Pagans who sit in darkness and have no light, who never
heard of a Mediator, but oh wretched and miserable if we neglect so great
salvation.

SERMON XLIV. Reasons why the Scripture speaks thus Universally about Christ's
Death when yet but some were intended; Also what Benefits Reprobates have by
Christ With some arguments Further proving the Point of Christ's dying not for
every man but some.
JOH. 17.9. I pray for them I pray not for the world.
WE are explaining this Doctrine that Christ's Mediatory Prayer, and so his
death is not for all and every one of mankind; Many introductory particulars
have been commended to you; The last whereof was, That though the word uses
universal expressions about Christ's Death, as all men and the world, yet we are
necessitated both from Scripture, reason, and experience, not to take them in a
large universality but restrained and indefinite, specialis quaedam
universalitas est, there is a special Universality, as Austin said.

We shall go on to further considerations.

And 1. I. Reasons why the Scripture speaks thus universally about Christ's
Death.
There may be very good reason given why the Scripture speaks thus
universally about Christ's death; Not that we should deduce an error from thence
contrary to other Scriptures which restrain it to those the Father has given
him, Joh. 6. and Joh. 17.

It may be to show that this great benefit purchased by Christ, was designed
for man, and not Apostate Angels; For Isa. 9. It is said To us a Son is born,
to us a child is given, not to Angels, and the Apostle does amplify this love
of God Heb. 2.17. h at Christ took not on him the nature of Angels, but the
Seed of Abraham: Hence it is that the Scripture speaks of his (...) not (...);
Seeing that God so loved the nature of mankind that he gave his Son, for those
that should believe in him, passing by innumerable Angels who might have done
him more service, It might well be said that Christ gave himself for the sins
of the world, viz. men the Inhabitants thereof.

This might be in opposition to the Jews, For a long time the means of
salvation were only amongst them, as Joh. 4. Salvation is of the Jews:
Therefore we see Peter would not so much as preach the Gospel to the Gentiles
till from Heaven he was admonished that he should call no person unclean, Act.
9. Seeing therefore that formerly to the Jews only were the Oracles of God
committed, Now that by Christ's coming the partition wall is broken down, and
God does not call one Nation more then another; Neither are means of Salvation
enclosed in one Country more then another; It may very well be called the
whole world that Christ died for, for commonly the Scripture comprehends all
the men of the world under this division, the Jew and the Gentile; Hence there
is that command, Go preach the Gospel to every Creature, that is to Gentiles as
well as Jews, Mat. 26. and certainly this seems to be the most genuine Reason
why the Scripture speaks thus universally about Christ's death. Observe a
notable place for this, Romans 11.15. where the casting a^ay of the Jew is said
to be the reconciling of the world, i. e. the Gentiles are taken in, while the
Jews are cast off, so that the world there is opposed to the Nation of the Jews.

As it is used in opposition to the Jews, so also to abate and confound the
pride of the Jews, who because the Messiah was to come of them were apt to be
puffed up with this privilege, and to envy or murmr that the Gentiles should
be made partaker of this grace; This our Savior represented under the Parable
of the Prodigal Son entertained at a Feast, and the elder Brother murmuring at
it, Luke 15.30. We see how hard a thing it was to bring the Jew off from those
privileges he enjoyed, and the Righteousness of the Law, so as to be
beholding to Christ's Righteousness only.

This might be because when Christ came into the world few of the Jews were
converted to Christ comparatively to the Gentiles; For Romans 11. you see the
Apostle speaking of a Veil upon their eyes, and that hardness of heart was
come upon Israel, and those former branches are said to be broken off, that new
ones may be grafted in; Therefore it might well be said That Christ died for
all, and that he was a propitiation for the sins of the whole world, because
the Nations of the world of all parts did now come in and worship Christ;
whereas few of the Jews did receive him; Therefore consider the time when those
passages were written, and then you will easily understand those Scriptures.

now no Nations or particular persons are excluded, For although there be an
Election of some only, and Christ had a special love in his death only to
those that the Father had given him, yet because who these individual persons
are is not manifested by God; Therefore the outward propounding of it is
universal, not excluding any, Thus all the Invitations and commands are
universal; Christ calls all that are heavy laden, all that thirst to come unto
him; And although it he true that many even where the Gospel is preached, are
given up to blind eyes and hard hearts: That the Gospel of Christ is a savor
of death unto many, yet we not knowing who are thus inwardly withered and
cursed, are to hope that to all those to whom the offer of the benefits of
Christ's death extends, even to them the death of Christ it self reaches, and
this may be thought the main reason why the Scripture uses such expressions
about Christ's death.

Many are called but few are chosen, Mat. 22. yet if we judge of those for whom
Christ died absolutely in themselves, they arise to a great number: So that as
Austin made two Cities, the one of good Men and Angels built by God, the other
of wicked men and devils, whose author is the devil: Thus according to the
Scripture we may divide the world into two worlds, the world of those that are
to perish, and the world of those that are to be saved; The former is the
greater part, the latter the better part, yet this better part is very
numerous, as appears by the many thousands in the Revelation that are said to
be sealed, so that we may not wonder if it be said Christ died for the world,
seeing the number of those he died for in all Ages have been so many.

Lastly, No wonder if the Scripture uses such an indefinite expression,
because we see it does in other things also, when yet there is an acknowledged
necessity by all that it might be restrained, and speaking of Christ it is said,
All flesh shall see the Salvation of God, Luke 3.6. Now it is confirmed by
experience that there were many in Christ's time who yet did not see him either
bodily or spiritually: Thus Act. 2. I will power my Spirit upon all flesh, and
their Sons and Daughters shall prophecy, when yet all know they were but some
that had those extraordinary gifts, especially that famous Promise, That all
Nations of the earth should be blessed in Abraham is clear for our purpose; For
the Apostle Gal. 3. does plainly limit it to the spiritual Seed of Abraham.

Thus you see that it is no new thing to use expressions of universality, when
yet there is a necessity of restraining their sense; We might also add those
places, Mat. 3.5. Jerusalem and all Judea are said to go to Christ, and Mat. 9.
the whole City is said to meet Jesus, yea, all the world is said to run after
him; Therefore it is not the mere bare words but the coherence and other places
must direct us herein.

Secondly, Although we cannot say Christ had a special love intending his Death
a ransom for all and every one, yet it is very plain, II. Reprobates receive
much benefit by Christ's death.
that even the Reprobates and those who for their sins are eternally
condemned do receive much good and benefit by his death; Indeed in some
respects their condemnation is the greater, but that is their own sin who
wilfully refuse him, and will not have him to be their Lord and King, as Ioh.
3. This is the condemnation that Light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather then Light; And again, If I had not come unto them they had
had no sin, Joh. 15.22. So that all those who live under Christ's gracious
offer, as their sin is greater so their condemnation will be greater, it
being better for them, if there never had been a Christ, or that he had not
been crucified: Though men's voluntary wickedness make it thus, yet several
mercies do redound even to the Reprobate by Christ's death.

1. There is no man but may for his particular, that lives under the means of
grace, be encouraged to repent, and to believe for his Salvation; Every one may
with a great deal of hope be encouraged to the duties of Repentance and
humiliation; Whereas you see God has left the Apostate Angels as without
remedy, so without all hope, It Is not said to any of them, Repent and believe,
and so be saved: Whereas there is no particular man but this is enjoined him;
Therefore this very consideration that there is hope for any individual person*
that his case is not desperate; That the door of heaven is not absolutely
bolted upon him is of great consequence.

2. We who are the Ministers of the Gospel by Christ's death find a way so
opened for all Gentiles that now we may promiscuously preach the Gospel to all;
As we cannot, so neither indeed are we to let any such thoughts enter our
hearts, as whether such be reprobated or no; But we are so to preach and exhort
as if every one that we publish the Gospel to, were within the Sphere of
Christ's Death; And certainly if the Apostle writing to Churches wherein many
were corrupt both for doctrine and manners did yet give them the Title of a
Church, and Saints, and Believers, not excluding any from the benefit of
Christ; We may also do so in our preaching, and therefore this is to be
observed, That the Epistles are written to Churches already planted, and
therefore it is no wonder if he use such universal phrases, for that comprehends
those that are within the Church already, and in the judgment of charity we
may speak so, especially it being their Obligation and duty as Christians to
repent and receive Christ; But when we say that the Ministers by Christ's death
have a Commission to offer Christ to all, You must know that is in a due order
and method; We do not propound Christ as a Savior to them in the first place:
But we are to do as Paul when he preached to Felix, Act. 24.25. who desired to
hear of Christ, he began first with temperance, and righteousness, and the
world to come; Felix being guilty of Injustice and unchaste courses; Paul
preaches about those sins and hell, laying open the wrath of God, insomuch
that he made Felix to tremble, so that Christ must have a way made for him; The
mountains must be laid low, and the valleys exalted, and all flesh must be
convinced to be grass; Before Christ can be entertained this ought to be our
Method; To men plunged in sin we are to discover unto them the wrath and
anger of God, all the curses that are due to him who breaks the Law in the
least iota; To make men see their poverty and misery, and when men are thus
prepared and humbled, then we exalt the brazen Serpent, so that by Christ's
death the Ministers Commission is greatly enlarged and made more ample then in
the Jewish administration.

3. Even Reprobates have this advantage by Christ that they enjoy all the
mercies they have; That they have health, wealth, and the comforts of this
world; For seeing that by Adams sin all was forfeited, and a curse come upon
every thing, now by Christ who is the heir of all things they come lawfully to
enjoy the mercies they have, Heb. 1. It is Christ that bears up the world, if
he did withhold his arm the whole world would fall into rubbish; It Is true
indeed if we speak of a sanctified use, so wicked men have none of the comforts
they enjoy, but being impure all things are impure to them, so that the curse
of the Law is not taken off from them, because they are not yet in Christ,
otherwise they have a lawful right before God and man to the comforts they
enjoy, for that is not to be received though many pious men have preached it,
that wicked men have no right to the goods they have, but are as Thieves and
Robbers, and shall answer for every bitt of bread they eat as Usurpers; This is
against the Scripture which says, God has given the Earth to the Inhabitants
thereof, Psalm. 115.8. And that command Thou shall not steal does make it
evident, that both by Gods Law and man's Law what wicked men have in Righteous
ways they are true and lawful Possessors of, and this, say Divines, comes by
Christ, who restored the Forfeit, Adam made, else the world would not have
subsisted a moment: Although it must be granted that some Learned men attribute
the enjoyment of Comforts which the ungodly have, not to Christ, but to the
patient Providence of God, whereby he does not take the present Forfeiture; But
may not this Patience of God be attributed to Christ's death seeing he did not
use any such to the Apostate Angels, but they were immediately chained up in
the close Prison of utter darkness.

4. It is by Christ's Death, That many unregenerated men are partakers of the
common gifts of Gods Spirit; There are many that live within the Church of God,
though not regenerated, yet have great gifts and abilities, They have many
admirable endowments; Now how come these but by Christ, as Ephesians. 4. So 1 Cor.
14. It is the Spirit of Christ that gives several gifts to men; Christ is the
Vine, and so not only Grapes but the very Leaves come from his Sap and Juice,
So that what temporary Faith, Joy, Enlargements in Prayer and common gifts of
the holy Ghost any in the Church have it comes by Christ's death.

Yea Lastly, Christ by his Death is made Lord of the whole world; And has
conquered all the Inhabitants that are therein, So that they are Christ's as a
Lord that bought them by his Death; Thus that place is to be understood, 2 Pet.
1.1. speaking of ungodly men whose damnation would swiftly come upon them, for
the damnable heresies they brought in; It Is said, They denied the Lord that
bought them, (...); Christ bought them in that by his Death, which was an
Atonement only for the godly, yet he thereby was made Lord over all; So that
although it cannot be said he is the Savior of all in the strict sense of a
Savior; Yet we may say he is the Lord over wicked men, they are his Vassals
and Servants, and he can order and dispose of them as he pleases for his
Churches good.

The last Notandum to be propounded is to see how different they are amongst
themselves who have maintained universal Redemption; How the maintainers of
Universal Redemption differ among themselves.
For some go so far that they are rejected and cried out upon by others,
though Universalists also.

That so universal is the grace of God obtained by Christ's Death, that it is
not only sufficient but efficacious in all men as they are men; They think that
by Christ's death every man by his own natural Reason and power may be able to
save himself; Thus Puccius wrote a Book wherein he glories of an hundred and
twenty Reasons to prove this, but this is so monstrous that others cry out of
it; For by this means all unbeleevers and heathens should be partakers of the
grace of Christ, whenas Joh. 3.24. He that believes not, the anger of God
abides on him

Huberians from Samuel Huberus who thought that Christ by his Death procured
actual Reconciliation with God without any respect to Faith or Repentance; So
that he says, Christ did as actually and applicatively bring Gods
Reconciliation to all mankind, as Adam did actually condemnation, And that
therefore none are damned for their sins as being expiated by Christ's Death,
but because by their unbelief they reject this actual Reconciliation made for
them, so that all men have a general Remission of their sins, but those only
have a special Remission that by Faith accept it; But this also is rejected as
absurd, although it be observable that most of those places they bring for
Universal Redemption speak of the act, and so the Huberians keep more to the
plain words then they do who plead for universal grace, Joh. 1.29. The Lamb
that takes away the sins of the world. 2 Cor. 5. God was in Christ reconciling
the world, speak of actual not potential or conditional Reconciliation, and
they themselves say universal redemption not redimibility.

3. There are the Arminians and Remonstrants, men of greater Learning and more
refined understandings then the former, and they hold, Christ died for all in
respect of Impetration not Application; Christ died intending a Ransom for all
if they believe, but who should believe and who not, does not arise from
Christ's Death, but comes partly from grace partly from free will; So that by
this Position though Christ died, yet not one man might be saved; But this in
the issue will be found derogatory to Christ, and leaves the greatest weight
of our salvation upon merit.

Christ's dying intentionally for all; But how they can reconcile their Opinion
with their other Tenants, holding Christ's universal love to all in his Death if
they do believe, and yet at the same time a special love to some to make them
believe, and not others, is judged very difficult, and also wholly unprofitable
as to any duty or comfort, The Doctrine whereof they think the more to
establish by this opinion.

Lastly, There are those who say, Though Christ's Death is in it self suffieient
for all, yet the purpose and intention of Christ was to give himself a ransom
for some only, with these I join as having Gods Truth on their side.

I w^ll briefly give you some grounds because others have largely handled it*

Grounds of the Point.
Because we are said to be elected in Christ our Head; So that Election though
it be originally from the mere will of God, yet we are chosen in Christ as the
Mediator; If then Election be only of some, as it is plain, Rom 9. then Christ
died only for some, For Christ is but the medium whereby Election does bring
about all the effects thereof; Seeing therefore Election is only of some and
that is in Christ as the medium, Christ also must be for those only that are
Elected.

For whom Christ would not pray as a Mediator, he did not die; Shall he give
his blood, and will he not vouchsafe a prayer, his intercession and his
oblation go together.

Those for whom Christ died he did not only die for their salvation, but grace
to prepare and fit for it, Tit. 2.15. he died to make us a peculiar people
zealous of good works: Now this must needs convince, for we speak of dying for
all, and think only of salvation, but Christ's death was to obtain Faith and
Repentance as the means to Salvation, therefore we may as well say universal
Faith and universal repentance as well as universal redemption.

Romans 8. Therefore to say Christ died for all, and yet will not save all, is to
grant the greater and deny the less.

Use of Instruction, In stead of needless and impertinent disputes about
Christ's death for all, do thou labor and apply thy self for a particular share
in his death; We know not who they are that are shut out, but therefore we
encourage and exhort every one; Oh consider the sad consequences of having no
share in his death; Who shall accuse? It Is Christ that died; Christ's death
keeps off all accusation and condemnation; Oh then woe unto that man who is to
answer all accusations and condemnations in his own Name, and must justify
himself from the works he has done; It Is now a dispute in every man's mouth;
Every one will be arguing in this matter, when alas the Question is of such a
vast comprehension, that it is only for learned, moderate and sober men to
handle.

SERMON XLV. The Application of the former Subject; Setting forth the Necessity
of Faith and Repentance as to the Interesting us in Christ; The Freeness of
Gods Love, The Qualifications of those to whom Christ's Death is made
advantageous; And also their Privileges above all others.
JOH. 17.9. I pray not for the world.
THe controversall part being dispatched so far as was convenient in this
place, we now come to the practical: We lead you out of the Camp that ye may
gather honey; For you may ask To what purpose is all this D^sputation? What
matter is it whether Christ had a special or an universal love in his Death? I
acknowledge it is very good to keep within the bounds of Sobriety and Piety,
and not to be so disputative about the universality of Christ's Death as to be
sollicitous whether we are in the number of those for whom he died* for whether
he died for all or for some, If we repent not and believe there will be little
comfort or advantage for us either way.

Use shall be of Instruction to demonstrate the necessity of conversion and
turning unto God from our sins, for all men that pretend to any reason or
piety howsoever they differ about Christ's death, yet agree in this, that no man
has benefit by Christ's death but such who cleanse themselves from their
iniquities, who renounce their former lusts that were like so many Lords, quot
vitia tot Domini; And take Jesus Christ for their Lord and King; There was
scarce any Heretic ever so besotted as to preach Christ so died for all that
it is no matter whether ye repent or no; whether you forsake your sins or no,
Christ died to save you; No, they agree in this, though otherwise so different
that no benefit of Christ's death is actually applied to any man, till by Faith
and Repentance he be a qualified Subject; so that the wicked man wallowing in
his sins has cause to tremble and quake under this Truth, he may say Mihi nec
seritur nec metitur; Here is nothing makes for me in all these Opinions: If I
be Calvinist, Arminian, or any other way, I cannot have any quietness, or look
for any comfort till I and my sins are divided; Only that of Origens might give
thee some ease, if it could be true that all men and devils shall be saved at
last, after they have been a long while tormented in hell; But this is so
directly contrary to Scripture that calls these torments everlasting torments, a
fire that cannot be quenched, a worm that cannot die; That if this be all thy
hope thou may roar out in horror, and wish thou had never been born, so
that if wicked men would set judgment on work they would see nothing abides
them but a fearful expectation of the vengeance of God, all Opinions, all
Doctrines shut them out; If there could one come and bid thee Go on merrily in
thy sins, be as profane as thou have been, never think of cries and tears for
thy sins because Christ has died to save thee howsoever; This man indeed might
make thee run into excess of all riot, and to say, Let us eat and drink for to
morrow we shall die, and so be saved; But the Scripture is so plain against
this, that all may be persuaded of it without any difficulty; Shall we sin that
grace may abound? says Paul, God forbid; Romans 6.1. And he makes the damnation
just of those men who gather such consequences: Think then with thy self that
in what sense soever Christ died, yet thy sins make a great gulf between thee
and Heaven; God has set a flaming Sword to keep thee out of Paradise;
therefore cry out I have no hope as yet, Oh my condition has no comfort, I
cannot meet with any sound Doctor that dares give me any comfort while I love
and live in my sins; Why then, will thou embrace those lusts that are such a
present poison and ruin to thee? Hereafter thou will be persuaded when too
late; That sin has been thy only Enemy when God shall bid thee Depart ye
Cursed, then will thou bid thy cursed lusts Depart, but then it will be too
late.

Use 2. of Instruction, To teach the godly what a sad aggravation there is in
every sin they commit, That it is against the special love of Christ in dying
for thee; This bloody circumstance is in thy sins which cannot be in the sins
either of wicked men or devils; Excellent is that Meditation of Eusebius
Emissenus, Though (aith he) the devils should be damned for many sins and I
but for one, yet that would exceed the devils Impiety, for the devils never
sinned against a God that became an Angel for them; They never sinned against
God that died and was crucified for them, but miserable and wretched I ( pro
anima mea cur non liquefio cum haec cogito) have sinned against a God made man
for me, Against a God dying an ignominious death for me, Against a God leaving
me such an example of love and holiness; Indignior sum Lucifero, indignior sum
daemonibus, I am more unworthy then the devils, more unworthy then Beelzebub;
Oh that we could all both think and speak so, that not only our tongues may
utter it, but our hearts be inwardly affected, that we might as Bernard said,
linguam in sanguine cordis tingere; Oh then let this special love of Christ to
thee more then many thousands wotk in thee more special love and thankfulness
then others have; Take heed of sin, for thy sins have this special
aggravation in them which wicked men have not; Christ has showed thee so great
love that he himself could not show a greater, and therefore who shall excuse
thee if thou sin for all this; Here is then no doctrine of carnal Security in
this Point; Here is no door set open for Licentiousness, but as Christ said
from a Parable, She loved much, for much was forgiven her; The same should be
in all the godly, much has been given and forgiven them, therefore they ought
to love much, and this was set upon Paul's heart even Christ's peculiar and
special love, Gal. 2. Who loved me and gave himself for me.

Use 2. Had Christ a peculiar and special love in his prayer and death for some
only, then here we see what is the Thesaurus Ecclesiae, not any Popish
Indulgences or imagined heaps of superfluous merits, but even the death of
Christ, that and that only does enrich, comfort, and make happy all the people
of God: If therefore thou art one who can upon true grounds gather thou have
a propriety in Christ's death, thou art not to be afraid, neither living or
dying what man or devils shall do unto thee, Rom 8. The Foundation of all
justification, sanctification, and glorification is upon this, Christ died, Who
shall condemn? It is Christ that died; Therefore there cannot be any accusation
or condemnation because Christ died; Therefore the main Question is, What
Evidences thou have for an Interest in Christ's Death, for if that be once
granted, unspeakable and innumerable are the privileges that belong to thee;
Therefore encourage and strengthen thy heart with the comfortable fruits of
Christ's Death; Let us consider whether thou have the qualifications of such to
whom Christ's death is made profitable and advantageous.

They that have an Interest in Christ's Death they are dead to sin; The
Qualifications of such to whom Christ's death is made savingly advantageous.
Christ's Death and sins death go together; So the Apostle, As Christ died
once, so should we to sin and live to Righteousness, Romans 6.10, 11. and Gal
5. He that is Christ's has crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof; If
Christ be crucified for thee, the lusts of sin are crucified in thee; For the
end of Christ's Death was not only salvation and happiness but to kill all the
spiritual Enemies we have of this happiness, and sin is the main, for Death
had no sting, no, neither could hell be hell, or the devil a devil to thee, did
not sin put power into all these; Be not then presumptuous, but fear and
examine thy self; Thou speak much of Christ's Death, This is in thy month, I
trust in Christ that died for me; But is Christ's Death the death of thy sins?
Can thou see those lusts which like Pharaoh and the Egyptians did once rule
over and oppress thee, now drowned in the Red Sea of Christ's blood. This is
necessary if thou will have any comfort because Christ is dead, see whether
thou art dead to sin or no: Art thou as a dead man who in respect of all
pleasures and delights finds no Inclination, thus it ought to be with thee:
The Scripture speaks often concerning this, that the godly are dead to sin,
sin has not that dominion and power once it had; Oh but how many as the
Scripture distinguishes are dead in sin not to sin; Though they have
mountains of sins lie upon them, Though the vengeance of God belong to them
all the day long; That whether they are eating, drinking, or sleeping, they are
an accursed people by the Law, which is Gods own Sentence and doom, yet for all
that they are not afraid, neither do they tremble; Oh then examine thy self
faithfully in this, If Christ died for me how comes this sin to live in me,
for Christ like Sampson when he died wrought the death of his Enemies; When he
died, it was that those lively active lusts should die also.

If thou have an Interest in Christ's Death thou art not only dead to sin but
to the world, God forbid that I should glory (says Paul) but in the Cross of
Christ, whereby the world is crucified to me and I to the world, Gal. 6.14. Set
your affections on things above, not on things on the earth, for ye are dead,
Col. 3.2, 3. Therefore not only gross profaneness does exclude from a
propriety in Christ's Death, but an immoderate frame of heart to these lawful
things below; Indeed if thy overflowing affections to these things be a burden
to thee, and matter of daily conflict, then it is plain these immoderate
affections are not in a quiet pacifical dominion over thee, and so they are the
evil thou would not do; And then these can never hurt non sensus but
consensus nocet: But if they do withal delight so possess thy heart that they
quite dead thee to God and heaven, Thou sindest no relish in heavenly things
comparatively to the earthly; Thou can say contrary to David, when thy Wine
and Oil increases thou have more joy then those that trust in God, Psalm. 4.
Then art thou to fear Christ's Death, and his Prayer does not as yet belong to
thee. Hence it is that the efficacy of Christ's death is much discovered in the
godly by this twofold Death it works on them, a death to sin, and a death to
the world; Even his Resurrection manifests it self in quickening of us to all
holiness, and seeking of those things that are above; Let us then see by the
effects that Christ's Death belongs to thee.

They that have an Interest in Christ's Death they make that an example of all
patience and humble Resignation, 1 Pet. 2.21, 24. Christ's Death is not only
efficacious and meritorious but exemplary also, So that if the Lord afflict us
it is no more then what has been done to his only Son already; Though he
were a Son, yet he learned Obedience (says the Scripture) by those
sufferings; Heb. 5 6. Now then behold Christ in all his sufferings, when he was
reviled reviled not again, when he suffered threatened not; What threatenings
might not Christ have denounced against the Jews because they killed him who
was the Prince of glory, and so dear to his Father, but he is like a Lamb that
opens not his mouth before the shearer or the killer: Oh then how should this
shame us for our unruly passions, for our impatient workings and commotions of
soul; Oh silence thy Soul, saying, Did Christ bear his afflictions no
otherwise? Did Christ refuse the bitter cup that was given him to drink? Did he
not say, Not my will, but thy will be done.

He that has advantage by Christ's Death looks upon the bitterness and
ugliness of sin as being so foul that nothing but the blood of Christ could
wash it away: The very thoughts of Christ's Death presently makes him say, Oh
the cursed and foul nature of all sin; Neither men nor Angels could take away
the spot of it but only Christ's Death; Wicked men therefore they are said to
trample under feet the blood of Christ. Heb. 10. Because they have not those
right precious thoughts about it as they ought to have; Though the blood of
Christ speaks better things then that of Abel, yet it does in some respects
speak more terrible things, because by that we see how infinitely God is
displeased with sin, how unsatisfied his justice was till such an atonement
was made; So that if we look into hell, if we behold all the torments and
miseries there, it does not so fully represent the foul guilt of sin as
Christ crucified on the Cross, sweating drops of blood, and crying out, My
God, My God, why have thou forsaken me?

They that shall have advantage by Christ's Death they are infinitely affected
with that love of God and Christ therein; As you see in Paul, That love of
Christ giving himself for us sinners and enemies, to be reconciled thereby to
God; Oh how mightily did it constrain Paul 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ
constrains us, holds us in an ecstasy, working on us, as the Spirit did on
the Prophets in their illuminations and prophesies; And why so? Because we thus
judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead; To consider from what a
dying damning estate Christ's Death does free us, must needs be like fire
burning and inflaming a man all over; If we had not been desperately dead, dead
every way, dead in sin, dead in guilt, dead in respect of all earthly hope,
Christ would not have died for us; Oh then the unspeakable affections and
enlargements which the Death of Christ works in those that have a propriety
therein.

They that have a propriety in Christ's Death will resign all they have up unto
Christ, and now live no longer to themselves or to worldly motives, but unto
Christ; Romans 6.10, 11. 1 Pet 2.24. so 1 Cor. 6.20. the Apostle urges because
we are bought with a price, therefore we are none of our own, and we should
glorify God in soul and body; He then that can claim a Title to Christ's Death
looks not upon his body, his estate, his health, his parts, the faculties and
affections of his soul, as his own, his love is not, his anger is not; Oh how
rare then are they who may urge this Argument, Christ died, Christ was
crucified for me, for unless thou art a redeemed man and that from thy self,
and all creatures in the world, to live wholly to Christ, and to resign all up
to him, here is little hope for thee; Observe then these qualifications, and if
upon true search they can be found in thee, then proceed to make an application
of all those glorious privileges that come by Christ's death; Fear not, let not
the devil or thy own guilty heart keep thee off from tasting, yea, eating
abundantly of this honey: Hearken what Christ speaks to his Church concerning
privileges and gracious favors, Cant. 5.1. Eat O Friends, drink, ^ea drink
abundantly;

The privileges that come by Christ's Death to those that have interest therein.
Those that can plead Christ's Death may also plead his Resurrection,
Intercession, and whatsoever glorious actions of his are done for his people;
If Christ died for thee, he rose again for thee, he interceded in heaven for
thee; When thou say he is an Advocate to plead thy cause, Rom 8. It Is
Christ that died who is risen again, so that the Death of Christ is the
foundation of all his other gracious acts: Hence it is that the remission of
our sins is attributed to the shedding of his blood: The atonement of our
iniquities is given unto his death, because in it he did manifest the greatest
obedience unto the will of God, and the lowest humiliation of himself for us,
Phil. 2. If then thou have a propriety in the death of Christ, Christ has done
the utmost for thee even to die for thee; You see that put him upon the
greatest struglings and agonies, if he would have refused in any thing it would
have been in this; This was the bitterest cup he was to drink of: Oh then the
glorious privilege of him who has a propriety in the death of Christ, he is
thereby interested in all the Offices, all the actions of Christ in all that
Christ is or can do for us.

Romans 8. The Apostle hangs all these admirable benefit ultimately upon Christ's
Death, Who shall condemn? it is Christ that died; So that Christ is that dead
Lion wherein as Sampson we may find so much honey not only for our selves but
for the refreshment of all others; This Argument cannot be denied at the Throne
of grace, It Is stronger then sin and devils; O Lord I am one for whom Christ
died, Can Justice, can the Law, can the devil condemn? Here was an atonement,
and Christ's doing it once was enough; The Apostle says Heb. 10.14. By one
offering of himself he perfected for ever all them that are sanctified; The
Apostle puts much in this one offering, and that he did it once, showing
thereby that if Christ had been crucified a thousand times over, yet he could
not have more perfected the salvation of the godly then he did by that once
offering; Say then when thou praiest for pardon, for sanctification, for the
favor of God; O Lord I ask not for such great things as thou have done
already, I do not beg a Christ to die for me, I do not ask a Christ to be
crucified for me, yet this thou have done, and therefore where the greater is
granted the less will not be refused.

no other good thing in heaven or earth shall be denied unto us; And what can a
godly man desire more; If thou should sit down to think and think again,
can thou go beyond this? Lord give me all things that are good for me; Now
the Apostle urges this, Romans 8. If he has delivered up Christ for us, how
shall he not with him give us all things else, all things, There is nothing in
heaven and earth, but thou may have from God as well as Christ, and truly the
argument is undeniable, if God will give us his only Son to die that
ignominious death for us, what gift can there be like to this? God himself has
not a greater gift to bestow upon us, There is nothing in heaven or earth can
be paralleld to him, if therefore thou have Christ, thou have enough,
whatsoever thou want it is not because God does not love thee, or because
his merciful thoughts are not toward thee, but because many good things are
not absolutely good in themselves, and so not wholly necessary for thee, if
thou could be no more without riches, and honors then thou can be without
Christ, thou were sure to have all these things in abundance; The Apostle
himself who made this Conclusion, yet he tells of the manifold perplexities and
afflictions he was many times in: He tells us, that if the godly had hope in
this life only they were of all men most miserable; Though he had Christ, and
so might have all things, thereby, yet thus he speaks; No wonder then if the
people of God do or should rejoice under miseries and troubles they have this
cordial to revive them.

4. He that has a propriety in Christ's death may from this special love to him
rather then others, have an assured persuasion of his immovable state in grace
here, till he be removed to glory hereafter; For how can it be thought that
Christ will lose that child of his for whose sake he endured all that misery
and agony as he did, after he has suffered thus many things shall it be in
vain; No (says Paul) from the consideration of Christ's death, Romans 8. Who
shall separate us? Shall tribulation, anguish, shall things present or things
to come.

Lastly, They that are planted with Christ in his Death they have this
privilege to rejoice in all tribulations, and especially to be above the fear
of death; For Christ's death took away sin the sting of death; See how Christ
triumphs and gives every godly man leave to rejoice, 1 Cor. 15. O death where
is thy sting? O grave where is thy Victory? For that death could have no power
over Christ, but he brake the bands of it asunder, therefore it is that the
members of Christ enjoy the same privilege; Therefore under all temptations
and fears run to the death of Christ, It was the death of all afflictions and
death it self, all the nature of such things is turned by Christ's death, they
are mercies, they are inlets to glory:

SERMON XLVI. Of Free Grace, opposite to Arminianisme; Tending to raise the
hearts of those that are Godly to Joy and Thankfulness.
JOH. 17.9. I pray not for the world, but for those thou have given me, for
they are thine.
WE handled that dreadful passage, I pray not for the world, at which says
Gerard, Mundus debet coherrescere, sed existimat ludum, ac jocum suo cum
prestantissimo exitio.

We come to a second description of those that are included in Christ's Prayer,
and they are characterized by this, They are given by the Father to Christ;
Certainly there must be much in this Consideration; For our Savior does no
less then five times use it in this Prayer, and Joh. 6. it is used several
times.

I handled it before but then I considered it much as it did imply the trust
and charge Christ had by this gift: God the Father gave them to Christ as a
faithful Mediator, he betrusted him with them as a people whose Salvation he
should obtain, and accordingly Christ was faithful to make these a peculiar
people and Gods precious Jewels; They were given him as a King to govern, as a
Physician to heal, as a Mediator to save, and as a Shepherd to feed, and this
propriety that both God and Christ has in them is a great ground why God
should hear Christ's Prayer for them.

But I shall now consider this phrase, as it tells us the manner how they were
made Christ's, and that is by mere gift and grace; God did not see or foresee
any merits or works in those Disciples more then others, for all are alike
corrupted in that common mass of mankind, but it was his mere and sole good
pleasure, For Gratia non est gratia ullo modo, nisi sit gratuiha omni modo; We
see then here what is the womb that first gives a being to all those thar are
saved, and that is Gods grace in giving some to Christ; Now what is meant by
this giving to Christ; It cannot be any other thing but Gods Predestination and
Election of some with the necessary effects of it in time, as Vocation,
Justification, etc. It Is a phrase that is like an hard stone to the Arminians
teeth, it troubles them exceedingly, and therefore see what violence they
offer to this phrase; By this giving to Christ is meant say they, the
disposition and ready Obedience which some give to Gods call; O monstrous
Transubstantiation, like that of the Papists of the bread into Christ's body;
For that which the Scripture gives expressly to God they take away and give to
man; The Scripture says, God gives them, and they say man gives himself; We
see that not only the ignorant and unlearned but even learned men corrupted may
wrest the Scripture to their destruction; But to discover this Interpretation
is refutation enough; Indeed it cannot be denied but that in this Chapter there
is a twofold giving of some to Christ.

1. By Election and Sanctification to Eternal Life.

2. A peculiar segregation or destination to some Office; Of this latter our
Savior speaks afterward, say some, when he said, None had perished of those
whom the Father had given him but the Son of Perdition; But of the former he
speaks v. 2. He gives Eternal Life to every one that was given him, and v. 9.
They were given him out of the world, whereas Judas was always of the world,
and thus it is taken here; So that to be given by Christ is for the Father
freely out of his mere good pleasure to choose some in Christ to Eternal Life,
sanctifying and calling of them in time, So that the Fountain of all the good
we have is the mere grace and love of God; The discriminating difference why
Christ prays not for the world but his Disciples, and in them all believers,
is not from any good or worth in them, but merely from the mere gift of God.

Doct. That all the spiritual good the godly enjoy is only the gift of God.
Obs. That all the spritual good the godly enjoy is merely and solely from the
gift and grace of God; This is a Point that the Scripture does most diligently
press and that over and over again, because we are so apt to attribute
something to our selves; Thus the Apostle speaks generally, Jam. 1.17. Every
good and perfect gift comes from above; The earth is no more able to give light
to the world then we can do that which is truly good of our selves; Therefore 2
Cor. 21.4. What have thou thou have not received? The Apostle makes an
universal charge, so that to say I have received from my self and made my self
to differ from others, (as Grevinchovius the Arminian) is to blaspheme in an
high manner, and to put our selves in the place of God; You see whatsoever
privilege Gods people have, it is because they are given to Christ.

For the full discovery of this we shall instance in some of the choicest and
most fundamental privileges the godly have, and you shall find they are all
so many beamlings from the glorious Fountain of grace; They are so many sprouts
from that Root.

I. Election is free.
And first of Election which is the first step of Gods love to us, this we shall
find to be only of Gods gift, and that is demonstrated thus.

From the Original of it; It Is only the mere pleasure of his will: If it be
asked why has God mercy on this or that man so as to make him happy to all
Eternity, the answer is, So is the will of God, Ephesians. 1. Romans 9. You see there
all is resolved into this, The counsel of his will: and Mat. 11. Even so
Father, for so it pleases thee: Hence Romans 9. It Is not of him that wills or
runs, but of him that shows mercy; Those therefore that find the certain
effects of this ancient and unchangeable love of God, with what praise and
glory are they to break out unto God, if they had not only the tongues but the
hearts of men and Angels, they were not sufficient for this work to glorify
God, for what is a drop to the Ocean, a spark to the fire, a stone to the
Moutain, a candle to the Sun: Hence it is for this use that it is necessary,
as the Apostle does often to inform the Children of God concerning their
Election, because that is the first round in that Ladder of Gods mercies
descending upon us: Oh then be thou astonished at this goodness of God, it lay
in his will to refuse thee and take another; There was nothing but his mere
Sovereignty and absolute good counsel has made thee a fit vessel for glory,
and left others as vessels of wrath by their own voluntary Apostasy in Adam; Oh
say in thy Meditation, O Lord I am silenced, I can go no further, the waters
overflow me.

it is not for any foreseen merits or faith; We had nothing at all to be more
acceptable to God then others, for there are some who are enemies to the grace
of God, and under the praise of nature and free will hide their secret
opposition to Gods grace; Whereas Bonaventure said well, If we must err it is
safer to err in giving too much to grace, then too much to free will; These
corrupt Doctors they have no way to vent their poison but by saying and
maintaining, that though God has chosen some before others, yet it was because
he did foresee who would by Faith and good works, with perseverance therein,
continue faithful to God; But how extreme injurious is this to Gods Election,
for by this means we shall choose God first and not God us? But what says our
Savior, I have chosen you and not you me, 1 John 4.10. Not that we first loved
God but God us: Here you see that it is God who first begins with us, God
first chose us, God first loved us, and then we loved him: Therefore let not
the Godly heart endure such Doctrines that shall tell us, God saw a better use
of thy free will in thee then in others; And hence it is that thou art Elected
to glory and not others, for then it would not be pre-destination but
post-destination; And besides, then no man could be Elected before the last
moment of his life; For who can tell whether he shall persevere or no? So that
these Doctrines rob God of his honor, and his people of their comforts.

Election must needs be of Grace, and so we are given to Christ, because of
that wretched and sinful estate we are all in by Adams Fall; Upon his Apostasy
we are all involved in his guilt, We are by nature Children of wrath, Ephesians.
2.3. Though there were no actual sins to witness against us; Seeing then
there was nothing in us but sin and misery, it is no wonder if God does what
he does out of his mere grace and favor, I acknowledge there are many eminent
and learned Divines called Supralapsarians because they hold an Election of
some and a pretention of others even before Adams Fall, and thereupon make
Election not an action of grace, because it supposes no sin but of mere
dominion and sovereignty, whereby he may dispose of his creature as he
pleases, but I think it more consonant to Scripture to hold an Election that
supposes man's fall, and that we are all in a corrupt lump and mass, and
hereby the grace and free favor of God is made more illustrious; Hence the
Apostle to the Ephesians is large to show what they are by nature, and how
corrupt of themselves, that so the grace of God may be made more manifest; Such
thorns as we are, cannot bear any grapes, Such polluted Fountains as we are,
cannot send forth sweet streams.

Our Election must needs be free and gracious, because all the good we are able
to do, and all the holiness we have is the fruit and effect of Election; He
has chosen us to be holy and unblameable, Ephesians. 1.4. So some believed because
they were ordained to Eternal Life, to be holy, not because we were holy; They
were not ordained to Eternal life because they believed, but they believed
because they were ordained to Eternal life: Thus you see that godliness being
the effect of our Election it cannot be the cause, and therefore the godly have
cause to cry out oh the depths and unsearchable riches of grace!

Lastly. If we consider Election comparatively, so it must be wholly of Gods
mere gift; That is, why God chooses some and not others, yea, why sometimes
the vilest and worst of sinners are taken, and others more civil and better
moraliz'd are left: The Apostle 1 Cor. 2. aggravateth this, Not many wise, not
many noble has God chosen, but the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise; And thus our Savior Mat. 11. Thou have hidden them from the wise and
prudent, and revealed them to babes; And it must needs be thus amongst men, for
so it was with the Angels; The Scripture speaks of Elect Angels, Now why did
some Angels fall and others are confirmed in their eternal happy abode, it
cannot be any other cause but their Election; Therefore when all things are
duly considered we must say with the Apostle Ephesians. 1. That we are predestined
before the foundation of the world that we should be to the praise of his
glorious grace.

II. Vocation is of grace.
The second step of that Ladder whereby the grace of God descends upon us is
Vocation and Regeneration; That whereby the Lord does graciously repair his
lost image in us, and of dead in sin makes us live a spiritual life.

Now that this also is wholly of grace appears,

original sin defiling the whole man with all the cursed effects thereof, for
we are not merely deprived of all good but positively inclined to all evil, and
filled with a cursed opposition to what is holy; The Scripture is very
plentiful and emphatical in describing this sinful misery of ours; We are
brambles and briars in the Wilderness till he plant us goodly plants in his
Garden; We are compared to all manner of beasts for the sinful qualities in us,
till he make us Sons of God, so that we would wonder to see the presumption and
arrogance of those Doctrines that would make man free to do good; Whereas our
Savior said, Then are we free when the Son has made us free, Joh. 8.36. Tunc
arbitrium est liberum, quando liberatum.

It Is all of grace, because the Scripture attributes this work solely to God;
That famous promise I will take away an heart of stone, Eze. 11.19. I will give
an heart of flesh, I will write my Law in their hearts, do argue he must be
wilfully blind that will not acknowledge this to be Gods work alone; Now then
if it be Gods work it cannot be ours also, unless subjectively, not causally;
Hence it is called the New Creature, because God immediately gives us such a
being, and indeed the experience of the godly soul does evidently witness
this; How long should I have wallowed in my lusts? how unwillng to leave them
till God changed my heart; If God had stayed for my consent and cooperation, I
had still been in the gall of bitterness; It Is God then and not man who lays
the first stone in this spiritual building: Does not the heart of a godly man
inform him of more Orthodoxy in this Point then most Books will do? Did thou
not keep thy lusts with all might? Did thou not wage open war against God?
Did thou yield thy self by agreement, or not rather by full conquest?

Lastly, That our vocation and conversion is wholly of grace appears, if we
consider many persons who are thus called, as many profane and wicked persons;
Men in league with diverse temptations to sin, such as Paul, Mary Magdalene,
Matthew the Publican, What condignity or congruity, which the Papists speak of
so much, could be in these men? And therefore observe how Paul upon all
occasions does willingly enlarge himself to speak of the grace of God to him
the chiefest of all sinners: Austin in his Confessions do^^ excellently
acknowledge the unwillingnesse in himself to be turned from his lusts till God
had overpowerd him, and therefore he calls grace verticordis very emphatically.

III. Justification is of grace.
The third step of these eminent gifts God gives his people is Justification
from their sins; This is so great a matter that the Apostle makes our
blessedness to consist in it; And David Psa. 32. out of the sense of this
mercy overlooks all temporal comforts, though never so great, and admireth
this: Now this is wholly of grace, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his
grace; The Apostle puts two words to show that it is altogether from the mere
grace of God that we partake of such a privilege.

Reasons.
Now the Grounds why Justification and pardon of sin must needs be of Grace, is

Because the Justice of God is like himself infinite; and so all the tears and
grievances we may put our selves upon are not able to recompense God; We see
the damned in hell are therefore detained in those chains of darkness to all
Eternity, because they are not able to satisfy the justice of God, if they
could pay to the last farthing then they would be set at liberty; Every sin
then even the least has an infinite guilt in it in respect of Gods infinite
Majesty against whom it is committed, so that neither one man, no nor all men
or Angels are able to expunge the least blot; Oh then tremble under the least
sin rhou art guilty of; Little do thou consider how insupportable the guilt
of it is, how impotent thy self and all the world is to cancel and wipe out
this debt.

It must needs be of grace because Christ made himself an expiatory atonement
and sacrifico for our sins; God made our iniquities to meet upon him, Isa.
53. yea, he was made a curse for our sakes, so that the doing away of our
iniquities is wholly of grace to us, for that was Christ's work, he undertook
this load, which would have crushed us into the lowest hell; If he that was God
as well as man did yet sweat drops of blood under this Agony, and cried out, My
God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? If the green Tree burn thus what shall
the dry do? For thee therefore to think by thy tears and Repentance to expiate
thy sin is wholly to mistake the necessity of Christ a Mediator; This is to
put an Atlas his burden upon a Pigmies shoulder; See what the weight of sin
did upon Cain and Judas? though they would have given a world, yet they could
not obtain the lest drop of water to ease their spirits, but like Dives were
tormented in hell while here on earth; Oh then that wicked men would consider
more, they lay load upon load, but who at last shall take it off; Thou think
not that though sin for the present be sweet, yet it has an eternal sting with
it; What will thou do when at last thou shall cry out with Cain, My sin is
greater then I can bear.

Lastly, IV. Glorification is of grace.
The last and utmost step of Gods mercy to us is glorification and making of us
happy for ever; When he has done this there remains no more to be done, and
even this Crown of Glory is put upon our heads because of grace, Romans 6.23. The
gift of God is Eternal Life; And Tit. 2. We are saved by grace, not by works;
The Apostle does in that place with exact diligence shut them out from any
share in our Salvation:

Now that all this, from the first to the last, Reasens.
even salvation it self is of grace will appear,

From the imperfection that cleaves to the best things we do; Insomuch that
they need grace to pardon, so far are they from having any worth in them for
heaven; This made the Apostle Paul, account all that he had and did dung and
dross for the Righteousness of Christ; This made David pray that God would
not enter into judgment or be strict to mark what is done amiss; When we have
done all we must say we are unprofitable Servants, how much more when we come
far short of all.

If we consider the transcendant dignity of that glory God will bestow on us;
It must needs be solely of grace; For the Apostle tells us The eye has not seen
it* nor the ear heard it, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive
of is, 1 Cor. 2.9. It Is no less then enjoying God himself, The immediate
fruition of himself is the only happiness we shall have; Now what comparison
is there between our graces, and God himself, Again the Transcendency is seen
in the duration: Suppose our graces were present yet are they but for a season;
They are transient expressions; Whereas our happiness does endure for ever.

3. If we are enabled to do any good thing, we are so far from deserving at
Gods hand, That we are the more obliged to him, and ought to be the more
thankful, Coronat dona sua, non merita nostra; The more thou art enabled to
repent or believe, the more thankful art thou to be to the grace of God: Thus
all is of grace.

But you will say, Is not heaven called a reward? At the day of Judgment does
not God pronounce a blessing because of the good works they have done? Are they
not called Blessed that die in the Lord because their works follow them? Rev.
14.13.

All this is true, but this proves no more then that an holy life and godly
works they are via Regni not causa Regnandi, as Bernard long since; If we do
not strive and labor we shall never have this Crown; If we use not violence we
shall never get this Kingdom, So that grace does not encourage to sin, or
maintain slothfulness, but we as the Apostle urges, Phil. 2. are encouraged
to work out our salvation because that it is God who gives us to will and to
do.

Use of Instruction to the godly, Are they wholly the gift of God in Christ? Is
all from the grace of God, then let the people of God walk humbly and
thankfully? Oh it is a close secret sin to have self-dependance,
self-confidence, and yet there is no sin has greater enmity to the Gospel of
Christ then this; Neither do thou think to divide the matter between grace and
thy duties, as the Papists make our hope to be coming partly from our merits,
and partly from the grace of God; What shall David, Shall Paul, such eminent
Cedars in Lebanon, fear their own selves, and do thou a low shrub boast of
thy self? Herein commonly is the difference between a true godly man and a
civil virtuous man, the one has a secret hope in himself, but the other looks
for and expects grace as merely from God, as if he never had done a good work
in his life.

Use 2. Let this grace of God quicken thee to all life and zeal for God; Grace
is like fire to melt thee; If man's kindness works upon a good nature, how
much rather should Gods kindness upon a sanctified and a renewed nature.

SERMON XLVII. Of Gods Propriety in his People as the Ground of all the Good
that accrueth to them.
JOH. 17.9. For they are thine.
THis is the third and last description which our Savior uses of those who
are the objects of his prayer, viz. The propriety that God has in them, They
are his own.

I have handled this Point formerly, but then I did it under an absolute
notion, showing you how many ways the people of God were his People, but I
shall now treat on it relatively, as it is an Argument used by our Savior why
he should be heard in his prayer for his Disciples; And certainly here is much
of strength in it, They are thine, I pray not for thy Enemies nor for
strangers, but such as are near thee, that are of thy own household, such upon
whom already thou have placed thy love and delight, Of Gods peculiar propriety
in his people as the ground of Christ's prayer for them, care of them, and of
all the good that accrueth unto them.
so that our Savior makes the propriety God has in his Disciples, and so in
all believers, to be the ground of his prayer for them; And indeed this must
needs be very effectual, for the Apostle argues, If any man provide not for
his own, 1 Timothy 1.0. he is worse then an Infidel; If then God does so greatly
abhor him who takes not care for his own, Shall not the Lord himself provide
for his? Thus Ephesians. 1.29. the Apostle urging the duty of Husbands to Wives
argues from propriety, Their own Wives; and no man ever hated his own flesh;
Now then God takes this relation of an Husband to his people, and because they
are his therefore he will hear their prayer, and vouchsafe all good to them;
Propriety is so great a matter that Aristotle makes it the cause of all the
labor and trading that is in the world, insomuch that he says, If all things
were common the world would be filled with idle persons, but because it is their
own ground, their own wealth, their own riches, therefore they are so diligent
to increase in these things: None regard the air, the light of the Sun because
it is common to all, Whereas if they could be appropriated, if no man had the
light of the Sun but one or few men, Oh what a price would be put upon it; It Is
then proptiety both with God and man that is the Fountain of all good, of all
care, Propositions concerning Gods peculiar propriety in his people.
and brings about all the blessedness that Gods Children have.

To open this Point, and not to fall in with what you have heard already,

1. Take notice That a people becomes the Lords peculiar ones, his Jewels,
solely by his grace and goodwill; He has chosen us, and not we him, he loved
us first: 1. A people become Gods peculiar ones freely by grace
The great God of heaven who might have made other people, other persons his
treasure, did out of his own mere goodness take thee and thee into such a
blessed relation: The Apostle does every where in his Epistles reduce it to
this cause, The counsel of his will, and out of his mere grace, and certainly
if Deuteronomy. 9.5. the Lord does again and again inform the Israelites, that it was
not for their righteousness, or any good in them but merely because be set his
love on them, that he made them his external people by an outward Covenant;
how much rather must it needs be the mere grace of God to make a people
inwardly and spiritually his, so that whosoever find themselves thus
appropriated to God, to be able with the Church to say as she does many times,
because our blessedness lies in this, I am my well-beloveds, and my
well-beloved is mine, Cant. 6.3. Oh let such be deeply humbled and even
astonished under the discriminating Grace of God, I am the Lords when the
devils are not, when such men of parts, abilities, and great Revenues in the
world; And if the Lord would have looked to any thing in man, how many
thousands are there that if converted would have been more glorious Instruments
of Gods glory then I am.

2. And from his mere goodness not out of any want.
2. As it is the mere goodness of God to make a people his, so it is not out of
any want or any necessity, any need that he has of us, that he did thus make
us his, and this also is a quickening consideration; Husbands have Wives because
they want such helps, Masters have Servants because they need them; Even the
greatest Monarchs want their people; But it is otherwise with God, My goodness
extends not to thee, says David, Psa. 16.2. And thus Job was told, that if he
were perfect and righteous he did not advantage God, God is the Elshaddai the
Allsufficient God blessed and happy enough in himself; Though he had never
created the world, Though he had not appointed one man to Eternal glory, yet
such was his goodness that he would have those Objects to whom he might
communicate of his fullness; And therefore God of many thousands has made such
and such his, not that he wanted their graces, duties, or prayers, but that
they might partake of his riches.

3. They are Christ's and the holy Ghosts as well as the Fathers.
3. When Christ says here, They are thine, he does not exclude himself from
having a propriety in them, nor the holy Ghost neither; For this is the
infinite privilege of the Godly that they are both the Fathers, and the Sons,
and the holy Ghosts, not only because whatsoever one person has the other
has, as Christ says, All mine are thine, and thine are mine but in an
appropriated consideration; Thus Christ says, they are the Fathers, They are
thine in the present tense, he had formerly at the sixth Verse used the
preterperfect tense Thine they were, but now he uses the present tense to
show, that though the Father had given them to Christ, yet he had not abdicated
or quitted himself of his interest in them, he had not so given them to the
Son as that the Father had no dominion or right to them, but they did still
continue the the Fathers possession though they were given to Christ; And as
they are the Fathers so they are the Sons purchased people also; They belong to
Christ in an indeared manner, which makes them to be called bone of his bone,
and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30. To be his members and body as he is the
head; They are also the holy Ghosts, and therefore they are said to have the
Spirit dwelling in them, and they are his Temple, and they are led by the
Spirit, and walk in the Spirit; We are the Fathers by mere grace, and therefore
are given to Christ as a Mediator; We are Christ's by merit, for he purchased
us by his blood; We are the Spirits by operation, for he works the holy Image
of God in us: Oh then that our hearts were enlarged in this matter, that we
might wonder how and why we who are not worth the owning or the the looking
after, should yet be made the Lords in such indeared respects. 4. Their being
Gods excludes all other creatures.


4. When the Godly are said to be the Fathers, though it does not exclude the
other persons, yet it does all other creatures; By this we are delivered from
all other proprieters and interest whatsoever, and this makes the phrase to
contain in it a Treasure of happiness, as first, Seeing we are the Fathers,
therefore we are no longer the devils: We are no more in his possession and
under his dominion; We may see by the Scripture in what a woeful and cursed
state all men by nature are, They belong to the devil, they are his proper
goods; The devil has them as his, even as he has the damned in hell, though
in this life there may be hope of delivering them, whereas the damned have
none, Ephesians. 2. The devil who is called the God of this world is said to rule in
the hearts of the disobedient; Hell is not more the devils place then the heart
of a wicked man, and therefore 1 Timothy 2.26. they are said to be Captives to the
devil, to be like tamed birds, and our Savior tells the Pharisees, They were of
their Father the devil, Joh. 8. And why? because they did his works; So that
whosoever does the works, commits the sins that the devils do, the devil is
their Father; Though they rage and are mad at such a charge, and this is the
reason in part why the glorious fruit of Christ's death is called a Redemption,
and why he is called a Redeemer, because we were wholly in bondage and
captivity to the devil; We were his, he had a proper right to us till Christ
redeemed us. Oh that the ungodly men of the world should hear this and not
tremble, Whose art thou? To whom do thou belong? Who may challenge thee but
the devil? There are a cursed sort of men who give themselves to the devil by
compact in the ways of witchcrafts; Now all wicked men though not by such an
express Covenant, yet implicitly by their wicked ways give themselves up to
be the devils: Oh what a terrible thing is this to consider, that though thou
can say, These grounds are mine, these Cattle are mine, these goods are
mine, yet thou thy self art the devils; Oh consider that the devil will have
his own when thou die, he will lose nothing; Neither soul or body shall
escape him if thou continue his: Be thou awakened out of thy desperate estate,
If thou art not Gods Inheritance thou art the devils possession, and thy
tongue, thy eyes, thy body, thy whole life proclaims to whom thou do belong.

2. In being the Fathers, as we are no longer Satan's, so neither the worlds or
men's in the world: Hence we are commanded not to be Servants to men, 1 Cor.
7.13. or please men, and to call none Father on earth, Mat. 23.9. The sense of
such commands is, that we are not to put our hopes and trust in men, not to
give up our selves to their commands when contrary to God, yet this is a sin
that all are prone unto; It Is the Favor of men, the power and greatness of
men that swayeth us more then God: Alas thou were not created or redeemed, or
regenerated, to make man thus a God unto thee: Whence is it that our fear is a
man's fear? yea, our Religion a man's Religion: but because we are not yet
delivered from man's thraldom, so neither are we the worlds; For our Savior
says, We are given out of the world to Chrict: Why then are we so immoderate
in our cares and affections about these things? It Is not the world that is
ours; The Church was seen clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet,
Rev. 12.1. God has made the earth under us, and Gold and Silver to be in the
bowels thereof, implying the low esteem we ought to have of them, and that we
look not on the world as a resting place, but seek for heaven,

Lastly, We are none of our own in being the Fathers; Thus the Apostle, We are
none of our own, Therefore we are to glorify God both in soul and body, 1 Cor.
6.20. Our Tongues, our Body, our Affections, are not our own; We may not love
as we list, nor desire as we list: It Is thset and Sacrilege thus to steal from
God; Why should it be a wound in thy Conscience to detain that which is another
man's, and not rather that which is Gods: My Son give me thy heart; If sin
has it, If the world has it, these are not the right owners; Remember whose
thou art, and this will keep thee solely and wholly for God.

How the propriety in God is the cause of all good.
These things premised let us now see How the Propriety we have in God is the
cause of all our good;

And in the general there is no temporal or spiritual good we have, but our
propriety in God is the Foundation of it: If the Apostle argue that because he
has given us Christ, how shall he not with him give us all things else? Romans
8. How much rather if God give us himself, shall he not give us all things: The
marrow and whole substance of the Covenant of grace lies in this, That God
will be our God and we shall be his People: God does not find us but make us
his, and when so made then all good things are bestowed on us; We will select
some choice particulars, and that two ways.

1. Of those good things we have from God. 2. Of those good things we have by
approaching to good our active and passive good.
And first Pardon of sin in which the Psalmist speaks our blessedness to
consist is given us because we are hi^. Thus Heb. 8. when God promised to be
the God of his People in the Covenant of Grace, Then follows the Forgiveness
of their sins, And he will remember their Iniquities no more; And this they
must necessarily enjoy, For Guilt of sin separateth between God and the
sinner, it makes him at a distance, and in a state of Enmity; But this
propriety takes away all Ground of Condemnation, Romans 8. Because they belong to
God therefore they are pardoned; David's sins were fouler then Saul's; But
besides that David had a better heart then Saul; David had a propriety in God,
and so had not Saul: Oh the Encouragement that Gods Children have upon this
account to pray for pardon: It Is more in God then in thy Repentance or Tears;
That is the surest Refuge they have, they are the Fathers: Therefore

2. Because they have more choice and intimate Fellowship and Communion with
the Father then the world: They have the Light of his Countenance, assurance of
his Love: They have the hidden Manna; They have a peculiar Enjoyment of him,
which is more as David says, Psalm. 4. then the wicked men have when their Wine
and Oil increases: They are called Friends in opposition to Servants by
Christ, Joh. 15.15. And therefore are admitted into that presence and those
heavenly Secrets, which wicked men know not, which made the Church repeat this
so often, She was her well beloveds, and her well beloved was hers, Cant. 6.3.
And from this follows that holy and heavenly Communion with Christ which the
Church has; Oh if the world did but know what the Godly have from God, Other
meat, Other Riches, Other Comforts then they understand: How would they lament
their distance from God? They have Husks only when there is the fatted Calf in
our Fathers House; Insomuch that though the Godly have not the good things of
this Life always, yet they have the good, yea, the better things of Heaven and
Happiness as a Viaticum in their Journey thither.

3. Because they have a Propriety in Christ therefore they are protected and
preserved: The Eye of God is said to run up and down the Earth, to stand in
the behalf of the upright in heart; They are Gods Treasure, and so his heart
and love must be toward them, I am thine save me, says David, Psalm. 119.94.
Propriety engages God, all Creatures look to their own, yea, they venture
their lives to save their young ones: The cruel and most wild Creatures are
fierce to defend their own; Now at the Psalmist argues, He that made the Eye
shall not be see, He that planted the Ear shall not he hear? Thus he that has
put into the nature of all creatures to protect their young ones, Will not he
do the like? This Argument the Church uses when she says, Isaiah 63 9. We are
thine, and are called by thy Name; Insomuch that there is a wonderful
expression in Zech. 2.8. He that touches you touches the Apple of my Eye; How
carefully has nature defended that as being a precious and dear part in a man;
Yet thus God is pleased to account of those that are his, And therefore he is
said to be afflicted in all their afflictions: Oh then that the Godly would
improve this propriety more; They fear this danger, this Trial, this Calamity;
Art thou not the Lords? Will not he look to thee more then thou could thy
self? Thou art more his then thy own; It Is indeed no such matter for thee to
lose thy health, thy Comforts, thy Life, but for God to lose his goods, his
Inheritance, his Jewels, would highly redound to his dishonor; Therefore the
Lord is said to know how to deliver those that are Righteous, 2 Peter 2.9. They
are under Gods care; And therefore thy Condition is more secure then if the
whole world were to keep thee; For he that keeps Israel neither slumbreth nor
sleeps, Psalm. 121.3.

4. Because they are the Fathers therefore they are sure to persevere, and not
to apostatize from the ways of grace and holiness; Adam indeed was his, and
the Angels before their Fall were his, but because not his in that sure and
better Covenant, which is established by the blood of Christ. Therefore they
fell from that propriety, but now a sure and everlasting Covenant is made
through Christ; They if once his, always his* Hence our Savior says, None
can pluck them out of his Fathers hand, John 18.29. Because the Father is
greater then all: Out of his hand, that is a very comfortable expression, as if
God held them always in his hand, as we do those things that are precious, and
therefore we are kept by the power of God to Salvation; Oh how often should we
lose our propriety, forfeit our Interest, become sins and Satan's, did not he
keep us his? This preserving of us his, is more then making us his at first,
for such is our falsehood and inconstancy, that we should every day dissolve all
those bonds of love between God and us: Did not he put this fear in our hearts?
Oh by this it is that we do not only live his but die his: By this it is that
we may with Triumph take up Paul's persuasion, That nothing shall separate us
from the Love of God in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. Build not then thy Perseverance
upon thy graces but Gods propriety.

These may suffice for the former part, then in the next place, This propriety
God has in us is the cause of all our good, in our approaches unto God.

And First, It is that only which administers confidence and fervency in
prayer; What hopes, what strivings, what agonies could there be in Prayer, if
it were not for this he is our God we are praying unto? Who can hopefully pray
to an Enemy or Adversary, to a condemning Judge, but when to a gracious Father
that breeds encouragement; Thus we are taught to pray Our Father; And the
Spirit of God is especially for this appropriating confidence to call God Abba
Father, and what is it that makes David so full of hopes even in sad
Temptations, because God was his God, his buckler, his Shield; And it is said in
that sad perplexity he was in at Ziklag, he encouraged himself in his God, 1 Samuel 30.6. So that take this away and you take away the very soul and life of
all prayers.

Joy and Thankfulness; The overflowing of the heart with praise and rejoicing
is from this, because God is our God; Thus David is like a Fountain often
running over, because God forgave his iniquities, and was his God; The people
of God walk in darkness because they are not clear in this, their evidences
are not strong here.

Contentation and a blessed composure of spirit: For in that God is theirs they
have all can be desired, Fear not Abraham I am thy exceeding great reward; The
Lord is my Shepherd I shall want nothing, Psalm. 23.1, I wonder not now that
Paul can say he knows how to abound and how to want, Phil. 4. 12. yea, that
he has all things (...) because he has God who has all things; Oh say not I
want a drop when thou have the Ocean.

Use To admire the blessed estate of the Godly; No wonder if Balaam wish that
he might die the death of the Righteous, and that his latter end might be like
his: See the Large Inventory of 2 very Godly man's Treasure, 1 Cor, 1. All
things are yours, and why is it so? Because Christ is ours and God is ours: A
wretched man thinks it a great matter to say, This Estate and that is mine,
when yet none can say as the devil of all the Glory of the World, All is mine,
yet he is happy that has the Lord for his Portion.

Use 2. Take heed of opposing and malicious vexing of those that are godly, it
redounds to Gods dishonor; It Is not they but God that is despised.

SERMON XLVIII. The Deity of Jesus Christ cleared and defended against the
Socinians.
JOH. 17.10. And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in
them.
THese words are an Argument to prove that though the Apostles, and in them all
believers were the Fathers, yet the Son was not excluded from a propriety in
them; Therefore to put more force in the Argument he presses the samenesse or
Identity of Nature, and ageeement with one another, as if he should have said,
Let not any prayer put up in their behalf be rejected, for they are fit
Subjects both for me to pray for and thou to hear, we both have an Interest in
them; We must deny our own if we deny them, This is the sense of the words, and
in them we may observe, 1. The argumentative particle. 2. The argument it self.


The argumentative particle in'the word (...), which is not conjunctive but
ratiocinative, It Is not so well translated and as for, so (...) is often used
for (...) in the Scripture, Even as the Hebrew is sometimes conjunctive and
sometime a Note of Inference, as Give help from trouble and Vain is the help of
man, Psa. 60.11. that is for; We have sinned and thou art angry, i. e. for
that, etc. So here, They are thine, for all mine is thine:

In the next place we have the argument it self, and that is from the
homoousiall consideration of the Father and the Son, All mine are thine, and
thine are mine, which words are not spoken quoad fruitionem only, or (...), but
quoad essentiam, all that Wisdom, power, Majesty thou have, I have, we have
all in common: Therefore this place is very strong against the blasphemous
Socinians, and used by the Ancients against the Arians; The Socinians have
nothing to evade but only that our Savior does not speak of the Fathers
Essence but of his dominion and propriety; The Apostles were the Fathers by
propriety, and so they were Christ's also; But this will not stand, for although
we must grant that before; The Apostles were said to be the Fathers yet he
proves this by an Argument from the general to the particular; No wonder they
are thine and mine, for all mine are thine, Note the Universality, all mine are
thine, all thine are mine, If all then the Essence, Nature and Majesty of God,
otherwise it was not all, and if Christ were a mere Creature he could not say
thus, for although the former part every creature may say, all mine are thine,
in respect of dominion and efficiency, because there is no good, natural,
moral, or divine but it is the Lords, and although in some sense a godly man may
by the Covenant of grace say to God, all thine are mine because now made his
God, in which sense the Apostle said, all things are yours, 1 Cor. 1. and I
have all things, Phil. 4. yet in regard of Gods essential Attributes, his
Omnisciency, Omnipotency, etc. None but the Son and the holy Ghost who are
God can truly say so; Now that our Savior means all in this sense appears
by a parallel place, Joh 16 15. all things that the Father has are mine; Mark
the aggravation, he does not say some things but all things, then that the
Father has in the present tense; Now God has nothing but essentially, he has
wisdom, he has life, but he has it essentially not as creatures who have it
accidentally; Therefore notable is that expression Joh. 5.26. As the Father
has life in himself so has he given the Son to have life in himself; No
creature has life in that sense.

3. He says, All things are mine, he does not say shall be mine, when I am
glorified, when ascended into Heaven, but even in that very state of
humiliation.

Lastly, He says, All that the Father has, In calling him a Father he
acknowledges a personal distinction, which cuts off the Sophistry of the
Socinians; If Christ has all things the Father has, then he is the Father:
No, the very compellation supposes a relative distinction, though there be an
essential Unity:

Thus you see the Text vindicated, and it is our duty diligently to vindicate
those Texts that assert Christ's Deity so much oppugned, for if Tertullian said,
Omnis sermo adaptandus est contra Idololatriam, much more against this
blasphemous heresy.

Doct. Christ has all things the Father has.
Obs. That our Lord Christ has all things the Father has; Even the things he
prays for, viz. glory, he says He had it with the Father before the world
began.

Let us unfold this Doctrine for it will be of great use both doctrinally and
practically.

1. The same Name and Titles.
And 1. The Lord Christ has the same Name and Titles that God the Father has,
Even that Name which they call the incommunicable Name Jehovah, and that is
never given directly to any creature, yet that is attributed to Christ, Heb.
1.10. Thou O Jehovah have founded the Heavens and the Earth; That spoken by the
Psalmist the Apostle does expressly apply to Christ himself, and although some
observe that in the New commonly the Father is called (...), and the Son (...),
as 1 Cor. 8. We have one God the Father of all, and we have one Lord, yet
Christ is often called God. Romans 9.11. He is called God blessed for evermore;
And 2 John This is the true God. And 1 Timothy 3.26. God manifested in the flesh,
So that he is called God as well as Lord; Now then this argues Christ's Deity,
that he has the same Titles with God; Magistrates indeed are called gods, and
Moses is said to be a God to Pharaoh, but not absolutely as Christ is, but
respectively for such an end and purpose, viz. to direct and govern: For the
Name of God is God, as Rabbis say, God is his Name and his Name is God; If it
be a capital crime amongst men, to give the Titles of the Supreme power to
those that have it not, or to deny it to those to whom it belong^; Take heed
then thou be not found in the number of those that think it robbery what
Christ himself did not to make him equal with God.

2. The same nature and essence
2. He has the nature and essence of God the Father, so that he is equal with
him; Mark that reason Ioh. 16.15. He shall receive of mine and show you all
things; For all the Father has is mine; The holy Ghost was to receive of his
wisdom and power, because all the Father had was his, which as it necessarily
proves the holy Spirit to be God, that does search the deep things of God, so
also Christ to be of the same divine nature, and thus the Jews understood him
when they charged him with blasphemy, that he being man should make himself God
or equal to God.

3. He has all the essential properties of God, he is immortal, eternal,
infinite, 3. All the essential properties of God.
omniscient, omnipotent; For he knew what was in men's hearts and needed none
should tell him, 1 John 2. ult. Eternal, for he created all things, and in the
beginning was with God, 1 Ioh. 1. called therefore Alpha and Omega; Omnipotent
in that the Creation of all things out of nothing is attributed to him, and the
wonderful Miracles he wrought not as the Apostles in a Petitionary manner but
mandatory and authoritatively in his own Name, do fully evince this, so that
there is no glorious attribute of God but the Lord Christ has the same, and
that not in kind but in number: The very same numericall wisdom and holiness.

4. Christ does all the works the Father does; I and my Father work hitherto,
4. Christ does all the works the Father does.
Joh. 5.17. The Son does nothing but what he sees the Father does, Joh. 5.19.
Does the Father create? so does Christ? Does the Father conserve and govern all
things? so does Christ bear up all things by the power of his word, Heb. 1. Did
the Father send the Prophets in the Old Testament? so (which i^ greatly to be
considered) did Christ, 1 Pet. 1.11. The Spirit of Christ is said to be in the
Prophets which yet were long befere Christ was born of the Virgin; Therefore
Christ had a subsistency as God before and did work as God; Therefore the
Israelites 1 Cor. 10. are said to tempt Christ in the Wilderness, And Moses
preferred the reproaches of Christ before Egypts Treasures, Heb. 11. so also
does the Father regenerate, give the holy Spirit, sanctify our natures, all
these things Christ also does.

5. The Son and the Father have the same will and the same purposes; 5. The
sa^e will.
This all the Socinians would have, But the samenesse of will and mind flows
from the Identity of the nature; Indeed when he prays for his Disciples in
this Chapter, that they may be one as thou and I are one; It Is not a sicut of
equality but similitude, not as if they were to be one essentially, as the
Father and the Son is, but that intimate Union of the Father and Son, is made
the Rule, as when it is said, Be you perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect,
Mat. 5. ult. that cannot be understood of an equality; The Rule has always
more perfection in it then the thing regulated by it: Hence it is that Christ
is called the express character of the Father, Heb. 1. What Christ wills, what
he purposes we may conclude the Father does so also, so that this
consideration may abundantly take away that doubt which may arise, That
although Christ be thus ready to work out our redemption, yet will the Father
accept of it, he is not obliged to take a Surety in our room, he will see the
Law satisfied in our own persons, but Christ removes this when he says,
Therefore does my Father love me because I lay down my life for my Sheep, Joh.
10. The Father then and the Son have the same gracious will, have the same
purposes of mercy, and whom Christ does invite the Father inviteth, whom Christ
calls the Father calls: So that in and by Christ we may see the gracious and
glorious thoughts of mercy God the Father had from all Eternity to his people;
Indeed as he was man though his humane will was not contrary, yet we see he
speaks conditionally, If it be possible let this Cup pass away, yet not my
will but thy will be done, Matthew. 26 39. Therefore his humane will if
absolutely considered, did desire freedom from death, but if particularly
considered in these circumstances, then he emptied that particular stream of
his humane nature in the Ocean of the divine.

6. The Son and the Father have the same propriety in all the godly; 6. The
same propriety in all the godly.
Those that belong to the Father belong also to the Son, This was the occasion
of this general Speech in the Text; The Apostles are thine, and all thine are
mine; So that the Father does not abdicate his right by the donation of them to
Christ; Hence Joh. 20.17. I go to my Father and your Father, by way of comfort
putting us into some co-partnership with his propriety; Those then that are
Christ's Sheep they have also Gods mark upon them, They do belong to the Father
by grace, and to the Son by merit and purchase, so that the Children of God are
to proceed by degrees, to evidence their propriety in Christ, and then in the
Father; For says Christ, If ye had known me ye would have known my Father,
Joh. 8.16.

Lastly, They have the same power and strength, and that in reference to the
defense and preservation of his people, Joh. 10. None can pull them out of my
Fathers hand, then he adds, I and my Father are one, one as in nature so in
that omnipotent power to govern and preserve his Children to everlasting
happiness, so that this doctrine is not merely speculative but tends to much
practical edification.

How all Christ has is the Fathers.
In the next place consider how all that Christ has is the Fathers, and so
reciprocally,

1. By eternal generation.
1. By eternal generation, The Socinians would grant the Son has many
transcendent prerogatives, but not by eternal generation, but by a temporal
donation; This cannot be so, because the Psalmist long before Christ was born
said, This is my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Psa. 2.7. And his
outgoings are said to be of old, Mic. 5.1. from the days of Eternity: So that
Christ has these things of the Father by nature, even as the Sun beams had the
light of the Sun, as soon as ever there was a Sun though there be a great
dissimilitude in this comparison; The Son then is not of the Father as the
world was by a voluntary Creation but by a natural generation.

2. By virtue of the hypostatical Union.
2. If we consider Christ as God and man, yet even then by virtue of the
hypostatical Union all that the Father has, is his; The infinite Majesty of
God, Christ nor only as God but as God-man has, but how? not as if the
properties of the divine nature were communicated to that, as the Lutherans
hold, saying, the humane nature of Christ is infinite, omnipresent, that is
absurd, for how can it be eternal when it is plain the humane nature had a being
in a time, but only by virtue of the personal union, there is a communication
of properties, not to the Natures but to the Person, Insomuch that the Apostle
calls it the blood of God, Act. 25. How can that be but by virtue of that
personal Union, the divine nature has no blood, neither can it suffer, and
thus Christ said, The Son of man which i^ in heaven, Joh. 3. that could not be
because of his humane nature but by the personal Union, so that although the
Text does principally intend Christ's communion with the Father as God in the
identity of his nature, yet this may in some sense be extended to Christ both
God and man.

Use. Therefore
The Use of this Doctrine is very fruitful, 1. By doctrinall Information of
the deity of Christ, that he is truly God, having all things God the Father
has, therefore retain by a strong Faith this Article of Religion, 1. Christ is
truly God.
and the rather because so many have brought in damnable assertions about this
Point; Socinus does impudently say, that this doctrine of Christ's Deity is so
absurd, that the Christian world will one day be so far informed as to be
ashamed to believe such a thing, yea, to hear such a thing, and that the word
Trinity may be in time as much abhorred as Transubstantiation and the Mass; Fly
from such persons as those that have a spiritual plague; This has been so
often cleared by the Church in all ages, that now there needs no more
disputation in it, we must not always be proving but we must at last hold fast
that which is good; Remember your Baptism it was In the Name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost; These you are with the same faith to acknowledge, to
these you are equally consecrated.

2. The people of God are happy
Use 2. Is all that the Father has Christ's? then how happy are the people of
God who are admitted into some co-partnership with all this blessedness; For
although though none but Christ (as you heard) can say, All mine are thine
essentially, yet every godly man being made a co^heir with Christ, he may by
fruition and enjoyment say so, Rom 8. Oh the infinite treasure of that
expression, a Son and coheir with Christ; Whatsoever Christ is heir to, we are
also coheirs with him, only here is the difference, Quod Christus natura, nos
gratia, what Christ is by nature that we are by grace; Why then are the people
of God so often dejected and cast down? They consider not how rich, how
honored, how abounding they are; All that the Father has, all that Chtist
has is theirs for their good and advantage, and this deed of gift God made
when he entered into Covenant with them to be their God, and they to be his
people; By this means Paul can triumph and say, I have all things, I can do all
things, Phil. 4. The people of God are never established and confirmed till
they be anchored here; They are tossed up and down as so many waves like the
wicked men of the world who live by sense, and have no bottom or rock to stand
upon; For this end it is that God eithet takes away earthly comforts or casts
in many roots of gall and wormwood in every condition, That you may know your
treasure is in God and Christ not in these earthly contents.

Use 3. Is Christ thus partaker essentially of all that God has, then take we
heed how we refuse him speaking, for God is not only with him but in him, 3.
Take heed of refusing Christ speoking.
as God said concerning the Angel that led the people of Israel which was
Christ, that they should take heed how they did provoke him, for his Name was
in him, Exo. 23.21.

4. How complete and full a Mediator we have; We need not fear his
insufficiency, for all that the Father has he has; He is an infinite God as
well as a finite man; Oh the unanswerable arguments that the godly may fetch
hence; O Lord though in thy sight no flesh can be justified, yet Christ was;
Though I am imperfect Christ is not.

Lasty, Here is a dreadful doom to wicked men, they are excluded from this
communion, what the devil has they have or shall have.

SERMON XLIX. Of man's Glorifying of Christ, And how many ways that is done.
JOH. 17.10. And I am glorified in them.
THis is a new Argument propounded by our Savior in the behalf of his
Disciples; Formerly when he prayed for himself he made this an Argument, that
he had glorified the Father; Now when he prays for his Disciples, he urges,
that they had glorified him: So that we see it is very acceptable to God the
Father that Christ should be glorified; He that is jealous of his glory and
will not give it to another, that struck Herod dead, and made him to be eaten
with the vilest creatures, because the people cried, The voice of God and not
of man, yet to his Son is willing that all honor and glory should be given as
he himself also had immediately glorified him from heaven.

In the Argument we may consider, 1. The Person glorified. 2. The action it
self, (...). 3. The Subject in whom and by whom he is glorfiied.


The Person is Christ; Having before asserted a community in essence and all
things with the Father, he now assumeth also a propriety in the glory his
Father is to have; Chief and ultimate glory belongs only to God: Let not him
that glories, 1 Cor. 1. glory in his riches, in his honors, but that he
knows God; The glory of God is the utmost end of man, and we may no more
attribute it to a creature then divine worship; So that the Deity of Christ is
here also implied.

2. The other is the action to glorify; The word is in the preterperfect tense
(as Austin thinks) for the future, according to the custom of the Hebrews, for
the Apostles had glorified Christ but little, comparatively to what they would
do after Christ's ascension, when such heavenly gifts were bestowed upon them,
but we may keep the proper signification, for the Apostles in that they left
all, believing in him as the promised Messiah, as also preaching and working
Miracles in his Name did in a great measure glorify Christ; Now when Christ is
said to be glorified by his Disciples, that is to be understood declaratively
only, not really for Christ being God, no real glory could be added to him,
only there might be an outward acknowledgement and manifestation of it.

Lastly, There is the Subject, for them, Some of the Ancients refer (...). to
the (...) before in the Text, to things and not to persons; all things are
mine, and I am glorified in those things, but it is more coherent with the words
to refer it to the Apostles of whom he had spoken before, They are thine, as
also because they are the Subject for whom he is praying, and this is a new
argument in their behalf (...) that may imply two things.

1. That they were the Subjects in which Christ was exalted.

And then 2. (...) is for (...) as often the Hebrew Preposition Beth, and so
Christ was glorified by them, because through their preaching many were
converted to acknowledge and believe in Christ as the Messiah, and so they
glorified him.

Obs. That as the people of God do make it their work to glorify Christ, Doct.
As the people of God make in their work to glorify Christ, so it is
well-pleasing to God.

How many ways the people of God glorify Christ.


so this also is very well-pleasing to God the Father; Christ uses it as an
argument to the Father why he should grant his prayer for his Disciples,
because they glorified him, so that two Propositions are in the doctrine.

1. The people of God make it their utmost end to glorify God. 2. That this is
very acceptable and well-pleasing to God.
For the first, Let us consider how many ways the people of God do glorify
Christ, and then why it is their duty:

For the first, Christ is glorified in these particulars,

First, When by Faith they do receive and own him to be the promised Messiah;
This our Savior you heard did again and again commend them for, 1. When by
faith they own him to be the promised Messiah.
they did believe him to be the Messiah sent of the Father, and so in other
places they acknowledged this, so that the very acknowledging of him to be the
Christ so often spoken of by the Prophets, and looking for no other, was in an
high manner giving glory to him, as on the contrary; Those Pharisees and
unbeleeving Jews who rejected him, saying, he was an Impostor and a deceiver;
These did in an high manner dishonor him, making him a liar, and therefore
charging him for communion with the devil, as if by him he did all his
miracles; It is therefore a glorifying of Christ when he is acknowledged and
believed to be the promised Messiah, and that to him only belongs the
characters of such an one.

But 2. This historical bare acknowledgement is not enough unless there be a
fiducial application of him, 2. When there is relying on him as Mediator.
and an holy confident relying on him as the Mediator between God and man; To
say as Thomas did, My God, My Lord, Joh. 20.28. and Paul Gal 2. who loved me
and gave himself for me; This is that believing on him (a phrase peculiar to
the Scripture) that brings Salvation; It Is one thing believe that there is a
Christ who is a Mediator, and another in him as that person by whom we expect
to have Salvation; Austin formerly made a distinction between Credere Deo,
Deum, and in Deum, but the Learned Critics observe that the Scripture makes no
such difference in the phrase, only we may for distinction sake use those
expressions for those spoken of Joh. 2. to whom yet Christ would not
communicate himself are said, (...),, Well, though the words and phrases may be
promiscuous, yet the matter extremely differs, for many do speculatively
believe that Christ is the Mediator, who yet practically do not out of the
sense and burden of sin lay hold on Christ; Whereas this is indeed to glorify
Christ, when we renounce all our own righteousness, when we feel our sins a
greater weight then ever we can bear, when we cry out as they did in the Ship,
Master, we perish; The immediate danger they were in, made them cry out three
times, (...) we perish, we perish; we perish; Thus that soul does unfeignedly
glorify Christ that cries out from the overwhelming nature of sin, I am
damning, I am damning; This is to glorify Christ when we see neither the
Righteousness of the Law, or of Men, or Angels, can interpose between God and
us, but Christ's Righteousness only; Therefore in Popery grace is obscured,
the Righteousness of Saints, and the merits of their own works eclipse Christ;
Hence they are like the Moon which though it receives all light from the
Sun, yet is the only thing that obscures and ecclipseth it by its
Interposition.

3. To glorify Christ there must be an outward profession of him.
3. To glorify Christ is not thus only to acknowledge him, and to rest on him,
for these are only internal acts of the soul, and so a spiritual inward glory
known by God only, but it is greatly seen in the outward confession and
profession of him, and that to the greatest reproach and danger which can be in
the world, Romans 10. With the heart man believes, but with the tongue
profession is made to Salvation; He that will be saved must in the greatest
danger and most scornful reproaches own Christ and his way; Thus our Savior
Luk 12.8. Whosoever shall not confess me before a crooked generation, of him
my Father and I will be ashamed; Certainly in this particular the Disciples did
highly honor Christ, for we know Christ himself was both by birth and life in
a most contemptible manner; There was no comeliness or desirablenesse in him,
and then at last was crucified in a most ignominious manner; Now for the
Apostles to look on him as the Messiah, to have such high and indeared thoughts
of him, when all the world held Christ wretched and accursed, and would not
upon any terms be of his followers, this was greatly to honor him; Therefore
our Savior said, Blessed is he that is not offended at me, Mat. 11.6, It was
the greatest wonder in the world not to stumble at Christ; We see the wise men;
the great men that lived then, they were all offended at his meannesse, Is not
this the Carpenters Son? Mar. 4. Oh how hard would it have been for us to have
received him as the Messiah, if we had lived in those days, for those that
followed Christ they were but a handful comparatively, and they were of the
more despicable sort, and they were accounted illiterate and mad simple people
that adhered to him.

4. A receiving him as Lord and King.
4. They glorify Christ who receive him as a Lord and King, to whose Laws they
willingly submit themselves; For the self-love of a man may make him glad of
Christ as a Savior, but then to resign up themselves in an obediential manner
to all the commands of Christ, in this they draw back: Christ is not to be
considered only as a propitiation for our sins, but also as a King who does
govern his people by holy and spiritual laws, and hence we may read that he
interpreted the Law in a more spiritual and strict way Mat. 5. then the
Pharisaical Doctors had done, and laid the axe to the very root of all
corruption within us, he forbids heart-lusts, heart-passions, these Embers in
the fire though they never flame out; he calls upon all to deny themselves, to
take up their cross, and to follow him; To love him more then Father or
mother; If therefore we would honor Christ, it is our duty to forsake all those
rebellions we are guilty of, To lay down our opposition and enmity against his
commands, to take his yoke upon us, and to think it light and easy; What an
honor was it to Christ to have men leave all their outward subsistence and
earthly comforts to follow him? Did they not hereby declare that they prized
the service of Christ more then all the world, and that they accounted more of
his commands then the greatest Monarchs in the world; So that all who walk
disorderly and contrary to Christ's command, they say with those in the Parable,
Christ shall not reign over us; Though he will reign over them, maugre all
their disobedience, if he do not govern them with the Scepter of grace, he will
break them with a rod of Iron.

5. A suffering persecution for his sake.
5. Those that suffer and endure all persecutions willingly for his Name and
Truth; They do in an high degree glorify Christ; In a special manner did
Christ take notice of his Disciples, because they had accompanied him in his
Temptations, and the Apostle Peter does at large show how God is glorified when
men suffer not for ill doing, but as Christians; That as they glorify Christ,
so Christ makes a spirit of glory to rest upon them, 1 Pet. 4.14. Those marks
Paul did bear on his body, They were so many Trophies; Even as Soldiers count
wounds a mark of honor, they have received in fight for their commander; When
the Disciples went away rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to suffer any
thing for Christ's sake; This did greatly redound to Christ's glory; Oh then let
not the people of God be afraid or shrink at reproaches, dishonours, and
troubles for Christ's sake, for wherein can they glorify him more? Or can the
world say upon better grounds, Behold how they loved Christ and his Truth,
better then their estates or their lives; Those millions of Martyrs that have
died for Christ's sake, brought an astonishing even to the very heathens; No
Emperor or Monarch, No Master or Teacher ever had such a multitude of
Disciples readily sacrificing their lives, so that we mistake if we think the
glory of Christ has been in such an outward pomp as earthly Kings have been;
No, by sufferings, by revilings, by the most cruel deaths that malicious men
could invent, they made the Name of Christ glorious through the whole world;
Even as Christ called his own death a glorifying both of himself and his
Father, so did the miseries and calamities of his Children redound greatly to
his honor, for greater love and esteem they could not show then by laying down
their lives for him.

6. 6. And by a holy life.
Those honor Christ and glorify him who walk in an holy and worthy manner to
that calling whereby Christ has called them, 2 These. 1.12. That the Name of
Christ may be glorified in them? And how was that? by walking worthy of their
calling; Even as on the other side when men live profanely and wickedly they
reproach Christ, and make the Gentiles to blaspheme the Christian way; Oh that
this were sadly thought upon by most; Is not every Town, every Family full of
cursing, swearing, drunken and unclean persons? Now these are a Reproach to
Christ, they make the Christian Religion a scorn, and the name of it even to
stink; Even as Salvian a zealous Writer against the profane lives of
Christians, said, The heathens by way of scorn might say, Christiani sancte
vixissent, si Christus sancta docuisset; They thought the reason why Christians
had no more sober, chaste, and godly lives, was because Christ was not an holy
Lawgiver, he did not give them holy precepts; The looseness and profaneness
of a Servant is a disgrace to his Master, and what dishonor must this be that
those who call upon Christ's Name, yet should live according to the devils
temptations, that they should say they are for Christ, and their lives for
Satan.

7. They honor and glorify Christ who live cheerfully and comfortably in the
midst of all their troubles and exercises; 7. By walking cheerfully in the
midst of all troubles.
For seeing that Christ by his Death has purchased justification for us, this
ought to cause great peace and joy in our hearts, as Paul said; Blessed be God
who causes us to triumph through Jesus Christ; And why so? because as
afflictions so Consolations by Christ abound much more, 2 Cor. 1.3. Oh then let
the people of God who are apt to be dejected and cast down, to walk in a
discouraged manner, to have their hearts pierced through with many thorny
cares, Remember what Christ has done for them, and how acceptable it is to him
that we should walk comfortably and thankfully; Is it not a dishonor to the
Master for the servant to be dejected and grieved? Does it not proclaim to
others that they account his service an hard uncomfortable condition? Thus when
men leave their former wicked courses, and give up their names to Christ, but
after that are troubled, grieved, and have no comfort or encouragement; These
reproach the Lord Christ as if the world could give better comforts then
Christ, as if we had done for the worse by forsaking the devils service, and
resigning our selves up to the Lords; Oh then consider that as in gross
profaneness and unrighteous ways there is a scandal to Religion, so in all
discouraged and uncomfortable dejections, refusing to be comforted, thou art a
dishonor unto the Lord Christ, as if he could not give manna to us in the
wilderness of this world; Thus you see how many ways Christ may be glorified.
Why it is our duty to glorify Christ.


Now let us consider why it is our duty thus to glorify Christ.

1. Because Gods purpose from Eternity was to put infinite glory on Christ
First, Because Gods purpose from Eternity was to put infinite glory on Christ;
God suffered Adam to fall, and in him all mankind to be lost, that so the
glory of Christ sent into the world for an atonement and a Mediator might breed
amazement to all, yea, some Divines have said, that the first Decree which God
made was to glorify Christ, and that therefore he had been incarnated, though
man had not fallen; Therefore say they all our Predestination, Justification,
and Salvation, it is not so much for us as in order to Christ; Howsoever that
there is a Church, a people of God, that they shall have such privileges of
glory, the end of all is that hereby Christ should be honored, Joh 5.23.
Christ was sent into the world that he who honors the Father should also
honor the Son.

2. It is the end of the Ministry to glorify Christ.
2. The end of Gods Spirit in appointing a ministry, and giving gifts to them,
as also accompanying of them with his spiritual presence is to glorify Christ;
We are appointed for the work of the Ministry, for to glorify Christ, and all
your hearing ought to be for that end, Joh. 16.15. He shall take of mine and
glorify me, and Ioh. 14. he shall convince the world of sin and righteousness
in reference to Christ; We see here what is the utmost end in preaching and
hearing even that Christ may be glorified; Insomuch that there is no greater
pest to the soul of man then for the Ministers thereof to be given up to vain
glory, to seek their own glory from men, for hereby Christ will not be exalted;
Oh it is far better for them to have it said Christ is glorified in our
Ministry, then that men give glory to us.

Lastly, Christ will in time glorify his, therefore they may well glorify
Christ; For what is our drop to his Ocean? What is our glowworm to his Sun?
It Is well he will accept of it, we are of such polluted lips.

Use.
Use of Instruction to live both doctrinally and really to the honor and glory
of Christ; doctrinally, when we believe all such opinions as magnify Christ,
the contrary whereunto Popery does abound in; This made the worthy Reformers
first think of departing from that Church, Christ was robbed of his glory, he
had not that honor which did belong to him; And then really by an heavenly,
holy, and unspotted conversation; Oh the patience and mercy of Christ, that he
should suffer the earth to bear so many profane wretches that are a reproach
to him and all Christianity; Did the Disciples call for fire because the
Samaritans would not receive Christ? how would their zeal have kindled to see
so many crucify the Lord Christ again? You glorify the devil, and exalt the
ways of sin, but in time you will feel how dear this will cost you.

SERMON L. Of Christ's tender care of all his People in the greatest of their
dangers and afflictions.
JOH. 17.11. And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and
I come to thee.
THis Eleventh Verse begins a new and special Reason why Christ is to be heard
in his Prayer for his Disciples; Whereas the former Arguments some of them were
taken from the person of the Father, some from the person of the Apostles
themselves, some from the Person of Christ.

In this Verse the Person of the Apostles and Christ are conjoined together,
Now the efficacy and force of the Argument lies, 1. From the Condition of
Christ. 2. From the Condition of the Apostles.


The present condition of Christ is described thus, I am no more in the world.

2. Of the Apostles, But these are in the world.

Let us explain the words that relate to Christ's condition, and then see the
pith of the Argument.

For the first,

Christ may be said to be in the world two ways,

Either 1. Invisibly in respect of his divine nature and operations; Thus
Christ cannot go out of the world no more then God, who is every where, and in
this sense he told his Disciples, he would be with them to the end of the
world, Mat. 26.

Or 2. Visibly and corporally in respect of his humane nature, and thus he was
to be with them no more, so that this is a strong place against,
Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation, Though they would gladly evade the
dint of it.

But why does Christ say I am no more in the world in the present tense, seeing
while and when he said it, he was in the world?

I answer. This Apostle (as is observed by the Learned) of all does most abound
with Hebraisms, and with them it is ordinary to use a participle of the present
tense for the future, as might be showed; And besides our Savior was very
shortly to go out of the world by his sufferings; and it is ordinary with all to
speak of a thing as done which is immediately to be done, as Heb. 11. Abraham
is said by faith to offer up his Son Isaac, when yet he did not offer him up,
but was prepared for to do it immediately.

Lastly, Observe the difference between being in the world and of the world;
When our Savior says, I am no more in the world, it supposes he had been in
it, but now he never was of the world, as he says, v. 16. For to be of the
world is to partake of the wickedness and ungodliness which reigns there,
The whole world lies in wickedness; And therefore Christ could not be of the
world in this sense; For the Apostles after their call, neither any converted
persons are thus of the world, though they be in it locally.

The words thus explained, Consider the efficacy of Christ's argument, I pray
for these, and commend them to thy care and protection, because I am going out
of the world; I shall not be corporally present with them, I was a comfort to
them, and preserver of them, but now I commend them to thy hands; Thus we see
the admirable care and love Christ showed to his Disciples, he seems to be more
mindeful of them then his own self; All his thoughts about his own sufferings
did not so affect him, but that still he could remember his own Disciples, that
it may go well with them.

Doct. The greater the dangers are Christ's people are in the greater is Christ's
care of them.
Obs. That the greater the dangers are Christ's people are kept in, the greater
is Christ's care and love to them; It was likely to be worse with the Disciples
then ever, therefore it is said, their hearts were troubled, Joh. 14. when he
spoke of leaving of them, for what can the Chickens do when the hen is killed;
What can the Sheep do when the Shepherd is smitten; Now because they were
fallen into such a condition our Savior does in amore special manner commend
their Estate to God, we do not read that formerly he did in such a peculiar
manner give them up to God, because their danger and temptations were not so
great as were likely to be; This is a Truth worthy of all acceptance by the
godly; They are dismayed when they see their afflictions rise higher, never
considering that the love and care that Christ has to them does also increase,
Ioh. 13.1. when Christ saw the time of his departure was come, having loved his
own, he loved them to the end, more then ever he discovered his love, partly by
condescending to wash their feet, and partly by instituting the Sacrament as a
remembrance of his death for them; So that as they say of all motions, they are
swiftest toward the end; Thus Christ loving his Disciples from his heart, upon
pure grounds, he loved them most of all at his latter end, as the clock runs
fastest at the last stroke; But it is good to open this Box of Ointment that the
sweet smell thereof may comfort and refresh us.

I. If God remove some mercies he makes a supply of others.
And first, Christ never calls his people to any danger and temptations but as he
removes some mercies from them, so he makes a supply otherwise; If they are in
greater streights and difficulties then before, So if they do observe they
shall find some mercies they had not before; Christ will not let thee be a
loser by any thing he does to thee; Neither will he be in thy debt, if he takes
away any mercy, he will recompense it otherwise; So that still his love is as
great if not greater; See this notably Joh. 14.1, 2, 3. Let not your hearts be
troubled, viz. at the sad things I have told you of my departure, and the rage
of the world, For I go away to prepare a mansion place for you; It Is expedient
I should go away, you shall not be the worse for it; Therefore v. 18. I will
not leave you comfortless or Orphans, I will send the Spirit of God to comfort
you and abide with you; Thus you see, though Christ removed his corporal
presence from them, yet he gave them a spiritual presence; If then the Spirit
of God can be a Comforter to supply the room of Christ's corporal presence, how
much more of a husband or father, If God take any of these away, pray that he
would send his Spirit the Comforter, and if that can be better then Christ's
bodily presence, much more then than ten thousand Fathers or Husbands; Oh then
let not the Children of God deject themselves, either with the condition they
are in, or they fear may be in; If such and such things fall out, what would
become of me? Oh remember it is Christ's way when he takes away one mercy to make
it up otherwise again.

Secondly, Christ's love and care appears in that if he call to greater
dangers and afflictions, he will then give more strength then ever to bear
them, If he greate^ ^gers (...) then (...) stren^
and more comfort then ever even to rejoice in them: If then thy afflictions
are more then ever what art thou the worse? If thy strength be greater then
ever; God will not lay a Giants burden upon a childs back; But if he prepare
a Giants burden for thee, he will enable thee with a Giants strength; Thus
these Apostles because they were to encounter with the rage and madness of the
whole world; Therefore did the Spirit of God come in an extraordinary manner
upon them; They were commanded to stay at Jerusalem till they were endowed with
power from above, Luke 24.49. Thus before also, when our Savior told them,
They should be hated before Kings and Governors for his Names sake, he adds,
It shall be given them in that day to know what to speak, in that day; Oh then
when thy dejected heart says, What shall I do if the Lord bring this and that
sad trouble upon me! If this or that temptation come upon me, it will grind me
to powder; Oh remember it shall be given thee in that day: If with Job he
deprive thee of thy Estate, and Goods, and Children at once, it shall be given
thee in that day to bear it; Do not then measure or compare a great affliction
with that little strength thou have at present; No, if God make the waters to
increase, he will provide an Ark for thee, the Apostles could not work miracles
when they would, as they could not cast out some kind of devils, but when they
were called to it, and their miraculous faith was increated then they could do
it; Thus it is here, If God should give thee no more faith, no more patience,
no more heavenly-mindednesse then thou have at the present; Thou were never
able to bear such mountains and loads of trouble that happily God may bring on
thee, but God proportions thy strengtht to ^hy afflictions, as our Savior
said, Mat. 9.17. New Wine is not put into old bottles, They must not fast while
the Bridegroom was with them, but the time was coming when they should fast; As
God increases their strength so he does also their comfort, he gives them more
joy and consolation then they ever had, as the Disciples had the Comforter
promised them after his departure, and accordingly we read that under all the
persecutions and miseries they endured, they were filled with joy, and they
went away rejoicing, so true is that of the Apostle 2 Cor. 1.4. Who comfort
us in all our Tribulations, that as our sufferings abound so our consolations
also abound; This we see abundantly fulfilled in all the holy Martyrs and
Confessors, was not their dungeon a Paradise to them? Were not live Coals beds
of Roses? Did they not rejoice and sing Psalms? Now how came all this about?
The more their miseries were, the more were Gods mercies; Christ that gave them
but drops before, does now bid them drink the whole cup of praise and
Thanksgiving; Now they are taken up to the Mount of Transfiguration, They have
not only clusters but the Vine it self; Consolations abound now, when never it
may be before.

Thirdly, III. Christ's care of his appears in the dangers themselves.
The Lord Christ his care is seen even in the dangers and afflictions
themselves, and that diverse ways.

1. In not suffering them to be but when there is a necessity, you are
afflicted if need be, 1 Pet. 1.6. That word is full of consolation, The^^ no
affliction, no trial, but thou did need it, considering thy corruption ^hy
dullness, thy earthlinesse, there was a necessity to have some affliction fall
upon thee, to humble thee, and to make thee more enlivened; Hence afflictions
are compared to the cutting off the luxurious branches of the Vine, Joh. 15.
which is necessary; Frosts and cold have their necessity, and both man's body
and the ground needs that as well as the Summer; This made David say, Out of
very Faithfulness thou have afflicted me, Psa. 119.75. And hence afflictions
are attributed to Gods Love, Whom he loves he chasteneth, Rev. 3. and all
because the people of God could not be so fruitful and active if they were not
thus chastened, So then here is Christ's care, there shall not be any trouble
but when necessary.

2. As he wisely orders them to be, so his great care and love is seen in the
time and season when they are inflicted; Afflictions will not in every season
do good, no more then the cutting down of trees, or pruning of them is at any
time to be done: The Patient may dye by the unseasonable letting of blood;
Therefore Christ shows his great care and love to take the opportune season,
to afflict and to exercise thee; As God would not have mercy upon Epaphroditus
presently, but he lets him lie in danger, it being thereby better both for him,
and Paul was thereby much afflicted; Paul had the buffetings of Satan which did
greatly humble him, but when was the time; after his Revelations; And therefore
that then it might not puff him above measure, It was that he had those Thorns
in his side; so that Christ does not only regard the necessity but the fit
time and season of all thy Troubles: Even as Christ himself came in the
fullness of time, so do all his chastisements, if they should come sooner or
later, they would not do that good; Paul prays thrice, yet could not remove
those strong Temptations, 1 Co. 12.

3. His love and care is seen in the nature and kind of the affliction and
trouble: There are calamities of all sorts; Now as it is not all kind of
Physic that is for every disease, so neither all kind of calamities that are
fit for every sin; Hezekiah gloried proudly in the Treasures he had, and
therefore God caused an Enemy to come and spoil him of them, he might see by
the afflictions what his sin was, David was too inordinately affected to
Absalom and Adonijah, and they became rebels to him and sore afflictions; Oh
it is a great matter to observe the wisdom and goodness of God in ordering
that kind of affliction rather for thee then another, Thou wast not thankful
to God for thy health, or serviceable to him, therefore he afflicts thee with
sickness: The people of Israel were weary of Gods Service, therefore God
delivered them up to evil Lords and Masters, that they should know what another
service meant; One Godly man lies under one affliction and another under
another: Now if one had that which another has he could never bear it, it
would be more then death to him, so that the wisdom and love of Christ is to
be admired in all, say, this very kind of affliction, and at this time comes
from the love and care of Christ.

4. As the kind so the continuance God will not let it abide any longer then
it does his work, These horse-leeches shall suck no longer, then the corrupt
blood lasts; The devil shall throw some of you into prison ten days, Rev.
2.10. See there how God orders it first it is but some of them, and then into
prison, there is the kind, for ten days there is the continuance, which made
the Psalmist say, The rod of the wicked shall not always rest upon the back of
the Righteous; Psalm. 125.3. It Is true the people of God have many times thought
their deliverance too long, Will the Lord cast off for ever? Has he forgotten
to be gracious? Thus they expostulate and complain, but God at another time s^^
^he would hasten it in due time, Isa. 60.22. and he calls it but a moment,
^^^rein he had hid his face from them, Isa. 54.7. although it was seventy
years; So that the flesh says one thing and the Spirit of God another; Know
then that thy exercise is for a continued or appointed time, God has set
bounds to these waters, and therefore be not discouraged under them.

Lastly, The care and love of Christ is seen in working out a way, and making
an escape from them, when it is for their good and his glory; There has no
temptation befallen you but out of which he will make a way to escape, 1 Cor.
10 13. The Lord knows how to deliver those that are his: The Artificer
knows when to take his Gold out of the Fire, The wise Physician knows when
there is blood let out enough: Thus much more does God know when thy
afflictions have done the Errand he sent them about; The Wisdom of God also
can find out a way to save thee out of them; For he that could find out a way
to save thee from sin and hell, much rathar can he find out a way to deliver
thee from this or that temptation.

In the fourth general place, IV. Christ's care in sanctifying the troubles that
they may be for spiritual benefit.
Christ's care and love is seen in sanctifying and fitting thy troubles that
they shall be for thy spiritual benefit; Whatsoever may be done to thy estate
or life, yet nothing shall hurt the soul: Thus the Prophet, This is the fruit
of Jacobs trouble to purge away his sin, Isaiah 27.9. and Romans 8. All things
work to the good of them whom God loves: Christ that has so loved thee would
never let this or that come upon thee, did he not intend to turn it for thy
spiritual good? This made David say, Before he was afflicted he went astray,
Psalm. 119. And when both these go together, Afflictions and Sanctification,
David calls it a Blessedness, not a misery, Blessed is the man whom thou
chastenest, and teach thy way, Psalm. 94 12. If God teaches thee by thy
afflictions the bitterness of sin, the duty of Faith and weanednesse of
Spirit from the world; Oh it is a blessed sickness, a blessed loss, Thank God
that ever he laid his hand upon thee, Though it seemed grievous to flesh, and
thou were apt to be impatient, yet nothing under Heaven was better for thee;
Not that we are to pray for afflictions; It Is disputed whether we may or no,
but we may not, because they are an evil, and so no fit object of our desires,
and in themselves they do no good unless sanctified, but if the Lord chastise
us we are to submit, and therefore when Jeremiah prays, Jer 10 21. Correct me
but not in thy wrath, It Is a concession or submission: Lord, if thou will
correct me, and it cannot be otherwise, then do it with much mercy and love; Do
not then make thy afflictions an argument of Gods withdrawing or leaving of
thee, but rather of love to thee; Christ loves his Disciples dearly, yet not so
as to keep them from dangers, he will let them be in the world, and put them to
hardship, only he will then take the more care of them: But the godly heart
does make this ordinary Objection.

It Is true in those troubles which are for Christ's cause, as the Apostles were,
It is no wonder if Christ take such special care of his, if he account all the
troubles and losses they have upon his score, if he say to them as Abiathar the
Priest, I was the occasion of all the Priests blood, therefore stay with me,
thou shall be as I am, and I as thou art, but my troubles and afflictions are
the fruit of my sin, It Is not for Christ's Name but want of love to Christ, it
is my dullness and lukewarmnesse that has brought anger upon me: To this
consider,

1. It cannot be denied but that there is a great difference between those
afflictions that are exploratory, which are to draw out the graces of the
godly, and to increase their glory which comforted one Martyr, who said, he
thanked God, though he had sins, yet it was not for his sins but his duties
they put him to death, and those which are castigatory for some sin
committed, yet even such are not to cast away all comfort, because though there
is not so much, yet there is great cause of joy even to such, if humbled and
sensible of sin under Gods hand, for

1. Though it be bitter because it is for sin, yet it is comfortable to feel thy
sin, and to repent of it; Oh then though thou mournest because thy sin has
brought this on thee, yet rejoice because thou have an heart to repent of it;
The true penitent de peccato dolet and de dolor gaudet; So that the
brokennesse and tenderness of heart is an evident testimony of thy ground to
rejoice.

2. Consider thy voluntary accepting of thy afflictions and judging thy self
for them, makes all thy afflictions to be a kind of Martyrdom: It Is required
we should accept of the punishment of our sin, Levit. 26.41. And 1 Cor. 11.
We are to judge our selves, 2 Cor. 7. The Corinthians repenting had a holy
revenge upon themselves; Now when we do thus kiss the Rod, and willingly
accept of this affliction, It Is a kind of Martyrdom, It is for Gods cause, and
out of love to him, that thou do with patience endure it.

3. Thou have the chiefest ground of comfort, which ever Christ's Sufferers
have, though not that particular they have; For the Martyrs did not rejoice in
their Sufferings as matter of merit, and as that which was equal to Eternal
Glory; No, They could not but find many Imperfections, even in those noble
undertakings, And therefore desired pardon even for their very dying for
Christ, that they had no such perfect faith and patience as they ought: It was
therefore Christ and his Sufferings administered them all their comforts, and
this thou may take though thy sins have caused thy afflictions.

Use of Instruction, what Treasures of comfort the Godly have, With what
triumph and joy they might live even in the greatest afflictions, if believing
this; But oh our leanness, our leanness, whence come all those dejections,
those outcries? I fear this and that may undo me, but because Faith does not
present Christ with his open arms ready to preserve them, well is believing
called Eating of Christ's flesh, and Drinking his blood, Joh. 6. For as a man
though he have never so much dainties, yet if he eat not, they do him no good,
so it is here, Though Christ have never so much love and pity toward thee, yet
if thou believe not this, it helps thee not.

Use 2. of woe to the wicked that are cast out of all his care, let the devil
tempt them, let sin overcome them, let hell devour them, yet Christ has not
taken them into his special favor.

SERMON LI. Of the great Danger of Gods Peoples being in the world, chiefly
from its tempting and seducing to Sin.
JOH. 17.11. But these are in the world.
OUR Saviors Argument (you heard) in the behalf of his Disciples was partly
from the state and condition of Christ, who was now leaveing of them, and
partly from the Apostles who were still to continue in the world as sheep
without a Shepherd, and that amongst Wolves: Therefore the danger they were in
is made an Argument why Christ's Prayer should be heard for them.

This troublesome and dangerous estate of the Apostles is described in these
words, But these are in the world,

Where Note, 1. The adversative particle. 2. The condition it self.


The adversative particle is expressed in (...), for whereas the Learned
observe, that that particle (...) is used three ways in Scripture.

1. Which is most common as conjunctive. 2. As adversative. 3. As
argumentative.
Here we see it used in all these respects in one Verse, And I am no more, etc.
But these are in the world, for I go to the Father, so (...) should be
translated here:

As for the Condition it self, To be in the world is no more then to have our
abode here amongst men, who by nature are all set against God and his ways,
and so daily conceiving and plotting mischief against the Kingdom of Christ; So
that to say They were in the world was to say, They were in the midst of the
Sea under the power of all winds and tempests, without any haven, wherein
every moment they might expect utter destruction.

Obs. That the godly man's life in this world is full of spiritual danger and
outward trouble; For To be in the world, these two things are implied, Doct.
The godly man's life is full of spiritual danger.
To be in a place of wickedness, where are daily temptations to sin, and in
a place of misery where are constant troubles and pressures, and indeed the
former is the greatest evil, though we fear the latter more, Therefore our
Savior prays v. 15. that the Father would keep them from the evil of the
world; They must be in the world, but let not the evil thereof infect them, it
being no less a miracle to be kept from the sins of the world while we live
in it, then for those three Worthies not to be burned while in the fiery
Furnace; The Apostle John excellently describes the foul contagion of the
world, 1 Ioh. 5.19. The whole world lies in wickedness, the whole world, None
are exempted till called out of it by Grace; All the humane Grecian power,
though so famous for wit and moral virtues is included herein, and then it
lies in wickedness, this denotes the habitual custom of sin, as also the
impotency even to help it self: It lies in wickedness, there is also their
contentedness and delight, as the Swine lies in her mud; And then in
wickedness (...) a troublesome wickedness, that makes trouble and vexation to
those that are not in the same excess of wickedness with them.

In the explaining of this concerning the danger of sin to a Godly man in
this world, it will appear how difficult it is to them to pass by these
Sirens, how hard it is to refuse every temptation that stands like Solomon's
Whore tempting every passenger to come in; How many had escaped those flames of
hell, and had been now partakers of the Robes of Glory, had not this world been
a Dalilah always enticing them; Not only the profane man but the professor
who seemed to give up his Name to Christ, even the world has undone him as
will appear, For

I. Of the contagion of sin in the world.
First Consider the infecting and contagious sinfulness in the world: How
hardly can we breathe and live, but we must suck in this pestilentiall air; As
those that live in an infected Pesthouse, or such as abide in a noisome
Hospital, they cannot but have the smell and the disease of the place, so to
live in this world which is wholly set on wickenesse, it is a wonder of wonders
if we smell not of it, savor not of it: Therefore pure Religion Jam. 1.27. is
said to keep a man unspotted from the world, Unspotted, that implies what a
noisome dunghill or fllthy infecting place the world is; Oh then with what care
and fear should the people of God walk in this world; Every hour, every day,
thou art in danger of getting some spots and defilements upon thee; Thou art
not in Heaven or Paradise, but in a place where the devil has his Throne* He
rules in this world, and therefore pray and watch, depend upon Christ, little
do thou think what mire thou may fall in, if the arm of grace support thee
not; Did not our Savior say to his very Disciples that they should take heed
of surfeiting and drunkenness, that their hearts should not be overcharged
with the cares of this world, Luke 21.34. Who would not have thought the
Disciples far enough from this sin, yet they must take heed; If the green
Tree may so easily take fire, what will not the dry do?

II. Of the temptations in the world by lawful comforts.
Secondly, As there is the world infecting, so there is the world tempting and
seducing even by lawful comforts; It infects by sin, it seduceth by lawful
good things, and herein is great danger to godly men, their Houses, Wives,
Children, their health, wealth, and whatsoever is a worldly good, These are apt
to ensnare and seduce our hearts, So that the love, care, and joy about these
things shuts out that love to God, 1 Cor. 7. The Apostle tells us, that those
who marry must be as if they married not, those that buy as if they bought not,
and those that use the world as not abusing it; So that there is using of this
world and abusing it; using it, when we make all these comfortable things we
enjoy instrumental to Gods glory and our good, but abusing it when we do use
them too much, So abuti the Latin word is used sometimes, when the Waters
overflow the Banks; But who can stand under this Truth? Who can endure this
glorious Light? Is not the world a tempting world though not an afflicting?
Thou do not communicate with the wickedness and gross impieties the world
lies in, but thy heart is overcharged and surfetted with affections to lawful
things, Thou over-lovest, over-grievest, Thy trade is a snare to thee, Thy
Wife, thy Children are snares to thee, they draw thee into this and that
immoderate affection; One of the Ancients saw in a Vision, that the world was
full of Snares, Thus indeed it is, Thou can not be at home or abroad, Thou
can not be in this or that condition but there is a Snare; Even as the Bird
cannot light upon the ground but the Fowler has set a snare for her every
where; Oh then how well is it that not only we pray but Christ has prayed to
keep us from the evil of all these things; To have riches and sin not, To
have health and sin not, To have mercies and offend not; Know then that Egypt
was not fuller of Frogs and Lice in every chamber, in every hole, then the
world is of Temptation to sin: There is no mercy, no relation, no condition,
but it will draw out a world of sin, if thou watch not, every Creature is a
kind of a devil, Christ warrants that expression when he said to Peter, Get
thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16.23. When he tempted him from his duty; Thou have
cause sometimes to say to the best comfort thou have in the world, Get thee
behind me Satan, Thou savourest not the things of God.

Thirdly, III. He is in danger from the deceitfulness of all things in the
world.
A godly man's danger arises from the deceitfulness of the world with the
things thereof: Thus Mat 13. it is called the deceivablenesse of Riches: And 1
Cor. 7. the world is said to have a fashion, That as in the stage there are
pleasing gestures and representations, but they pass away immediately, and you
think you see Kings and Queens, but there is no such matter; Thus it is with
the world it promises thee peace, joy, comfort; Oh if thou have it thou art
ready to think thy self made, but it proves a Sodoms apple, Ezechiels Roll,
sweet in the mouth but bitter in the belly; Now because it has such a present
sweetness to allure, whereas grace is for the present rather bitter, therefore
are the godly in so great danger; There are sweet baits every where but
dangerous hooks; Judas thought his thirty pieces a sweet morsel, but it proved
wormwood and gall when it was devoured; Achan thought the wedge of Gold a sweet
bit, and Gehezi Naamans Talents, but alas it was gall though it had the color
of honey, so that it is very much, if the godly man escape undoing himself,
Seeing there is so much deceivablenesse every where; that which is real misery
seems a desirable good; That which is full of bitterness yet appears, as if
altogether good, So true is that, Per fallacia mala itur and vera bona per
fallacia bona itur and vera mala, By seeming evils we come to real good, and
by seeing God to real evil.

Fourthly, The Godly man is in danger because of the sutablenesse of the worlds
temptation with that corruption within; IV. From the sutablenesse of the worlds
temptation to that corruption within.
So that he has a dangerous Enemy about the Walls, and a treacherous party
within; The world and his heart are in a Confederacy against the good of his
soul, so that thou can not eat or drink, or sleep in safety because of the
adversary without, and the Traitor within; If thou had Argus his eyes they
would be too little to look about thee in this matter, for an Angel who is free
from any inward filth to be sent into this world, and to be here doing the will
of God, it is no danger, there is no fear that an Angel should sin, because
though the world should tempt in all the allurements of it, yet there is
nothing within to receive those sparks, but now man carries about with him
prepared matter of sin, he has a body and law of sin within him, and
therefore the world does no sooner knock at the door but this root of sin
betraieth all, sets open all, insomuch that the godly man is hardly saved,
because there are so many Spies laid in wait to damn thy soul, as there were to
kill; Now the Apostle John, 1 John 2.16. when he had exhorted not to love the
world or things in the world; He does divide all the things of the world into
three heads, and who is there that lives in the world that is not in danger of
being ensnared and overtaken by one of these.

1. There is the lust of the flesh, that is, all those things that draw out the
pleasure and delights of a man immoderately; Thus the young man he finds the
Word a very whirlpool; Beware of too much pleasure as eating of too much honey,
it will quickly turn to a Surfer.

2. There is the lust of the eyes, Expositors say this is Covetousness, for so
aceording to the Scripture an earthly heart is described, because whatsoever
profitable thing it sees, it is ready to desire it; Another man's land, another
man's house another man's goods, so that the eye like hell is never satisfied,
and thus the world is a dangerous Whirlpool to the old man, who as in his body
he is every day growing nearer to the earth, so his soul also grows more
earthly, desiring it most of all when he shall have the least need of it

3. There is the pride of life, and that is all those things that draw out
ambition, pride, and desire of great things in this world; To have power,
greatness, and preheminency above others, this is the middle age sin, so
that the Apostle does lay down three main capital Springs of all the evil in
the world, and makes them like three predicaments, to which all other things
may be reduced: Now do but consider what a Sympathy and fitness there is
between these Objects and man's corrupt heart, and it must needs be that every
man will inevitably sink in these Waters unless Grace do keep him up.

V. Because of the clogging disposition all things in the world work in erspect
of heavenly things.
Fifthly, A godly man's danger in this world to sin, is because of the clogging
and dulling disposition all things in the world work in respect of heavenly
things: The earth is the most heavy Element, and therefore a stone the product
thereof falls down speediy; Thus men of the world they are the most senseless,
heavy and stupid men about heavenly things that are; They incline with all
might to these things below: This is the reason why the Scripture so often
says, a man cannot serve God and the world, Friendship of the one is Enmity to
the other; As a stone cannot ascend upwards, Jam. 44. So that though a godly
man be never so powerful in grace, yet the world does cool him, dull him, and
indispose him: It causes dust in his eyes, and lead in his heart, To pray, to
hear with worldly thoughts is to swim with a Millstone about a man's neck; Hence
Mat. 13. the cares of this world are said to choke the Corn that came up so
hopefully: As the Lark does not sing sweetly till she is got aloof from the
earth toward the heavens, so neither can the soul full of earthly and worldly
thoughts, May not then the godly cry out, O Lord I would fain meditate with
delight on thee but this world will not let me: I would gladly serve thee
without dullness and distraction, but this world will not let me; Oh that while
we are in our callings, in our worldly businesses, we would think of what
danger we were in: Korah and Dathan were swallowed up in the Earth bodily, take
heed thy soul be not spiritually that is a more grievous judgment.

VI. In respect of the discouragements the world puts upon godly men.
Sixthly, A godly man's danger i^ in respect of the discouragements and
disheartenings the world puts upon godliness, that is, man must be endowed
with great might from above, that can despise all the reproaches and shame the
Word of God meets with; Therefore a great encouragement is put upon the
Confession of Christ before a crooked and wicked generation. Mat. 10.35. To be
godly in the world, To own the strict and powerful ways of God in the world is
to laugh amongst Lions, to dance among Serpents, to contemn all dangers; The
Scripture tells us often that the world cannot but hate the Disciples of Christ,
for they are as Light and Darkness together; Now then where there is
continual opposition for thee to be steadfast is a great matter: Oh how many
have suffered shipwreck because of the shame and reproach of the world; In
mundo nihil nostra refert nisi ut quam primum de oe exeamus: Now these
discouragers in Heavens way are not only the profane and wicked sort of men,
but many times their dearest Friends, their Parents, their Husbands, their
Wives: What will you be wiser then others? Will not you do as most do? Will
you be a byword where you live? Thus there is no time when Christ is to be
born as it were, but there is some Herod or other to kill him: Insomuch that
many Children had been saved but that their worldly Parents h^ndred them; Many
Wives, but their worldly Husbands like Pharaoh to the Israelites, would not let
them go out of Egypt to serve God; This made our Savior say, He that loves
Father or Mother more then me is not worthy of me, Matt. 10.37. This made him
say, That he came to set Father against Son, and Mother against Daughter, and
to make those of his own Household a man's Enemies, verse. 36. Because where
Christ is obeyed there will be greater opposition to the contrary: Oh then
Consider, the Word of God convinces, the Ministry urges, Conscience presses,
but I have this or that worldly Friend, and he dasheth all, But if thy worldly
Friends cannot hinder thee in the main for Godliness, yet they hinder thee in
the degree and fervency of it; Thou art not so forward, so active as thou
should be; This is to endanger thy Salvation, for the lukewarm God will spue
out of his mouth, Revel. 3.16. Oh take heed of saying, I dare not be more
forward, I shall displease my Parents in doing thus, thou caust not please God
at all; If thou will be Godly, be Godly as God, and his Word would have thee,
Do not be stinted by carnal, worldly Friends: How many think they can never
have Wealth and Riches enough, yet think they may quickly have too much of
Godliness, and that this strictness will mar all, Sed modus diligendi Deum
est sine modo.

Seventhly, A Godly man's Danger in this world is because the worldly Snares
that are be improved to the utmost by the Devil, 7. Because the worldly snares
are improved to the utmost by the devil.
whose the world is, and in which he reigns, 2 Corinthians. 4.4. He is called the
God of this world that blinds the eyes of men: And he is said to have men
captive in his Snares, 2 Timoth. 2.22. So that though God made the world, and
it is his good Creature, yet as it is a wicked world, as it is immundus mundus;
So i^'s the Devils Seat, and so some expound the (...), the whole world lies
in wickedness, and in danger to be the Devils; If there were mere snares and
baits to sin, it would not be so dangerous, but when they are Snares of the
Devils setting, Baits of his making that is so cunning and subtle a Serpent,
sliding into a man's heart every way; This makes the case more desperate: You
see the Devil could tempt Eve to sin when there was no Corruption or Lust
within, though she was pure and upright, how much rather when he has to do
with men corrupted and depraved inwardly; This is so great a matter that Ephesians.
6.5. it is said, We wrestle not with Flesh and Blood but with Principalities
and Powers in High places; As if the Temptations of the world were nothing to
those of Satan; And therefore he is called the Tempter, 1 Thessal. 3.5. Oh then
the danger of a Godly man* the world tempts, his own flesh tempts, the Devils
tempt; May not this make every one in this world to look upon himself as Jonah
in the Whales Belly, To cry out as zealously and as fervently to be delivered
as he did.

Lastly, 8. A godly man's danger appears by the Examples of Scripture.
The Danger of a Godly man's being in this world appears by Examples recorded
in Scripture; Those who have seemed to be putting one Leg into Heaven, have yet
been pulled back by the world; When men had escaped the gross pollutions of
the world, yet the cares and love of the world did wholly undo them: The third
kind of Hearers that began so hopefully did miscarry because of the world;
Judas that wrought Miracles, and could say with the rest, That he had left all
to follow Christ, was undone by the world; If you ask Paul what made his dear
Demas that had been so long his Companion in the Gospel to forsake him, and to
leave him, the reason was because he did cleave to this present world, 2 Timothy
4.10.

Use of Instruction, why there are so many duties to pray, to watch, to be
working out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling; Why is all this? We are
still in an evil World, Every Day, Every moment we may undo our selves; We are
not out of Egypt yet in Canaan, We cannot see all our Enemies drowned in the
Red Sea: Alas! It is not thy Prayer, thy Fasting, had not Christ prayed could
keep thee from the evil of the World; Thou could no more live the Life of
Grace in this wicked world then they say Birds can live near the Lake
Asphaltites, that by its Sulphurous Smell kills them while they fly over it:
Do not think to say all the Jebusites and Wild Beasts are destroyed, I may
now bid my Soul take its ease: Oh let the fearful Falls of so many Godly in the
Scripture be Pillars of Salt to thee who knows ere thou go out of this
World what a Judas thou may prove, what an Hell thou may make thy self,
For though the Godly are kept by Gods power that they shall persevere, yet they
may get many Falls, tumble in the mire, seem the Devils Swine rather then
Christ's Sheep for a while, and all is because they do not labor to keep their
Garments lest their nakedness appear, They meet with searching Tempests
therefore let them keep their garments close to them.

SERMON LII. Of the Danger Gods People are in in the world, in respect of its
hating and opposing of them; With Reasons why the Lord makes the world such a
disquieting place, Such a Valley of Tears unto his own People.
JOH. 17.11. But these are in the world.
THe Condition of the Disciples described by this, that they are said to be in
the world, makes them the fit Object of Christ's Prayer and Petition, such are
the Snares to sin and the outward troubles opposing, that were it not for
this Prayer of Christ still putting forth its efficacy; None could arrive safe
to the Haven.

We have handled the danger of being in this world, as it is tempting and
seducing to sin.

Now let us consider it as it is an hating and opposing world of those that
fear God, as it is an Egypt; Before we handled it as it was a Sodom; We
considered the honey of it, now the sting; The world fawning, now the world
fighting; As it was a glistering Serpent, now as a roaring Lion; So that the
Subject we intend to pursue is, That the Godly are in this world as Daniel
thrown amongst Lions, as Sheep among Wolves; As the Disciples in the Ship, that
were tossed up and down ready to sink every moment; This is so sore a
Temptation that our Savior does often forewarn them of it, that they may be
forearmed, Joh. 15.18, 19. There he foretells their Portion to be hated of the
world: Hatred is the highest degree of a man's enmity, it is circa speciem, not
individua; It Is not enough to destroy one Disciple, one Godly man, The worlds
great enmity against those that are godly.
but they would raze the whole kind out of the Earth; Expect no mercy from any
wicked man, he hates thee; and did not God restrain him, he would utterly
undo thee; That every godly man is not devoured by the wicked is as great a
Miracle as that the waters should stand still and not overflow the Israelites;
It Is not for want of malice and a will, only God who chained up the devil their
Master, that he could not hurt Job any further then he was permitted, does also
confine his Children and Instruments; Our Savior gives the reason why they
will hate them, for it might seem strange why the Godly should be so opposed,
they wrong none, they defraud none, they injure none; Oh but says our Savior,
You are none of the worlds, you are not of them; Would you drink, swear, run
into the same excess as they do, then it would love you and embrace you,
Likewise Joh. 16.33. Our Savior tells them again of this trouble from the
world: And why again? Because it is a very heavy burden to bear; To live among
Neighbors as among so many Serpents and Scorpions, among unreasonable men, as
Paul calls them, and he prays to God to be delivered from them, 2 These. 3.2.
Unreasonable men, that are carried by no Religion, no Conscience, no reason,
but their lusts and passions, Men that will hate you, because they will hate
you, absurd men as it is in the Greek: You see Paul was afraid to fall into the
hands of such men, and David in many Psalms complains of this more then any
thing; That there were men who had teeth like Lions, and a tongue like a sharp
Razor, So true is that, Homo homini Lupus, and homo homini Demon; Because
therefore this is such a strong Tempest ready to shake the tallest Cedar, Our
Savior again and again bids them expect it, for it is a great-quieting of the
heart to be able to say, This is no more then I looked for, I thank God I am
one that the world hates, I should suspect my self if wicked men loved me, our
Savior therefore tells them, they shall have trouble (...), that is, such
trouble as squeezes and oppresses, tribulation, a word that comes from a
Thorn or Thistle that pricketh, or else from the Flail that beats out the
Corn; This you must look for, but then mark the cordial, Be of good comfort I
have overcome the world, You are sure of Victory before you begin to fight^

The several ways whereby a godly man falls into trouble in this world.
To Consider this more exactly Let us take notice of the several ways whereby a
Godly man falls into trouble in this world, and it arises from many Springs.

1. Seeing that the most holy and godly that are have many imperfections and
diverse sins, therefore God he brings many troubles on them; God in the first
place he troubles them, 1. Because of their many sins God brings many
troubles on them.
though his troublings be like the troubling of the Pool, it is in mercy, and
that healing might be vouchsafed; Thus God troubled David, and made him
encounter with grievous calamities because of sin; Thus whom God loves he
chasteneth, Heb. 12.6. This is Gods judging of us that we might not be
condemned with the world; And certainly it is this that so deeply wounds the
Godly, that wicked men's tongues are but Gods Instruments of his displeasure, as
David when Shimei railed on him, The Lord has bid him, says he, 2 Samuel 13.

But besides those troubles which come mediately from God by Instruments there
are immediate exercises which are more difficultly born then any outward
troubles; Thus God troubled Job, when he complained, The arrows of the Almighty
stuck fast in him, Job 6.4. Thus David often complains, God does hide his
face from him, and he was troubled; These are temptations the carnal man is
ignorant of, he was never in these deeps where there is no trouble like this;
If it were Plague, Famine Diseases, the Soul could bear them, but a wounded
Spirit who can bear, Prove. 28.14. So that herein the world is a place of
trouble and misery, that God many times exercises his own people for their
sins, leaves them in darkness, yea, in an hell, that they are weary abroad
and weary at home; Whereas when once arrived in heaven, there shall be no more
night but bright day always.

2. From Satan.
2. The trouble of Gods people in this world arises from Satan; He is their
professed Enemy, and so creates them all the misery he can, that because he
cannot torment them in hell he will do what he can in this world; Thus Peter
compares him to a Roaring Lion, 2 Pet. 5.8. How can a man but be troubled to
be in the danger of many Legions of these unclean Spirits, Ephesians. 6. We are said
to wrestle with these Principalities and Powers in darkness; This our Savior
meant in part when he told Peter, Luke 22.13. That Satan had desired to sift
them as Wheat; In sifting there is a commotion and a great agitation; Thus the
devil intended not the separating of the Chaff from the Wheat, but to trouble
and to confound them, that so they might the easier sin; Was not Paul
exceedingly troubled when 2 Cor. 12. he complains of the bufferinge of Satan,
against which he prayed often, so that there is scarce any godly man but the
devil does immediately cause trouble in his Soul by sad temptations, heavy
suggestions, he comes and takes the good Seed away as soon as it is sown, his
Temptations are like so many Egyptian Frogs, always croaking and troubling the
Believer that he cannot pray, cannot believe in a promise, cannot walk in faith
and peace as he ought to do, The devil makes it a troublesome world.

3. The godly man's trouble arises from the wicked and profane in the world,
3. Their trouble arises from the wicked and profane in the world.
And this is the proper meaning of the Text, This is the world that hates
them, viz. the ungodly and wicked men, which are the greatest part in the
world; This therefore the godly must make account of, Think it no strange thing
to have wicked men malice thee, deride and trouble thee; David though a King
yet Drunkards would make Songs of him, Psa. 69.11. Christ though never any
walked so holily and unblameably as he did, yet they slandered him and said, He
had ^n Devil; Mat. 12. The whole Nation cried, Crucify him, Crucify him, and
they would have Barrabas a Murderer spared before him; Now our Savior tells us,
that the Servant must not expect to be above his Master, Joh. 13 16 If they
abused, derided, and reproached Christ, thinking he was not worthy to live;
Do thou think to escape? Did ever any Wolf or Lion love the Sheep? Can the
Serpent but have enmity to a man? Will not Cain kill Abel? Ishmael persecute
Isaac? No, darkness cannot agree with light, nor Christ with Belial, The
Sheeps blood is sweetest, and they find a kind of sweetness in their scofts
and malicious plots against thee; Let the godly then not give place to any
discouragement for a moment, Let the world rage, revile, oppose, thus must thou
enter into Glory; Wicked men's tongues are like those Dogs tongues that licked
Lazarus whole; Their reproaches, their malicious words will help to make thee
more Godly, and make thee walk so watchfully that thou may put them to shame
which thus speak evil and disgracefully of thee.

4. The Godly man's trouble in this world arises not only from professed wicked
men and open enemies, 4. And sometimes from the godly themselves.
but many times even from those who really or apparently look toward the same
Heaven with them: And this is the worst trouble that can come from men, Some
are only Friends in show, and it is no wonder if they at last appear without
their vizor; David makes sad complaint of his familiar friend, with whom he
took sweet counsel, that this man should rise against him, Psa. 41.9. and Paul
also complains of the peril he was in by false Brethren, 1 Cor. 11.26. So
that this is no new thing even for those who profess the same Christian way,
and that in a most intimate manner, yet to become Enemies and Adversaries to
those that truly fear God, was not Christ betrayed by Judas one of his own
Company, that had left all, to become his Disciple, yea, not only from apparent
and seeming Friends, but even from those who do truly look toward Heaven, yet
there is many times great trouble created by them: Was there not a Paroxysme
between Paul and Barnabas? Did not the Corinthians go to Law and wrong one
another? Does not the Apostle James tell them of their envyings and their
devourings of one another, Iam. 13.16. Why does our Savior above all things
pray in this Chapter for the Disciples Unity, That they might be one, but
because of the pronenesse that is even in Gods Children, to fall out with one
another, as Jacobs Children did; Hence we see Believer against Believer,
Christian against Christian, pursuing one another even to death; It was
Cyprians Complaint of old, Madet orbis Christianus mutuo sanguine, and quod cum
privati fecerint homicidium dicitur, eum public geritur virtus vocatur: Oh
what a sad thing is it not to see Sheep and Wolf, but Sheep and Sheep devouring
one another; Does not experience convince of this? Are not many godly men's
Enemies of the same house, of the same Religion, of the same Christian Faith
with him? Oh this is hard to bear, if it were a profane and wicked Instrument
of the devil, I could bear it, but it is such an one with whom I have prayed
often, humbled my self often; They acknowledge the same principles of
godliness, the same experiences upon their souls, yet are like Lions.

5. No condition and relation free from trouble.
5. God has made the world a troublesome world in all Conditions, in all
Relations, so that none can find this place any other then a Valley of Tears;
The Apostle 1 Cor. 7. shows the condition of Married Persons, that they shall
have trouble in the Flesh; The Married Condition has it is trouble, the single
has its Trouble: There is trouble in Husbands, Wives, Children, in all
Callings, The Husbandmans, The Citizens, God will not let us have a Paradise in
this world, lest we do as the Reubenites that desired to sit down in a Country
fruitful for Cattle, and cared not to enter into Canaan; It was Basils Opinion
that the Earth before Man's Fall brought forth no Thorns or Thistles, and that
the Rose did grow without pricks; But here is no such Blessedness now; Out of
the same Fountain comes bitter and sweet, From the same Root grow Figs and
Thistles, Grapes and Thorns: There is no Mercy or outward Comfort but has its
Insufficiency, and there are as many drops of Gall as there are of Honey; Which
made Job say, That man who is born of a Woman is full of Trouble, even as the
Sparks fly upward, Job 14. It Is as natural as for the fire to ascend, so that
as it would be a miraculous and wonderful thing to see the Fire descend
downward, no less would it be to see a man without some Trouble or other: We
read of one Polycrates that never had any Adversity in his Life time, and he
endeavored to put himself upon some Loss, but could not, for once he threw a
Ring of a vast price into the Sea, intending to lose it, yet afterward it was
found in a Fishes Belly, and he had it again; But though he had no trouble for
a long season, yet at last he was taken by an Enemy and put to Death with most
exquisite torments; Though wicked men have the good things of this life, yet
these good things are not merely and universally good; They have a Sting as
well as Honey; They have Trouble as well as Comfort: The Godliest men have
acknowledged that their days have been few and evil in this world: Oh then
expect not a Summer always in this world; God has subjected all these created
Comforts to changes after a Glorious day to have a dark Night; Thou shall have
this Condition, this Relation, this Comfort thou desire, but thou shall also
have the burden, and the trouble of it which thou do not desire, Onus
transit cum honor.

6. A man's trouble arises from himself.
Lastly, A man's Trouble does arise from his own self; If there were no devil, no
wicked men to trouble, yet such is the Unbelief and the Discontents that are
apt to rise in a Godly man, that he would be a Trouble, an Enemy, yea, a Devil
to himself: Does not David often speak of the frettings and heating that his
heart was in, and who put him into it: What made his Soul like a Foaming Sea?
Was it not his own diffidence, his own froward heart; Austin cried once, Libera
me Domine, a meipso tanquam maximo host, which holds true, not only in a
sinful way but in a troubling way: Oh how many times does a Christian raise up
his own Fears, his own Jealousies, and his own Doubts; So that as the Linen
breeds the Moth that corrupts and destroys it, as the Tree the worm that
eats it; Thus from a man's own heart arise such troublesome Thoughts, and Cares,
and Fears, that he may be called a Mager Missabib, Fear round about him: We see
then in how many particulars God is pleased to make this World a troublesome
Place to us while we live and continue in it, and also a very dangerous place;
That we should as much fear to be in it as in Sodom, when Fire and Brimstone
was ready to fall down from Heaven to consume it,

Let us in the next place Consider the Grounds and Reasons Why the world is
thus made by God a disquieting and troublesome place to the Godly; That they
are but as Pilgrims and Strangers in it, and therefore are little esteemed by
it.

That our Hearts may not be immoderately and inordinately cleaving to this
world; We see there are many strict Commands against the Love of it: Now if we
are so ready to love it though so troublesome, what if it were nothing but
content; If (says Austin) though it be Mundus amarus a bitter world thou
love to eat and to feed of it, what if it were dulcis a sweet world; If it be
Mundus periturus a perishing world, and thou art so doting upon it, what if it
were Eternus everlasting: If we can handle it with delight though full of
pricks, what if smooth and plain; Certainly every Godly man should wean himself
from these Breasts, Seeing God has rubbed them with so much bitterness and
affliction; When therefore thou meetest with Crosses, with Troubles, with the
Deceitfulness and Inconstancy of worldly Comforts, say, This is to instruct
and teach me, that I am not to expect an Heaven here; The world is an Enemy
thou must not love it, though commanded to love our Enemies: Here may be an
over-loving an over-desiring: Here the Rule is much more true then in Physics,
Appetitus non est Regula Concoctionis, Thou must hunger after these Earthly
things no more then thou can concoct or improve for Gods Glory and thy own
particular good; And let the Godly know, Their greatest danger lies in these
inordinate Affections more then in gross sins; These Cares will grow up with
Duties when open profaneness makes a man wholly to despise them.

The Lord makes the world thus full of Enmity to us that we might remember what
our Condition is, that we are but Pilgrims and Strangers, and therefore are not
to settle our abode here, Heb. 11. They that say such things declare they look
for a better City: Oh how apt are we to make the world our home; To desire we
might abide here always, To think of no other Happiness or Blessedness but
what is in the Creatures, but God by the Troubles therein does convince us,
that there must be a better Condition then this; We have no abiding place in
this world, we are here to day, to morrow we may be gone, and therefore we
should be Diligent in Watching and Praying, and preparing for our Masters
Coming: Oh what a Bridle would it be to our carnal Affections to remember we
are but Sojourners and Strangers here: To look upon thy Estate and Inheritance
no otherwise then a Traveller does upon the Goods in an Inn.

That we might not symbolize with it or contract any of the guilt and pollution
of it upon our Souls: It is a Mercy that Wicked men are Scorpions and Serpents,
That they are Wolves and Lions, hereby thou art chased and affrighted from
their Company and Society; whereas if they were loving and pleasing thou
would be often with them, and so sit in the Chair of the Scorner, and come
into the Assemblies of wicked men: Is it not a Mercy to be kept from a
Pesthouse, or a Place where Infectious Diseases are; Thus God has put such an
Enmity and Contrariety between the Godly and the Wicked: There is such a great
Gulf and vast distance that Solomon says, The wicked is an abomination to the
Righteous, and the Righteous to the wicked, Prove. 29.27. The Godly man can no
more endure the wicked man's ways then the Wicked can abide a Godly man's ways;
Therefore bless and praise God for this Enmity and opposition, and make good
and profitable use of it.

That Heaven and the Enjoyment of him to all Eternity may be more prized and
better esteemed by us; We must with Lot even be violently pulled out of this
Sodom; Oh our sinful and our unworthy Hearts, that we should so delight to
be tossed and hurried up and down in the Ocean, and be afraid to come to the
Haven; That Death should be so unwelcome when it is the Passage to
incomprehensible and immortal Glory; What have not all thy Pains, Afflictions,
and Grievances yet made thee long and thirst for Heaven? Do thou not think,
Here I am sighing, crying, diseased, distressed, when the Glorious Saints in
Heaven are rejoicing.

Use of Instruction To the people of God, Not to be dejected, but rather to be
exceeding glad, as our Savior commands, when the wicked world opposes them
for their Godliness and Uprightness; For mark our Saviors Expression herein,
Matthew. 5.20. It must be for Christ's Sake, and Righteousness Sake, not for any
wickedness or ungodliness of thy own: Do not take the just reward of thy
sins to be the glorious Consequents of holiness, But if it be because thou
fear God, thou ownest God and his way, thou stand up for his Truth and
Godliness, then leap and dance for Joy that God has put so much honor upon
thee; Say with David, I will be more vile still, The Stars are never the
less glorious though they have given them ugly Names, of the Bear, and the
like: So neither are the godly less Glorious though the world labors to
besmear them with dirt, a Jewel is a Jewel though soiled with dirt.

SERMON LIII. The Exaltation of Christ improved for the joy of of all Believers.
JOH. 17.11. And I come to thee.
THis is the Third distinct Argument in this Verse which Christ uses in his
Petition for his Disciples; Some indeed take it Exegeticall or Declarative of
what he meant by saying He was no more in this world; But others take the
Particle (...) ratiocinatively, as a Reason why he is no more to be in the
world, because he is going to the Father.

This Argument implies then that Christ by going out of the world does not
cease to be, but that he goes to the Father, and there will be a potent
Favorite in the Court of heaven for them; Christ then speaking here of his
Local Motion, we may in this as in all such Motions Consider,

1. The term from which, that is the world, which is not to be understood as if
he did depose and lay down his humane Nature, or that he was not still present
in an efficacious invisible manner, but in respect of a bodily presence; This
place confutes Popish Transubstantiation, and the Lutheran Vbiquity of Christ's
Body.

2. There is the term to which, to thee.

3. The Via per quam, the way by which, and that is implied by his Death and
Sufferings: In the Greek it is (...), in other places it is (...), and once
that is used absolutely, The Son of man goes, etc. Mat. 26.24. That is he
dies, here there is contained much comfort to his Disciples, that neither
Christ's Enemies or Death did overcome him, but by Death he goes to his Father,
and that for the great benefit and advantage of all true Believers.

Obs. That Christ by Death went to his Father; Doct. Christ by Death went to
the Father.
Here is much practical Divinity in this Point; We see our Savior again and
again instructed his Disciples about his; He knew how much his Sufferings and
Death would amaze them and shake their Faith, he knew what a false principle
they were possessed with, viz, that he would erect a temporal Glorious
Kingdom; Therefore that they might not be undone by these thoughts, he tells
them often both of his death, and whither by that he was to go, Ioh. 14.3. Our
Savior comforts their troubled hearts with this, that he was going to the
Father, and that not merely for his own glory and honor, but also for their
good; Even as Joseph was advanced in Pharaohs Court as well for the good of his
Father and his brethren as for his own glory, and by the way observe that our
Savior tells them, That they knew whither he went and the way, yet Thomas in
the name of the rest says, Lord, we know not whither thou go: Now you may
ask, Either Christ who is Truth it self spoke not right, or Thomas, The answer
is, Both spoke right, for the Disciples knew in the general and confusedly but
not distinctly or particularly, or they knew it habitually, but in time of
temptation they did not put this knowledge forth; By this we see the Godly may
have that grace and that faith in them, which yet they think is not there.

All these particulars are involved or implied in the Point.
To open this Doctrine let us consider the several particulars that are enclosed
in it.

That it was appointed by God, that the way whereby Christ should from this
state of humiliation come to glory with him, should be the way of ignominy,
reproach, and death; It behoved the Son of man to suffer, and so enter into
glory, Luke 24.46. It must be so else the Justice of God could not be
satisfied, else man's Redemption could not be obtained; This our Savior
implies, I come to thee, but how, Even as the Israelites to Canaan, through a
Sea of blood; That then which our Savior quickly spoke, was with great pain
and agony undergone; I come to thee through fire and blood, The Father does
this to demonstrate the bloody nature of sin, the unspeakable love of Christ,
and the order God has appointed for all believers ere they come to glory, 1.
the bloody nature of sin, for it was this and nothing else that put Christ to
be a Sacrifice for us, had not Adam and we in him all apostatized from God;
There had been no need of his death, but now by this transgression, and ours
superadded, without the shedding of his blood, there could be no remission of
sin; Yet oh the profaneness and blindness of the world, what a little
matter do they make of sin, how easily do they think a pardon may be had for
it; Oh remember the least vain thought or idle word cannot in this world or in
the world to come be expiated but by Christ's blood only, had there been no
other sin in the world but a vain thought, Christ must have undergone all
that wrath of God and man ere it could be blotted out; Oh think of this you who
like Leviathan laugh at the Spear, and sport your selves with those sins,
which put Christ to all that Agony: Lastly, This shows the order God has
appointed we must first be on Mount Calvary before we can be on the Mount of
Transfiguration; As Christ had first a Crown of Thorns here, before he had a
Crown of glory, so it must be with us, Romans 8. We shall be glorified with him
if we suffer with him, Let this then sweeten all thy afflictions and miseries,
Though the beginnings of God with thee, like those of Joseph to his brethren,
are harsh and rough, yet the endings will be full of sweetness and comfort; If
thou grudest at thy Tribulations say, this is to grudge at the Crown of Glory,
This is to repine at the way to everlasting happiness.

he goes to his Father, herein is implied, that state of glory and honor he
shall have in heaven, as if he had said, I shall be no more in the state and
habit of a Servant, no more in a despised and contemned condition, but I am
going to receive that Majesty and glory which is due unto me; Although we told
you Christ ascended into Heaven for our good, and to plead our cause, yet it
was also for his glory and honor; This our Savior excellently presses, Joh.
14.28 If ye loved me, ye would rejoice because I go to my Father; The Disciples
were troubled and full of fears because they were to lose his corporal
presence, but (says our Savior,) true love to me would make you do otherwise,
you would regard my honor more then your benefit; It is for your good that I
abide with you; It is for my glory that I go to the Father; Now love that is
unfeigned lies in our affections to another, not because of the good we have
by him, but for his own good; Thus the Disciples they were to rejoice because
Christ was to be honored and exalted, though they should lose the comfort of
his presence; See here then who are they that do spiritually love Christ, even
such as rejoice in that he is exalted and glorified, though it be to their
ruin and undoing; O Lord, Let me have this comfort and that comfort no longer,
if Christ may be more honored; As Mephibosheth said, Let Ziba take all, so
that King David was returned safe, so that the honor and kingdom of Christ may
be promoted, let good Name, wealth, and life it self go, unless we be the true
genuine Sons of God, we are never able to abide this touchstone; Do not the
most holy depend on Christ more for the benefit they receive by him then to
honor and glorify him; Hence they bemoan their want of assurance and evidence
which is their comfort more then recumbency on Christ, which is his glory; So
then in that Christ went to his Father it is implied, that now there was a
period to be put to all sufferings: Now he was no more to be like a Servant but
to be made the Prince of Glory, Therefore observe the reason why he goes to
the Father, because the Father is greater then he; Not as the Arians would have
it essentially, but in outward dispensation, because Christ here was in the
fashion and form of the meanest and most despised of men.

yet we must know also that in this is the whole Treasury of a Christian; The
Fountain of all our Comfort is in this, that Christ is gone to the Father;
Therefore let the believer diligently improve it, for the effects are admirable
of this his departure.

Hereby his holy Spirit is given in, the more plentifully and abundantly; The
benefits of Christ's aseension and exaltation.
It is said, The holy Ghost was not yet given, because Christ was not yet
glorified, Joh. 7.39. The large administration of the gifts of Gods Spirit were
reserved till Christ in triumph went up to heaven, Ioh. 16.7. If I depart I
will send him to you, You see the sending of the holy Ghost depends upon
Christ's departure; The Spirit comes to make a spiritual supply of Christ's
bodily presence; There cannot be two Suns together in the Firmament, O then let
all those who have Gods Spirit dwelling in them, enlightening, sanctifying, and
comforting of them, acknowledge this, the blessed fruit of Christ's going to his
Father, but men are so profane and sensual, that they know not what the
Spirits working upon the Soul is, no more then a beast knows the operations
of a rational Soul.

the enabling of us with all holy and heavenly gifts, either in a sanctifying
way or a ministerial; Thus; Ephesians. 4. Christ when he ascended into heaven gave
gifts to men, That you have a Ministry and Ordinances with the spiritual
effects thereof, it is wholly from this Yea Ioh. 14 12. all miraculous Gifts do
descend from this, Our Savior there says, That he who believes on him shall
do greater works then he does, that is, as some say, greater Miracles in
themselves, for we read that by Peter's handkerchief and his very shadow
wonderful things were done, which we read not of Christ, or greater in
quantity and extension; They did them in more places, For whereas Christ
wrought no Miracles at Jerusalem, the Apostles did, or greater (as others say)
in regard of the success, because far more were converted to the faith by
the Apostles preaching then by Christ's; Well, let this be how it will, Consider
the ground why they shall be enabled to do these great things, because (says
Christ) I go to the Father; So that this departure to the Father is the cause
of all those dona sanctificantia and ministrantia in the Church: Thy Faith, thy
Repentance, thy Love of God and delight in holy things is because of this truth.

to prepare a place for his Children; Indeed heaven was prepared for them from
Eternity, yet Christ Joh. 14.3. says He goes to prepare a place for them in
an allusive sense; It Is therefore for our infinite Consolation that Christ is
gone to the Father, for there he prepares places of glory for us, and mark the
word v. 2. In my Fathers house are many mansions, (...), that is spoken in
opposition to ours here, where we are but Pilgrims and strangers; In the earth
we have only Tabernacles, in heaven there are mansion places; They continue
there to all Eternity, and further he says, many Mansion places; That they
might not think there is not room enough, and withal it denotes the readiness
of Christ to entertain us, as Rebeccah when she invited the strangers said, We
have straw and Provender, and there is room enough; So that Christ is gone to
heaven to see that Thrones of glory he provided for his people; Oh the Godly
man dying, if in his temptations, is ready to think, O my Soul whether art thou
going? What will become of thee? where will thou lodge this night? To this
Faith should answer, Christ has prepared a place, he has provided a Rest, and
a dewlling place, and though thy Soul cannot be always in thy body, nor thy
body always in these houses we dwell in, yet there is a mansion-place, from
which we shall never be removed.

Christ goes to his Father, to be an Advocate and plead our cause, 1 John 2.
Heb. 7. He ever-liveth to make Intercession for us; Christ is not so affected
with that glory and honor, God has put upon him, that he should forget the
meanest of his children, he deals not as Pharaohs Butler that forgot poor
Joseph, when he was promoted, No, when we are not and cannot think or mind our
selves, yet Christ is commending our estate to the Father, So that we have this
glorious Friend speaking for us in the Court of Heaven, whenever any
accusation is brought against us, So that the godly soul while it sits sighing,
I am here sinning and offending of God, may also remember at that very time
there is a potent Advocate preventing all the dangers that may come by sin.

Ioh. 14.3. I will come again and receive you to my self, that you may be where
I am: This is the utmost happiness that a believer can desire, If it be such
joy for the child to be with his Father, a wife with her Husband, how
transcendent is this mercy to be with Christ; Therefore in this Chapter our
Savior prays for it, that his Disciples be where he is; Now this being where
Christ is, does comprehend the communication of all glory and blessedness,
which Christ bestows on his people, and that without any intermission; Here
in this life we have many clouds to intercept the Sunbeams with the Church
through our unbelief and slothfulness, we have lost our beloved, so that many
times the soul is straightened and cries out, where is he whom my Soul loves;
But then and there we have a perpetual communion with him, and if so be the
enjoying of him by faith fill the soul with so much joy, what will the
immediate fruition of him do? Thus you see that we are in a jejune speculative
manner, to say Christ by his death went to the Father, but to be affectionately
possessed with it, as being the treasury of all consolation.

that death could not detain Christ in the grave, it could not hold him there
so as to hinder his going to the Father; By this therefore we see Christ has
triumphed over the devil and sin with all the effects of it; The devil that
prevailed by his Instrumens to put him to death, would much more have kept him
always in the grave, but his resurrection and ascension to heaven, there to be
with the Father in glory signifies that he has now overcome all his enemies,
and which is the godly man's comfort, all his enemies likewise, for Christ and
the believer have the same enemies, if Christ overcome they overcome; The devil
is Christ's Enemy, and death was Christ's Enemy as well as thine, and it is good
to observe that death is called Christ's Enemy, 1 Cor. 15. Christ shall put all
his Enemies under his feet, The last Enemy that shall be destroyed is death;
See then that death which is so terrible to thee which thou look on as an
Enemy, it is Christ's, and he has overcome it; Oh then what glad tidings should
this be in our ears, Christ has ascended to the Father, for that is as much as
to say, Neither sin, or devil, or grave could prevail over him, and therefore
he has fully discharged the work of a Redeemer, he has paid to the utmost
farthing, so that the love and justice of God cannot but be satisfied by the
atonement he has made.

5. It Is worth the observ^ng, that this expression of Christ's, I go to the
Father does put an excellent face upon that which is most terrible, for that
which was death, and death in the most ignominious and cruel manner, he
expresses in this lovely and desirable manner, I go to the Father; Those
agonies and drops of blood, Those deep and strong cries, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? he covers over with this amiable phrase, I go to the
Father; Thus Christ out of the temptation called it so, but in the temptation
he asks why he had forsaken him? Not that Christ in his temptation was guilty
of any sin, or was capable of any sinful imperfection, only he had not the same
experimental feeling as at other times, for when he had told his Disciples all
should forsake him and leave him alone, yet says he, I am not alone, for my
Father is with me, Joh. 16.32. In his sad temptation he had not the
experimental comfortable sense of this; No marvel then if the godly find a
great alteration of themselves in a temptation, they have not the comfortable
sense and persuasion of that, which they felt when not tempted, for it was thus
with Christ only without sin.

Lastly, As Christ himself thus calls his death a going to the Father, so may
every believer, yea, he ought to do so, for though God be the Father of Christ
by Eternal generation, yet he is the Father of the believer by a gracious
Adoption; Therefore our Savior puts them togethe^, I go to my Father and your
Father, Joh. 20.17, We should make the King of terrors the King of
Consolations to us by this Meditation; Does the child fear to go to his Father?

Use of Instruction to the godly man, In all his temptations and
soul-exercises, Let him stay himself with this, Christ is gone to his Father;
Fear not the greatness and aggravation of thy sins, Fear not thy weaknesses
and infirmities; Say, how shall not peace be made with God, for Christ has
removed all impossibilities, and made thy salvation not only possible but sure
to thee?

SERMON LIVE. That all Civil Governors (as well as Ecclesiastical) from the
meanest Master of a Family to the Greatest Monarch, have from Christ a
Spiritual Charge of those that are under them; And are above all things to
endeavor the good of their Souls.
JOH. 17.11. Holy Father, keep through thy own Name those whom thou have given
me, etc.
HItherto we have considered the Grounds and Reasons why Christ prays for his
Disciples, Now we come to the Prayer and Petition it self.

In which we may consider, 1. The Preface or compellation. 2. The Prayer it
self.


The Compellation is in those words, Holy Father; Which words are used by our
Savior, not that he needed any insinuation into Gods favor, but because those
expressions are so many Arguments with God to hear his Prayer; He is a Father,
and so cannot deny Children praying to him; He is an holy Father, and so can
easily sanctify Believers: For the Object matter of the prayer it self that
comes next into consideration.

But of the Compellation at this time, Holy Father.

It Is usual in Scripture to give such Titles and Attributes to God that are
suitable to the matter in hand: Thus Christ being to pray for the holiness of
his Disciples, he calls him Holy Father; When he prayed for himself, he said
only Father, Here he says holy Father; At v. 25. he praietb Righteous Father
upon another reason then in hand; The Greek word (...), Some would have to come
from (...) and (...) as much as without earth, Others more probably from (...),
to reverence, because holy things are reverently to be handled, according to
that old Rule Sancta sancte.

In the first place Consider the Relation Christ is in, while praying thus for
his disciples, and so we may consider him as a Governor, as a Pastor, or
Master, who had a charge and trust over the Disciples, and this he administers
with much Faithfulness, For being now corporally to leave them, it is not
honors, greatness, and temporal advantages he prays for, but only the
spiritual welfare of their soul, viz. a preservation from the evil of the
world, and a perseverance in good, so that here we have an admirable example
for all Governors, all that have charge over any Inferiors: As Abimelech said
to his people, What ye see me do, that do ye; So what we behold Christ doing,
let all Trusters for others do the like, Let Magistrates, Ministers, Parents
and Masters, see that it is the godliness and Souls good of their Inferiors,
that they are to pursue above all other things.

From whence observe,

Obs. Doct. That all Governors that have a charge over others are to watch and
pray for the good of those they are betrusted with.
That all Governors who have a Charge over others are above all things to
watch and pray for the spiritual good of those they are betrusted with; Let
the same bowels and spirit be in you which was in the Lord Jesus; Oh be more
afraid lest your Children, your Servants should any ways sin against God,
and so endanger their souls, then of any outward misery, desire rather to make
them great in Heaven, then here upon the Earth; As we see Christ here, so we
may read of many godly Governors that have been diligent in this Point; Moses
though he had much ungrateful usage from the people, yet how constant in
praying for them, how greatly troubled when they had sinned, and when God
offered to make him great, he refused to have it upon such terms as should
prejudice the people: Samuel also though he for all his good Service was
rejected by the people, yet he says, God forbid I should cease to pray for
you, 1 Samuel 12.23. Paul he was a spiritual Governor, and in all his Epistles
you see his fervent prayers for the spiritual good of the Churches, yea, the
care of all was upon him, he was tempted in every man's temptation, and it was
his Crown and joy, yea, life it self; If they stood steadfast in the Faith;
Abraham also and Joshua, you see the care they had that their Family, Children,
and Servants should fear the Lord, and this is so great a matter that God takes
special notice of it in Abraham, and therefore will hide nothing from him. Genesis
18.19. We see from thence that this is so acceptable to God, that he admits
such into his choicest Secrets, and reveals himself more to such then others, I
know him, says God, and that by this, he will not suffer his Children and
Household to do what they list, but he will command them to keep the way of the
Lord; To set this upon our hearts, for all wickedness and impiety does
commonly arise in Inferiors from the neglect of Superiors, and the waters
cannot be sweet as long as the Springs are bitter.

In the first place, Know and set this down for a Rule, That wheresoever any
Christian has a Government, there is also a spiritual Charge and trust going
along with it; In a Minister it is clear, In a Magistrate it is as clear, for
he was to write the Law of God out, and that not for his own particular use,
Deuteronomy. 17.18. But thereby to govern his people, Insomuch that it is a promise,
Kings and Queens shall be Nursing Fathers and Mothers to his Church, Isa.
49.23. As for Parents you have not only many places in Solomon's Proverbs, where
both Father and Mother do again and again give spiritual counsel to their Son,
but the Apostle Ephesians. 6.4. enjoyneth it as a duty in the New Testament; Thus
also Masters Phil 6.9. They must aim and look up to Christ in the discharge of
their government, and remember they also have a Master in heaven, That as the
Servant must look at God in his Relation, so must the Master, therefore he
says, And ye Masters do the same things unto them: And certainly this Relation
Grace will discover the truth of a man; Aliter Rex servit Deo, ut homo, aliter
ut Rex, and thus a Father, a Master they serve God as men, or as Fathers and
Masters, and to this charge they are to attend unto.

2. All Superiors and Governors they are to give an account of this Trust unto
God at that great day; We are to appear before him, and to answer how we have
lived not only as Christians in the general, but as in such Relations; Thy
Ministry sins, Thy Magistracy sins, Thy sins as a Father, as a Master*
will they not make a large Catalogue? and be like Ezechiels flying Roll, that
had curses written on it within and without: This is proved by the Parable of
the Talents, where he that had but one was not pardoned, but must give an
account, and for his negligence be condemned; Now by a Talent is meant every
thing that a man is betrusted with, thereby to glorify God, and it is called a
Talent because of the high price and worth that is in every the least
opportunity we have to serve God; Oh then let all Superiors tremble at this,
how great and unexpected will thy account be; If thou have endeavored to be
good thy self, and holy, yet if thou have not attended to have holy Children
and an holy Family, thy Condemnation will be exceeding great; Think not to say
with Cain, Am I my Brethrens Keeper? What have I to do with others? I am no
Preacher or Minister, for in that thou have a trust, thou shall give an account
of thy godly improving of it.

All those sins that Inferiors do commit for want of thy care and
instruction, will be thy sins, and thou will be the cause of their damnation;
That Rule in morality is also true in Divinity, qui non dat vitam, aufert;
Ezechiel must be judged guilty of the Israelites sins, and God will require
their blood at his hands if he do not his duty to them, Eze. 3.18. And
therefore Paul protested he was free from their blood, because he had made
known all the Counsel of God Act. 20.26. Who then will be able to stand under
this burden? Have thou not sins of thy own? but thou must have thy Childrens
sins, thy Servants sins also to lie upon thy back as an heavy burden: Will
Christ at the day of Judgment condemn men, because his poor Members were sick
and they visited them not? They were hungry and they fed them not; And will he
not much rather be provoked because there have been sick, sinful, wicked
persons under thy care, drunkards and thou did not admonish, Swearers and
thou did not frown on them; Shall God make Inquisition for the blood of the
body upon Murderers? And will he not for the blood of Souls? Shall Abel, though
dead, speak and cry Vengeance, and shall not Children, Servants, Inferiors
damned in hell, cry out, saying, It was the negligence, the profaneness of my
Superiors that has brought me hither: Were not men stones and Rocks, these
Considerations would make them melt and tremble.

Use of Exhortation to Governors, especially Parents and Masters; Take our
Saviors example here, and follow it, see his care was that his Disciples might
not sin, that they might be kept in all holiness; Oh then blame and condemn
thy self, saying, my thoughts, My cares have been to make them rich, to provide
for them in the world, but not at all have I looked to their Souls: Do they not
lie, swear, drink? Do they not profane the Sabbath, and live dissolutely? yet
these things are no trouble to thy heart; Can thou say of thy Children as was
said of Austin to his Mother Monica, It was impossible that a Child of so many
Tears should perish; Are thine Children of prayers and tears, and careful
instruction? How many are too like that Woman of Zebedee, she comes to Christ
with this Petition, That her Sons might sit with Christ in his Kingdom, one on
the right hand and another on the left, dreaming of some earthly, temporal
greatness; Thus we are apt to think we will provide so much, leave such
Estates, and in the mean while their miserable Souls are undone to all
Eternity. Be moved hereunto because

This is the greatest love and charity to them: You cannot discover greater
compassion then by taking care of their Souls; Their Souls are more worth then
all the world, how highly did Christ esteem of Souls, when he came into the
world and endured all that misery for Souls only? He died only to make them
blessed.

thou show no dislike, no frowns on them, they think they have cause to
sin then; It Is well observed by Lactantius, speaking of this particular about
Example, The nature of man is proclive to all vice, and would seem not only cum
venia but ratione peccare, and this they never do more plead then when their
Superiors are such as act Wickedness, or else do countenance it.

3. Be moved hereunto from the Certainty of the Souls good and uncertainty of
all worldly things; When thou have consumed thy self in thoughts and cares
about thy Children; Solomon's Observation will hold true, Who knows whether he
will be a wise man or a Fool, thou have labored for, Eccl. 2.19. But now if he
has been instructed in the fear of God, This will abide to all Eternity.

In the next place we come to the Compellation Holy Father, From that attribute
given to God, he is an holy Father, and so being a Fountain of all holiness,
may easily communicate it to others.

Obs. That God is an holy God, Doct. God is an holy God and able to make others
holy.
and so able to make others holy.

For we are not to consider of this Attribute merely as a glorious property in
God, but to improve it for our good, that we also might be made holy; This
glorious Attribute Isa. 6. the Angels of all others do single out, and with
great ^cclamation praise God, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy; Yea, this is the only
Attribute we are to imitate, Be ye holy as I am holy, not be omnipotent as I
am; Now God is holy several ways.

And first, He is essentially holy, his holiness and his nature are not two
things as it is in Angels and men; In this sense Christ said, I. He is
essentially holy.
None is good but God, God is a pure act, and so whatsoever is in God is God;
His holiness therefore is not only in that he works all things holily, but
his very nature is holy: Hence God is called Jehovah, and I AM, Exodus 3.14.
because what he is he is essentially, and therefore seeing his nature is
incomprehensible so is his holiness; Seeing we are never able to define what
he is, so neither can we what his holiness is, Quicquid de Deo dici potest eo
ipso indignum est, quia dici potest, Our dwarfish Nature cannot measure these
Pyramides, Our shell cannot contain this Ocean; Though Astronomers by their
Instruments guess at the magnitude of the Sun, yet we cannot reach unto the
greatness either of Gods Nature or his Attributes.

Secondly, He is not only essentially holy, II. Oppositely holy to all false
Gods.
but (...) and oppositely holy to those false Gods man's corruption has set up,
and in opposition to the Devils who are called unclean spirits: Hence he is
often styled the Holy One of Israel, because they only worshipped the true God;
Those ancient Christian Writers Arnobius, Austin, and others, who wrote in
defense of the Christian Religion, did convince Heathens of their Impiety, by
worshipping such for gods whom yet they fastened many impious actions upon, for
certainly nature would have told them, That was God, quo nibil melius cogitari
potest; Thus the God whom Christians according to the Scripture do serve is
the only holy and true God.

Thirdly, He is holy in respect of his will, command, and approbation; His word
is an holy Word, The Scriptures are holy Scriptures, They command, III. Holy in
his Will and commands.
They approve, They encourage and comfort nothing but holiness; David Psalm.
19. compares them to Gold often refined that has no dross, and Hab. 1. God
is of purer eyes then to behold Iniquity, viz. by approbation; Therefore he is
said to be angry with the wicked all the day long; Oh then though other men
love thee, and thou art in love with thy own self, yet if not holy God does not
God cannot love thee.

IV. Holy efficiently.
Fourthly, God is holy efficiently, He is the Author and cause of all the
holiness we have, James 1.17. Every good and perfect gift comes from him; We
are his Workmanship created to good works; He made the Angels holy, He created
Adam holy, yea, he infused all holiness into Christ's humane Nature, and
therefore much rather must he cause all the holiness that is in us; Therefore
Christ by praying that God would sanctify his Disciples, does thereby teach,
that none can make holy but God alone; Let then the proud Patrons of free will
be confounded at this; They that cannot make themselves Creatures, will they
say' they make themselves holy Creatures? Minus est te fecisse hominem quam
justum.

V. He is finally holy.
Fifthly, He is finally holy, That is all our holiness is to terminate in him;
Holiness does properly respect God as the Object, and therefore though a man
prays, hears, gives alms, yea; his body to be burnt, and does not with a
pure and chaste Intention look at Gods glory in all this, it is not holiness;
Hence it is that many have low thoughts about holiness, and grossly mistake in
it, taking copper for Gold, and Samuels Ghost for Samuel himself; Thou art not
holy till thou can truly say in some Degree at least, though with much
opposition, Whom have I in Heaven but God? and none on Earth besides him: In
Heaven Heaven it self would not be heaven to a gracious heart, but because God
is there.

VI. Holy exemplarily.
Sixthly, God is holy exemplarily; He is the Rule, Pattern, and Example of
holiness, 1 Pet. 1.15. Be ye holy as I am holy. Levit. 20.26. So that if we
would know how we are to be holy, it must not be as men think, or as the world
prescribes, but as God is holy: Not that we can attain to an equality, but to
a similitude only; So that the principle of the world must fall to the ground;
They will do as others do, or as most do: Oh but rather Consider that God
himself has set down a Form for thee, and because there is such fullness in
him as in an Ocean, therefore we have a necessity of growing every day; No man
is as holy as the pattern, therefore still he is to be perfecting Holiness and
Righteousness in the Fear of God, 1 Cor. 7.1.

Thus you have heard that God is holy, But in the next place know it is our
Duty to improve this Attribute for our Good, For so our Savior does not look
upon it as an absolute property in God, but as that which may be profitable
unto his Disciples, So that we are to make use of this by Faith.

And that first, Because when God becomes our God by the Covenant of Grace, he
is wholly ours, and all his Attributes are for our benefit and advantage; I
will be their God: Now God is not our God nulesse his Wisdom be ours, his
Holiness be ours, that is for our benefit; For we cannnot separate God and
these; Oh then what an unwise and foolish thing is it in a Christian when he
has such a Treasure, and yet will make no use of it, Such a Mine and yet
improveth it not! In God there is holiness for all Angels and men, much more
for thee.

Secondly, God being thus absolutely good, he is communicating of it, and it is
a Rule, The more any thing is good, the more diffusive it is of it self; As we
see in God, who though glorious and happy enough in himself, yet he created a
world, and ordained many to Eternal Glory out of his mere good pleasure and
Fulness, not that he needed or wanted any; Oh then it is very acceptable and
well-pleasing to God that we should come with thirsting Souls unto this
Fountain, and draw Water out of it, That we should suck plentifully at these
full Breasts and be refreshed.

Use of Instruction to the People of God who are greatly afflicted under this
great Temptation; They are not an holy People; Oh they find sin captivating
them, sin prevailing over them, but where is an holy heart, holy affections,
and holy aims in what they do? Oh they say! Could they find they were more
holy though they were poor and afflicted, yet they should rejoice: Let such
Consider, It is their Unbelief and want of earnest Prayer, if they be not
richly supplied and furnished in this, for God is infinitely holy, and he
delights to communicate it; The larger the Vessel is the more willing he is
and will be to fill it, and there cannot be any Prayer more acceptable then to
beg for this above all things.

Use 2. Is God thus holy, Then let the most holy be humble in all their
approaches to him, for he is of such pure Eyes that he finds spots and
blemishes, yea, damnable matter in thy most holy duties; Angels holiness is
not proportionable to him.

Thirdly, Of Reproof to wicked men, who deride, scoff, and maliciously oppose
holiness, What is this but to rise up against God himself? Is not Holiness
the Glorious Attribute of God? And do the Beams of this shining in his People
offend thee? This argues thou art of a perverse and of a devilish Spirit, for
thou should rather reverence and honor it, saying, Oh that I might live and
dye like such holy men! Indeed there are many would like Balaam die like a
Godly man, but not live like him, as One said, He would live like Croesus but
die like Socrates; Yet this is impossible, There must be an holy Life else
there will hardly be an holy Death.

SERMON LV. The Great Lord Keeper of Israel from inevitable Ruin both of Body
and Soul extolled.
JOH. 17.11. Holy Father, keep through thy own Name those thou have given me,
etc.
WE have dispatched the Introductory Compellation, and now proceed to the
Petition it self, and in that Consider, 1. The mercy prayed for, and 2. The
Amplification of it.


The mercy prayed for is Keep.

The amplification is,

1. From the Subject, described by their Election from Eternity.

And 2. Actual donation to Christ in time, Those thou have given me; This is
often repeated by our Savior, as being a main Argument why nothing should he
denied them that were thus indeared both to Father and Son, and also the
frequent Iteration of this might produce the more faith and confidence in the
Disciples.

3. This is amplified by the manner or instrumental cause how they are to be
kept, Through thy own Name.

4. The End or Consequent of all this, That they may be one as Thou and I are
one.

Of the Mercy prayed for Keep, and the Subject, Those thou have given me in the
first place; I shall not enlarge any thing more upon this Description; Neither
is there any difficulty in the words, only (...) is rendered by some serva, and
they take it properly, for those were said to be servari who were taken in
war, and so the Conqueror had full power over them to put them to death, but
of his clemency he saved them, and thereupon were called servi, but the Greek
word has no such allusion; Only there is a twofold keeping external and
temporal from the violence and rage of wicked men in respect of their bodies
and lives because the world hates them: And 2. Spiriutal and internal in grace
and holiness, and this he does principally pray for, as appears by the
matter instanced in; Keep them in their outward condition that they be not
destroid, keep them in their spiritual condition that they lose not their faith
or other graces; Keep them in bono that they be not undone deficiendo; Keep
them a malo that it hurt them not Inficiendo; If they do sin, keep them
reficiendo by repairing and raising them up again; If then the Disciples though
thus wonderfully given by the Father to Christ, do need a daily keeping lest
they be undone every way, then it holds true also of all believers.

Obs. Doct. That all the people of God if not kept by Gods grace would be
undone in soul and body.
That even all the People of God were they not kept by Gods grace and power
they would every moment be undone both in Soul and body; It is not our grace,
our Prayer, our Watchfulness keeps us, but it is the power of God, his right
arm supports us: We may see David praying to God that he would keep him in both
these respects from temporal dangers, Psa. 17.8, 9. Keep me as the Apple of thy
Eye from the wicked that oppose me; Where he does not only pray to be kept, but
he does insinuate how carefully God keeps his people, and in what precious
account their safety is, even as the apple of the Eye, and for spiritual
preservation he often begs it, Psa. 19.13. Keep back thy Servant from
presumptuous sins; Though David be Gods Servant, yet he will like a wild
Horse run violently and that into presumptuous sins if God keep him not back,
yea, he prays that God would keep the particular parts of his body that they
sin not, Psa. 141.3. Keep the door of my Lips, he entreats God to keep his
Lips, and to set a watch about his mouth, as if he were not able to set guard
sure enough; Thus much more are we to pray that God would keep our hearts, our
minds, our wills, our affections, for they are more masterfull.

Let us briefly consider the first, God keeps us from temporal dangers, That
God keeps all his from temporal dangers, prove
and that upon these grounds.

Man has by sin forfeited all his temporal mercies, there is nothing due to
him, no health, no wealth; not the least comfort, but every man here upon the
earth, might be like Dives in hell, begging for a drop of water, and not able
to attain it, Gal. 3. Cursed is he that keeps not the Law, and Genesis 3. upon
sin, death in all the concomitants of it, came into the world, so that if all
these curses of the Law be not every moment inflicted upon us, it is because God
keeps us; He bears off the blows that Justice and the Law would lay upon
us; So that it is Gods goodness that keeps thee alive, that keeps thee on
this side hell, that keeps thee from that proper doom which belongs to thee*
The Sentence of death is passed upon all long ago, only the execution of it
is put off till God pleases: Who art thou then that repinest and art troubled
under such a loss, such an affliction? how many thousands more are there that
God keeps thee from? None is so miserable, but he may see others more miserable
then himself; It is the Lord that keeps all these curses from thee, and thee
from them.

The godly man would be undone if God did not keep him from his own imbecility
and infirmity; He has no power to preserve himself from misery; Hence man is
called Enoch, and in the New Testament (...), So that he does not only deserve
all misery but he is prone of himself to fall into it, did not God keep him,
Job 14.1. and Job 5.1. Man that is born of a woman is full of trouble, even as
the Sparks fly upwards; So that as the Spark if not stopped does of it self
ascend upward; Thus man of himself though there were no outward cause to drive
him, yet would stumble and fall into all desolation; Therefore the great
troubles men lie under are self-created, they come by our indiscretion,
blindness, or some sinful way or other; Therefore Solomon observes that a
man's misery is great on the Earth, because he has not judgment to discern the
times and seasons of things, Eccl. 8.6. If therefore God did not keep the Godly
man, no Child would sooner fall or run into the fire then he would into
mischief; You may read of that good King Josiah for whom the Kingdom made such
Lamentation, how foolishly he ran upon his own Death, 2 Chro. 33.22.

Did not God keep us the devils rage and enmity is such that he would not only
destroy the Soul but the body: You see his malice when he had liberty to
possess the bodies of many, how miserably he tormented them, and when God gave
him leave to afflict Job in his Estate and body, he did it to the utmost; There
wanted no evil while he could do it; Now there is no reason why the Devil
should not do thee the same mischief continually, but only God binds up this
roaring Lion; The Devil is said to be a Murderer from the beginning, and that
for the body as well as the Soul, he tempted Cain to murder Abel, he tempted
Judas to betray Christ; Oh then wonder that God keeps thee when there are such
Legions of Devils crafty and potent enough to procure thy destruction.

Did not God keep the godly he would be undone temporally, because of the
hatred and malice wicked men bear to every godly man; Therefore Christ said,
they were as Sheep among Wolves; Can they hope for mercy from a Wolf? David
complained that his Soul was among Lions, and Ezechiel complained he dwelt
among Scorpions; Now then seeing the world is so full of malice, and the number
of wicked men is like the Sand upon the Sea-shoar to them; They are as the
Israelites Army seemed to the great power that came against them, like a Flock
of Birds; Now what is the reason that wicked men have not their will of
destroying the Godly; It is only God that keeps them, yea, God keeps every
part of them, He keeps their feet, Every stone else might be their Death;
Yea, Psa. 34 20. He keeps all their bones, he makes their Beds in their
sickness; What an expression is that? There is no Nurse can so diligently and
tenderly look to the sick as God does to a godly man diseased: Oh then that we
should attribute our Estates to such care and diligence of our lives, to such
places, to such second causes! and not rather look up to God who keeps us all
the day long; His keeping of all the godly does not diminish his care in
keeping every particular man, for it is God that keeps every man, and that
keeps the Church in general; How could this Ark that had no Sails, no Pilot,
no Stern have been kept in the midst of the Deluge? but that God preserves it,
Psa. 121.3. God is said to be the Keeper of Israel, and such an one that
neither flumbreth or sleeps; Certainly could the people of God for their
Estates, Lives, and all they have, commit all to this Keeper, they would live
with more joy; Thou say, who will keep me? Who will keep mine? Oh remember a
better Keeper then if thou had all the Monarchs in the world; Whence then
arise your fears and doubts, but because you are your own Keepers, or Friends
must keep, or such an Estate, and so much wealth must keep you; See what David
tells us, Psalm. 121.1. Except the Lord keep the City even the Watchmen watches
in vain; Though he watch and do not sleep, yet there must be a better Keeper:
Say so of thy House, of thy Family, of thy Children, and of all outward worldly
things.

Therefore let the Use of this Branch of the Doctrine be to all that are godly,
to cast off all fears and perplexities about any worldly thing; They have a
faithful Keeper, all their mercies are in his hand; The world, nor the devil
cannot take them away; Is not the Child secure because he has a Loving Father
who keeps all things for him? We are not our own Keepers no more then our
Creators: And if thou losest any outward comfort, stay thy self with this, I
have a wise and an holy Keeper, who would not have suffered this or that loss
to fall out, but that it was best for me to do so, and thou may be encouraged
to this holy Security, because

1. God is an Omnipotent God, None (says Christ) is stronger then my Father;
Joh. 10. We betrust men with things, and there comes a stronger then they who
takes all away, but none can do so here.

2. He is a faithful and wise Keeper; He will not lie or deceive thee; Thou will have no cause to complain as Jacob did to Laban, That he had defrauded him
so many times; Thou can not trust in riches, or in men, for these are
unfaithful, These are a lie, but God is not like man, he will not deny himself.

3. He does not only keep thee himself but appoints others also to keep thee;
Armies of Angels are appointed by him to keep thee, yea, all the creatures are
a Safeguard to thee; The stones in the Field are at peace with him who fears
God: Did not thy Faith lie asleep in thee, as Christ in the Ship, there would
never be so many dangerous Tempests to overwhelm thee.

But I proceed to the second part, which is more principally intended by our
Savior, and of greater consequence to the godly, for what i^ their Goods and
their bodies be kept, but their Souls lost? Will this keeping avail them, if he
keeps us that an hair of our head do not fall to the Ground, Of Gods keeping
all true believers from spiritual evils.
but our graces they are lost, a man could take little comfort, therefore let
the godly know of a Truth, That it is the power of God that keeps them to
Salvation.

1. 1. God keeps the truth of grace in them.
It Is God only that preserves and keeps the Truth of Grace once wrought in
thee; We see Adam and Angels lost their precious Treasure of Grace; And can we
think to be better Conservators then they were? No, thou would immediately
of a Paradise become a noisome dunghill, and a hell, did not the Lord keep
thee; Hence the Apostle prays so often, that God would strengthen and settle
them; No Leaf would fall sooner to the ground then our Graces wither, did not
God keep them; We see then upon what Rock the godly are built, what it is, that
though they are in the midst of spiritual Thieves and Robbers, yet their Jewels
are not stolen, it is because God keeps them; Hence is the perseverance of the
godly; Hence it is that Peter's Faith is not totally and finally lost: David and
Peter were in sad and great Temptations, in danger to lose all the Truth of
grace put into them, and all had been gone but that God kept them; So that as
in natural things God is not only the Creator but Preserver of all things, And
if he did not uphold them by his arm, they would fall into their first nothing:
Thus did not God graciously keep thee, thou would fall into that old
desperate state of impiety again, and be as profane and wicked as ever before.

2. The Lord does not only keep the habits and being of grace, 2. He keeps in
the actual stirrings of the soul to good.
but also all the quickenings and actual stirrings of the Soul to good; Such
Sparks would quickly go out, did not the Lord keep them alive; We might say of
them as of man's life, They are but a Vapor and a Bubble; Thus 1 Chro. 29.18.
When David and the people had with so much willingness and delight offered
unto God, he prays that God would keep this for ever in their hearts; If then
thou find thy heart at any time raised up to actual hungrings and thirstings
after God, if it break for the longing it has to God always, then run to
God that he would keep this excellent frame of heart always in thee; That the
world and the Temptations thereof may not bring thee down again from this
Mountain of Transfiguration; Say, O Lord, It Is not in me to keep this frame of
heart always, I shall quickly lose it; Something or other will take away this
live Child and put a dead one in the room of it; Oh therefore O Lord do thou
help me and keep me, I renounce my own strength, I see my own weakness, and
certainly if we are to pray to God for daily bread, though we have a B^rn full
of Corn, because he can immediately blast all, and within an hour or moment make
us like Job, how much more have we cause to pray for this daily Keeping, even
though we were the strongest Christians, for we see what many of the chiefest
Rank in Piety, even David and Peter did when without this actual Custody or
preservation; They fell into the Dunghill, and from thence would have fallen
into hell, had not the grace of God stopped them.

Now you must know, There is a great difference between the Degrees or
quickenings of Grace and the Essence of Grace: Christ did not so pray that his
Disciples might not fall from any Degree of their Grace, Neither does God so
keep them as that they never stumble; No, we see the contrary to this, For the
Disciples fled through fear when Christ was apprehended, and though Christ in
particular prayed for Peter, That his Faith might not fail him, yet it did in
some measure, otherwise he could not with cursing and swearing so sadly have
denied the Lord Christ; Christ's Prayer therefore, and Gods keeping does
infallibly extend to the Essence and Truth of Grace: They shall never lose
that, but for the Degrees and Intensions they are amissible, yea, so far
loseable, that to the eye of others there is no difference between a wicked man
and them; As in the dead of Winter we cannot by the outward appearance tell
which is a dead Tree, or a living, only there is inward sap in one which is
not in another; And thus there is an inward principle of Life in one which is
not in the wicked man; The Godly then notwithstanding Gods keeping and Christ's
praying may lose much of their grace, fall into sad ways, and run much into
debt, though they do not prove Bankrupts.

3. He makes them hold out to the end.
Therefore Thirdly, God keeps them spiritual by making them to persevere and to
hold out till the very last; So that notwithstanding all the difficulties which
are in the way to Heaven, yet as it is said of Christ, He will not suffer his
Holy One to see Corruption; So neither will he suffer his Holy Ones eternally
to perish: Here we see Christ praying for his D^sciples, and afterward for all
Believers, that they may be kept by his power, and be one with him; so that
this is a sure Argument for the perseverance of the Saints: Christ has prayed
to God to keep them, and the Father hears him in all that he prays. For
hence God has promised Jerem. 32.40. to put his fear into the godly wans
heart, that he shall never depart from him, and he has the immortal Seed
within him, keeping of him that he cannot sin, viz. unto Death, and so as
Cain and wicked men sin who are altogether corrupted: Oh then what matter of
Encouragement is this to the Godly man, who is apt to fear his entrance into
Canaan, when he sees so many Anakims and tall Giants in the way; He begins to
tremble when he thinks of the Apostles Exclamation who shall be saved? If it be
such a difficult thing to get to Heaven, the way be so straight, and so many
prove Hypocrites and Apostates; What will become of me? How shall I do? When
the Godly are thus afflicted, let them remember God keeps them and with him all
things are not only possible but easy; He that could keep the Israelites
shoes that they did not wear out, he can much more preserve and deliver thee
from being tired out in thy way toward Heaven.

4. God keeps his people from the Temptation of sin or their hearts in the
Temptation, Rev. 3.10. Because the Church kept Gods Word, therefore God
promises to keep her from the hour of Temptation; This keeping Austin
acknowledged with much affection, saying, O Lord, when I had a heart to sin
thou keptst off the Temptation, and when I had the Temptation thou keptst off
my heart: Had Joseph's heart been as ready as his Temptarion was strong, he had
been wholly overcome; Oh then how great a Favor and Mercy is this which the
Godly enjoy every Day; They may as soon Number the Stars in the Heavens as
the preventing Graces of God to them continually; This is so great a matter
that as often as we are to pray we are commanded to pray that God would not
lead us into Temptation: But how un-apprehensive are we of all Gods Goodness
and Kindness toward us herein, but even as the Sucking Infant apprehends not
all the care and love the tender Mother vouchsafes to it, so neither are we
affected with all that grace of God in keeping us continually.

Use of Admonition to the people of God, To whom all their praise is due, while
they are not undone in soul or body, and to whom their Prayers are to be
directed in Fears or Danger of either: Even unto this mighty and wise God who
is the Keeper of Israel, Every Day would bring forth evil to undo thee, were
not Gods gracious Power ready to stop it: Be then humbled under thy own
Weakness; Say, O Lord, I lean and depend wholly and continually upon thee;
Thou art my Refuge, my Strength, and my strong Tower, All other things they are
but Reeds and tottering Walls, Especially desire Gods spiritual Preservation;
Thy own Danger and Sense will make thee pray to God to be kept corporally, but
a man must have a spiritual Eye and a tender heart that can fear his
Spiritual Destruction: In the midst of bloody Wars what a wonderful Mercy
was it thought to have your Estates, Houses, yea, and your Lives kept from the
Fury and Violence of an Enemy? Oh that we could every Day and every hour be as
sensible of the Danger of hell, and the Devil with his subtle Suggestions and
Temptations seeking to allure us, and thereby fly unto God for his Defense.

Use of Terror to wicked men, who are given up to Spiritual Judgments; For
God neither softens their heart nor removes Temptations, but a ready Door is
set open to act all their wickedness; Thus Solomon says, Eccles. 7.26. He
that is abhorred of the Lord shall be enticed by an whorish Woman; And Romans 1.
Men are there given up to vile affections, Oh the heavy doom of ungodly men
that have none to keep them from falling in the Mire; They have many Occasions
to sin and they love and embrace them.

SERMON LVI. That it is not enough to be put into a state of Grace, unless by
Gods Power we are kept therein. How far Men may acknowledge Gods Help, and
yet with the Pelagians, Arminians and Papists not give him his due Glory: And
also shows, How many ways the Power of God keeps his People.
JOHN 17.11. Keep through thy own Name, those thou have given me.
THe Mercy prayed for, and the Subject for whom, described in these words,
Those whom thou have given me, have been treated of: Our Savior does so often
repeat this Description of his Disciples [ Whom thou have given me] that
although we have said much of it, yet what more may be added, shall be brought
in verse. 34. where in the last place it is mentioned.

I proceed therefore to the Instrumental Cause, or Manner how God is prayed to
keep them, and that is, Through his own Name, (...), which expression admits of
various Interpretations, although all be subordinate, and none contrary to each
other.

Some take Name for Glory, Gods Name, for his glory, Ezekiel, 36.22. Psa. 79.9.
and then the Preposition (...), they take for propter, for it answers the
Hebrew Beth, which is sometimes used so, Genesis 18.28. Luke 22.20. And indeed
here is a truth in this, because whatsoever God does about his Church, he does
it for his own glory: There is no merit or worth in us to move him; It Is his
own glory only, as Joshua urged, What will thou do for thy great Name? Josh.
7.9. Yet this Exposition seems not to be so pertinent.

Others by Gods Name understand his power, his strength, his might, and thus
it is often used, Prove. 18 10, etc. and then the Preposition (...) answers per,
and so the Hebrew is often used, called therefore (...) beth auxilii, This
seems very pertinent, and is part of the meaning, but last of all that which
late Interpreters pitch most upon is, that Name is here taken for the Truth,
Doctrine and Knowledge of God, both for the Object, the Doctrine that is known,
and the Grace is, that Faith whereby we are enabled to know, it being usual in
Scripture to call the Object of any affection, by the affection it self. That
Name is here taken for the Truth and Doctrine manifested by Christ, appears
from ver. 6. where it is so used, where the (...) is expounded by (...) and
(...). Those therefore that understand it of the true and pure Doctrine Christ
has delivered, retain the proper sense of the Preposition (...), Keep them in
thy Name, in thy true Doctrine: So that they say, Christ prays, first for the
purity of their Faith, 2. their Unity of Love and Charity, which are the two
Pillars that bear up the Church of God.

Others take Name, not for the Object, but for our Knowledge and Faith of this
Doctrine, and so you have a notable use of the word, Revel. 2.13. and they make
the Preposition instrumental, Keep them through the knowledge and faith of
thee; as we have a like phrase, 1 Pet. 1.5. They are said to be kept by the
power of God through faith.

These three later Interpretations we take as one whole complete sense, for
they are kept by the power of God in the true Doctrine, and a true faith in
Christ is the means whereby we are kept. From the first Interpretation, that
God keeps us by his power, Observe,

That it is not enough to be put into the state of Grace, Observe. That its not
enough to be put into the state of grace, unless by Gods power we are kept
therein.
unless by Gods Power we are kept therein: Or, When a man is regenerated, it is
not his own strength, or ability, but Gods power merely that keeps him.

Let us take notice of that place again, 1 Pet 1.5. Who are kept by the power
of God through faith to salvation. The Greek word (...) is observed to be very
emphatical, for it is properly used of those who keep a place by a Garrison of
Soldiers, it is a military word; here it is applied to the Power of God that
does keep us as safely, as strongly, and as securely, as if we had an whole
Army about us.

So that the word denotes two things,

1. The Defense and Custody in a strong manner the people of God have.

2. The great Danger we are in from Satan, sin and the world; for what
needs such a defense, if there were no danger? It Is then God that keeps us,
and that to salvation: Though God did never so much for us at the first, yet
should he not keep to the very last to salvation it self, we should suffer
shipwreck in the very Havens mouth.

To open this Doctrine, Consider,

First, That the power of God is necessary both to the beginnings of grace, and
the progress. Christ must be not only the Author, but the finisher of our
faith. Heb. 12:2. When the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.3. had showed, that God through
his abundant mercy had begotten us again, he shows this is not enough, but we
are kept afterward by his power; only the power of God in working grace in us,
at first finds us in a different estate, then when it preserves or keeps
us. At first the power of God finds us dead in sin, and in respect of any
holiness, like that Chaos at first without form and void. Therefore Ephesians. 2.
it is a quickening power, which infuseth supernatural life, and so makes us of
spiritually dead, to live: It Is an Omnipotent, insuperable Power, like that of
Creation, which was out of nothing; and therefore we are said to be created,
and his new-creatures. But in the progress of Grace, the power of God finds us
not dead, but with spiritual life, only there cannot be any further motions or
actings of this life without power from above, Acti agimus, and moti movemus,
it is God that inableth us to believe, to hunger and thirst after the enjoyment
of him: Even as Conservation does not find the creature in the Womb of
nothing, as Creation did, only it continues that being already existent, which
otherwise would fall into nothing: Thus did not the Lord bear up daily by his
power, that heavenly building raised up by him at first in thy soul, it would
become a very ruin, and not a stone left upon a stone. It Is this later kind
of power, the godly need all the day long, if his right hand bear them not up,
they immediately fall to the ground.

Secondly, Although we say, It Is the power of God only that keeps the godly
and not their own strength, yet it cannot be denied, but that the Scripture, as
in some places it affirms, Gods keeping of us, So it also speaks of a godly
man's keeping himself. Thus 1 Timothy 5.22. (...), Keep thy self pure, James 1.27.
Pure Religion is to keep a man's self unspotted from the world, 1 John 5.18. He
that is begotten of God, keeps himself. Sometimes they are put together, Jude
v. 21. Keep your self in the love of God, and not long after he adds, To him
that is able to keep you. So 2 Timothy 1.14. Timothy is exhorted, To keep the good
thing committed to him by the holy Ghost. Quest.
By these places we see a godly man is said to keep himself, and Gods power
likewise, Does not this seem to attribute too much to man, or at least divide
the work of preservation between God and our selves?

Answ.
I answer, No. For first, Our own keeping is wholly insufficient and unable
without Gods keeping, when man attends to the utmost, with all watching, and
diligence, yet if God come not in with his power, all is in vain. We like
Gehezi may lay the staff to the dead child, but it will not rise till the
Prophet himself come. Satan and his power is greater then ours, if considered
in our selves: Therefore no wonder, if we of our selves cannot combat with
him; he that is with us is stronger then the devil, but not we our selves. And

2. Though we keep our selves, yet this is wholly from and by God: We act with
subordination and dependence on him, we keep our selves, because God inableth
us to do so, as the less wheel is moved by the greater, as the greater
orbmoveth the less; so that here is no glory or praise due to us no more than
the pen that writes, or the hatchet that cuts, for we depend wholly upon God,
both quoad esse, the essence and being of grace would not continue did not he
uphold it, as also, quoad posse, and quoad operari; Therefore our keeping is
not a contra-distinct or separate keeping from God, as if he were one partial
cause, and we another, as when two lift one burden; but ours is from him, by
him, and under him, as the Master guides the hand of the Scholar to write.

How far men may acknowledge Gods help, and yet not give the full glory to him.
Hence in the third place, We may acknowledge Gods power to help us, and that
several ways, and yet not not give the full glory that belongs to him. All
the Erratical Stars that have been in the Churches firmament, have at last
acknowledged some power, some auxiliary help of grace, but yet justly condemned
by the Orthodox, as robbing grace of its due praise; for if a man should say,
It Is Gods power that helps us, because he created us at first with a rational
soul, so giving of us understanding and will, whereby we are enabled to choose
what is good, here Gods power is acknowledged, but at a remote distance. Here
like some Heathens, we sacrifice the wax to God, but keep the honey to our
selves; thus Nature and Grace is confounded; Pelagius at first thought this
would serve. But if a man should go further, acknowledging Gods power in
revealing the object, though he works nothing upon the subject; Here God is
acknowledged but at a low rate. Thus also Pelagius said, It was the grace and
power of God to make known and reveal the objects of faith, but when revealed,
then we have power to believe them, as a man cannot see, till the Sun arise,
but of himself he has perfect eyes to behold the light, Here is power given to
God, but not enough, who does not only prepare the object, but fit and
sanctify the subject.

Further, If a man confess the power of God to help, Not absolutely to do that
which is good, but to do it more easily and willingly, as Pelagius at last did
yield. Here is Gods power acknowledged, but still here is not glory enough
ascribed to God. God will have all the glory, or else none.

Lastly, If we acknowledge the help of God to keep us necessarily, yet if we
make it a general indeterminate cause, and not efficacious, till by man's will
it be particularized. Here is something attributed to God, but yet still much
ascribed to man; Therefore though the Jesuits have many large Tractates De
auxiliis gratiae, yet because they do not make Grace efficacious in it self
antecedently to our will, but our will to improve that; Therefore still we say,
They advance not Grace, for it is not Grace, unless it be Gratuita omni modo.
Thus then you see a necessity of informing your judgments in this Point, That
no subtle Heretics under fair pretenses, and acknowledgements of Grace, do
deceive you: For Pelagius deceived the Eastern Bishops by this means, yea
Sulpitius was seduced by the Pelagians, who had been a long enemy to them,
which when he perceived, he was so grieved, that he enjoined himself perpetual
silence, as the Centuriators observe.

In the next place, Let us consider, How many ways the power of God does keep
us.
How many ways the power of God does thus keep us: and let it not be thought
tedious, if I be long on this Text, I do not compel the Text to go one mile,
one Sermon further than it would: The honey drops from the comb without any
crushing of it. And

First, The power of God keeps his people in the way of grace inspirando, by
inspiring and breathing into the Soul such holy thoughts, and quickening
meditations, that thereby we are kept in the fear of sin, and love of God
always. The Apostle says, We are not able to think of our selves any thing
tending to our own good, or the good of others, but our sufficiency is of God,
2 Cor. 3 7. How vain, idle and distractive would our thoughts be, if the Spirit
of God did not suggest and put in other things? Therefore that is promised as a
remembrancer, to bring to our minds, such things as we let slip, when the
Church prays, Arise, O North, and blow, O South, (Cant. 4.6.) that her garden
may give a smell; it is a prayer for the heavenly and holy breathings of Gods
Spirit into the soul.

Secondly, The power of God helps excitando, by stirring up and quickening
those habits and principles of grace, which are in us. Our faith, our love, are
apt to lie dormant in the soul, till they be awakened. Thus David, though in
the state of grace prays often, That God would quicken him, that he might
keep Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. And this the Church prays for, Cant. 1.
Draw me, and we will run after thee; so that were there not this drawing, this
quickening the people of God would be like so many lumps of earth, they would be
very Idols in all their duties, seeing they would not see, and though knowing,
yet not understand. This exciting grace is as necessary every moment to thee
for spiritual life, as the air is for thy natural.

Thirdly, The power of God keeps, inclinando, by inclining and determining the
heart: For though the heart have grace in it habitually, yet the world and sin
tempt strongly; so that these habitual principles work not, till God incline
and determine the heart, as Ezekiel. 36. besides an heart of flesh, God promises
to cause him to walk in his statutes. David prayed, That God would incline his
heart to keep his Law. This determining grace is that, which Pelagians,
Arminians and Jesuits object against, whereas if the power of God does not
this, our power will have the greater part in our Salvation.

Fourthly, The power of God keeps us dirigendo, by directing and ordering our
steps, so that we do not fall. We are very weak and unskilful, and like babes,
who are said, Heb. 6. to be unskilful in the word of righteousness; Christ and
the way of faith is unknown to us, a strange thing to us: As Sampson being
blind, needed one to direct him, where the beams were: Thus we need direction
concerning the Author of our strength, and how we may be made partakers of it.
When David was in Readiness armor, he could not tell how to weild or manage it:
The Lord Christ he it is that strengthens his people; a kind of omnipotency is
communicated to them by him, I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. But there is much skill, and an heavenly act
required to make use of Christ, and to derive power from him: Therefore the
Lord helps us by directing our hearts unto the love of Christ, and faith in
him, 1 Thessalonians. 3.5. Hence David many times prays, God would direct and order
his ways. This directive power is of consequence to us, for without it we
should throw our selves into every pit.

Fifthly, The power of the Lord keeps us applicando, by an efficacious applying
of the means of grace to us. For when we say, God's power keeps us in grace,
that is not to be understood immediately, as Angels in Heaven are kept, but
mediately by the Word and Ordinances. Therefore the organical and instrumental
cause of our conservation is the word of God, as our Savior afterward
prays, God would sanctify them by his truth, his Word was truth: So that
this makes much for the advancement of Christ's Ministry, and the Gospel
preached, for by the lively working of these, we come to stand fast. These are
the continual rubbings that keep heat in us: These are the Cocks that crow, to
put us in mind of our sins: These are the frequent alarms against our
spiritual enemies, that they surprise us not in our security.

Sixthly, The power of God keeps us corroborando, by strengthening and
fortifying the powers of the Soul while they do work. A man that is
paralytical, though he has life in him, yet cannot steadily and firmly move
the parts of his body, but they shake as if they did not belong to the body:
Thus even while the people of God are acting, and working what is good, they do
it so remisly, so faintly, that did not the Lord confirm them, all their duties
would be very uncomfortable to them. Hence Paul so often prays, That God
would strengthen and settle them, that he would establish and build them on the
work. It Is a blessed thing to walk in the paths of godliness, with an
imboldened and confirmed heart.

Seventhly, The power of God does keep us suaviter alliciendo, by putting
strong consolations, and sweet delights in our soul, while we are doing his
will. Nehem. 8.10. The joy of the Lord is your strength. We glory in
tribulations, when we are filled with joy. As fear and unbelief make feeble
knees and weak hands; so joy and heavenly delight does strengthen and confirm
the soul, What is that which makes Angels and Saints so inseparably adhere to
God, and that to all eternity, never weary of him? Is it not the infinite joy
and delight they have in God? So while God does thus give us to taste and feel
how good he is, while we have an experiment of the preciousness of Christ upon
our hearts, we stand immovable like so many Rocks in the same place, though
never so many waves beat on us.

Eighthly, Gods power keeps us from sin reprimendo, by repressing and curbing
those relics of sin, which are within us; For from our own selves would
arise such noisome lusts that would separate us from God; even as from the
earth arise such black vapors, that hide the Sun from it. The Spirit of God
therefore does mortify the body of sin, keeps this root from sprouting
forth, and is ready to crush the Cockatrice in her eggs.

Lastly, The power of God does keep us arcendo, by driving away, and keeping of
the devil from us. How strangely this roaring Lion is set upon us as a prey,
appears by that of our Savior, Luke 12. Satan has desired to winnow you, he
would spare no godly man; Therefore he is called the Tempter, because all the
day long it is his work to seduce to sin; so that herein the necessity of Gods
power appears Ephesians. 6. We wrestle with principalities and powers. Thou art
no fit match for them: You see that Adam in the state of integrity was overcome
by him. It Is God then that keeps these roaring Lions tied up, otherwise what
could poor Sheep do to oppose so many Lions?

Use of Instruction. With what thankfulness and joy we should bless God at the
close of every day? Have thou not been a Cain, a Judas this day? Bless God that
kept thee; Have thou not by words or works broken thy Communion with God? Oh
acknowledge his goodness to thee! Thou might have been tempted and seduced
by sin or Satan, so that great wounds and gashes might have been made upon
thy Conscience: Oh say, Lord, I am amazed at thy power and grace in keeping of
me! The Godly are called (...) the preserved ones, and well may they be called
so, for did God withdraw his hand you should see them wallowing in filth, and
made like the vile ones upon the Earth: Do not then presume on thy own strength
but depend upon Gods power.

SERMON LVII. Reasons proving the Necessity of Gods preserving his Children in
Grace, That God keeps them by Faith, Also why and how Faith keeps them rather
then other Graces.
JOH. 17.11. Keep through thy Name those thou have given me.
WE have heard how many ways God keeps even converted persons from falling
into their first Chaos and confusion.

Let us Consider the Grounds Why there is such a Necessity of Gods preserving
power, Why there is such a necessity of Gods preserving power.
that so we may be humbled in our selves and God exalted.

by the Apostate Angels and lapsed Adam; What can more forcibly teach us this
Truth then their Apostasy? Did not God create Angels full of Light and Glory
like the Stars? and yet the Apostle Jude says, From the Apostate Angels and
lapsed Adam.
They kept not their first habitation; Did not also God create Adam after his
own Image in Righteousness, yet how quickly did he become a Prodigal, and
spent all? You see here the most glorious of all Creatures, furnished with a
rich stock, yet in a very little space proved Bankrupts, and lost all; Oh then
what shall the godly man think of himself who has not such strength of grace
as they had; And besides they had no corruption or principle of Rebellion
within them to betray them as we have: Who then is not compelled by this
consideration to acknowledge the glorious right hand of God to uphold his
Servants from falling every moment, for in that all the Angels did not fall as
well as some, it is to be attributed to the mere confirming grace of God,
therefore they are called the Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21. God did by his power
graciously confirm them in what was good, and denied such help to those that
revolted; Oh then let the Godly Soul pray fervently, Lord keep me daily; Adam,
yea, the glorious Angels could not keep themselves, and shall I think my self
secure?

grace abiding in us is but a Creature that needs help and support as well as
other Creatures; Though Grace in us be the most glorious thing in the world,
and the Image of God, yet being still a created being, it needs preservation
from God; So that as in our natural life we live, and breathe, and move in
God, So it is much more in our Spiritual Life, So that as our grace because of
the imperfection of it cannot justify us or save us, so neither from the
weakness of it can it preserve, Grace is not God, neither has it the power of
God.

Quest.
Obj And if you say, That actual help of grace whereby God keeps us, that is
but a Creature, and then that must need another help, and so in infinitum, as
some Arminians urge.

Answ.
I answer, Grace inherent in us is by way of a permanent principle abiding in
us, and so needs some to excite and quicken it, but this actual helping is
by way of a transient principle, moving but not continuing, and so that does
not need a further help; This is like the sharpening of the edge of the tools;
This is like the actual Ejaculation of the Sunbeams, which make Objects to be
actually seen; Take heed then of magnifying grace too much within us, as in
Popery, when it is made our Righteousness whereby we are justified before God,
or when we judge this able of it self without further Auxiliaries of God to
preserve us.

Because while we are in this Life we are yet but in the way; We are not come
to our Eternal home in Heaven where we shall be so confirmed that we shall not
need such peculiar helps as now we do; We are here still in the way; Our
Condition is compared to a warfare, to a Wrestling and fighting: We are but in
the race, we have not yet put on the Crown, and therefore Gods assisting grace
is always necessary; One reason the Orthodox give why we are justified by
imputed Righteousness and not inherent, why our inherent Righteousness is
imperfect, though God could make it perfect, is because God thereby would make
us humble and lowly in our selves; But say the Adversaries, if we were
perfectly holy there would be no danger of pride no more then there is in those
that are glorified; To which it is answered, That suppose a man were made
perfect in this Life, and were yet in via, not in termino; There would be as
much danger of pride as there was in Adam and the Angels; The Saints therefore
glorified they are made perfect, they are no more in the way; They have
overcome, and so are made Pillars in the Temple of God, that never shall be
removed; But it is not thus with the most holy man, he is yet fighting,
sighing, groaning, and so needs daily custody.

If we do Consider those many Commands and Exhortations, not to be
high-minded, but fear, Romans 11.20. To walk with fear and trembling, These argue
a necessity of dependence upon God; The Apostle Romans 11. bids a man take heed
of boasting lest he fall, for thou bear not the Root but the Root thee, Romans
11.18 This is very pertinent, Thou do not keep God to thee, but God keeps
thee to himself; The branch gives not juice to the Vine, but the Vine to the
branch; The Arminians from such Exhortations would infer the Apostasy of
Saints, but they are rather practical and powerful means whereby he does
preserve his people; By these admonitions to take heed of falling they are
enabled to stand; Only by them we are advertised to look up unto God as being
unable to establish our selves.

The remainder of corruption within the Godly, that is very active, and working
proves the necessity of Gods gracious power; Paul Romans 7. complains of the
lively power of this Law of sin within him, and that at all times, and in all
duties, even so far prevailing that it hindered him from doing the good he
would; Now then if we have such a powerful Enemy within us, if from our own
hearts would arise lusts to destroy us, who sees not the necessity of Gods
keeping of us? Alas, we live all the day in spiritual danger, our Souls may be
betrayed every moment, Did not God therefore keep us we needed no Enemy to
destroy us but our selves.

The malice and power of Satan continually assaulting of us proclaims the
great necessity of Gods power; He is the Tempter, and he is a roaring Lion to
destroy; The Devils are the principalities in high places, and above all he is
most set against the godly, as Luke 22. Now who could be secure in the midst of
so many Legions of devils, if Gods arm did not always support us? would not
Satan have possessed the heart of Peter, as much as he did Judas, had not Gods
power withstood him, his Temptations are so suitable, so subtlely managed, so
importunately urged, that it must be a power from above that can overcome them;
They are called Satan's darts, and his fiery darts, to show how quickly and
forcibly they can enter, Ephesians. 6.16.

Lastly, That Gods gracious help is necessary every moment appears in the sad
Falls and woeful decaies of the truly Godly, which could never have been, had
they not with Sampson deprived themselves of their strength; how comes David in
all that mire of Uncleanness and Murder, how comes he to be made indeed like
one of the vile persons of the Earth, as once Michol falsely upbraided, but that
God had withdrawn his present assistance, and whatsoever sins or Falls you read
of in the Godly, it was because the Lord was not a present help to them in that
Temptation, as when the Sun withdraws his Light it must needs be dark, or his
heat it must be cold.

Use of Exhortation to the godly, Use. Depend on Gods gracious power only in
thy way to heaven.
to live by a depending Faith upon Gods gracious power only, in thy way to
Heaven; The way is so straight, the oppositions so many, Thy corruption so
great, that thou can never come to the Journeys end unless God be with thee
all the day long: Shall men in outward temporal difficulties say, as
Jehosaphat did, O Lord, we know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee, how
much rather in all thy combats with sin, and endeavors after holiness, may
thou cry out, O Lord, the work is so great, the dangers so many that I know not
what to do; Woe be to me if the Lord let me alone to my self! Therefore as the
Church resolved, so do thou lay hold on God, and do not let him go, Wrestle
and strive with God, as Jacob, not letting him alone till he bless thee; Say
as Moses, I will not go unless the Angel of thy presence go along with us, And
take heed of these things
and that thou may do this take heed,

Of presumption and self-confidence; They are the humble and self-debased whom
God will help, When I am weak, then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12.10. Paul exhorts
Timothy to be a spiritual Soldier, and to get the heavenly armoury upon him,
yet he must be strong in the power of the Lord, 2 Timothy 2.1. The like is said to
all Christians, Ephesians. 6.10. When Peter presumes upon his own strength then
Gods assistance does forsake him.

Take heed of wilful throwing thy self into the occasion of sin; For by this
means thou temptest God whereby he forsakes thee; Thou will run into the
flames, and yet expect Gods power to keep thee, this is to tempt God, Peter
will be in the Highpriests hall, and where wicked company is, and no wonder if
it prove a Temptation to him, he that handles pitch shall be defiled with it:
He that comes near an infected person may blame himself if the plague seize on
him.

Be thankful unto God for every daily assistance; Be much in praise and
acknowledgement of this his gracious power, Unthankfulness makes God withdraw
his mercy; how often has God assisted thee both by preserving in what is good,
and from what is evil, yet thou have not called upon thy Soul and all within
thee to bless his holy Name? Therefore thou shall to thy woe find what a sad
thing it is to be left to thy own self, and not to have his grace to help in
time of need.

The second Interpretation takes Name for the Knowledge of God and Faith in
him, So that the sense is, Keep those thou have given me, by Faith, as 1 Pet.
1.5. This is part of the meaning, and from thence we observe,

Doct. That the people of God are kept to salvation through Faith.
Obs. That the people of God are kept to Salvation through Faith; Faith is a
special Instrument to preserve us, We are not only justified, but sanctified
and preserved through Faith; hence the Apostle John, calls faith our Victory
over the world, 1 John 5.4. And Ephesians. 6. when we are exhorted to put on the
whole Armor of Christianity, he says, Above all take the Shield of Faith, he
gives the preheminency to that.

Consider these Propositions.
To open this Consider,

1. That whatsoever privilege is attributed to Faith either in respect of
Justification or Salvation, 1. That whatsoever privilege is attributed to
faith either in respect of justification or salvation it is not for any dignity
in faith.
it is not for any merit or dignity in Faith; Therefore it is (...) not (...) it
is through faith not for Faith, for if it were for Faith as a work, then the
Apostle Rom 4. would not oppose working to believing, and the worker to a
Believer, so that to put any confidence in our Believing, to trust in our
trusting, is to give that to Faith which the Jews did to works, and in this
sense not only those that seek to be justified by the Law or works fall from
Christ, and make him to die in vain, but also those that set up Faith in this
Consideration.

2. Therefore though Faith be isntrumental thus to our Conservation, yet Faith
it self needs Gods help as well as other Graces; 2. Though faith be
instrumental to our conservation, yet faith it self needs Gods help as well
as other graces.
We need his help to believe as well as to love God and arise from sin;
Therefore though the power of God keeps us by Faith, yet it also keeps Faith,
Vt nos custodiat per fidem, ipsam custodit fidem; We should fall from our Faith
as well as other graces, did not God strengthen and confirm that, Only when
that is established God by it does preserve us in the exercise of other graces,
so that being confirmed by God this confirms and establishes us rather then
other graces, and that in these particulars.

Why faith confirms us rather then other graces.
Faith is that grace to which the promise of Gods power is made preheminently;
To him that believes all things are possible, Mar. 9.23. So that as all the
promises are yea and amen in Christ as the Foundation and meritorious cause, so
they are yea and amen to Faith as isntrumental; It Is of Faith that the promise
may be sure, Rom, 4.16. What promises then or deeds of gift God has made over
to his people; They are all made effectual to the believer; No Faith, no help,
no assistance.

Faith only receives into the Soul Christ who is the author and procurer of
all strength; Paul says, He can do all things through Christ that strengthens
him, Phil. 4.13. But how shall we make Christ ours? How shall he come to dwell
in us? The Apostle says, By Faith, Ephesians. 3.12. So that herein Faith is greatly
isntrumental to keep us because it brings Christ with all his power into our
soul, It deriveth all ability from him; It Is not Faith but Christ by Faith
received that does thus enable; It was not Sampsons hair the weakest part about
him, but Gods power, whereof that was a Symbol or sign that did confirm him;
No wonder then if Faith be thus serviceable to preserve us; Seeing that by it
Christ is wholly made ours, in whom all Fullness both of grace and power dwells.

in that it renounceth all our abilities, and carries out to God only; This
Faith has peculiar to its nature above all other graces, it emptieth a man of
himself, it makes a man renounce whatsoever privilege and righteousness he
may seem to have; Thus Phil. 3 Paul refuses all privileges, accounts all gain
loss in respect of Christ's Righteousness which is by Faith: As the Criple
cast his eye upon the Apostles, hoping to be healed, he had no thoughts of his
own Sufficiency but their power only, So it is here; Faith makes a man cast his
eye upon God, and look up to him only for ability; Oh then prize and nourish
this grace of faith which does so nullify thee and omnifie God.

Faith is serviceable to keep us by improving and making effectual those
instituted means appointed by God for to preserve us, Such is the Ministry of
the Word preached, etc. These are ordained by God to keep a man in holiness;
Those that think they are above these, and can be kept without them, Let them
think as well that they can live without food: But how come these iustituted
means of grace to be effectual in us, the Scripture attributes it to
believing; The Word did not profit when it was not mixed with faith, Heb. 4.6.
So that as the Word preached is used by God to beget Faith in us at first, so
afterward Faith does improve the means of grace for all increase; If therefore
we would expect to have the Ministry and the holy means of grace to keep us in
the way to heaven, it must be faith that makes all these profitable.

because by that the devil who does most solicit our undoing is repelled; No
grace but Faith does so immediately and formally repel him, Whom resist
steadfast in the Faith, 1 Pet. 5 9. And by Faith we overcome the wicked one, for
Faith is not strong with its own strength, and therefore it must needs overcome
the devil, as David overcame Goliath, not by his own valor but in the Name of
the Lord.

Faith is therefore helpful to our preservation because in some sense it
stirs up and acts all other graces; What the Papists say of Charity that it
is the assistant form of all other graces, we may say of Faith, That it does
direct, act, and stir up all other graces to work; Therefore faith is said to
work by love, Gal. 5.6. Thus it works by patience, it works by repentance;
Therefore Heb. 11. all the glorious achievements that those Worthies wrought
are attributed to Faith: Thus we see how many several ways faith helps to
keep us.

Use of Exhortation to the godly, above all keepings to keep faith up; The Just
is to live by faith, and we are to walk by faith, and all the while we do so we
stand immovable upon a Rock; If thou growest secure or revolting, if thou
beginnest to decay all is because thy faith weakens; The streams must dry up
when the Fountain does; If the branches wither there is some defect in the Root.

Use 2. of Instruction, That it is no wonder if wicked men grow worse and worse,
if they stumble, and fall, and never rise more, if they become like the
Blackmore and Leopard that cannot change their skins, for they have no true
lively faith in God, and so have not whereby to be staid up: Till God make a
wonderful change in them expect no other, but he that is filthy will be more
filthy still.

SERMON LVIII. The Greatness of the Mercy of being kept sound in the Truth: And
the Damnableness of Error demonstrated.
JOHN 17.11. Keep through thy own Name those whom thou have given me.
WE are now come to the last Interpretation, which is part of the complete
sense here intended, in this phrase, (...), and that is, to take Name for that
pure and sound Doctrine, whereby God in a saving manner is known. Thus Name is
used at the 6th verse, I have manifested thy Name, which is explained by the
word, they had kept. And then the Preposition (...), is taken properly, Keep in
thy Name, in thy Truth and Word, which I have manifested to them. For there is
a twofold keeping of Gods Word, Obedientially, by conforming our lives to it;
and Doctrinally, by preserving the truth of it; In this sense Timothy is
exhorted to keep (2 Timothy 1.14.) the good thing committed to his trust, gold he
has received, he must look this be not debased by erroneous dross. Observe,

Observe. That its a special mercy to be kept in the truth, and pure faith we
have received.
That it is a special mercy to be kept in the truth and pure faith we have
received. Faith and Unity our Savior prays for, agreement in error is not
true peace, and faith without Unity will like a live-coal quickly die of it
self alone. In these times of Errors and Heresies this Doctrine has more than
ordinary usefulness in it, and therefore diligently attend to the grounds, why
it is a special mercy to be kept sound in the faith, and that we are more to
rejoice that our souls are kept from deceitful errors, than our bodies from
infectious diseases. And

Grounds proving it to be such a special mercy.
First, It Is a special mercy, because of the frequent and diligent Exhortations
given to all, that they fall not from the truth, that they make not shipwreck
of their faith, 2 Pet. 3.17. The Apostle having spoken before, that some wrest
the Scriptures to their own destruction, he bids even the godly beware; a word
used in matter of great concernment, I. Because of the frequent and diligent
exhortations given to all, that they fall not from the truth.
and where there is great danger, lest they also be lead aside; Therefore
error is not the way to Heaven, and the Error of the wicked it is called;
Wickedness is showed in corrupt Doctrines, as well as in profane lives, (so as
to fall from their stedfastness) if you begin to shake, to doubt, it is a sin,
we must not fall from our stedfastness: There is a notable place also Jude
verse. 3. when the Apostle gave himself diligently to write of salvation, what
does he pitch upon, to strive for the true Faith, and he does not barely write,
but exhorts, his affections as well as his judgment, are set on work, and it is
not simply to believe or keep the faith, but (...), to be in an agony, as they
that are in a fight or race; The faith should be as dear to us as our lives,
and the word implies a difficulty to keep it, because of violent enemies to
take away this live child, and put a dead one in the room: Lastly you have the
character of this faith, it was once delivered, so that new Revelations are not
to be expected; But we are to enquire, What was once delivered? Thus you see, a
Christian must not be cold and lukewarm in the truths of God, but he must with
all his soul employ himself about it.

Secondly, True Doctrine is a special mercy, 2. Because one main end of the
Scripture, is to inform and keep us therein.
because one main end of the Scripture is to inform and keep us therein. As God
made the Sun a fountain of all light, and the Stars shine with a borrowed
light from it; so has God put all spiritual light into the Scriptures, and
with this Sun both Pastor and people are to be clothed. The Scripture is
not only a rule of our life, but of our faith principally, 2 Timothy 3.16. The
Apostle there reckoning up the admirable use, and end of the Scriptures, puts
this in the first place, That it is profitable for Doctrine; How then dare a
man say, it is no matter what Religion I am of, all the doctrinal Disputes are
but Scholastical Subtilties? Is not this to blaspheme the perfection of the
Scripture? and is it not horrible ingratitude to God, who gives his Church the
Scriptures, as the most glorious Jewel it can enjoy? This was the Jews
privilege, to them were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 9.

Thirdly, It Is a special mercy to be kept in the truth, because the Lord has
appointed Officers in the Church, for this end among others, 3. Because the
Lord has appointed Officers in the Church for this end among others, to
preserve the truth.
to preserve and propagate the truth. If it be then of such esteem with God,
ought it not to be also with us? And wherein does Gods regard to his truth more
appear, than in ordaining Officers in his Church, whose main work and
employment should be to disseminate this pure seed wheresoever they come,
Ephesians. 4.14? There we have Offices given to the Church, and one end is, that
believers be not tossed up and down with every wind of doctrine: And though
Timothy, as some expound that place had prophesies concerning him, what a
glorious instrument he would be in the Church of God, yet Paul does again and
again exhort him to keep the same doctrine he had delivered to him, (1 Timothy
9.20.) O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thee; That compellation is
insinuating, and argues much affection in Paul, and there is a reason even in
the very expression of faith, he calls it depositum, as Aristotle observes;
it is a greater sin to imbezil, or alter that, than any thing we have
borrowed, because this is committed to our Justice; but a depositum to our
faithfulness. The Depositor does rest upon us as trusty men; So that by this
all the Ministers of God are to be awakened, Christian faith and doctrine is
committed to you, as the preservers of it; The Priests lips are to preserve
knowledge, and the people are to require it at their hands. The Apostle 2 Timothy
1.14. as if verbum sapienti sat est, were not true in this matter, does again
re-minde him, to keep the good thing committed to him; See with what esteem he
speaks of the true Doctrine, and this is to be done by the holy Ghost. The
matter is so great, that unless the Spirit of God enable us, besides all our
study and learning we are not able to keep it; yea a Deacon must not be
ordained, unless he hold fast the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, 1 Timothy
3.9. Oh then, let none have low thoughts about that, which God has appointed
an Office for, and therefore given them the titles of the light and salt, and
nihil est sole sale utilius.

Fourthly, It Is of special consequence to be preserved in the pure faith, 4.
Because the more godly and endeared any are to God, this privilege they shall
have to be kept in the truth, at least so as not damnably to err.
because the more godly and endeared any are to God, this privilege they shall
have to be kept in the truth, at least so as not damnably to err. Insomuch
that a sound judgment in Religion, will distinguish a godly man, as well as an
unblameable life. Mat. 24. Our Savior speaking of false prophets, with what
powerful pretenses they should prevail, says, If it were possible, they
should deceive the very elect; If it were possible: You see by this, that there
are such false ways in Religion, that are inconsistent with salvation; and
therefore the elect man shall not fall into them, no more than into gross and
abominable sins, viz. so as totally to lose Heaven and salvation. Yea John 10.
our Savior describes his sheep and goats, not by their lives, but by their
attending to the true Doctrine, My sheep hear my voice, and a stranger they
will not hear, yea they will flee from him, verse. 5. So that a godly man does
hang his godliness about his intellectuals, as well as morals; He is not only
to consider, Am I diligent in prayer? Do I walk conscionably in my ways? But
am I also a lover and prizer of the true Doctrine of Christ?

5. Because that is the foundation and necessary pre-requisite to ho^inesse.
Fifthly, It Is of great moment to be preserved in the pure Doctrine, because
that is the foundation and necessary pre-requisite to holiness. The will can
never apprehend that which is bonum, if the understanding do not first show,
what is the true good: The apprehensive faculty must guide the appetitive, If
the eye be dark, the whole body is (as our Savior afterward prays)
Sanctify them by thy truth, thy Word is truth. Gods truth is only instrumental
to holiness; Errors can no more nourish spiritual life, then chaff or stubble,
yea or poison can nourish a man bodily: For as false Sacraments (such as the
Popish) cannot increase grace, because they have neither institution or
promise; so is it also for errors; and therefore the same persons that had
thrust away a good conscience, they could not endure or abide it, the same made
shipwreck of their faith, they put it away, 1 Timothy 1.19. They had some good
conscience once (though not truly sanctified) but this they repel, they do not
love it any more, it is against their interests, their worldly advantages, their
lusts and carnal affections; Can we then have too precious thoughts of Gods
truths, seeing they only are blessed to a man's true godliness?

6. Because of the proneness that is in men to be lead aside by errors.
Sixthly, It Is a mercy to be kept in the truth, because of the proueness and
readiness that is in men to be lead aside by errors. Gal. 2. I wonder you are
so soon carried away, so soon; Let there come a false teacher, and he can
quickly do more hurt, and pervert men's minds then the Apostle Paul could do
good. Wonder not, if you see some seducer come to a Town, and in a moment
corrupt men's minds, and make them his Disciples, and so overthrow that
building which a faithful Minister has been many years building up, you see
it was of old so, Paul, though an Apostle, neither by man, nor of man, yet
found it so; and at another time he complains, how ready they were to become
even slaves to false-teachers; they might abuse and domineer over them, you
suffer if a man buffet you, etc. only the true Apostles they could not bear
them. We see then, why it is that a goodly field may suddenly be overrunne with
tares, a hopeful Church, the body of Christ, be all over with a Gangrene, and
made deformed. There is a proneness in a man to err in his judgment, as well
as in his life. Happy then is he whom God keeps.

7. Errors of judgment are damnable as well as sinful practices.
Seventhly, Errors of judgment are damnable, as well as sinful practices.
It Is true, some errors are fundamental, some superstructive only, and so one
kind is not as damnable as another; but thus it is in Saints also, some are
compared to a gnat, some to a Camel; but as we say of the least sin, it
deserves hell, so of the least error; for as no sin is in it self little,
because God is not a little, but infinite God; so no error is in it self
little, because it is against the same glorious God. Hence Gal. 5. Heresies are
reckoned as the fruit of the flesh among other gross sins; and can there be
more terrible words spoken against any sort of wicked men, then the Apostle
Peter does (2 Pet. 2.1.) thunder out against some false Teachers, that should
privily bring in damnable heresies, whose damnation sleeps not. Oh then
tremble to lose thy soul among errors, as well as sins! For the Apostle 2
Pet. 3. says, Ignorant men wrest the Scriptures to their destruction;
Damnation is in perverting of Scripture; yea 1 Cor. 3. we see there that even
hay and stubble, errors of a lighter nature, make the salvation of a man
difficult, he shall be saved, yet so as by fire. Austin and Syrinensis
distinguish between the Haeretici and Credentes haereticis, the seducers and
seduced; The former are in a condition more exposed to vengeance then the
latter; howsoever errors in Religion, as well as corrupt practices tend to
hell. Austin questioned who was worse, a Christian believing truly, but living
wickedly, or an heretic living unblameably, but believing unsoundly, Non audeo
dicere, I dare not determine it. But Salvian a pious ancient Writer, inveighs
more against the profane Christian, and as for the unblameable heretic,
Errant (says he) sed pie errant, haeretici sunt, sed tibi, non sibi; and thus
Bernard reckoning up the three little ages of the Church, the first under
persecutions; the second under heresies; the third under corrupt manners, makes
this latter the more bitter: But we cannot absolutely pronounce which of these
two is the worse in some respects one exceeding the other.

Eighthly, It Is a blessed thing to be kept in the truth, 8. Because of those
heavy censures the Scripture inflicts upon heretical persons.
because of that heavy censure, the Scripture inflicts upon heretical persons
to avoid them, to turn from them, not to bid them, Godspeed, John 2. They must
not receive such into their house, or have any familiarity with them, and they
are to avoid an heretic, yea the Apostle would have us hold such accursed,
though they were Angels or Apostles themselves, and Gal. 1. The same reason,
viz. a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, which is brought as a ground to
cast out the incestuous person, is also applied to a corrupt doctrine. The zeal
and detestation then which ought to be in all the godly against heresies
argues the greatness of the mercy, if kept from them.

Ninthly, 9. The more noble the subject is in which any habit or perfection
does consist, the more noble is that perfection.
The more noble the subject is in which any habit or perfection does consist,
the more noble is that perfection. Now a sound faith and true Doctrine is
seated in the mind and understanding, which is like the eye, and the Sun in
a man: So that if the mind be corrupted, all is corrupted, and such are more
incurable then profane men, because they have laesum principium, they account
their error truth, they believe a lie, and then who can heal them?

Tenthly, Gods command is laid upon us to believe the true Doctrine, as well as
obey the holy command, both are indispensable. The same God that says, Thou
shall not commit adultery, says also Believe this and that Doctrine revealed.
God has laid a command upon the mind to believe, as well as the heart to
obey. 10. Gods command is laid upon us to believe the true Doctrine, as well as
obey the holy command.


Use of Exhortation to the people of God, to take heed of erroneous opinions,
as well as sinful practices. The one are damnable, are the fruits of the
flesh, and provoke God as well as the other; let thy heart be equally bent both
against heresies and profaneness. Nothing should be dearer to thee then Gods
truth. Did not the Martyrs burn at the stake merely for sound Doctrine? Did not
Christ say, For this end I came into the world to bear witness to the truth?
And know those errors thou have been lead aside with, when once truly
enlightened, will be bitter and sharp thorns in thy side, Jam. 1.19, 20.

SERMON LIX. That it is a special Mercy for the Ministers of the Gospel to
agree in one; Wherein their Unity should be, And the Reasons of the Differences
that are among them.
JOH. 17.11. That they may be one, as thou and I are one.
WE have considered the matter of Christ's Prayer, Let us proceed to the End of
it in these Words, That they may be one; Some indeed say that this relates to
the manner of Gods keeping of them, as if it were a specification of that which
would keep them; If they agree in love among themselves they are sure to be
preserved, but we take it rather for a distinct mercy, that as he had prayed
for their sound faith, so now for their Union and love.

We may Consider the Disciples under a twofold Relation.

1. Common, as believers and disciples, and so with others given of God to
Christ, and thus the Unity of Believers among themselves is a precious mercy;
But because he prays for this at verse. 21. I shall pass by that
Consideration.

In the second place the Apostles may be considered strictly and particularly,
as men in office, as those who were appointed to preach the Gospel, and so our
Savior prays for their Unity in this Consideration.

It is of infinite consequence that the Ministers of the Gospel should agree
among themselves, for when they are divided the people must be divided; If the
Pilates in a Ship disagree the Ship must necessarily sink; So that our Savior
knowing the devices of Satan to set Apostle against Apostle, Pastor against
Pastor, he therefore prays for their Unity in this Ministerial Office and
emploiment, and the expression is observable, he says not, that they may be
united, but be one, and that according to the highest example of all unity, the
Father and the Son: Luther thinks the Substantive answering (...) is (...)
one mystical body, but we rather take it of their Office and Ministerial
Employment, as 1 Cor 3.8. The Apostle arguing against Church-divisions, by
setting up several Officers one against another, says, He that planteth, and
he that waters are one, Doct. It is a special mercy for Ministers of the
Gospel to agree in one.
They all have the same end, and all have one general emploiment, viz. the
conversion of men to God.

Obs. That it is a special mercy when the Ministers of the Gospel agree in one;
Nothing is so terrible to the Churches adversaries as their Pastors Unity; This
was the Reason, say some, why our Savior chose Apostles, that for the most
part were of kindred one to another, that so their love might be the more
Inviolably preserved; This Counsel also our Savior gave the Disciples, Have
Salt in your selves, and peace one with another, Mark 9.50. Have Salt, i. e.
Season the world and one another with grace, but lest this Salt should bite and
smart too much, he adds, and have peace with one anooher: Thus peace and love
is of so great concernment that Joh. 14.20. He leaves only peace with them as
a Legacy, My peace I leave with you, my Peace I give to you, and Cap. 15. Cap.
13, 14. He calls this the New Commandment he lays upon them to love one
another; yea, he makes this a Character of their Discipleship, not if they cast
out devils or work miracles, but if they love one another.

To open this Doctrine Consider,

1. That such is the corruption of the best men, and Satan is ready to bl^w up
tho sparks immediately, that there have been contentions and differences amongst
the most eminent pillars in the Church: Twice we teade of the Disciples
contentions amongst themselves concerning primacy and a preferment above one
another: Afterward the Scripture tells us of a Paroxysme, a sharp controversy
between Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15. yet Paul and Peter they have an hot
contest, and that in a religious Point of practice: Now if the Sun and Moon
meet in such an opposition, there must needs be an Eclipse in the Church: And
if we descend to Ecclesiastical Histories, we shall find as bloody pens
against one another as the devouring Sword in civil affairs: That which Cyprian
complained, Madet orbis Christianus mutuo sanguine and quod cum privati
fecerint, homicidium dicitur, cum public geritur virtus vocatur, is true of
Ecclesiastical contentions; The Christian Church is divided, and subdivided
against it self, and that which if done in private causes would be called
malice and revenge in religious affairs is called zeal and courage for Gods
glory: At that famous first Council of Nice when Constantine called the Bishops
together for to end Religious Controversies instead of this, they had prepared
mutual Libels and accusations one against another, which Constantine
perceiving took the Papers, rent them in pieces and burnt them before their
faces, gravely exhorting to peace and unanimity; It would be long to relate of
the passionate contentions between Jerome and Austin, between Epiphanius and
Chrysostom, who upon their parting did strangely threaten one another with
that which came to pass; Epiphanius told Chrysostom he should not die a
Bishop, and this proved true, for he was ejected and dyed in banishment,
Chrysostom threatened Epiphanius, he should not dye in his own Country, and
this also fell out, for he died in his Voyage ere he got home, and who can with
heart tender enough speak of the many oppositions and divisions between
Calvinists and Lutherans, and others of the Reformed Church, by all which we
see the necessity of Christ's Prayer for Unity; There being such corruptions in
our hearts and Satan so busy to make differences and dissentions, That though
Legions of Devils can agree to be in one man, yet he will not suffer two
Doctors to agree in one Church.

2. The Unity that the Officers of Gods Church ought to have consists in these
things, The Unity that Church Officers ought to have.


Unity of Faith, That they believe the same doctrine, called therefore Ephesians. 4
5. One Faith. And 1 Cor. 3. There is no other Foundation but one even the Lord
Christ; And indeed this must be the ground of all other Unity, when the Papists
would make Unity a note of the true Church; We say Unity without true Doctrine
is but a Faction, a Conspiracy; The Turks have Unity, The Jews have Unity, but
yet because they have not the true Doctrine, it is not true peace and concord;
So that true Doctrine, that is, the Soul, the fountain and the root of all.

is in the same Confession and acknowledgement of Faith, and that in the sam^
words, and truly this is very desirable not only to hold the same doctrinal
Points, but the same words also, for new words bring in new Doctrines: Hence
the Apostle 1 Cor. 1.10 pressing for Unity, does not only exhort them to be of
the same mind and judgment, but to speak the same thing, 2 Timothy 1.13. Timothy
is exhorted to hold fast the form of sound words; Though they be but words and
a Form, yet he must hold them fast, and this made the ancient Church so
tenacious of the word (...), because by that all heretical Opinions were
excluded; It Is a remarkable expression, Luke 1. God is said to speak by the
month of all the holy Prophets; Though they were many yet it is mouth not
mouths, They had all but one mouth, and spoke the same thing; Thus it ought to
be but one mouth of all the Ministers of the Gospel to believe, We are to know
what all Teaches by what one Teaches.

There must be Unity of affection and hearts, as Act. 1. In the beginning of
the Churches increase their Unity of affection is greatly commended, ver. 14.
They continued (...); So also Act. 2.1.46. especially Act. 4.32. The multitude
of Believers were of one heart and of one soul; Though a multitude, yet they
had but one soul, one heart;

Thus you see what kind of Unity there ought to be among the Ministers of the
Gospel.

Grounds why it is such a mercy to have Unity among Church Officers.
In the next place let us Consider the Grounds why it is such a mercy to have
Unity amongst Church Officers.

Because fortitude and strength is in Unity, Vis unita fortior, A Kingdom
divided against it self cannot stand, says our Savior; When one piece of the
Wall divides from the other it foretells ruin; As that Heathen to his Sons,
giving them a Quiver of Arrows, intimating thereby as long as they agreed they
were invincible: All the united power of the Church is little enough against
their common enemies, and shall they weaken themselves.

so it opposes the Enemy more successefully, which is the devil and all his
Instruments; What is there that the Popish adversary does more insult with,
then to upbraid with the diverse Sects that are among the Protestants, for
although we can retort and tell them of their divisions, and that in
fundamental Points, yet it is our shame and grief that such a charge is in some
measure true, though not in that height the Adversaries do revile, for none of
the Reformed differ in Fundamentals; As for the Socinians though they do
vehemently oppose Popery, yet we take not them to be of the Reformed Church,
who overthrow the Foundations of our Christian Religion; But this is certain,
The Protestant differences give advantage to the Papists, thereby they gain
upon unsettled persons; Look you, say they, they have no certainty among
themselves, They know not where to stay, The Lutheran spirit judges the
Calvinisticall, diabolical; And thus unconstant, inconsiderate persons look
upon this as a great Argument against the Truth, whereas even in the Apostles
times the Church of God had sad divisions amongst themselves, as 1 Cor. 3. Oh
then let us bewail the corruption of the best, that they should be so far
transported with passion as to neglect the Truths of God by giving advantage to
the common adversary.

because their divisions breed divisions amongst the people; The differences of
Teachers breed irreconcilable distractions amongst people, as if the Heavens
should be confused in their motions, it would distract and destroy sublunary
things: We see in the Church of Corinth, when the Teachers were divided, what
divisions also were there amongst the people, some for Paul, and some for
Apollo.

because their Controversies bring a main neglect of the chief work of their
Ministry, which is to come out and to build up souls in heavens way: This is
the end why God has called us, now when we fall out with one another, and set
up Opinion against Opinion; The work of the Ministry is much retarded: Hence
the Apostle enjoyneth Timothy to fly such disputations and quarellings as are
unprofitable, because they fret away godliness, and are like thorns and
nettles among the Corn, hindering the growth thereof.

because this agrees with their office and call; They preach the Gospel of
peace, and God is the God of peace, Christ is the Prince of peace, and Col. 3.
he is our peace reconciling all things; Why then should the Ministers tongue be
a tongue of war, as if they were Priests to Bellona, rather then the Ministers
of the Gospel, So that if all these grounds be considered we may well pray with
our Savior, Lord make the Ministers of the Gospel as one man, for div^sions
(as Jerome said) are amicorum dispendia, inimicorum compendia, and publica
divinae irae incendia.

In the next place, what are the Causes (you may say) that may make the
Ministers of the Gospel thus to dissent

And 1. In the general It Is corruption and sin which lurketh in the hearts of
all, So that it is more to be wished for then expected, for to have Jerusalem a
City compact within it self; Never expect in this world to see such a time
wherein the Ministers of the Gospel shall have one Faith, one heart, one mouth;
This is reserved for Heaven, where there will be no difference of Calvinists
and Lutherans, of several forms of Church Government: The Church of God has
always been on fire, only as when an house is on fire, some cry for water,
some for Ladders, some to pull down the House, so some have cried for more
moderate means, some for fierce and vehement.

2. Corrupt affections of pride, ambition, and covetousness; These things are
charged upon the false Teachers by the Apostles; Diotrephes he loved to have
pre-eminence; Others accounted gain godliness, and had their hearts exercised
with covetous practices; There was no heretic ever proved a firebrand in the
Church, but one of these causes for the most part moved him, which made Austin
put it in the definition of an heretic, that he did alicujus temporalis
commodi causa, either invent or propagate false Opinions, But of Unity more
when we come to the following Verses.

Use of Exhortation, to follow Christ in this Prayer, give the great God of
heaven no rest by prayer till he has given rest to his Church and the guides
thereof; Cry out as the Disciples did to Christ, to rebuke the winds and
tempests, for the Ship we are in s^is^nking; These divisions are not only sins
but sad prognostics of Gods wrath, as if he had a purpose to unchurch us, and
to make us no more his people, as he did to the Churches in Asia.

SERMON LX. The great Pattern of Unity; The Nature and Properties of the Unity
that is between God the Father, and the Son, against the Socinians. That the
Ministers of God should endeavor after a perfect Unity, even to be One, as the
Father and Son are. Also some Rules guiding thereunto.
JOHN 17.11. That they may be One, as Thou and I are.
WE are now come to the close of the Prayer, which contains the Example or
Pattern of that Unity Christ prays for. It Is not for every kind of Unity he
prays for, but he would have them imitate that Unity which is most absolute
and complete, even the Unity of the Father and the Son.

Before we raise the Doctrine, this particular must be vindicated: For the
Arians and Socinians think this a pregnant place to overthrow the (...) all
nature of the Father and the Son. That therefore here cannot be meant an
essential Unity. Thus they argue, Such an Unity the Father and Christ have, as
the Disciples are prayed for to have: But that is a Unity and Concord and
Agreement, not of Essence: Therefore Christ and the Father are not Essentially
One.


This seems to be very specious and plausible. But

First, Grant that we should interpret the Oneness spoken of in the Text of
consent in Will and Agreement, as Calvin does, yet it does not follow, that
other places speaking of their Oneness should be also understood in the same
manner, yea from the Oneness of Will between the Father and Son, is
necessarily inferred the Oneness of their nature: So that although we should
understand this principally of Unity in accord, yet by consequence it would
prove Unity of Nature; for in free Agents, where there is the same will, there
there is also the same nature; where there is the same humane will, there is
the same humane nature; and where is the same divine will, there is the same
divine nature, indeed with men it is the same specifical nature, not numerical;
but because there is one God only, therefore it must be the same numerical
nature.

But in the second place, We are to take the Unity of the Father and the Son,
in as large a sense (at least not to exclude it) as in other places it is. Now
in other places, especially John 10.30. there we have undeniable Arguments to
prove it is an Essential Unity, I and my Father are One. Bellarmine, though
otherwise a Papist, yet in this point against the Arians, is Orthodox, and does
strongly maintain the truth against them. Now these three Arguments he brings,
That the Unity spoken of in that verse, is Essential.

First, Because otherwise our Saviors Argument there mentioned would be
insufficient; for thus Christ argues, None can pluck my sheep out of my hands,
because none can pluck them out of my Fathers hands: Why does this follow?
Because I and my Father are one. So then, if Christ and the Father had not one
power, and so one Divine Nature, the Argument would not hold.

A second Reason is, Because the Jews did understand him in this sense, and
therefore they took up stones to stone him; and mark the reason, verse. 33.
Because thou being a man, make thy self God. If our Savior had meant no
more, then Unity of Agreement with Gods will. The Jews knew that every godly
man had the love of God in this sense written in his heart. Therefore they
could not think that blasphemy. They did not think that David made himself a
God, when he delighted in the Law of God, making his will to accord with Gods.

Thirdly, Because our Savior upon this accusation, does not deny the thing, or
charge them with falsehood, but further proves it, Because he does the works of
the Father, therefore he bids them believe his works, if they will not believe
him, which are to make them know that the Father is in him, and he in the
Father; upon which words it is said again, verse. 39. They sought again to take
him, implying, he had not corrected, but confirmed that more, which they called
blasphemy.

In the third place, Though our Savior prays the Disciples may be One, as he
and the Father are; yet their Argument will not hold, unless they can show,
that (...) (as) is always used as a note of equality, and not similitude
only; but we can show the contrary in Scripture, that (...) is used for
similitude, not equality, Luke 6.36. Be ye merciful, as your heavenly Father
is merciful: There it is a note of similitude only, for how can a drop be
equal to the Ocean? So 1 John 3.2. He that has this hope purifieth himself as
God is pure; Here it must be a note of similitude, for none can be equal to God
in purity; and thus here in the Text, endeavor to be One, as the Father and
the Son, not that you can equalize it, but propound that absolute and perfect
Rule to follow: Insomuch that if this place be well considered, it makes
against all Arians, and so is pro testimonio fidei, which they perverted in
argumentum perfidiae; and Austin's observation is not to be neglected; Christ
says, he prays, that they may be One as we are; he does not say, that they
may be One with us, or that they and we may be One, as we are One, but that
they may be One, as we are One. What more may be said upon this, is to be
spoken unto verse. 21. Observe. The Ministers of God must endeavor after the
most perfect Unity. Even to be one as the Father and Son are.
Observe,

That it is not enough for the Ministers of the Gospel to be one, but they are
to endeavor after the most perfect Unity, to be One as the Father and Son
are. Oh this consideration should make us blush and ashamed to see the
contentions and differences that are! Did the Father and the Son, ever show
such discord! We should never take our eyes off this pattern.

Let us but consider in how many respects we are to aim at such a Unity as is
between them. 1. The Unity between the Father and Son is a spiritual union.


First, The Unity between the Father and the Son is a spiritual Unity:
Insomuch that some have called the Spirit of God, the holy bond of the Trinity;
It Is not a carnal, bodily Unity, but spiritual; and thus ought the Ministers of
the Gospel to be, though they be of the same nature, of the same flesh and
blood, yet if they have not the same spirit composing and sanctifying of them,
they will be like ropes of sand; This the Apostle urges admirably, 1 Cor. 12.
4, etc. and verse. 13. where enumerating the several gifts and operations of
Gods Spirit, he still adds, It Is the same Spirit, and by one Spirit, we are
all baptized in the same bond. This then ought to be our Unity, the holy Spirit
of God is to move, work and guide all our hearts and affections. As it is the
same Soul that informs all the parts of the body, or as some Philosophers
said, There was one intellectus agens, that was universal to all men. There may
be agreement for civil and political considerations, but this will never hold,
till there be a spiritual Unity. As Tully observed, That all friendship founded
upon bonum utile, or jucundum, would never endure, unless they added bonum
honestum; We may add further, Even that moral honest good, is not ground
enough, unless it be bonum spirituale; If then the Spirit of God did work, the
same measure of illumination and sanctification in all, there would not be any
disagreement; but though all godly men have the same Spirit, yet not the same
gifts or graces, or degree of graces, and for want of this comes contention.

2. Its constant and individed.
Secondly, The Unity between Father and Son is constant and individed. There can
never be a separation between them. The Father and Son were always one,
though the manifestation of this is more, under the Gospel Light, then it was
under the Law; and thus ought the Ministers of the Gospel to agree constantly,
perpetually; for if at any time contention breaks forth, it proves like a
dead fly in a box of ointment, it makes all the other good they have to be ill
spoken of; Let them never be so learned, so godly, so zealous, yet discord will
scandalize all; and this constancy of Unity is to be preserved against all
outward or inward causes of difference; outward is the persecution and
opposition of enemies to the Church of God; inward is from our own corruptions
and distempers. Against both these we are to watch, that so our peace be not
weakened.

3. An holy unity.
Thirdly, The Unity of the Father and the Son is an holy Unity. They are one
in that which is holy and heavenly; They only will what is good, and the Sun
may sooner become a dunghill, then they will what is evil; such an Unity let
the Ministers of God endeavor after. An unity in error, an unity in mischief
and wickedness, is such an unity as the devils have amongst themselves: That
unity amongst Papists, which they boast of, is it not like the unity of Herod
and Pilate, both agreeing against Christ?

4. Full of love to mankind.
Fourthly, The Unity of the Father and Son, is full of love and bowels to
mankind. They both are one in this, to procure the salvation of believers: The
Father he wills to send his only begotten Son, to die that reproachful death,
and to be an atonement for man's sins; The Son does voluntarily and readily
undertake this bitter cup, then they are one to procure the salvation of man;
If the Father and the Son had disagreed, no salvation had been possible: Oh
then that the Ministers of the Gospel would make this use of their Unity, that
they might all as one man endeavor the conversion and edification of souls!
How happy would it be to lay all differences and disputes aside, that they
might bring people to the saving knowledge of God? What a spur should this be
to us? Shall the Father not think his Son too dear? Shall the Son not think
his blood too dear for men's souls, and shall we ruin souls by contentions? Do
we not take the devils work then upon us, and not Christ's?

Fifthly, The Unity of Father and Son is a well-ordered Unity. Though there be
a Unity of Nature, yet this breeds not a confusion of the Persons: The Father
is the Father, 5. A well-ordered unity.
and the Son is the Son; for all this Unity, they are not unus, though they
he unum, and thus the unity amongst Gods Ministers, and the people must not
degenerate into confusion; The difference between shepherd and sheep, between
Governors and governed in the Church must be maintained; When the Devil cannot
divide, then on the contrary he would bring unity into confusion; The
difference of gifts and offices shall not be kept up, as Corah and his Company
told Aaron, They took too much upon them, all the Congregation was holy as well
as they: But the Apostle though he press unity fervently, and that because we
are one body, yet he shows a difference between the members in that body,
every member is not the eye; so neither is every one a Preacher, an Officer in
the Church. This unity ends in all schism and disorder at last.

Lastly, The Unity of the Father and the Son is most perfect and absolute. 6.
Most perfect and absolute.
It Is an essential Unity, and although we cannot have this Unity, yet this
should teach us to a^m at the highest degree of unity we can, not to suffer the
least grudging and repining thoughts, not the least proud or envious thought
against one another, to love more then father or children, then husband or
wife, or any kind of relation that causes unity, for they are but one flesh
This calls for an higher unity. We have heard the duty and necessity of
unity, as also the causes that break it, what good remedies may be prescribed
to keep this excellent harmony. Although I shall not lanch into this whole
point, deferring it, till verse. 21. yet I shall name some,

First, We are earnestly to pray to God, to bestow such a spirit of concord.
Means to be used to get and keep this unity
It Is not the industry or policy of all the Conciliators, Moderators and
Pacificators in the world, to bring this about, but God only can bend men's
hearts for it. Hence we see our Savior praying to the Father for this
agreement, and God is called, The God of peace, because he only can make it in
the Church and State. It Is from Gods anger and wrath, when an evil contentious
spirit is amongst the Prophets, as well as when he sends a lying spirit amongst
them, when the Temple was to be destroyed, the rending of it was a prognostique
of the desolation thereof; and when God will unchurch a Church, and make a
Garden a Wilderness, commonly divisions are the antecedent causes of it.

A second Rule is, To rejoice in the parts and gifts of others, as much as our
own, when God is glorified by them, and to be compassionately affected in the
weaknesses and failings of others. These two are necessarily joined together,
and they are able to cement, and unite all differences. The former is to
rejoice in other men's gifts, and abilities with that success accompanying them,
as if they were our own. As we see John did, John's Disciples came with an
envious spirit against Christ, and said, All men run after him. This was
enough to leaven and sour John's heart, but see his excellent temper, I must
decrease, and he must increase, John 3.30. he was willing that Christ's light
and glory should be exalted, though it darkened and obscured his. This is a good
Reconciler, and the latter is a tender forbearing of one another, and suffering
of one another weaknesses, and a proneness to forgive others rashness, if the
stones of Jerusalem were thus polished and smoothed, they would lie even and
firm together.

A third Rule is, Love to the public good of the Church, if this did reign in
our hearts, it would compose all differences. The true mothers bowels would not
suffer her to have the child divided. It must be selfish revenge that shall
make two enemies desire to see the ship sink in which they are, rather then
they will agree to preserve it. What self-denial was that in Jonah, to give
himself up to destruction, rather then have the whole ship endangered: Every
one ought to say, If I be the Jonah, cast me out. Among the Romans they had a
Temple dedicated Jovi depositorio, because there they would go and lay aside
their mutual contentions before they entered into the Senate House. What a shame
is it when many Heathens have laid aside their mutual quarrels for the common
good, and shall not the Ministers of the Gospel much more for the Churches
safety?

A fourth Rule is, Not to charge such consequences upon one another doctrine,
that are not natural, and which they do abhor. This in doctrinal disputes
has been oil to the flame. The Lutherans charge upon the Calvinists Doctrines
about Predestination, That they make God the autheur of sin, that they make
him cruel and unjust, worse then Pharaoh, that commanded brick, but gave no
straw; yea, cruel like Nero, who, having a mind to put a vestal Virgin to
death, caused her to be ravished, and then put her to death, because she was
ravished. But the Calvinists detest and abhor all such consequences, and if
they did see such conclusions did follow necessarily from their Doctrines, they
would publicly abjure them, some gathered from Paul's preaching of free grace,
that therefore men might sin that grace might abound; but Paul cries, God
forbid at this, and says, The damnation of such Logicians is just, Romans 3.18.

Lastly, So far as men do agree with us in the fundamentals, let them retain
peace and concord. The Apostle thus exhorts Phil. 3.16. Whereto we have already
attained, let us walk by the same rule. It has been Gods mercy that the
Protestant Churches, though differing in many opinions, yet do not dissent in
fundamentals, For as for the Socinians I do not reckon them among the
Protestants, yea some place them not amongst Christians; but as for other, they
keep the same foundation, though some are purer Churches then others. Now it is
a special preservative of charity to embrace one another with hearty
affections. So far therefore it is an uncharitable and peevish thing in some
Lutherans, that will not call the Calvinists brethren, or admit of
reconciliation, but profess they will rather do it with the Pope, whom yet
they maintain to be Antichrist.

Use of Exhortation, to run to the God of peace for to settle peace and truth.
The greater the mercy is, and the more the devil does oppose it, the more do
thou strive for it: How many Unities does the Apostle mention Ephesians. 4? And why
then should we be many? Blessed are peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Sons of God, Mat. 5.9.

SERMON LXI. The great changes that even a Godly man is subject unto, in
respect of the having and losing those Sensible supports, both outward and
inward, which God at some times vouchsafes to them: Also what those sensible
Enjoyments are, and why God does so change the conditions of his People.
JOH. 17.12. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy Name.
WE have dispatched the prayer Christ put up for his Disciples; We are now to
consider other reasons and arguments he uses for his Petition. Our Savior
expressed many before the Petition, and some also after the Petition.

The words of the Text are brought in as a reason, why he prayed for them now
so solemnly, and not before; because formerly he had kept them in a visible
manner, by his corporal presence with them, but now the manner of his presence
being shortly to be changed, he therefore commends them to God, as if he should
have said, Holy Father, ever since they became my Disciples, I took a special
charge of them; the world was against them, they could not keep themselves, and
I came as a Mediator appointed by thee, to preserve them to eternal life, which
trust I have faithfully discharged, and therefore seeing they have hitherto
been kept, let them not perish at last.

In this reason we may take notice 1. Of the Disciples mercy vouchsafed to
them, they were kept, this implies their own insufficiency and inability.

2. The efficient cause of this, I have kept them; wherein also is implied his
fidelity and diligence in that trust he took upon him as a Mediator.

3. The manner how, In thy Name; which mercy is illustrated from the
circumstance of time, While I was with ^^em. 2. Of place, while I was with them
in the world. First of the circumstance of time and place, While I was with
them in the world, he speaks, as if for the present he were not with them, but
that is because his departure was immediately at hand. Now when our Savior
speaks in this manner, while I was with them, I kept them,

1. You must not think as if Christ by his bodily leaving of them, did also
spiritually leave them; No, this would contradict that promise, Mat. 28. where
Christ said, he would be with them to the end of the world: he did not change
his presence, but the manner of his presence; it was before corporal and
visible, now spiritual and invisible.

2. In that Christ said, While I was with them, it is necessarily inferred, that
Christ is not corporally present every where; that his body is not every where,
though Christ be every where: That is true of Christ in the concrete, which
cannot be verified of each nature. As his Divine nature did not suffer, so
neither can his humane be every where.

3. By this expression, says Austin upon the place, we must not understand, as
if there were a vicissitude in the Fathers and Sons keeping of us; as if the
Son had kept them a while, excluding the Father; and now the Father was to keep
them, excluding the Son; but the Father kept them even while Christ kept
them; and Christ will keep them after his departure, while the Father keeps
them, but not in the same manner; before there was a corporal visible keeping,
but now spiritual.

4. We are to avoid the Socinian reason given, why Christ speaks thus in the
Text: It is (says he) because Christ had not yet obtained that power and
sovereignty to keep them after an invisible manner; for they say, Christ had
not that Divine power and authority till it was given him after his
resurrection, then God gave him the universal dominion over all, (say they.)
But our Savior had sufficiently before showed, that what the Father did, he
also did.

Lastly, When Christ says, Hitherto I have kept them in thy Name, attributing
the power of keeping them to the Father, it is not as if he were not also God,
but he speaks here as Mediator, as in the form of a servant, and an
Ambassador doing all things in the Fathers Name. Hence in other places he
says, it is not his doctrine, but his Fathers; and so he seeks not his own
glory, but the Fathers. Thus much for explication. Whereas then our Savior for
a while was in a corporal, sensible manner with them, providing for them and
protecting of them, but at last is to leave them to greater hardship, and
stronger temptations, Observe,

Observe. That though God may afford his people for a while many comfortable
supports, yet they must not look to enjoy them always.
That though God may afford his people for a while many comfortable and
sensible supports, yet they must not look to enjoy them always. As the child
must not think always to hang on the breast, or to be dandled on the knee, so
neither must Gods children always think to have comforts, mercies, and
whatsoever their souls desire, but they must expect changes and several
trials. Hence the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 4.12. they are not to think any fiery
trial strange. The godly are to be prepared in the midst of their mercies,
that if God on a sudden raise the clean contrary, this should not seem a new or
an hard thing to them. John 21.18. Christ tells Peter, when he was young, he
went whither he would, but in his old age, another should girt him and carry
him whither he would not: In his younger years he had liberty and freedom, but
in his old age he should meet with bonds and imprisonments. Thus God says to
many, in thy younger years thou had health, comforts, but afterward thou
shall have diseases, pains, What are those visible supports that God for a
while may vouchsafe to his people.
and many sad afflictions. To open this Doctrine let us consider, what those
visible supports are that God for a while may vouchsafe to his people: And

They may have for a while many outward comforts and mercies. They may abound
in wealth, in riches and honors, ^o that they want nothing; they may have an
heaven here, and then at last, God gathers black clouds, and so there are
sudden storms and lightnings that spoil their sunshine day. It was thus with
Job, he tells us in what plenty, honor and ease once he lived in, but God had
made a sad change upon him: Even as Jonah had got a gourd, whereby he defended
himself from the scorching heat, and he began to think himself now very well,
and presently God prepared worms to devour this defense. Oh then, if there be
any of Gods children on whom he thus smiles, they have riches when others are
in the depth of poverty, they have plenty, when others are pinched with want,
remember all thy wealth is but like a little dust, if God breath on it, it is
scattered away: All these things run on a wheel, and that which is uppermost,
may quickly be lowest. As the Grecians say, There are no beggars, but their
ancestors have been Kings, and no Kings, but their ancestors have been
beggars; such a change and mutation are all these earthly things subject unto.

Gods children may for a while enjoy many sweet consolations, and have good
assurance of Gods love, and this is a special sensible support. When David
has no cause to complain that God hid his face from him, when he said, his
mountain was strong, when he could bless God, because he had forgiven his
sins, so that he could with heavenly boldness call him his Lord, and his God,
all this while David was happy; but this fair weather does not last always,
God hides his face, and then he is troubled, then he cries out, Why art thou
cast down and troubled within me, O my soul. It is a gross error to say
assurance cannot be lost, yea we may lose it by our careless and lazy walking,
and God may deprive us of it for wise and holy ends: If then God gives thee
these soul-sensible supports, that thou know and feel his love upon thy
soul, make much of this mercy, faith of evidence will not be always: There
will be a time when faith of adherence and dependence will be all in all.

Then have the people of God carnal and sensible supports, when they are
preserved from the outward malice and persecutions of men, so that they live
honored and prosperous lives here below. Such a time Joseph had at last,
David, Mordecai, Esther, and many others; yea we see in Ahabs days, when there
was such an hot persecution of Eliah the Prophet, and other godly Prophets, yet
Obadiah a godly man, lived in great favor with Ahab, so that although the rage
and malice of the world be prepared against every holy man, yet for a while
they may be the worlds darlings, they may have the Kingdoms, the Powers, and
the Honors of the world, so that we may sometimes say in this respect, the
servant is above his Master, Christ's Disciple above Christ; only let them know,
there may come a time, and then God depriveth them of all these, for their
honors, they have disgrace, for their glory, reproach. It Is much if God lets
them have the good things of this life, and of the life to come.

They may have a calm and serene time in respect of soul-temptations and
spiritual exercises. Paul had not always these buffetings of Satan: These
spiritual temptations, whether entering from the blackness of our own hearts,
or injected by Satan, are very terrible and bitter, they have made the godly
weary of themselves: Hence they are compared to darts, and fiery darts, Ephesians.
6.16. to show how mortal and how piercing they are. Now although God may many
times give his people a quiet, settled, composed spirit, yet this is not
enduring, but the storms do arise, the ship begins to sink, and they cry out,
that they perish.

They may have the comfortable presence and corporal direction of wise, holy
and godly persons, but at last God may take them away. Thus a godly people may
have the ministry of a faithful Pastor, while he is with them, the flock is
kept, no wolves have been able to get into the fold. Children and servants may
have a godly Father and Master; wives, gracious and wise husbands, now these
while they were enjoyed, were wonderful supports. Hence Elisha is called the
horsemen and chariots of Israel. When Chrysostom was banished, the people said,
The sun might have been better taken out of the firmament. Thus God has given
his people many sensible supports by godly Magistrates, godly Ministers, godly
Fathers, godly Husbands, and while they had them all was well, as with the
Disciples while Christ was with them, but when the shepherd is smitten; when
the pillars of the house are removed, oh then thy condition is a new condition,
it requires new graces, new strength. While Ismael is in his fathers house, he
will do well enough, but when cast out of doors, there is his difficulty. Oh
then if God give any of these visible supports to you, do not think to have
them always; God will put you to higher exercises; God by degrees brings up
his people to more and more hardship. Deuteronomy. 32.12. God there compares his
dealing with the Israelites, to an Eagle fluttering over her nest, and teaching
her young ones to fly. They say the Eagle does not presently expel her young
ones, but by degrees teaches them hardship, and at last makes them live upon
the prey they get themselves. God put not his people immediately upon war with
their enemies, but used them forty years to hardship in the wilderness.

Reasons why God sometimes changes his peoples condition from better to worse.
The grounds of this change which God may make are eminent:

That we may live upon him more; that faith may be purely and exactly put
forth. While we have our visible supports, we cannot tell whether it be God or
the creature, whether it be promise or sense we live upon; therefore he will
make thee renounce all creatures, that thou may say, O Lord, it is not
wealth, but thou in my wealth, it is not this or that mercy, but thou in the
mercy, that my heart adheres unto. Whom have I in earth, or in heaven but thee,
says David. Oh this is admirable, when creature comforts and mercies hinder
not the soul from God himself: when you use them as ladders to climb up to
heaven, as Jacobs Chariot to carry you to God; when you can say in matter of
love and affections, as the Samaritans in matter of faith, Now we believe, not
for the woman's sake, but because we have seen Christ himself. O Lord, I depend
on thee, and live upon thee, not for my mercies sake, not because of this or
that comfort and sweetness, but because of the infinite fullness that is in thy
own self: Or when thou can say as Paul in the matter of his doctrine, because
he had immediate revelation from Christ, therefore he said the eminent pillars
added nothing to him; so in matter of practice, because thou have enjoyment of
Gods fullness, the most excellent creatures cannot add to thy joy. Blessed is
he that believes and sees not.

That we may grow up in grace, and get more strength therein every day. The
Scripture tells us of babes and young children, as also of young strong men, who
have overcome the wicked one. Now if we were always kept at the breast, or
with milk, we should never get masculine strength, Heb. 6. The Apostle blames
such as stood still in their first principles, and were not carried out to
further perfection: God will not use his people always to a tender and
delicate way, they shall know Christianity is a warfare. Hence Ephesians. 6. they
are commanded to put on the whole armor of God; and can this strength and
heavenly fortitude be ever put forth, if God remove not all thy sensible
comforts, and make thee grapple with great adversaries? God will have Job at
last go into the field and combat with Satan and all his temptations. The
winds and storms shaking the tree, make it root the faster, and thus God by
bringing thee into hardship, makes thee the more sound and solid Christian: So
that though for the present thou have no spiritual adversaries upon thee, yet
lay not aside this holy armor, as the people of Israel marched in the
wilderness, in a warlike posture, and their Camp exactly ordered, though for
the present no enemy appeared.

To teach thee more experimental knowledge in all the ways of godliness, as
also of all the corruptions and deceitful ways of Satan in every temptation.
A man that has been always at home knows not what fashions and customs are
in remote Countries: Paul knew how to abound and how to want, he was acquainted
with the graces and with the temptations of every estate: A Christian is to
grow in all spiritual wisdom and knowledge. Now as a learned man by reading of
all Authors, and the works of Heretics, is able to speak to every argument
they have, can give account of every doctrine they maintain: Thus a Christian
removed from mercy to affliction, and from afflictions to mercy, is able to
speak to every doubt, to every temptation from his own experience.

That we might be a spiritual people, prizing the light of Gods countenance,
and esteeming spiritual communion with him above all things. Thus Christ is no
more corporally with his Disciples, that they might the more partake of his
Spirit in all the works thereof. It Is very hard for a man not to account all
his blessedness he has to be these outward comforts, but God will teach his
people more excellent and heavenly lessons; they shall know the remission of
sins, the spirit of adoption, power against sin, are greater mercies, then
if God should give them ten thousand worlds: But how can we come to this? never
till our visible props be removed; God will not rain this Manna till all our
provision we have be spent: We cannot have the fatted Calfe, till we have left
our husks.

Use of Instruction, Use.
With what weaned and moderated affections we should enjoy our present sensible
mercies, look not to have them always; God will make changes, and many turns
in thy estate, yea it may be he will exercise thee with such afflictions as
thou never thoughtest of, that thou shall complain with Job, The time was he
lived in prosperity, and had all honor and glory, but now he is brought to a
dunghill scraping worms of his ulcerous body. The time has been thou had
Assurance, Joy, Peace, but now God raised storms and a very hell within thee:
Oh then pray for that temper Paul was taught, To know how to abound, and how to
want, how to have comforts, and how to have none. There are deluded people that
say, they live above Ordinances, oh that we could live above creatures, above
relations and conditions, having God for all.

SERMON LXII. Shows how prone men are to know Christ after the flesh, and
wherein it appears.
JOH. 17.12. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy Name.
A Second Observation may be gathered from the circumstance of time and place,
in these words, while I was with them in the world.

This (you heard) was in respect of his corporal visible presence, otherwise
he would be in a spiritual invisible manner always with them, his presence is
not changed but the manner of his presence, From whence this Doctrine flows.

Doct. That there is no corporal or visible improvement of Christ but spiritual
only.
That now there is no corporal or visible improvement of Christ but spiritual
only; We are apt now with Thomas to ask for the wounds and prints of the nails;
We are not now to expect any visible or corporal refreshments by him, but what
we have, must be in a way of faith. Heb. 11.1. Faith is the Evidence of things
not not seen, This the Apostle presses, 2 Cor. 5.16. Though we have known
Christ after the flesh* yet henceforth know we him no more; Whatsoever corporal
helps and comforts, whatsoever visible supports once they had, yet now they
attend not to any such things any more; Christ himself is not now known after
the flesh, but after the spirit.

To open this Consider,

1. That there was a time when the Apostles and Believers had not only a
spiritual enjoyment of Christ by Faith but also a visible and corporal one,
viz. in that time when Christ was familiarly conversant with them in the flesh,
Then they saw Christ face to face, and rejoiced in him as one friend with
another: Now this in it self could not be but unspeakable comfort with our own
eyes to see Christ, with our own ears to hear him speak, and with our own hand^
to handle that Word of Life, as 1 John 1.1. Luke 10 24. Our Savior himself
calls them blessed, even because they lived in that age wherein they might
corporally see him, Many Kings and Prophets have desired to see and hear the
things you do, Prophets though they had immediate Revelations and Visions from
God, and so were called Seers, yet they desired to see Christ in his bodily
presence; And Kings though they had the temporal glory of the world to behold,
yet they desired to see Christ in the flesh; No wonder then if it were one of
the three things Austin so desired, that he might have lived in those times
when Christ was here upon the Earth; Do but judge within your selves, Would you
not go many miles if it were certain Christ were in such a place teaching and
working Miracles; Now the Disciples by Christ's visible presence had many
advantages, when they were in any outward streights he provided for them,
though he sent them without any money upon his work, yet they confessed they
lacked nothing all that while; When they were discouraged with their wicked
Adversaries he comforted their hearts; When they were in any temporal danger,
as when the Ship was tossed with Tempests he saved them, and which is above
all, he was a visible Doctor and Teacher unto them, so that there was nothing
in Religion they doubted of, but he could infallibly direct them in; It Is that
which the Papists so much plead for, that there must be a visible infallible
Head in the Church, who is to decide matter of faith, otherwise there cannot be
any certainty, but one will pretend to the Truth as well as another: Now the
Apostles had such a visible Head of the Church to direct them, though we have
none now, but the Spirit of God by the Word does direct and guide such as walk
humbly: Oh what a Treasure was this, That an Apostle could not have one doubt
upon his heart, any scruple in his Conscience, any doubt about any Text in the
Old Testament, but he had an infallible Prophet to go to who could teach him
all things! Thus there was a time of outward visible enjoying of Christ.

But 2. This outward visible enjoying of Christ was not of any advantage at
all, if there had not been also a spiritual believing on him; It was not the
seeing, the hearing, the living with him made a man happy, but the spiritual
receiving of him as a Mediator; Did not Judas live with him in this kind, was
not he as a familiar Friend with him, yet for all that he was a Son of
Perdition? Hence our Savior upon all occasions took them off from attending to
such visible advantages, as Luke 11.27. when they cried out, Blessed is the
womb that bare Christ, and the paps that gave him suck: He corrected this, and
said, Blessed are they that hear the Word of God and do it; So that the very
Mother of Christ was more blessed in conceiving Christ in her heart by Faith,
then conceiving him in her womb, So Mar. 3.35. when they told him his Mother
and Brethren were to seek him, he answered, Whosoever does the will of God, the
same is my Mother and Brother; So that now all such corporal considerations
are to vanish, and spiritual Arguments are to take place; Even as when Christ
left his Disciples bodily, then the Spirit of God came powerfully upon them. If
then we would duly improve Christ as a Mediator, we are to be a spiritual
people, our hearts, desires, and aims must be wholly spiritual; But this is
too great a lesson for any natural man, he cannot make any use of Christ, but
after a fleshly carnal manner one way or other; The life of Faith is as much
above them as reason is above a Beast; The natural man cannot receive them
because spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. Therefore wicked men are called
sensual, and are compared to brute beasts, which are wholly carried out by
sense.

We will instance in some particulars by which it is apparent that we are prone
to know Christ after a corporal manner: Wherein men's pronenesse appears to know
Christ after the flesh.


All those doctrinal Opinions in Popery about visible Images and Crucifixes to
represent God and Christ, what are these but even to desire Christ to be here
bodily with us still: And because this cannot be, therefore we have a Crucifix,
we keep some bodily representation of him; This the Papists commend as of
special use to stir up devotion; Hence some of them make the same kind of
worship to be given to a Crucifix as to Christ himself; Thus Christ is wholly
neglected spiritually, he is not propounded as a Mediator to Faith, but as a
pleasing picture to the sense; And thus also though God be a Spirit, and he
would not appear to the Israelites in any similitude, that they might not make
any Image of him, yet how prone were they to make similitudes of God, and is
this only among Papists? Are not the common people so ignorant and
superstitious as to be doting upon such visible Objects, Even as little
Children love to play with Babies.

in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, where the Papists hold the Bread and
Wine to be really turned into the body and blood of Christ, that it is no longer
bread or Wine but Christ's body and blood; Therefore they look not up to Christ
in heaven by Faith, but to Christ in the Sacrament, as if his corporal being
there were all in all; Insomuch that all the affection and devotion they put
forth in a Sacrament is wholly visible and carnal; They worship it as if the
body of Christ were there; They set it up to be seen that all may bodily fall
down and worship; Thus all is done in a corporal manner, and whereas of old it
was sursum corda, now it is deorsum corda; None are more devoid of spiritual
Understanding then those that are thus busied in a visible carnal way of
Religion.

The corrupt Opinions about Sacramenes as if they did conveigh Grace and Christ
by the very work done; This is also to know Christ after a carnal manner* for
it is not the Ordinances but the Spirit of God in and by them, that does us any
good, Joh. 6. The flesh profits little, but the Spirit, yet this has been
the universal disease of Gods Church in all Ages: In the Old Testament there
they rested upon the Sacrifices, upon the Temple, upon their external Rites; Oh
how often do the Prophets labor to convince them of this error! Hence Paul
speaks of a Jew in the flesh, and in the Letter, and a Jew in the Spirit, Rom
2. and all the Jewish rites are called carnal Ordinances, and beggarly; They
bring no real good to them that are exercised therein without the Spirit, and
may we not say, that almost all Christianity is but a religious carnality, a
resting and relying upon Ordinances so far as they are bodily and visibly
performed; When the Apostle 1 Pet. 3. had said, Baptism serves to prevent all
mistakes, he adds, Not the washing of the body but the answer of a good
conscience; When a man upon good examination of himself can say, O Lord, thou
know that I do in truth and uprightness keep to those duties I am solemnly
by Baptism engaged unto; Thus for the Lords Supper, is not it the very
receiving of it judged the very saving of men? Do not commonly people take it
as if in the very bread and wine there were some Sacrifical virtue, as when
they take Physic they judge some Physical inherent virtue in that to help
them; Oh what Jeremy has his head full enough of water to bewail this carnal,
gross, and ignorant Christianity that is in the world, which judges the very
Sacraments, or any bodily worship in prayers or singing of Psalms, though they
be but as Parrats in these things, to be great evidences for heaven; But as the
body without the soul is dead and a loathsome Carcass, thus is all thy
Religion, worship, and Ordinances a dead loathsome thing in the presence of God
without the Spirit; This the Apostle calls serving of God in the oldnesse of the
letter, not the newness of the Spirit, Romans 7.6. And in this sense we may say
the Letter kills and damneth, but the Spirit gives life; Oh then be afraid
thou art not one of those that split their souls at this Rock; This is the
common poison that devoureth most; Even as the Scripture speaks contemptibly of
the Egyptian Army, Isa. 31.3. They are flesh and not spirit; The same may be
said of all that Religion and devotion which most put confidence in: But yet
take heed of another extreme error that cries down the Ordinances, and under
pretense of a spiritual high attainment, which they think they have, wholly
lay aside these visible Ordinances and performances which Christ has appointed
in his Church till the end of the world.

Then men would have Christ after a visible manner when they pretend
Revelations and Miracles; For what is this but to leave the Word and the
promises as if that were not sufficient, God indeed has condescended to
support sense, as when he vouchsafed Miracles in the Infancy of the Church,
yea, the Sacraments he has appointed are a kind of relief to our sense, he
considered our weakness in appointing such visible Signs, but when we are not
contented with Gods Institutions but desired such sensible supports, which he
will not afford, This proceeds from a carnal disposition in us, This is the
cause in Popery why they tell us of such miraculous apparitions, they will tell
you of Crucifixes bleeding, of Christ's visible appearing, of such great wonders
done upon the Invocation of such and such Saints, and all this is to humor the
carnal part of a man, for spiritual things are supernatural and very hard and
difficult to flesh and blood.

5. This is to know Christ after a corporal manner, when we profess his Truth,
and acknowledge his ways only for earthly advantages, as he said, Fac me
Episcopum Romanum and ere Christianus; Thus they did of whom Paul made mention
with weeping, that they were enemies to the Cross of Christ, that their God
was their belly, that they minded earthly things, Phil. 3.19. Such Disciples
were those that followed Christ because of the Loaves; Now the Lord Christ he
calls to such duties that are opposite to flesh and blood, that are against the
incilination of our nature; To pull out the right eye, To deny our selves, To
take up the Cross, We are not to be of those that love Christ's Crown of gold
but not his Crown of Thorns: How greatly did Mahumetan Religion prevail, by
such Doctrines as were pleasing to the corrupt inclinations and sinful
pleasures of men, and because Christ's Doctrine was accompanied with so much
difficulty.

Lastly, There is in the godly sometimes an inordinate desire after Christ in a
sensible manner, and that is when they cannot rest upon the promises, believe
on Gods Word barely unless they have also evident and sensible Consolations:
Bare acts of depending faith and constant waitings on God in the way of his
promise argue thee to be more spiritual in thy Christian warfare.

Use of Instruction, how much it becomes all Christians to be a spiritual
people, for all things in Christ are spiritual, and all benefits to be received
by him are in a spiritual manner; How comes Christ's Death, Christ's Resurrection
effectual to thee, but in a spiritual manner; You cannot now do so much as the
Woman in the History, touch the hem of his garment: You cannot with Thomas put
your fingers in the print of nails, No, here is the Eye of Faith required to
behold Christ, Christ bid the Woman touch him not, for he was not yet ascended,
but we may say, Because he is ascended do not thou have carnal imaginations
about him; It is for want of a spiritual heart that so many titular Christians
have no real virtue or efficacy from him; He is not an Head, he is not a Vine,
he is not Wisdom, Righteousness, and all things to thee because thou art not
a spiritual Subject to entertain him.

SERMON LXIII. Of the Saints Lord Keeper. Showing how safe the Godly are kept
to Salvation by Christ as a Trust committed to him.
JOH. 17.12. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy Nam^, etc.
HAving dispatched the Circumstances of time and place, we proceed to the
Benefit it self, which is expressed with the efficient cause of it, (...) with
the manner how In thy Name; Because something has already been spoken to this;
I shall be the briefer in both the particulars,

First, The Benefit with the cause of it is to be considered, I have kept them:
The Word is used sometimes for an outward violent detaining of a man in prison
or other custody, Act. 12.5, 6. Thus the Jailors are called (...), Mat. 28.4.
Heinsius understands the word (...) which we render observe, Herod observed
John, in a corporal manner of keeping him in a safe hold, because Mar. 6.19. it
is said Herodias would have killed him but could not: Sometimes the word is
applied to an Obedientiall Observation of the Commands of God, Ioh. 14.15, 21.
Joh. 15.10. Hence also it is applied to the observing of the Sabbath, Joh.
6.16. Sometimes it is applied to the reservation of a thing, Joh. 2.10 Thou
have kept the best wine to the last; But in the Text it is applied to the
preservation or custody that is vouchsafed to such as need it, as v. 11. and v.
15. So in this place: Now our Savior by this expression I have kept them,
signifies that the Father had given them to Christ as so many precious Jewels
and an excellent treasure, and that Christ did undertake to preserve them,
insomuch that if any should be lost, the fault would be charged upon Christ,
and he would be found blame worthy.

Doct. All that are to be saved are committed to Christ's care to be kept to
Eternal Life.
Obs. That all those who shall be saved are given to Christ, and committed to
his trust, that they may be kept to Eternal Salvation, That look as the devils
2 Pet. 2.4. have the beginning of hell already, and are said to be (...) kept
in chains of darkness to judgment, so that they can never evade or escape it;
Thus the godly they have the beginning of heaven, they are interested in
Christ, and therefore Jude 1. are called the (...), and the Crown or
inheritance of glory they are to receive is said (...), kept safe in heaven, So
that all the power in hell and the world, are not able to deprive them of it;
This is very comfortable news to the people of God to hear they are kept, if
they were left to their own selves, how horrible and irrecoverable would their
fall be.

Let us Consider how much is implied in this Truth, That Christ keeps them as
his charge. How much is implied in this Truth that Christ keeps them at his
charge.


And first, Here is plainly denoted their own infirmity and insufficiency* For
why should Christ thus earnestly pray the Father to keep them, and say he had
kept them hitherto, but because they were weak and unable to preserve
themselves, So that Christ speaks of them as some tender young Infants that are
given from arm to arm to be kept, as being not able to go themselves, I. Their
own insufficiency.
and truly if the Apostles who were Christ's first born (as we may so say) and
although Christ knew that he was to endow them with the power of the holy Ghost
afterward in an extraordinary manner, yet if these that seem to be Giants
cannot help themselves, what shall we Dwarfs do? If the Pillars are not able to
stand of themselves, what can Reeds do? God to show the Church her miserable
impotency compares it to a child new born that is not only loathsome but
feeble, and necessarily perishing without some aid, Eze. 16.5, 6. Even thus are
we all in our own strength and power.

Secondly, As it implies their insufficiency, II. The precious esteem God has
of them.
so also the precious account and esteem God puts upon them; Men are not said
to keep their pebble stones, or their Weeds, but their Treasure, their Jewels;
And thus God Mal. 3. exp^esly calls them; Hence all the godly are called (...) a
peculiar people; The only Treasure God has, and they being his Treasure, his
heart is upon them, so that howsoever the worlds esteem of them is reproachful
and malicious enough, they are the off-skowring and the worst of men, yet with
God they are precious; Nay, though to their own souls many times they are as
castawaies, as loathsome branches, they abhor themselves, and therefore they
think God will do so much more, yet with God they are of high account.

Thirdly, There is implied a more peculiar care and attendance to their good
then of the whole world besides; III. A peculiar care of them.
For they are said to be given to Christ out of the world that he may keep
them; This giving of them to Christ supposes an Election or choice of such
from all others; God is a preserver and keeper of all, Job 7.20. called
therefore the preserver of men: Yea Psa. 36.6. he is said to preserve man and
beast; God is every where essentia, presentia, and potentia, and thus he cannot
but be every where, but he has a gracious presence with his Children, which is
not from his infiniteness or necessity, but from his mere love, so that if God
were not infinite and immense (pardon the Supposition) yet his grace and
goodness would make him abide and dwell with those that are his; You see by
this that Gods keeping extends even to inanimate Creatures, he keeps the very
Sparrows that they fall not to the ground, but there is a more excellent and
choice way of preservation to those that are given in special charge to
Christ; The eyes of the Lord are said to run to and fro in the behalf of the
upright in heart, 2 Chronicles. 16 9. What can be more comfortable then that
expression; Hence the Lords peculiar is compared to a Bird flying over the nest
where her young ones are, Isa. 31.5. Only the Bird is silly and weak, has no
power to defend, but she shows her desire and affection; Thus God is pleased
to compare himself, to encourage our Faith, for we are apt to look more at what
is against us then for us; We consider the devils Subtlety, the worlds danger,
our own corruptions, but do not attend to Gods merciful Preservation.

Fourthly, This phrase does imply the safety that the people of God are in, IV.
The safety they are in.
For though in respect of the world and their Corruptions, they may say with
Iehosaphat, A great Army is against us and we know not what to do, or they may
be afraid as the man Elisha led into the midst of the Enemies Camp, yet for all
this they are safe, for there is a fourfold cord that holds in them, which
cannot easily be broken; There is first Christ's power which is omnipotent, the
same with the Fathers power, Ioh. 10. I and my Father are one; None can take
them out of Christ's hands, because none can take them out of the Fathers hand;
Therefore Col. 3. their life is said to be hid with Christ in God: And it is a
crown laid up in heaven; Now what men or devils can break into Heaven? Who can
rob and steal from thence? if there be a stronger then God, more powerful then
God, then doubt of thy preservation but else not.

2. There is his fidelity and immutability, He is the Amen, He is the Alpha and
Omega, for we might think, though we are never so well to day as it was with
Adam, and the Angels apostatizing, yet we may be undone to morrow, we may alter
or Christ may alter, No, he is faithful and true, He is Christ to day,
yesterday, and for ever, Heb. 13.

3. There is his love and compassion* for this quickens both power and
fidelity, and sets all on work; It is his love to us that will not let his
people perish, and certainly if he loved his Children so as to die for them,
and that when they were sinners, then it follows invincibly that he will do
that for us which is less then death; It is but speaking the word, whereas
before it cost him many a prayer and strong cry, it put him in agonies, and
made him sweat drops of blood; Again it is otherwise with us then formerly,
When we are Enemies he died for us, and now being reconciled how much rather
will he finish what he bath begun, Romans 5

4. There is his wisdom, for though there be power and love, yet through
imprudence we see amongst men it often miscarrieth, but now in Christ are hid
the treasures of all wisdom; And Isa. 9. he is called the Counselor, as
having wisdom to direct, and power to deliver in all the sad Trials they are
plunged into; He is called often the wisdom of the Father; Now then put all
these together, Omnipotent Power, unsearchable Wisdom, Infinite Love and
Immutable Fidelity, and you must conclude that the godly man's safety is firmer
then Mount Zion or the Earth that God has established, for they may be
removed, but these cannot be no more then Christ, Christ and they will stand or
fall together.

V. It implies an Obligetion on Christ to keep them.
And lastly, (because more is to be said to this in the words following) this
implies a strong tie and obligation upon Christ to keep them, for they are
given him as Sheep to the Shepherd, and as Jacob was to answer for every torn
or killed one, so must Christ; They are given him to keep, as Benjamin was to
his Brethren; Look (says Jacob) you see not my face unless you bring him
safe* Insomuch that if Christ should not preserve those that are given him, all
the glory of his Mediatourship will fall to the ground, You see how he
declares his diligence, None is lost, For if he had lost some of them, then
had not Christ gone through with the work of Redemption, and so could not
expect the glory he prayed for, neither could he have said, I have finished the
work thou have given me, yea, it would have behoved him to come and die again,
to be crucified again, if he had not by one Oblation once perfected for ever
the Godly, Heb. 10 14.

Use of Exhortation to the godly, to take heed of all unbeleeving and dejecting
fears in the way to Heaven, persuading themselves, Oh they shall never hold
out, one time or other they shall be devoured by such and such sins; Is not
this to be ignorant of the relation you are in to Christ? Will Christ be an
unfaithful Steward? It lies upon Christ more then thee that thou be
preserved; Is not Christ's honor and glory more then the salvation of thousands
such as thou art? Now if thou should perish and not get to Heaven, it would
be Christ's dishonor; It would be because he was not either able or willing;
Indeed thou art to walk with an holy fear or trembling, thou art to despair in
thy self, but thy faith and confidence in Christ's strength should make thee
courageous, Stronger is he that is with thee then he that is against thee: It
is true, thy corruptions are strong, thy Temptations are strong, but Christ is
stronger, Live not with such anxious fears as a Cain fearing every thing may
kill and damn thee; Interpose Christ between thee and all fears and dangers,
Say, you may overcome me but can you Christ?

In the next place we come to the manner how he kept them, In thy Name; And
here name may be taken in all the significations mentioned in the former Verse,
But I will not trouble you with that; This may be spoken in a twofold respect;
Either to show what kind of preservation it was, viz. not a corporal or carnal
one, (though he was bodily present among them,) but a spiritual one in the
name of God; He did not keep them, as the powers of the world keep their
Subjects by the outward force of the Sword, but as Paul said of the Ministry,
Our weapons are not carnal but spiritual, So was Christ's defense, or else it
might be spoken by way of humility, for Christ in respect of his office was
inferior to the Father; And therefore he speaks of himself in this Chapter as
one sent, or an Ambassador from the Father, who is to do all things in his
Name, and to follow his will only, in this latter sense we take it principally,

Obs. That if the Lord Christ though God, Doct. If Christ though God, yet in
respect of his Ministry does attribute all to God, how much more ought the
Ministers of the Gospel who are frail men.
yet in respect of his office and Ministry does attribute all to God, how much
more ought the Ministers of the Gospel who are frail sinful men; Shall Christ
say, he kept them by the Fathers power? Shall he say, It Is not my Doctrine but
the Fathers? Shall he say, I seek not my own glory, but the glory of him that
sent me? How much more ought the Officers God has appointed in the Church take
their Auditors off from them, and carry them to God wholly; It is Observable,
That Christ did still inform his Disciples and Hearers to look up unto the
Father, and the Apostles they labored to take off believers from applauding of
them but to look up to God; Thus Paul 2 Cor. 3.5, 6. even when he advances his
Ministry to the Highest, yet left men should therewithal advance the persons
put thereinto (as Hortensins said of Tully that he commended Eloquence to the
Heavens, that he himself might be lifted up with it) See what corrective
expressions he uses, Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any
thing, our sufficiency is of God; All is attributed to God; Paul though endowed
with so many excellent gifts, yet says of himself, he is not able to think, he
does not say to do, to convert and change men's hearts, but he cannot think,
and he does not say he cannot think some choice, sublime, admirable thing, but
he cannot think any thing, the least thought in reference to the salvation of
others; And therefore he adds ver. 6. It is God that has made us able
Ministers; The Ministers of God may as well say they create the world, They
work Miracles by their own power, as say, they enlighten the minds, or soften
the hearts of those to whom they preach; Thus 1 Cor. 3.5. When the people
through vanity did rest too much upon the Officers of the Church, and
attributed that to them which belonged to Christ: Paul does severely
expostulate with them, 1 Corin. 1.13. Was Paul Crucified for you? Were you
Baptized in the Name of Paul? What are these but Ministers by whom ye believe?
Two errors in the extreme we are to avoid,

1. That because the Ministry cannot do any thing without God, therefore we
despise it and neglect it as too many do; This is to oppose the Principal and
the Instrument: They will not do so in natural things, though man does not
live by material bread alone, but by the Word of God, yet they will not throw
away that Food as needless, unprofitable, and unnecessary; Why then will they
do so to the immaterial food and heavenly manna of the Word.

The other extreme is, To advance it too much, To set up the Instrument to the
neglect of the Principal, and that is when we so rest on and admire the Gifts,
Learning, Elocution, or parts of the Minister, that we look not up to God, and
this we are prone unto; Therefore the Apostle gives a large Commendation to the
The ssalonians, 1 Thessal. 2.13. That they received the Word Not as the Word of
man, but as of God, which effectually works in Believers, John 4. It Is said
of John's Hearers, That they did a while rejoice in his light, They flocked
after his Ministry, yet afterward they quarelled with him, and said, He had a
Devil; Thus Ezech. 33.32. He was to the Jews a very lovely Song, They loved to
hear him, they came thronging in great Multitudes and Companies unto him, but
yet they would not do any thing.

Use of Instruction, If the Office and Abilities of the Ministry are nothing
without God, then do you lift up your hearts in Prayer to God more, That his
Power, his Voice, his Strength, may be seen in the Ministry: When you go from
the Sermon examine whether Gods power and grace come home to your hearts or no;
Can you say? Here was more then the Ministers Study, then the Ministers Gifts,
for Gods mighty heart-changing power did also work on me; Oh the Convictions,
the meltings, the burnings and changes of heart that were upon me! It was upon
my mind like Lightning, It was upon my affections and Conscience like Thunder;
As we are to preach like the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. He does not say (...)
but (...), not as the Word but as the Oracles, as having the Spirit of God
immediately breathing upon us, So should you hear and receive them as the
Oracles; As the Prophets received their Visions, and the Word that was spoken
to them; It wrought a mighty change, They did not seem to be the same men they
were, nor did the same Actions; Even thus should ye return home: Ye come
Earthly but go home Heavenly; Ye come carnal but return spiritual.

SERMON LXIV. Of the Manner of Christ's keeping those that are His. Of a
fourfold Principle that is operative to the Preservation of Believers: And of
the excellent Effects of the lively Meditation of this Doctrine of being kept
by Christ to Salvation.
JOHN 17.12. Those which thou have given me, I have kept, etc.
IN the former part of the verse, you heard our Savior expressing, that
glorious privilege of Protection and Preservation of his Disciples, and so all
that were given him in the midst of all dangers to eternal life. Now our
Savior amplifieth the fidelity and diligence he used in this custody.

So that in the words we may observe Christ's diligence and fidelity expressed,
I have kept them.

2. The Subject, Whom thou have given me. This is the fifth time our Savior
repeateth it, and therefore the more to be observed.

3. His fidelity in preservation is illustrated by the sign or effect of it,
None of them is perished.

4. He answers an Objection concerning Judas (granting that he perished) with a
twofold reason, He was the son of perdition, and that the Scripture may be
fulfilled.

All these particulars contain solid and substantial Divinity, both Doctrinal
and Practical. They will serve to confute false Doctrines, and reprove wicked
conversations. And

First, Let us consider the fidelity and diligence Christ uses, expressed in
that word, I have kept them. This is a new and different Greek word from the
former, which was (...), but here it is (...), which the Septuagint make often
to answer the Hebrew word Shamar, which signifies to keep with all diligence
and circumspection. In the New Testament, it is many times used of a corporal
violent detaining in prison, as (...) is, Act 12.4. Act. 23.35. Hence (...) is
often for a prison, Act. 16.23, 24, 27, 37, 40. and (...) is to hale to prison,
Act 22.19. but when it is applied in a spiritual sense, it signifies a diligent
observing of a command, or more frequently, a careful preserving of our selves
from sin, as Luke 12.15 1 John 5.21. And hence comes the Greek word (...),
Matthew. 23.5. They made broad their phylacteries, called so, because by them
they were warned to take heed of sin: But in the Text it is used for
protection and preservation to everlasting happiness, as John 12.25. only we
may observe the use of it in three places very fit to our matter in hand.

It Is applied to Shepherds diligently watching to their sheep, and that in the
night time, Luke 2.8. and thus Homer uses it also; and hereby is represented
that Christ is that chief Shepherd, which will keep his sheep, though never so
infirm or weak, that no danger shall befall them.

2. It Is applied to the keeping of some precious thing deposited in our hands,
that we are betrusted with, 1 Timothy 6.20. and thus also all the godly are
delivered to Christ as his charge, that none be lost.

3. Lastly, It Is used of preserving in a safe place in the midst of dangers.
Thus Noah is said to be kept in the Ark, 2 Pet. 2.5. which is notably true in
all the godly. The deluge of Gods wrath falls upon all the wicked of the world,
and the godly are kept safe in Christ, as Noah was in the Ark, whereas then our
Savior does so often inform his Disciples, that he keeps them. Observe*

Observe. That Christ's divine Protection of his people to eternal life is daily
to be thought on and improved by them.
That Christ's divine protection and preservation of his people to eternal life
is daily to be thought on, and improved by them. They are not in a transient
manner to apprehend it, but they are to keep this blessed truth in their
hearts, till it inflame them. As it is not one shower, but plentiful and
constant droppings that go to the root of the Tree; so it is not a thought now
and then about Christ's keeping of thee safe for heaven will affect thee; but as
Jacob to the Angel, so thou art to say, I will not let this truth go, till it
bless me; and truly for this end it was, that our Savior does so often repeat
[ Those thou have given me, and I have kept them] to confirm and increase the
Disciples faith, seeing they have so many strong Anakims in the way to Canaan:
Every man that looks only to his own strength, and the dangers that are in the
way, would bring up an ill report of Heaven, as those Spies did of the Land of
Canaan, saying, It Is impossible for any man ever to come thither; and with the
Disciples to say, Who then can be saved? but with God nothing is impossible.

There is a fourfold principle, which is operative to the conservation of the
believers.
To open this Doctrine, consider, that there is a fourfold principle, which is
operative to the conservation of the believers.

First, There is an inward vital and vivifical principle of grace abiding in
the godly, which will never fail: Not but that of it self, it would, as in Adam
and Angels, but as God could confirm and establish the grace of Angels, that it
never shall perish; so does God that supernatural principle of holiness put
into his people, 1. An inward vital and vivifical principle of grace abiding in
them, which will never fail.
1 John 3.8. He that is born of God, he neither does sin, or can sin, viz.
so as to be given up wholly to it, and that because the seed of God abides in
him. Though there be different thoughts about this seed, what it is, I do now
suppose it to be that inward principle of supernatural life, from whence all
gracious operations do flow. This God has set in the heart and inward parts of
his people never to be rooted out. Thus John 4 14. The believer is said to have
in him a well of water, springing up to eternal life. Here is a fountain that
cannot be dried up: Therefore it is said, He shall never thirst more, viz. with
a thirst of a total indigence and want: Even in the greatest deficiencies and
barrenness of Gods people, there has been sap in the root, when the branches
seemed dead.

2. A daily help of grace quickening and corroborating the soul in all holiness.
A second principle thus conserving is, That daily help of grace quickening and
corroborating the soul in all holiness. The former grace is permanent and
habitual, this transien,t actual, and by way of motion. This latter does
complete and actuate the former; For as it is not enough to have a natural
life, unless there be a further concourse of God, by which we actually move
and stir: So in our supernatural life, it is not enough to have that principle
of life infused, but we are to receive the daily impressions, and powerful
quicknings of his holy Spirit; and this is to have both the (...) posse and the
(...) operari, the will and the deed. These are the two internal principles of
our conservation, for the Lord Christ does not keep us immediately, but by
means in a subordinate manner.

In the next place, there is a twofold principle extrinsecal of our
preservation. And

The first is, Our Election, 3. Our Election.
that is the fountain of all our perseverance This is the first round in that
ladder, by which we ascend to Heaven, Romans 8. It Is from Predestination, that
nothing can separate us from the love of God in Christ. Romans 11. It Is Election
has obtained, that elected remnant shall never perish; and thus in this prayer
of our Saviors, all security of the godly, it is because the Father had given
them to Christ, viz. by Election, as the root and source of all their good;
This is so cogent a truth, that many who hold a falling away from true grace,
do yet maintain, That no Elect man can ever perish finally, because then God
should be frustrated of his purpose, and the counsel of man should make void
the counsel of God. This Election of God, is the vivificall cause of all
Preservation. As by this they were Called and Converted from a state of sin,
Election did bring them in; so the same Election, when they are Converted, does
protect and keep them, if they fall, does raise and repair them, whereby they
safely at last arrive at Eternity; so that their Perseverance is not a merit,
or reward of their former holiness, but it is a free gift of God, and an effect
of Election, as their effectual Vocation was.

The second external Principle is, The Covenant and Promise of God made in
Christ to the Godly: So that the Covenant of Grace being confirmed by Christ's
death, In whom the Promises are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. being among other
glorious ends, to perpetuate and continue the work of Grace in them; it is
impossible, that hell, or the world should quite put them out of the way to
Heaven, Jerem. 32.40. God there promises an Everlasting Covenant, a Covenant
that shall abide for ever; And what is the Privilege vouchsafed in that Deed
of Gift? It Is the putting his fear in their heart, that they shall not depart
from him. You see by this notable place, That it is not we our selves, but God
who keeps us; and for this we have his Promise: So that the godly may triumph
in an holy Confidence because of it: Many other Promises that are branches of
this Covenant, the Scripture declares, which should be sweeter then the honey,
and the honeycomb: For what can be more precious to hear, then that God will
safely preserve thee in the way to Heaven, so that no fraud or force without,
nor any lust or corruption within shall hinder thee of the Crown of Glory.
Isai. 40.29, 30, 31. He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no
might he increases strength, etc. God in the verse before is said Himself not
to faint, or to be weary: Though he created the Earth, and does still preserve
it, yet he is not weary, and because he is thus, he will make his people so:
They in themselves may be fainting and weary, but he will renew strength: And
he illustrateth this from natural strength, Though young men in their full
strength may be weary, yet these shall not. And again, he compares their
strength to the Eagle that mounteth up with wings to the Heaven, and is not
weary. Thus God will enable the godly soul: Though they run, or walk, they
shall not be weary; What a reviving place should this be to the dead, dull, and
languishing believer? Why do I lie grovelling on the ground? Let me fly up to
Heaven like an Eagle. We have also a remarkable Promise of Divine Protection,
Isai. 4.5, 6. where God by two similitudes does notably declare it, First, by
an allusion to that wonderful Preservation of the people of Israel: It was not
enough, that God had brought them out of Egypt, they would have perished for
all that, without his Protection; Therefore we may read the History, Exodus 13.
how God created a directive Protection for them, both by day and night. In the
day time, there was a Cloud and smoke, and a shining flaming fire by night.
Thus God promises he will do upon every dewlling place in Zion, and upon her
Assemblies; by these are figured the several Churches that are assembled to
serve God, For upon all, the Glory shall be a defense; By Glory, is meant the
Ark, which is here made a Type of Gods people, and they may be called Gods
Glory, both because they glory in God, and God is glorified by them: So that
the meaning is, Look what care and defense God did once show to the Israelites
to preserve them from perishing in the Wilderness, that they might be brought
to Canaan; The same, not in a miraculous visible way, but in a spiritual and
invisible manner will God do to his Church. The second similitude is from
Shepherds, who in those hot Countries, did erect Tabernacles and Cottages for
their flock, to defend them against the heat, and all other storms; By this is
signified, That God would create such defense for his sheep against all kind
of dangers and calamities, that they perish not, therefore in all our
extremities; We have four strong pillars to bear us up.

The effects which a lively meditation of this preservation will produce.
In the next place, Let us take notice of the blessed effects, which a lively
meditation on this preservation will produce; It Is worth the time to be
improving this truth. For

Hereby an holy boldness and confidence will keep up our hearts against all
dangers and discouragements. The people of God are subject to fainting and
swouning fits; Their fears and cares make them feeble. Oh then what a cordial
and reviver will this truth be to us? Boldness against all discouragements.
Though I am weak and cannot preserve my self, yet I am in the arms of him that
both can and will; a Child in a Giants arms is safe enough from falling: We
see David in many Psalms acknowledging his confidence and boldness, even
challenging all the world, Though the earth be removed into the sea, and though
an army of men should encamp him round about, yet he would not be afraid,
because he trusted in God; and he often speaks of Gods right hand holding him
up; Oh what a support is that, Gods right hand! There is more strength in that,
then in all the creatures combined together: So that if not only Devils, but
all creatures else, good and bad, should combine against thee, yet to Gods
right hand, they are but as tow to the fire. Thou can no more fall then God
himself can be weary and faint. The Heathens said of their feigned Atlas, whom
they made to bear up the Heavens, that he must not so much as stoop, if he did,
the Heavens would fall down immediately. To be sure, if God for a moment only
should withdraw his arm, not only believers, but even the Angels in Heaven
would fall into hell; if therefore thou did by faith rest thy self on this
Protection, thy life would be a sweet, gracious and composed life.

The consideration of Christ's Protection would make us go out of our selves,
and renounce all our own power. To trust in the arm of flesh for temporal
deliverances, is great Idolatry; but to trust in the duties or graces of the
soul for spiritual mercies, is much more abominable Idolatry; for it is more
peculiar and proper to God, and belongs to him as his only glory, to justify
and save us, then to defend and preserve us corporally. This Preservation then
of us is the only thing to humble us, to put us in remembrance of our own
impotency and sinfulness, Those many promises to help thee, are so many
demonstrations of thy own infirmities. We are never nearer falling, then when
we begin to trust in our selves; When Peter says, Though all men forsake thee,
yet I will not, then is he most prepared to forsake and deny Christ: So that
this Doctrine of Christ's Protection is a self-debasing and self-emptying truth,
it makes us see our own poverty and nakedness, and thereby fly solely to him.

Thirdly, The consideration of this Preservation will make us readily and
willingly set upon all those duties God calls us to. We will not shrink from
them, saying, Oh they are too hard, too difficult! We cannot go through with
them! What made the Israelites dispond upon new dangers? but because they
remembered not the miraculous power of Gods presence with them, they thought
every thing great but God. Their enemies they looked upon as great enemies, but
not on God as a great God. We see this sinful fear in Moses also, How many
excuses did he pretend, that he might not be employed in that embassage to
Pharaoh, till Gods wrath was kindled at him? Therefore if we did with faith
consider Christ's power, though our duties were great, though never so contrary
to flesh and blood, yet in the name of God we would go out and do valiantly.

Fourthly, The powerful meditation of this would prevent a thousand doubts and
fears that we usually make about what may be. We do not remember our Saviors
Rule, That sufficient to the day is the evil thereof, and therefore we
excruciate our selves with supposed future conditions, not considering, that as
our necessities and infirmities shall abound: so Gods preservation will: The
godly man thinks, What if I should be bereaved of such sensible helps, an
Husband, or some able friend, or my estate lost? How should I subsist with many
children? Or how if I should be called to Martyrdom, to be imprisoned, to lose
my life? Such is my weakness (says the believer) that I fear I should with
Peter deny and forswear, do any thing rather then endure extremity? Oh but
whence are all the confusions of thy soul, but because we remember not Christ's
protection and presence is with us!

Lastly, The lively faith of this Protection will keep us in a careful
diligent walking in such ways, wherein God vouchsafes his presence. Work out
your salvation (says the Apostle) for it is God that works in you to will and
do. Presumption on Gods power breeds security and laziness; but faith in Gods
power takes Gods way. Christ because he depended on God, would not tempt God in
unlawful ways.

Use of Thankfulness: Oh call upon thy soul to bless God for every moments
preservation! God kept thy heart, thy eyes, thy tongue to day, what shops and
instruments of wickedness would they have been else? That thou go not to
bed, as if it were into an hell; That thou art not full of gashes and wounds by
sin; Bless God that has kept thee close to him.

SERMON LXV. Of the Perseverance of the Saints. The Question stated.
JOH. 17.12. Those thou have given me, I have kept, and none of them is
perished, etc.
WE have considered the faithfulness and diligence Christ showed in the
preservation of his to eternal life, expressed in that word, [ I have kept.]
The next thing in order is the subject preserved, Those thou have given me; but
because this expression does once more, even the sixth time come in, ver. 34. I
shall pass it over till then: I shall therefore proceed to the 3d particular,
which is the effect, or a sign rather whereby he proves his faithful
protection of them, None of them is perished. The words are emphaticall, None,
he does not say all but one or two, but none; for as for the instance
following, [ but the son of perdition] we shall show you, that is not
exceptive, but adversative; because it is said, none of those that are given him
perish: now though in some sense Judas was given to Christ as an Apostle, and
in respect of his Office Christ said he had chosen twelve, yet he was never
given in the sense it is used, ver. 2. where such are said to have eternal
life. The last aggravation is, None of them is perished, he does not say none
of them has been killed by persecutors, or none of them have grievously fallen
by sin, for so Peter did, but none is perished; he speaks in the present
tense, not none shall perish, but is perished, as if because they were not
already perished, they should never, or rather, because in respect of Gods
promise, it was as sure as if they were already in heaven: Even as Judas is
said in the Text to be perished, although he was not yet in hell; he was not
yet gone to his proper place, but because of the certainty of it. This
expression was so remarkable, that Chap. 18.9. we have mention made of it as a
famous saying, That the saying might be fulfilled, of those thou have given me
I have lost none: only whereas in the text it is expressed passively, none is
perished; there it is active, I have lost none; but that change of the word is
very comfortable, for thereby is signified, that if any did perish, it would be
because of some fault in him, if they be lost, it is he has lost them. Though
sin and the devil should instrumentally destroy them, yet it would be
principally attributed to his want of love, or power or faithfulness in his
trust. In the text one word is to be observed, and that is (...) is perished:
The word is used sometimes of a corporal and temporal destruction, Judge.
12.11. They perished in the gainsaying of Core. 1 Pet. 3.6. The whole world is
said to be drowned in water, so 2 Cor. 10 9. Sometimes it is used of a
spiritual destruction, in respect of the soul by everlasting damnation; Now
the word does here take in both the senses, spiritual destruction as the
principal, and temporal as the secondary; for that this is partly implied
appears, cap. 18.9. I am he ye seek, let these go, and then follows, that
none may perish: In respect of the first destruction it is chiefly that the
devil has his Name (...), Revel. 9.11. only you must observe, that when the
Scripture uses this word in a spiritual sense for a lost man in soul and body,
it speaks of a twofold undone condition; First, There are some in a lost,
perishing condition, but yet recoverable by the grace of God; they are as Moses
drawn out of the water, where certain death would have been, and thus all the
godly before their conversion, are lost. Thus Matthew 18.11. Christ is said to
come, that he might save such as were lost; he did not come to save a lost
Judas, or such as were from all eternity, left by God in their undone
condition, but those elect persons, that for the present were in a lost estate.
Thus Luke 15.24. The Prodigal son is said to be lost or perished, but he was
recovered again. The other sense is, when it is applied to such as are in an
undone estate irrecoverably. They are in a state of perishing, and will never
be brought out of it; and thus it is applied to Judas. Thus it is used 2 Cor. 15.
The Gospel is a sweet savor to those that are saved, and in (...), those that
perish, where it is opposed to (...). The words thus explained, Observe,

That none of those who are elected, or given by the Father to Christ, shall
perish. Observe.
They will be enabled to persevere; They will certainly get to the haven. This
is a principal truth in Divinity; and as it is much oppugned by learned
Adversaries, so it has also great influence into our lives practically, and
therefore I shall be the larger on this subject; and before I come to explicate
it, it is good to compare two other Texts with this, as excellent parallels.

The first is John 6.39. This is the Fathers will; where you have the truth
asserted, and that very powerfully.

1. He says, He will lose nothing of what the Father has given him; He does
not say, he will lose none, but nothing (...), not any thing, neither his soul,
nor his body, and therefore because the body, when consumed to dust, seems to
be for ever lost, he adds, I will raise it up at the last day.

2. This is so great a matter, that he says, This is the will of his Father
that sent him; So that the main command to be received from the Father, and the
great thing willed was, to let none of the elect perish.

The second Text is John 10.28. where speaking of this property of his sheep,
that they hear his voice, he adds, I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish. Here you see the expression for the future, lest it might
be objected against this in the Text, though none is perished yet, yet he may
when new temptations and dangers arise, then they may be undone. Judas did not
immediately upon his Discipleship betray Christ; but our Savior says, None
shall perish, and he gives a sufficient cause of this their perseverance,
because they are in his Fathers hand; Here is the dear respect God bears to
them, and then none is stronger then the Father: So that you must find out a
power greater then Gods, and more prevailing then his arm, if you will hold
they can perish. Thus you see this truth confirmed by the mouth of two
faithful witnesses. But because this truth is of singular use, and of much
difficulty. Introductory Propositions.


I shall first lay down many introductory particulars to the stating of this
Question; for if the child at first be not well swadled, it proves crooked in
it is growth; we must therefore lay a sure and clear foundation, that our
superstructure may endure. And

The Question is not of the possibility of a believers total and final
perishing; If we consider him in himself, if we behold him in his own power not
as elected and covenanted with in Christ, then it is not only possible, but even
necessary, that he should eternally perish: This is evidenced in the apostate
Angels and Adam, there grace was amissible, yea they did actually lose it, when
yet they had not a corrupt nature within to betray them, as we have. Therefore
they did not necessarily, but by a voluntary choice fall into their own
destruction: How much more would this terrible apostasy be in godly men,
though sanctified, seeing there are the powerful relics of corruption
abiding in them, and withal many violent temptations without to overwhelm
them, if left to themselves. When therefore we say, the true believer cannot
perish, it is not to be attributed to his strength and power, but solely to the
grace of God, which as at first wrought conversion; so it does also
perseverance and continuance in that estate; for as the removal of the pillars
does immediately make the house to fall, being it is natural motion is to
descend downwards; so the withdrawing of Gods gracious power would immediately
cause the most holy man to fall into his old rubbish and filthy vomit of sin;
it is not therefore only possible, but certain and inevitable, that every
converted man, would be apostate from God; did not a mighty grace daily
preserve him; and this is fully evidenced by that prayer; all are taught to
pray, though never so holy, that God would not lead us into temptation, does
not that plainly teach us, That we are so weak and infirm, that there is no
temptation, if left to our selves, but it would wholly overcome us: Oh then,
Let the most eminent and chiefest believers daily pray, that God would not
leave them to their own strength and temptation, for this is to be left in hels
mouth.

So God for holy and wise ends, has in some measure and degree left them,
whereby they have fallen foully and dreadfully. So that we may say, they were
like Sampson, they lost their strength; the Philistims rose upon them, only in
time their strength came again. As a man in an Apoplexy or Lethargy, has an
inward principle of life, but there are no outward demonstrations of it.

Now this apostasy and decay may be in several particulars:

1. In respect of the acts and exercise of grace. These are interrupted, the
streams do not run. They seem to be a barren wilderness, rivers of living
water do not flow out of their belly; God finds as in that Church, Revel. 2.
Their works are not filled up or perfect: Hence God promises, Ezekiel. 36.17. not
only to give the habitual principles of grace, but the actual exercise of them,
when the just is said to live by his faith, that denotes a continued acting,
yet many times these actings of faith and other graces are intermitted. The
pulse beats slowly, if at all.

2. Not only the actings of faith are interrupted, but the contrary actings of
sin are put forth, in stead of faith they break out into unbelief; in stead
of fervency and heavenly-mindedness they are dull and earthly; so that now, not
the house of David, but of Saul does overcome; Now grace is dormant, and sin
is awakened and lively; yea they commit foul and enormous sins, such as the
light of nature would palpably condemn, as we see it in David, with what
contrivances and devises did he accomplish his adultery and murder, adding one
grievous sin to another, and no doubt would have gone further, had not the
Lord stopped him in his way: Not that these gross vices did totally drive away
the Spirit of God, and eradicate all the principles and seed of grace within,
for then how could David immediately upon Nathan's reproof, have so melted and
ingenuously confessed his sin, but for the while, the root only of grace was
under the ground, there appeared no fruit; or as a man that is mad has a
principle of reason, though for the present, the use of it is violently
hindered: or as Eutiches, who fell from the window ( Acts 20.) and all thought
he had been dead; but Paul said, There was life in him. Thus it was with David,
there was a secret principle of grace, but that was overwhelmed and stopped up by
many lusts, as when foggy mists do arise and obnulliate the Sun. It Is true,
David at that time knew those actions to be sin, and so he could not but
sin against his conscience; but it was a general conscience, it was not it
may be, practical and convincing, quoad hic and nunc; so that he did not sin
maliciously, though he was seduced by strong lusts: Whether it was a sin of
infirmity, is discussed by some: But we cannot say, David's sins at that time
were of ignorance or infirmity, nor yet properly of malice, but of a mixed kind:
It was not of mere malice prevailing, from a total want of a principle of good,
but from the not working of that good principle; They were not sins of ordinary
infirmity (says D. Ames) but of extraordinary.

Not only the acts, but the habits also of grace may in respect of their
degrees be much abated and grown languid. This indeed some have doubted of,
Whether a godly man can, or does fall from any degree of his grace; and they
have held the negative, That a degree of grace is of the same nature with the
essence of grace, and both indefectible. But when sin in the acts of it, has
prevailed on the godly, as many examples declare, no doubt but the principle of
grace is thereby debilitated; If darkness be introduced, the light cannot be
so prevalent; If sickness increase, health must impair: Now sin does expel
grace, both meritoriously and efficiently, in a well-explained sense.

None can positively dogmatize, how far, and in what sins a godly man may
fall, and how long he may continue ere his recovery. As it is difficult to give
in a Catalogue of the Fundamental Articles of Religion, without the faith
whereof a man must necessarily perish; so it is to lay down, what sins, and
how perpetrated do immediately expel grace from the soul. Indeed we may speak
to the negative, what shall not be done; but to the positive, How far, that
is difficult to say, we may say, they cannot commit the sin against the holy
Ghost, or the sin unto death, that they cannot die in final impenitency or
obstinacy; but to go further, and to set down the very peg, as it were,
hitherto they can fall, and no further, to give the minimum quod non, and the
ultimum justum non esse, is harder in grace, then in nature. The godly
therefore are to hear these things with trembling, and with all diligence to
attend to such means, as are appointed for their preservation to eternal life;
God may leave them in a dreadful, miserable condition; so that they may for
the present seem to be so many Cains and Judasses.

we would certainly be undone; So the godly when sinning do deserve Gods
eternal forsaking of them. The ground of their indissoluble union with God, is
not any good in them, but Gods mere grace: They do often and often deserve,
that God should withdraw all favor from them, as he did from the apostate
Angels; so that it is a calumny of those who oppose the Saints perseverance,
that we teach, the godly man, though he give way to all licentiousness and
impiety, yet may be assured that God will never leave him, and he shall be
saved; for though we are to say more to this, yet for the present we affirm,
That a godly man is so far from having any such absolute certainty in a way of
sin, that he is to conclude the contrary; if he do thus and thus rebel
against God, and not cleave to him. God will at last wholly forsake him.

Now these things do especially provoke God to leave his people, though not
totally, yet gradually, and that both in respect of grace and consolations.

1. When they resist the light of God shining upon them. There is a natural
light, and a supernatural: now to oppose this, to walk against this, is to
provoke God to forsake us, for thus such who enjoy the means of grace, and have
wonderful workings upon their soul, as Heb. 6. come to be left by detaining
the truth in unrighteousness. Therefore the Jews were delivered up to blindness
and hardness of heart, because seeing they would not see, and hearing they
would not hear; and thus by proportion it is in a sanctified person.

2. Vnthankefulness for those heavenly and glorious privileges the effects of
grace make us unworthy: When God shall by such an arm as this is bring thee out
of thy sins, leaving thousands of others in their cursed and damnable estate
and condition, and thou do no more rejoice in thy Thanksgiving unto God, this
is to procure frowns and displeasure from God upon thee.

3. To walk carelessly and slothfully when this Grace is received, is
endangering to lose all; She that did not strive and stir up her self with Zeal
is bid to take heed lest another get her Crown from her Rev. 2. He that was
unprofitable, and hides his Talent, shall have that taken away which he had;
The Church because of her great negligence and slothfulness lost Christ, and
with much trouble did at last obtain him again; Therefore it is said by Peter,
We are to give much diligence that we may make our Calling and our Election
sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.

SERMON LXVI. Of the Perseverance of the Saints.
JOH. 17.12. I have kept them, and none of them is perished, but the Son of
Perdition.
THe Doctrine observed was, That none of those who are given by God to Christ
shall perish.

To state and clear which Truth we have given in some particulars; and some
more are now to be added, which if well digested will be so many Answers to
those many Objections which are made against this Truth.

And First Consider, That though we hold the Godly man will persevere to the
End, yet this is not to be attributed to his own power and strength, but solely
to Gods Help; This Truth was maintained of old by Austin against the Pelagians,
who thought a man by his own power might overcome Temptations, and persist
constantly in what is good: In his Book De bono perseverantiae and lib. de
correptione and gratia, He makes it his great work to overthrow that proud and
presumptuous doctrine, and among other Arguments this is often urged, That a
man prays unto God for perseverance, which would be absurd if it were in man's
own power to give it, and he also presses another Argument of two having equal
grace (whether he mean true real sanctifying grace, is controverted by the
Learned; Vossius says he does, but others think not, as Rivet: He propounds
this Question, Why one does persevere and not the other, as we may instance,
why Peter and not Judas, who though he had not Sanctifying Grace yet had many
good Gifts of Gods Spirit, and none can give a dfference of this but by running
to Gods grace confirming one and not the other, So then as we see it was with
the people of Israel in the Wilderness, traveling to Canaan, their shoes and
garments did not wax old, or their bread moldy, God miraculously preserving of
it; Thus in our way to Heaven God preserves the Godly so that their Graces
which otherwise would quickly perish and decay, are yet kept lively and
vigorous by him; As in Physic there are Medicines to recover out of Diseases,
and then to preserve and keep health; So there is the grace of God, out of
sin, and Grace to preserve us being thus recovered; Hence Austin well
observes that expression, Rom 11. I have left to my self seven thousand that
have not bowed their knees to Baal; It was God that had saved them from
Idolatry, he kept them from the common corrupt worship, not they themselves,
and Romans 14. the Apostle speaking of a weak Christian says, he shall be holden
up, for God is able to make him stand, God is able not he himself; This Truth
that profound Doctor Bradwardine does solidly maintain against Pelagians, lib.
2. De Causa Dei, cap. 8, 9, 10. where he reproves Lumbard the Master of
Sentences for attributing perseverance to a man's Free Will, desiring his Zeal
may be excused, because it is for Gods Truth; In that Discourse he well shows
how that when God has infused Grace into a man's heart, it is not as when the
Husbandman has prepared and fitted the ground, and has cast his Seed into it,
then he leaves it that of its one self it may fructify and bring forth Corn;
But as the Air when it is enlightened by the Sunbeams needs the continual
presence of them, so that if but for an hour light be withdrawn it is presently
dark; Thus if God should from the most holy men withdraw his gracious help but
for a moment, they would be immediately plunged into all evil, for if the
Heavens that are so glorious Creatures, and for their firm settling called the
Firmament, do yet wholly stand by the Omnipotent power and Word of God, how
much rather must the eminent and dear Children of God be preserved in their
supernatural Life by the same Grace and divine might; Hence 1 Chronicles. ult.
David prays, that what good there was for the present in the peoples hearts,
God would always keep it in them; Thus perseverance then is not the fruit of
our own strength, nor is it bestowed for any antecedent merits of our own, but
merely from the grace and favor of God, but of this more, v. 15.

We are always to distinguish between those that are in profession and
appearance Godly, and such who are indeed so: No doubt but the Scripture gives
sundry and plain Instances of the Apostasy and Fall of many who for a while
were eminent and admirable in their profession of Religion, but yet for all
this they were not such as were indeed rooted and grounded in Christ; and this
proposition will serve to answer many places that are brought to prove the
perishing condition sometimes of those that had true grace, as Heb. 6.4, 5.
where some are said to be enlightened, and to have tasted the good Word of God,
and it is supposed that they may fall away and never be restored again, but
howsoever the Arminians think there is an enumeration of the best things the
godly may have, and that none can go beyond those qualifications, yet the
Apostle plainly speaks the contrary, for when he had reckoned up these
particulars, yet he adds, I hope better things, and things that accompany or
hold salvation; So then there were better things then these, and there are
things that hold Salvation, that cannot be separated from them, but such were
not these things named in the Text, and further the Apostle charge these
persons to whom he attributes these privileges, that they were dull and slow,
that they needed to be taught the first principles; By all which it appears
that the godly ought to have better things then those mentioned; Do not
therefore gather the Apostasy of those that are truly godly, because sometimes
you see men of eminent parts and professions in Religion become degenerate and
unsound, for possibly these never had the Truth of grace, and such also were
those named by Peter, 2 Pet. 2.20. where some are said to have escaped the
pollutions of the world through the knowledge of Christ, and yet were again
entangled in their former lusts; We grant, that the Faith of Christ had so
far a powerful operation upon them, that they left off those pollutions they
lived in whilst Heathens, but yet that they were never changed at the very root
and heart, appearrth in that the Apostle calls them but washed Swine, they had
not changed their Swinish nature, they were not made Sheep, though they had an
outward Reformation: Now that all such though never so wonderful for parts and
duties, if falling off, never were truly principled with the work of grace in
their souls, appears by that eminent place, 1 John 2.19. They went from us
because they were not of us, If they had been of us they would have continued
with us; Here it is plain, that whosoever is truly of the Church of God he will
always abide so; Indeed when we see the fall of such who seemed such glorious
Stars, and such tall Cedars, we ought in an holy manner to fear and tremble;
We that stand are to take heed lest we fall, but this does not prove the total
Apostasy of those that do truly belong to God, Mat. 13. He that did believe
and receive the Word with joy, did yet at last wither, because he had not a
good and honest heart; Now when we say, all these mentioned had not true Grace,
we do not mean they were gross Hypocrites, as if they did outwardly profess
they believed, but inwardly were the clean contrary; No, only we take an
hypocrite in a large sense for one who has some imperfect and inchoate works
of Gods Spirit upon him, which are like dispositions in a tendency unto true
Grace, as the Embryo to a Child, but yet they fall far short of
Sanctification; They in their thoughts and hearts are real and serious, others
apprehend them to be in the state of Grace, but still though Virgins they are
but Foolish Virgins, They have not that Oil which will serve when the
Bridegroom comes; Terrible it is to hear this, and oh what sharp goads should
they be in our sides, lest we never as yet have gone further then such persons,
Say it again unto thy self, Am I not gone further then such and such persons?

That even the Adversaries to this Truth do grant that God is able to confirm a
man in grace so that he shall never fall; They grant God does establish the
Angels in that happy condition that they shall never fall from it, yea, they
will not contend but that de facto God did confirm some, as the Apostles, that
they should never be separated from Christ; Now if this be granted, it will
overthrow all those reasons that they bring to prove the perishing estate
sometimes of the godly; For thus they argue, If a Godly man shall certainly be
preserved, to what purpose then are all Counsels and exhortations? Why are they
commanded to fear, and to take heed lest they fall; Do not all these
Admonitions seem vain and absurd? As if we should bid a man take heed he do not
fly up into the air, if he do, he will fall; Now if there be any absurdity in
this, will not all this hold as well in those Apostles whom they grant to be
infallibly preserved to Eternal Life; Though Christ told them Their Names were
written in heaven. That he went te prepare a place for them, yet for all that
he exhorts them to take heed of the least motions of sin, and abide in him,
though he promises they shall continue in him.

That of those who plead for an Apostasy of the godly, there is a destinction
to be made, Some go further then others, some hold one way and not another; As
first, Some hold that though men be Elected to Salvation, yet they may perish
because their Elect on is not absolute but conditional, supposing their
perseverance, and thus the Arminians, but some Papists and the Lutherans they
hold that no Elect man can ever perish, for then God might be frustrated in his
Councels, which were absurd to think; Others they say, That men may have true
grace for the present, but yet not Elected; They do not make true Faith proper
to the Elect only, but say, many besides such have for the present true lively
grace now with them; The Elect man he cannot fall from his grace but the other
may; The Learned V^ssius does at large endeavor to make this the Op^nion of
Austin, as we told you; Though some deny it, and bring places that seem to
evince the contrary, whose Opinion soever it be, it cannot be justified by the
Scripture. Lastly, Others hold, that a Godly man though Elected may for the
present totally lose all his grace, and not so much as any Sparks remain, but
then they say he will not always abide thus, he shall at last recover, So that
he shall not finally perish; Now we cannot join with any of these Opinions, but
affirm the truly godly, though never so weak, yet shall certainly be preserved
to happiness, so that though he may fall grievously, yet the Spirit of God
does not wholly and finally forsake him.

When we say that such as are given to Christ shall never perish, this is to be
understood of all and every one of them; Not only such who have an high degree
of Grace, but even those that are babes, such as are like the smoking flax and
bruised reed; Where there is true grace, though but like a grain of
Mustard Seed, yet that shall be so qu^ckened and enlivened, that it shall never
go out, and this is of great Consolation to the godly, who are apt to think
that though some eminent Believers be carried on to happiness, yet such weak
and frail things as they are shall never hold; they cannot withstand any
temptation, they presently are ready to fall as soon as ever they are set on
their feet, but they are to know that the same divine protection and power is
to all, because they are Christ's; It is not because one has more godliness
then another, but because all are in Christ's hands; A Child in the Ark was as
safe as any strong man, so that our protection is not founded upon the measure
of our grace but the truth of our grace, That which is true grace will
persevere, Perseverance does not make it to be true, but the Truth of it makes
it to persevere, So that where true Grace is, there Perseverance will certainly
follow, as where the Sun is, there will be Sunne-beams; Therefore that
distinction though applauded by the Learned Vossius of a threefold Truth of
Essence, To which is opposed no Faith, or a seigned Faith; Truth of intension
or degrees to which is opposed a weak and remiss Faith; Truth of radication or
perseverance, to which is opposed a temporary abiding, is well called by
Amesius, futilis destinctio, a mere frothy distinction, for the least degree of
true grace has perseverance annexed to it, and the good ground and the bad are
distinguished not only by their perseverance but by the very nature of the
soil, and therefore the good Ground only is called a good and honest heart, so
that we are not to say, Grace if it be rooted, but if it be true, will be
brought to Eternal Glory

Though the Godly shall surely be saved, yet this does not exclude a great deal
of difficulty and many dangers in the way; The Apostle says, The Righteous is
scarcily saved* 1 Pet. 4.18. which by consequence at least relates to a
spiritual ^alvation: Hence the way to heaven is a straight and narrow way, and
they are to strive to enter in, Luke 13.24 It is compared to all the hard and
difficult things, as are; It is called crucifying and mortifying of sin; It
is often compared to fighting and conflicting; Thus they are wrestling Jacobs
ere they can obtain the Blessing, many Iebusites and Enemies must be conquered
ere they can possess Canaan.

Lastly, The Godly are not only to be preserved thus to Eternal Salvation, but
they are to be assured and persuaded of it; So that two Privileges God
vouchsafes.

1. Their Perseverance.

2. Their assurance and powerful persuasion of this; As Paul Romans 8. I am
persuaded neither things present, or future, shall separate us from the love of
God in Christ; As Paul does not speak only of himself from some special
Revelation he had, but from such common Arguments that agree to all that are
holy; Not that this assurance is such an assurance, is such an absolute one,
that though I walk in all profaneness, and drink down the deadly poison of
sin, that it shall never hurt me, but it is a well-ordered assurance in the
constant and diligent use of the means, So that as we give all diligence to
make our Election sure to us* so commonly our assurance is; It is true the most
tender and exact godly ones, as Job and David are sometimes in desertions, and
cry out God has forsaken them, but ordinarily the more formal and careless we
are in our approaches to God, the more are our doubts and fears; As in standing
Pools croaking Frogs are generated; By this Doctrine then or Perseverance we
may see two Graces ought to be conjoined which the Godly by their weakness
make one oppose another; They are to believe firmly on Gods promise, and yet to
be humble in themselves; They are to rejoice, and yet with trembling; when thy
confidence devoureth an holy trembling, then take heed of presumption; When thy
fear devoureth thy Faith and Joy, then take heed of despair; But as in nature
there is the humidum and calidum radicale, both which preserve life; Or as to
the heat of the heart there is the pericardium to cool it, Thus in our way to
heaven; These are the two Millstones by which we are made pure bread; And as in
the Old Testament, so here, neither of them may be taken to pledge, because one
cannot work without the other.

SERMON LXVII. Arguments proving, That Every One that is in the State of Grace
shall be preserved to Eternal Life.
JOH. 17.11. Not one of them is perished.
WE have been delivering several particulars to state and clear this necessary
Truth, viz.

That every one in the state of Grace, the weak as well as the strong, shall by
a divine power be preserved to Eternal Life.

The next thing is to produce those Reasons and Arguments which will confirm
it, for when it shall appear to be Gods Truth and not man's bare Opinion, then
we may the more confidently rest on it.

Gods Election; Those whom God has ordained from all Eternity to Everlasting
Glory they shall never perish, but such who have true grace (though in the
least degree) God has thus predestined and appointed to happiness; So that
this Argument stands firmer then Heaven and Earth, for it is built on Gods
Election, and it is good to observe how the cause of all good and preservation
from a perishing condition, is reduced to this as the Original of all, Mar.
13.22. The false Apostles are there said to seduce if it were possible the very
Elect, If it were possible, therefore the Elect can never be seduced into a
perishing estate, if it be said, that Elect is to be taken adjectively for as
much as good and precious, as the Septuagint sometimes uses the word, in which
all Israel is sometimes called Gods Elect, Isa. 45.4. Isa. 65.9. This cannot
stand, for in the same Chapter, v. 20. These Elect are said to be those whom
God has chosen, So that the word is not to be taken adjectively as denoting
some inward excellency, but as a participle relating to Gods action. The Elect
whom God has chosen; If again it be said that the phrase ( if it be possible)
does not denote an absolute impossibility, but a great difficulty, as in some
other places it is used; Neither will this serve the Arminians turn, for though
it be used so in some places, yet unless they can prove it is always used so,
and therefore in this place, they do nothing; Now we say, that we are not to
depart from the literal meaning, when there is no absurdity, yea, in this Text
we are to stand to it, because it is brought in by way of aggravation of the
deceitful ways of False Teachers, They were so insinuating, so specious, that
had not the Elect a firmer ground then their own prudence and knowledge, viz.
Gods Election, they would be undone, so that Grotins his illustrations in his
Exposition on Mat. 24. from Galen, who uses this Proverb to express a
pertinacious adherent man to his Opinion; You may sooner unteach a man, Moses,
and Christ, or out of Austin, when they can write in the water, etc. then they
may persuade a Christian to forsake Christ, are but fair paintings to his
deformity: The Scripture intends a full impossibility and not a difficulty,
because brought in to aggravate, and indeed it would be frigid and jejune to
make this the sense, They shall come with such lying wonders, that they shall
difficultly and very hardly seduce the Elect; Besides the Arminian, who holds
that indifferency in a man's power, that when all pre-requisites on Gods part
are put, yet he can will or not will, cannot say it is difficult, at least so
difficult, as that phrase imports; Do they not say? David by his Fall did
wholly shake off all grace branch and root, and yet there was no such
difficulty to that? How easily did one sin draw on another? So that it would
have been absurd to have said that Bathsheba (who was merely passive at first)
did so strongly tempt David, that if it were possible he would have fallen into
Adultery: And if further you say, The godly may fall into fundamental errors
though Elected; Even the disciples did not believe Christ's Resurrection and his
spiritual Office as a Messiah, We answer, they may a while, but God will
graciously recover them; These Vipers shall not stick upon them till they die;
Though they have swallowed these deadly things yet they shall at last vomit
them up; As God though he suffered Christ's body to be dead and buried in the
grave, yet he would not let it see corruption; Thus it is here, Though the
Godly may err dangerously, and fall foully, yet they shall not see corruption:
Lastly* It is answered, that the Elect before their conversion may lie in all
sin, and be deceived by all kind of errors, Therefore there cannot be any
strength from this because Elected; But the Reply is easy; By elect are meant
such who do not only partake of that mercy, but such who find the effects of
this upon their soul, Elected and converted; And that this is included is
plain, because it is said, If it be possible to deceive even the Elect: Now he
is said to be deceived that was in the right and Truth, it is improper to say,
They shall deceive such as are already in a plain deceived way, So that this
necessarily infers, That it is meant of Elected persons who find the mighty
power of this upon their hearts.

from the Covenant of grace and Gods sure mercies, which are made to such, and
this makes them stand like Mount Zion, yea firmer, for at the day of Judgemnt
that shall be shaken, but these will go safe through the fiery Trial: This
Magna Charta, of which you have several branches or promises every where, is
clearly laid down, Jer. 32.39, 30. God there promises first the Conversion of
his people, He will write his Law in their inward parts, and then he promises
Perseverance, He will put his Fear in their hearts that they shall not depart
from him: God there promises he will never turn from them, and he will so
graciously affect their hearts as they shall never turn from him, and this
Covenant the Prophet calls an Everlasting Covenant, it shall last above the
Sun and Moon, it shall not be like the former Covenant that was broken, and
indeed it must needs continue, for it promises all those qualifications which
may enable to persevere, and perseverance it self* For whereas it may be
thought Gods own Children may through careless, negligent, and slothful
walking, undo themselves, God says, He will put his fear in their hearts, as
being the special Antidote against Apostasy, fot Blessed is he that fears
always, Prove. 28.14. It Is a blessed thing not to be in a doubtful perplexing
fear, that is a cursed, hellish thing, the portion of Cain and Judas* but in a
filial, godly Fear, as Joseph was, when he said, How can I do this, and sin
against God? Now sin can never come in at the Gate while Fear is the Porter;
Therefore above all things God says, He will put his Fear in their hearts, and
this promise is spoken so peremptorily and absolutely, that it is an absurd
thing with the Arminians to suppose some condition on man's part that it may be
made good, as if God indeed were ready to put his fear in their hearts, for his
part nothing shall be wanting, only they must not put a stop to his
munificence, for this is as if God had said, I will give you a will to fear me
if you will, I will make you to will if you will, or I will make you to
persevere if you will persevere; I will make you that you shall never depart
from me, if ye will not depart from me; What a ridiculous and absurd sense
would hereby be put upon this Glorious Promise; The Arminians do to evade this
powerful Argument, Say, This was made to the whole body of the Jews in their
Captivity, and are busy in finding out subtle Reasons, That it was never made
good, and are off and on, like Noah's Dove, not knowing where to set their Feet,
Whereas the Apostle in Hebr. 10.16, 17. does very plainly apply it as the
Covenant of Grace to all Believers.

Mediator of this Covenant, or the way to ratify and confirm these Gracious
Promises, which are from the first to the last, that we shall have Everlasting
Glory from Predestination to Glorification, and that is by Christ's blood, So
that Christ is become their Mediator, their Head, and they his Members; The
Covenant is confirmed by the Death of Christ, and the Sacraments are visible
Seals to confirm this, 2 Corinthians. 2.20. All the Promises of God are in Christ
Yea and Amen: There is not Yea and Nay, but a sure infallibility in them; Hence
this Priesthood of Christ and our Blessing in him, as Abraham's Seed is said to
have a Promise, and an Oath to confirm it. Hebr. 6.18. That by two Immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
Consolation: Christ then by his Blood purchased these Privileges for us, he
obtained by his Death our Salvation* and his Priesthood for this purpose was
confirmed by an Oath; How then can we ever think or imagine that they should
perish who have such preservation and Security provided for them: Indeed we see
the Angels, and Adam though full of Grace to Apostatize, and the Godly man
though weak in Grace, and surrounded with many Temptations, yet safely
preserved, but the Reason is plain, They have a Mediator of this New Covenant,
who by his Death will certainly bring them to Glory, for if this were not so,
but all depended upon man's indifferent power; Christ might have died, and not
one man have been saved, who cannot but detest and abhor such a thought, that
by the Arminian Position Christ might have suffered and endured all those
Agonies, and not one be saved, all might have been in vain, but the Scripture
speaks otherwise, Isaiah 53.11. The work of the Lord shall prosper in his Hand;
He shall see his Seed and the Travel of his Soul, and shall be satisfied:
Christ would not have been satisfied in his Soul, had he not seen the Fruit and
Event of his Agonies and Sufferings, and that such persons were saved for whom
he died.

From Christ's peculiar Prayer and Intercession for their Preservation; And thus
the Argument runs: Those for whom Christ offered up a Mediatory Prayer, and
earnestly begged and entreated that they might be so kept that none should
perish, Such must infallibly be preserved, but all the Godly are comprehended
in this Prayer for their Preservation; You see in these Verses it is Christ's
whole drift and scope to obtain this for them, that though they must be in the
world, yet that they might be kept from the evil and wickedness of the world,
and lest this should be thought for his Apostles only, or such as did already
believe in him, He adds, verse 20. that he prays for all such as shall
believe in him: Here you see all that do or shall believe in Christ they are
comprehended in this Prayer, that none may perish; Now it is plain that the
Father heard Christ in all that he desired, and there was always an Agreement
or Correspondency between his will and the Fathers; Now what Christ did for
all, we see more pregnantly in Peter, Luke 22.23. I have prayed (says he) that
thy Faith fail not; This is done for every godly Person as well as Peter, and
therefore upon this Occasion said in the general to all the Apostles; Satan
had desired to winnow them, if it were possible to have cast them out as Chaff;
And this Mediatory Prayer continues still in some sense, For Hebr. 5.26. He
ever-liveth to make Intercession for us; This certainly must necessarily be
effectual to our preservation.

The Godly man's divine protection to Everlasting Happiness is confirmed by
assertory places as well as promissory; There are several Texts of Scripture
that do plainly and clearly declare as much: Therefore let that be believed
before men's Opinions, John 6.39. It is the Fathers Will that of those who are
given me I should lose none of them; To this purpose also is that in John
10.28. Yea, that we may firmly be established herein, Matthew. 16.18. Our Savior
tells us, That he will build his Church upon a Rock, that the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail against it; Some would limit the Gates of Hell to Death, as
it were an Hebraisme, but it is plain our Savior means every thing that
shall oppose and hinder him in the Building of his Church, and thus not only
Death, but Sin and Hell are great Adversaries, otherwise it might so fall out
that God should have no Church here upon the Earth, which would be a horrible
Derogation to Christ, as if he might be a Head without Members: Another
pregnant place affirming this is in 1 John 2.19. If they had been of us they
would no doubt have continued with us; No doubt: See how the Apostle puts it
out of all Question; There is a Disciple indeed, and a Disciple in Appearance
and Profession only: The Disciple indeed is a Pillar that shall never be
removed out of the House, but shall abide for ever; But the Disciple in
Appearance and Show only, he is not a fixed Star but a Meteor, For all his
light and blaze is compounded of terrestrial matter, and so will quickly
perish and vanish away: We may say, Dust he is, and unto Dust he will return:
Of such our Savior speaks, John 10. Every Branch in me that brings not
forth Fruit, he cutteth off, and casts away: It is a Branch in him not by
lively Insition but external Profession: Another place to bring up the Rear of
these Assertory Texts of Scripture, is 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God
(there is the Universality) he sins not, neither can he, viz. not as a Cain,
as a wicked one he does not sin, he cannot give up himself wholly unto sin,
and the Reason is because the Seed of God abides in him.

The Comparisons and Similitudes the Scripture uses do infer the Godly man's
Continuance; And although Similitudes do not prove in every particular, yet
they do for that end they are brought; Now the Scripture excellently
illustrates the stability of the Godly by enduring things, Psalm. 1. To a Tree
planted by the Waters Side: Also to Mount Zion that can never be removed,
Psalm. 125.1. Especially John 4.14. where Regenerating Grace is called a Well
of water springing up to Eternal Life, and is differenced from material water
in this respect, A man drinks of that and is thirsty again, but whosoever
drinks of this shall never thirst again: He shall not go back into Egypt
again, desiring his former Onyons and Garlic.

humbly do prove their standing; Indeed the Arminian infers the clean
contrary, but the Truth is, By these Admonitions, Exhortations, and other means
of Grace they are enabled to continue: As man by his Food is preserved alive,
for God uses all these Ordinances as practical Mediums by which he stirs
them up when secure, quickens them when decaying, and recovers them when
fallen; To these we may add the Afflictions which the Godly are sure to have
when they go astray; Therefore whereas Solomon is thought by all to be the
hardest Instance of any that had true Grace, and apostatized so foully, yet that
he died not out of Grace, appears not only by the Book of Ecclesiastes,
which he made at his latter end, as a plain Testimony of his Repentance and
Turning to God, but also fully by 2 Samuel 1.14. If he commit Iniquity, I will
chasten him, but my Mercy I will not utterly take away, So that these
Afflictions being sanctified will be effectual to awaken them, and bring them
home with the Prodigal at last to their Fathers House.

Lastly, If God did not vouchsafe Perseverance in Grace as well as Grace, he
had not done the best for us; To keep Grace is far better then to have Grace:
It Is perseverance that crowns all, Holding out to the end, is that which
blesses all: Therefore the Scripture describes God by this, That he is able
to keep them unspotted and blameless till the Coming of Christ, It would
redound to Gods dishonor, as it did to that foolish Builder, if God should
begin and not finish his work.

Use of Encouragement to the Godly in all their Conflicts and Difficulties in
the way to Heaven, you have need of this Consolation, You had need have your
Eyes open to see what is for you as well as what is against you; This Assurance
will not breed Despair, but quicken you up to a lively working; Though thou art
not certain of Life and Wealth, yet of Gods assisting Grace to the last.

SERMON LXVIII. Of the Son of Perdition. Showing, That some Persons are
wilfully set to Damn themselves, though they have never so many Excellent
Remedies and Means to the contrary; And what are the Causes that move them
thereunto, and Characters of such Persons.
JOHN 17.12. None is perished, but the son of Perdition.
THe next thing to be treated of, is the employed Answer to an Objection, that
might easily be made, If Christ had so faithfully kept them all, How comes
Judas to perish? Now our Savior answers this two ways:

1. He was a son of Perdition.

2. There was a prediction of this in Scripture, and that must be fullfilled.

Again, This may not be brought only to answer an Objection, but by way of
Consolation to the Apostles, and Confirmation of them, who could not but be
much scandalized upon Judas his heinous betraying of Christ: Therefore this is
spoken to forewarn them, that they may not be offended, when it comes to pass.

The opening of the words does deserve much diligence, because at the first
view, they seem to carry, as if one of those who are elected may perish, and
that Judas is one excepted from among the chosen ones, and this place is much
urged by those that deny any absolute election: Therefore to inform your
judgments, let us take notice of these three things:

1. Why Judas is called a son of perdition.

2. Why he is said to be already perished, when as yet he had not destroyed
himself, nor was in hell.

3. Whether that phrase (...) be exceptive or adversative.

Why Judas is called the son of perdition.
For the first, Why Judas is called a son of perdition, this is an Hebraism;
for among many other usages of the word, Ben, or Bath, they particularly use it
in two cases; first, when they would express one that is given, or much versed
in such a way, they call him the son of that. Thus Deuteronomy. 3, 8. 2 Samuel 2.7.
The sons of strength, are strong men, The sons of Belial, Deuteronomy. 13.13, are
such as wickedly bent themselves to break the Law of God; and thus we have the
children of light, and the children of wisdom, the children of the Kingdom,
Mat. 8.12.

2. When the Genitive case signifies a punishment or reward; thus it uses the
word son, and signifies some desert or fitness for that thing. Thus 1 Samuel
20.31. a son of death, is one that deserves to die, Deuteronomy. 25.2. a son of
percussions, is one that deserves to be scourged, and Ephesians. 2.3. Children of
wrath, are such as deserve it; and thus it is here, Judas is called a son of
perdition, both because he did wilfully give himself up to such sins, as did
destroy him, and because he did deserve it, by his perfidiousnesse. Some indeed
take the word perdition actively, as if he were called the son of perdition,
because he did seek to destroy Christ, as the Devil is called Apollyon, because
of his endeavor to damn men; but that seems not so proper. Three things
therefore are implied in this phrase, a son of perdition.

First, The Event and end, which will certainly befall him, he shall be
destroyed.

Secondly, His sin or guilt, whereby he deserves such perdition: Even as
Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. is called, the son of perdition, and the man of
sin, the son of perdition, there is the end, a man of sin, there is the
cause, because he is a man of sin, he must be a son of perdition, and thus
it is with Judas.

Thirdly, There is a further thing in this, and that is Gods appointing and
ordaining of Judas to this destruction, not that the cause or blame is to be
laid upon this predestination, but upon Judas only; God ordained him for his
sins to this perdition: Even as Jude v. 4. it is said of some, That they were
of old ordained to judgment. The like is 1 Pet. 2.8. Romans 9.17.

The second Question is, Why is Judas said to be already perished, Why Judas is
said to be already perished.
seeing he had not yet hung himself, nor were his bowels gushed out, and he
gone to his proper place?

The Answer is, 1. Because the initials of condemnation were already begun in
him, according to that John 3. He that believes not is already judged. And then

2. Because this was but immediately before his perdition: even as Christ said,
I am not of the world, because he was immediately to leave it.

Thirdly, How are we to understand this (...), But the son of perdition? Some
say, that it is an exceptive particle, and therefore answer, That our Savior
speaks thus of Judas, as if he were an elect person, because in all men's
judgments he did appear to be so as yet. Thus Zanchy and Calvin, Our Savior
indeed speaks (says he) improperly, as to the Grammar, but consonantly
enough to the ordinary custom of men, who speak of a thing appearing to be so,
as if it were so.

Others, they understand this giving, Of which none is perished, but Judas, not
of giving by Election, but to the Apostleship, and by way of Office, in which
sense our Savior said, Have I not chosen twelve, and one of you is a devil? He
does not there speak of an eternal Election, but a temporal one to the
Apostolical Office; But because all along in this Chapter, Those that are given
to Christ are said to have eternal life, and to be given out of the world, we
understand it of eternal Election, in which sense it is plainly said, Judas was
now elected, John 13.18. I speak not of you all (viz. that you shall be happy)
I know whom I have chosen. Therefore the answer is, that (...) is not by way of
exception, but opposition, not as if Judas were one excepted of those given to
Christ, and perished, but the contrary, None is perished, but he who was never
given, and therefore is a Son of perdition. Thus the words are used Mat. 24
36. Of that day knows no man, no nor the Angels of Heaven, (...), but the
Father only, where it is not exceptive, for then the Father should be in the
number men or Angels, but by way of opposition; So Revel. 21.27. There shall
not enter into it any unclean thing, or that makes a lie, (...), but those that
are written in the book of the Lamb, where it cannot be exceptive, for then
those written in that book, should be in the number of those that make a lie,
or are unclean. One place more may be added, Revel. 9.4. where the Locusts are
commanded not to hurt the grass or trees, (...), but only those men, which have
not the Seal of God on their foreheads; and that it must be so understood here
is plain, because John 6.36. it is expressly said, None that are given to him
shall ever perish. Thus Latin Critics observe, that the word nisi, used in
this place by the vulgar, is sometimes in Tully and Terence, with other good
Authors for sed. The words thus explained, Observe

Observe. That there are some persons that are wilfully set to destroy and damn
themselves, though they have never so many excellent remedies to the contrary.
That there are some persons that are wilfully set to destroy and damn
themselves, though they have never so many excellent remedies and means to the
contrary. Thus Judas, though called to be an Apostle, though endowed with gifts
to work miraracles, though in the constant Communion with Christ, seeing his
holy life, and hearing his heavenly Doctrine, yet is not moved by all this, but
wilfully and obstinately goes on in ways of self-perdition; yea though our
Savior had immediately before washed all their feet, Judas his feet as well as
the rest, which was a strong engagement to make him full of love to Christ; and
though he was admonished of it, that he should betray him, though he heard our
Savior say, It had been better for him he had never been born, yet from these
admonitions, he goes immediately, and consummates all iniquity. From this man
called here, a son of perdition, yet formerly as eminent as the other
Apostles, many worthy particulars are to be gathered, but for the present I
shall pitch on this,

That there are some men so resolvedly and obstinately given to damn
themselves, that let what will come in the way, they will go on. Even as Balaam
in his purpose to curse the people of Israel, sets forward with great
resolutions, drives on his Ass, though that speak to him (which might have
been a terrible astonishment) yet for all that he pursues his wicked design,
till God stop him whether he will or no: Or as Saul was wretchedly bent to
murder himself, and therefore calls upon his Armor bearer to run him through,
which when he refused, he desperately falls upon his own spear, and kills
himself. Thus there are thousands of persons, that do with as much obstinacy,
and desperate hardness of heart, throw themselves into hell; God commands a
man, To do no murder, and self-murder is rare, because the care of life, and
fear of death is implanted in men, but self-destruction and self-damnation is
very common; for men neither have a love to their immortal souls, nor yet a
fear of eternal damnation. No wonder, if some persons are thus, when we read
of an whole body of people or Nation ready to do this, Matthew. 23.37. Christ
does there in a melting manner weep over Jerusalem, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
thou that killest the Prophets? etc. How often would I have gathered thee, and
thou would not? This compassionate bewailing of them, was enough to turn
stones into tears, but they would not. It is not said, they understood not,
they desired, but other things hindered them: No, They would not; There was a
pertinacious wilful obstinacy; There are more remedies and means sufficient to
have humbled them in sackcloth and ashes, but they would not. This cursed
disposition was of old in them, Jer. 18.12. when the Prophet had informed them
of Gods purpose to bring evil upon them, and that therefore they should return
from their evil way: See what an obstinate reply they make, There is no hope,
or as some render it, it is a desperate case, We will go every one in his evil
ways, and after the imagination of our own hearts: So truly did the Prophet
say, Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self. That as it is from a
man's own body diseases grow, which afterward kill him; and moths are bred in
that linen, which afterward consume it. Thus from a man's one self come those
sins, which tend to his everlasting damnation. They will destroy themselves,
who can stop them or persuade them to the contrary.

To pursue this, because it is the case of many men, The causes that move men to
damn themselves.
who live under the means of grace: Let us consider, What are the causes that
move men thus violently to damn themselves, as if they could not do it soon
enough? And

First, There are many, though glorying in the title of Christians, that are
profanely Atheistical. They do not believe there is a God, or Heaven, or Hell;
1. Atheism.
they do not firmly assent to Gods Word as true. Now what good can all the
preaching in the world do, though the Ministers were as so many Angels, and
their voice as terrible as the sound of the trumpet at the last day; if men be
Atheistical, they will not believe what any Minister preaches. They bless
themselves in their wicked ways, and will not hearken to any thing. Achitophel
did not more resolutely go hang himself, then those to damn themselves; For as
faith is the great instrument, whereby the Word preached becomes effectual to
salvation; so unbelief is the great stop and obex in the way. This is the door
and bar to keep all off, which made the Prophet complain, Isa. 53.1. and the
Apostle afterward alleges it, as the cause of men's destruction, Who has
believed our report? Hence Heb. 4.2. The Word did not profit the Israelites,
because not mixed with faith, A Metaphor from the Physicians potion, which does
no good, because not mixed with such ingredients; This is to be worse then the
devils, who believe and tremble, but thou do neither; As long therefore as
men abide in unbelief, no Ministry, no preaching will do them any good, faith
is the foundation, without this there cannot be any building. But though the
promises are not made good, unless we believe; yet know to thy terror that all
the curses and threatenings in Gods Word will be fulfilled upon thee, whether
thou believe or not.

Secondly, Another cause is, Gross, brutish and stupid Ignorance; 2. Ignorance.
When people have no knowledge or understanding in matters of Religion, they
fall as easily as blind men, that know not where they go, Ephesians. 4.18. The
Apostle speaking of some, who gave themselves up to wickedness, and were past
feeling. They had no remorse or sense of conscience; as a dead hand, though it
be run through with the sword, yet feels no pain, he makes the cause of this
senslesness, to be the darkness in their understanding, and the blindness which
was upon their hearts. Thus Hos. 4.1, 2. when the Prophet complained, That the
Land was overthrown with swearing, lying and murders, he makes this the cause,
There is no knowledge of God in the Land; and Jude v. 10. relates some, Who
speak evil of those things they know not, and what they know naturally, they
did as bruit beasts corrupt themselves with. Is not this the character of many
in these days? Their hellish mouths are opened to rail and deride, and so
speak malicious words against those that are godly, when they are sottish and
ignorant in religious things, having no knowledge, but what is natural, and
with that, they are like bruit beasts, corrupting themselves. The sottish
ignorance and brutish blindness upon many, makes them to venture desperately;
Oh if their eyes were open! Did they but see what the godly see, they would not
dare to step a step forward in that way which leads to death. But as mad men
feel no pain, though instruments be thrust into them, so neither do they. Men
out of their wits venture upon self-murdering practices; and thus do those that
are void of all spiritual understanding. Hence Admonition is called in the
Scripture (...), 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. Paul commands them (...), to warn them that are
unruly, or to put a mind and wits into them, as if they were mad, and would
destroy themselves not knowing what they did.

A third cause of such wilful resolvedness to damn themselves, is, hardness
of heart. As long as the heart is soft and tender, it trembles at Gods word,
3. Hardness of heart.
and is afraid of sin, but when it is turned into a stone, and made like an
adamant, then it is sensible of nothing. Pharaoh, though he had such wonderful
miracles wrought before him, that never such things were heard of in the world
before, yet because his heart was hardened, therefore does he sin
presumptuously to his own ruin: And thus it was with the Jews, when that
spiritual judgment spoken of ( Isa. 6.) was accomplished in them, to have
blind eyes and hard hearts. Thus all the Prophets at first, and all the
Apostles afterward, yea Christ himself with all his miracles did not mollify
them, yea by these remedies, as all incurable diseases do, they grew worse and
worse; what motions, relentings must we expect from stones? Lapidi loqueris, is
a proverb; Truly such is all preaching, and the whole Ministry to men given up
to a hard heart. Though the Prophet when he spoke to the Altar of stones,
crying* O Altar, Altar, that immediately rent, yet the hearts of men are more
senseless. Pray therefore of all judgments not to fall into an hard heart.
Though thou may fall into hard times, into hard dealings from others, into
many hard distresses, yet as long as thou have not an hard heart, there are
some hopes for thee.

4. Inordinate love to some sin.
Fourthly, Inordinate and immoderate love to some lust or sin: When a man is
once enslaved to some lust, though he has never so much light, so much
conviction; yea, though he have never so many afflictions upon him, yet he will
break through all to have his lust satisfied. As Nero's mother said, Occidat
modo imperet, Let him kill me, so he may reign. Thus let such sins damn me,
so that I may have my will and desire satisfied. What made Judas, though he had
received so much love and kindness from Christ? Yet so perfidiously betray him
into the hands of those who had long sought to kill him, but only he was a
thief, and had an immoderate love to worldly-gain: It was thirty pieces that
made him lose body and soul; Oh it is an heavy thing to be captivated to any one
sin! Thou must have such and such sins for thy darling sin: Oh this Dalilah
will be thy ruin, as it was to Sampson! Who would have thought that Sampson, a
godly man, as he is recorded Heb. 11. seeing what deadly enemies the Philistims
were, would have discovered where his strength was? But this Dalilah can
persuade him to his ruin: And thus Herodias can prevail with Herod to kill
John Baptist, though he knew him to be a just man, and had a reverential fear
of him; thy lust, thy sin, thy whore, thy unjust gain can make thee fall down
and worship the devil without any trouble of conscience.

Fifthly, Decayings from former expressions of holiness or quenchings, and
extinguishing of such motions as formerly have greatly affected us. These
commonly seek the Kingdom of darkness (as Christ speaks of the Kingdom of
Heaven) by force, and are violent for hell, Heb. 6.4. and 2 Pet. 2.20. The
Scripture speaks of some that have had great gifts of the holy Ghost, and have
escaped through the knowledge of Christ, the pollutions of the world, if such
are entangled again they are worse then ever, and there is no hope of recovery;
Therefore none are in such a desperate condition as those that once had greater
workings of heart, and hopeful movings of conscience, but since are grossly
apostatized, the prophanest men that live, who never cast an eye toward
heaven, are in a more hopeful condition then such; relapses are more dangerous
in the soul, then in the body, Mat. 12.45. when that unclean spirit was cast
out, but returned again, he brought seven other spirits more wicked then
himself, and so the last state of that man is worse then the first: Look to
this and tremble, you who have had often checks of conscience, and often wounds
of heart, take heed they plunge thee not into an incurable condition: The water
once heated, if cold again, is cooler then ever. These frequent aguish fits,
will at last end in a consumption. Take heed lest thou turn a derider and a
persecutor of what once thou were forward for.

SERMON LXIX. Of the Son of Perdition. Showing more Causes and Symptoms of
such wretched Persons that are desperately bent to damn themselves.
JOH. 17.12. But the Son of Perdition.
THe Words have been Explained, and the Doctrine gathered, which was,

That there are some men wilfully and desperately set to damn themselves,
though they enjoy never such means to the contrary.

We gave in some Characters of such wretched persons, and now proceed to
instance in some more.

And the first in order shall be, 6. Unprofitablenesse under the means of grace
A long and constant Unprofitableness under means of Grace; When men have for
a long time sat under the powerful means of Grace, yet are as ignorant, as
profane and unreformed as formerly; These men commonly are resolute in their
damnation; They have so often heard and heard, they are so accustomed now to
the remedies that they despise them, and get no good by them; This the Apostle
affirms, Heb. 6.8. The ground which often drinks in rain, and yet brings
forth nothing but briars and thorns, is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be
burnt; This was the case even of the whole body of the Jews, they being
accustomed for many years to the threatenings of the Prophets, were so far
from trembling under it, that they made a scorn of it, Jer. 23.33. because the
Prophet Jeremy did so often tell them of the Burden of the Lord, that is the
heavy Sentence and Judgment of God threatened against them, they did impudently
and profanely make a scorn of it; Even as many hardened sinners will now
adays at the name of hell and damnation; Oh then let all such who for many
years together have been under the Sun of the Gospel, fear lest when we speak
of a Son of Perdition it be said, Thou art the man, for as when the body that
has been accustomed to often Physic, does yet remain diseased, it is a great
Argument of its incurablenesse, Thus it is here, When there are daily
importunities of thee, constant expostulations with thee, and yet thou art
averse and obdurate, 7. Taking ungodly prejudices against the Ministers of God.
this may prove fatal and dreadful to thee.

2. Sinful and ungodly prejudices taken up against those Prophets and Ministers
of God that do in his Name admonish thee, and warn thee against thy sins: Oh
when men instead of hearkening to their Counsels, take occasion to slander
them, to oppose them, these men have hastily tumbled into confusion, Mat. 23.
This Christ complained of, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, etc. how often would I have gathered thee, and thou would not? And
it was of old the Jews wickedness to persecute and oppose all such as came
from God to admonish them of their sins, and therefore at last they crucified
the Heir, even Christ himself: The Wise man speaks peremptorily to this, Prove.
29.9 He that being often reproved hardens his neck shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy: You see how such men haste to their
perdition; Know then it comes of the devil who has a desire to undo thee for
ever; when thou take up prejudices and wicked discontents at such who plainly
tell thee of thy sins; This is made an Argument that David in his grievous
Fall had not lost all his grace, that when Nathan told him he was the man, he
does not rage at the Prophet, or threaten to kill him, but immediately humbles
himself, and says I have sinned, and on the other side King Asaph though a
good man, yet transgressed in an high manner, when he put the good Prophet in
prison for reproving of him, what a sad affliction befell that King even to the
end of his days; Oh then take heed how you entertain prejudices and objections
against the Ministers of God who are faithful in their work; The first time
that we read Judas beginning to discover himself, and Christ foretelling what
one would prove that was of his chosen Apostles, it was upon some mutterings
and captiousnesse that was showed at some words in Christ's Sermon, This might
seem a little thing, but it proved very dangerous; Observe the place, Ioh.
6.60, 61, 64, 67, 70. Our Savior there said, That his flesh was meat indeed
and his blood drink indeed, and that he which eats him should live; This
Speech not rightly understood offended some, and they began to murmr at it,
and although our Savior afterward explained it, that it was to be understood
in a spiritual sense, yet they were so far discontented, that they quite
leave him, yea, the Apostles were so staggering that Christ asked them, Will
you also go away? Now it appears by the Text that Judas was the chief man
that made all this Quarrel at Christ's Sermon, v. 64. There are some of you
that believe not, for Christ knew who would betray him, and v. 70. Have not I
chosen twelve of you, and one is a devil; Mark it in the present Tense, he does
not say, he will be a devil, but he is a devil: Our Savior knew with what a
cankered and malicious heart, even then he took occasion to quarrel at his
Doctrine: Let this Example make you afraid how you let such viperous and
Serpentine thoughts enter in your breast; You think to vex and trouble the
Faithful Minister, but thou do create the greatest trouble to thy own soul;
Many of these they would never hear Christ more, They would not frequent his
Sermons, but what was this, Even to go from him who had the words of Eternal
Life; This is to leave and forsake Manna, and to eat that which is present
poison.

8. Often rebelling against the Light of Conscience.
3. Often rebelling against the Light of Conscience whether it be natural or
supernatural, This proves very destructive in the latter end, Romans 1. Those
Heathens who had a natural Knowledge of God, and yet detained the Truth in
unrighteousness; They lived against what they knew, and committed those very
sins, their Consciences condemned them of, what was the issue of it, but to
be given up to unnatural affection, and to work all iniquity with greediness;
This was the fruit of rebelling against mere natural Light, but the sin grows
higher, when the Spirit of God by the Word does convince thee, and inform thee,
yet for all this thou will go on, and thou will accomplish thy lusts, This will
make way for a man to fall irrecoverably; Thus the Jews, they are come to have
a Veil upon their eyes, and hardness upon their hearts, and why? because they
always resisted the Spirit of God speaking by his Prophets, Act. 7.51. This
daily resisting of the holy Ghost made them come to the top of all their
wickedness, which was to Crucify the Lord of Glory; As the continual looking
into the Sun does at last blind the Eyes, so those by a frequent beholding of
Light in the Word come at last to all Heavenly sight; As men with frequent
labor get such a callousnesse upon their hands that they have no feeling; Thus
do many men by a daily rebelling against the Light, at last turn so stupid and
sottish, that sin and no sin, hell and no hell, is all one to them; Oh then
if thou would not be a Son of perdition nourish all the motions of Gods
Spirit, take heed of quenching the Spirit, If this be chased away, thou may
all thy life be like an Adamant, and never have more relentings.

4. Then men are likely to be Sons of perdit^^n when they have been under
diverse and frequent afflictions, yet are not preserved but grow worse and worse
under them, 9. That are worse by afflictions.
as the Prophet Isaiah tells the Jews, Chap. 1.5. Why should I smite you any
more? your wound is incurable; God he smites to awaken men that they should
repent and turn unto him; But when this rod makes them more stubborn, and they
will hold their sins, though they cost them never so dear, this is a sad
Forerunner of perdition; Ahaz because in his distress he grew worse and worse,
therefore the Scripture gives him this brand, This is that King Ahaz: The
Judgments and Chastisements of God are medicinal in their Institution, but if
they do not kindly purge from sin, they become penal and destructive: They
do hurt if they do no good; Oh then let such persons remember this, that have
many times been under Gods Chastisements; They have been often in the fiery
Furnace, and then with Pharaoh they cry out, They will sin no more, They will
let their Iniquities go, but when they see respite, and the Cloud is over, they
begin with all greediness to fulfill their sins, as if they were delivered
that they might transgress the more; Oh Consider that thy afflictions rise not
out of the dust, God has wisely ordered them against thee but take heed how
they leave thee; Do thou (as Job said) come out of them as Gold out of the
fire; Can thou say, that before thou wast afflicted thou wentst astray, These
Rods have brought thy sins to Remembrance, then bless God for it, but if thou
art recovered from the Grave, and withal delivered from the bitter pangs and
terrors of Death, thou shall again return to thy folly, then know assuredly a
foul Leprosy has spread it self over thee.

5. Success and prosperity in the way of our sins; When we offend God, 10.
That prosper in a way of sin
and get all that our hearts can desire, this makes a man like the fatted Ox
to go leaping to the Stall, even to hell, Psalm* 73.6. When David had complained
of the prosperity of the wicked, they offended God as they pleased, and yet had
as much outward happiness as if they were the only persons that pleased God;
He says therefore, Pride compasses them about as a Chain, and Violence
covers them as a garment, They were full of violence and bold presumption,
like the Unjust Steward, neither fearing God nor man, and this boldness in sin
was from outward prosperity: Hence the heart of such sinners is Isa. 6. called
a fat heart, from Cattle that do grow fat in Fruitful Pastures; But above
all places there is one more remarkable, Eccles. 8.11. Because Sentence is not
speedily executed against the sinner, Therefore the heart of the Sons of men
is fully set in them to do evil; Fully set, There is nothing can divert them,
they are resolved, come hell, and come devils, they will have their way.

6. Hypocrisy or a deceitful pretending to matters of Religion, 11.
Hypocrisy.
when yet at the same time their hearts are carnal, vile, and unsanctified,
this was the Case of Judas, he never from the beginning did truly love Christ,
or in a saving way believe in Christ, as appeaseth, Ioh. 6.64. It Is true his
hypocrisy was the more wonderful because they left all, and followed Christ;
They were exposed to all hardship, and hatred from the world, who would not
think that only pure ends had moved Judas? but yet you see that even in the
poor and low way Christ was in, yet Judas could have false ends and there were
temptations to draw out his carnal worldly heart, whether he was a convinced
hypocrite that lived in sins against conscience at first is hard to say; But
after he became the Bag-bearer, and did daily steal from that public stock
which Christ had for the maintenance of himself and his Apostles, then no
doubt, but he knew he did not walk uprightly, and so was a gross hypocrite;
Now this hypocrisy all along he discovers especially Mat. 26.7. in this
History of Mary, who anointed Christ's feet with precious Ointment at a dear
rate, Judas murmured at this, John the Evangelist mentions him only; ^e other
make all the Apostles to murmr, but either it is an E^allage, the plural for
the singular number, or else Judas was the beginning of the Sedition he was
Ringleader, and put others on it; But in this complaint of this, See how
speciously and religiously be covered his wickedness; Ad quid perditio haec,
says this Son of perdition, It might have been sold and given to the poor;
This he said, says the Evangelist, not that he cared for the poor, but because
he was a Thief; If all that had been put into the bag he could have stolen
from it, and so enriched himself, This was his hypocrisy: Another instance, is
when he had agreed with the Priests about betraying of Christ his Master, he
comes and kisses him with an Hail Master, this which appeared such an
obsequious expression of love was made the very sign by which they should lay
hold on Jesus and carry him away; It is true, some of the Ancients have much
excused Judas as if he intended only to cheat the Highpriests of their money,
because he thought that Christ could escape out of their hands as soon as he
was apprehended, for Judas had observed before that when the people took him
and intended to throw him down the Hill, that he did in a strange miraculous
manner convey himself from them, but this cannot be, for our Savior had
informed them that he must die, though as yet his hour was not come, that one
of them should betray him, and that Judas was earnest and real in this
Treachery appears by this expression, Whom I shall kiss that is he, take him
and lead him away diligently, as fearing Christ might have escaped them, or as
it is translated, Mat. 26.46. Hold him fast: Thus in his most devilish actions
he has fair pretenses, and under this Visor perpetrares his abominations; in
like manner Absalom when he was upon that Treacherous design of unnatural
rebellion against his Father, he pretends a Vow and Piety to perform it; Thus
that cruel, bloody and deceitful Doeg, on whom David acted by Gods Spirit does
pronounce so solemn Curses, yet it is said of him, 1 Samuel 29.7. He was detained
before the Lord; Though he was upon some special Vow, or otherwise serving of
God, yet he could even then take occasion to inform Saul against David, and be
the cause of the death of many innocent Priests of the Lord, and the Pharisees
were so hypocritically Religious that they would not enter into Pilates house
lest they should defile themselves when yet they could crucify Christ; Thus
when men can harden themselves as they think to cosen God and men, no wonder if
they fall into perdition.

12. Desperation.
Lastly, Men who become Sons of Perdition are such as wilfully despair of Gods
mercy, and conclude there is no hope for them: Judas had committed grievous
sins, especially in betraying innocent blood, but his despair at last, was
worse then all the rest; Even that blood he had shed would have washed away
that grievous sin of shedding it, had he by Faith sprinkled himself with it;
What made Cain so desperately continue in rebellion as was against God, though
with constant trembling upon him, it was his despair, My sins are greater then
I can bear: Thus as the devil when he possessed some bodies threw them in the
fire and water, so when he does the soul by despair he violently hurleth them
into hell.

Thus you have heard the inward cause of self^destroiers, there are some
outward causes mentioned in the Scripture,

And they are, 1. Evil and wicked company. Men imboldened in sin labor to
make others so: As Joab said to the young man that trembled to run his Spear
into Absalom, Fear not (says he) have not I loved thee? Thus such great Ones,
such rich Ones, or such a multitude, they bid thee do thus* Why then should
thou regard what Ministers or the Scripture says? Art thou so foolish and
precise to be awed with such things? Thus Prove. 1. Old hardened sinners are
brought in enticing the young man to be one of their company.

2. When Satan takes greater hold and possession of men then formerly, Thus he
drives them to hell, that as you read the devil entered into some Swine, and
threw them headlong into the Sea; Thus he possessth some men, and throws them
as violently into hell; Judas before he sets upon this Treachery is said Joh.
13.27. Satan entered into him, he entered into him, and took full possession of
his Soul; Thus before Ananias and Saphira did in so horrible a manner lie and
dissemble, it is said Act. 5.3. Satan had filled their heart, and thus the Jews
are said to be of their Father the devil; There is a generation of men that
have by way of curse the devil often in their mouths, but he is much more in
their hearts, and such men none can stop from hell,

Lastly, God by a just and severe judgment withdraws or denies all
mollifying and softening grace to some men for their former sins, and when
thus left by God they are in a sencelss, stupid, and impudent estate of
sinning; Thus Pharaoh was left by God, and then he was so hardened that no
Miracles did him any good.

Use of Instruction, Marvel not if such desperate mad men live amongst you,
though they come to Church, though they hear never so much, for they are fully
set to be destroyed; Oh pity and pray for such, that do neither for themselves,
if peradventure they may escape out of the devils snares.

SERMON LXX. Of the Son of Perdition: Shows from the Example of Judas, That
Men may be Eminent for a while in the Church of God, and yet afterward prove
dreadful Apostates.
JOHN 17.12. But the Son of Perdition.
WE come to observe a second Doctrine from this remarkable instance, and
certainly, if we consider who it is that is here called a son of perdition,
it may be matter of astonishment to us. It is Judas, one of the twelve
Apostles; It is he that for a long time continued with Christ working miracles,
and prophesying in Christ's name, yet even this glorious star is become a clod
of earth: This Apostle, an Apostate; he that in all men's judgments was once a
son of the Kingdom, he that was the light and salt of the earth is in himself
darkness, and is become like unsavory salt, fit for nothing but to be thrown
away. Observe,

That men may be eminent for a while in the Church of God, and yet afterward
prove dreadful Apostates. The beginnings of many men in Religion may be very
hopeful and admirable, but their finals may be tragical and very scandalous.
Thus Judas his beginnings were excellent. At first none more forward, more
self-denying then him, but afterward we see this rod that scourged others for
sin by his preaching, to become a Serpent; and see the wonderful
dispensation of God; Paul that began carnally and wickedly, ended spiritually;
he that was an opposer became a friend, and Judas that was a friend became an
opposer. So that, will we, nill we, we must acknowledge Gods grace is all in
all. It Is that which makes a difference only; Bad beginnings may have good
endings, and good beginnings bad endings. There are many meteors in the Church
that make a luster and a blaze, but afterward end in noisomness.

What particular eminencies Judas had.
To improve this Doctrine, Let us consider what peculiar eminency Judas had, and
this will make it the greater wonder, that he should be a Son of perdition.

Which was the first rise and step to all other his excellencies, he was taken
from his former conversation into an inward and more close fellowship with
Christ. We read of three sorts recorded by the Evangelists that related to
Christ: Even as David had three sorts of Worthies. There were those that did
believe in Christ, acknowledging him, yet continued still in their relations,
and former external conditions they were in, such were many of the holy women
we read of in the Gospels.

2. There were some selected from the common sort of Disciples and believers,
that did more immediately depend on Christ, and were employed in special
service for him, Luke 10.1. There were Seventy chosen by Christ to be in an
Office of Ministration and service to him.

But then there were a third sort, and they were more intimate with Christ then
the Seventy, and all the rest, and they were twelve in number called Apostles,
and these were as it were a College, and Christ the Master, these were
domestic to him, they were of his household, they were never asunder, they did
eat and drink, and live, and converse together, they were maintained out of one
common stock and treasury. Now Judas he was one of the twelve, he was received
into the most inward communion together, he was one of Christ's family: So that
it must needs be a great honor and prerogative to Judas, who would have other
thoughts of him, then a sincere eminent man, for Christ chose him to be in the
first place, Christ made as much of him, as of the rest. Who would not say,
This must needs be a good man, Christ is so familiar with him; and whereas John
2. it is said, Many did believe, yet Christ would not commit himself to them,
for he knew what was in man, yet here, though Judas did not truly believe, and
though Christ knew what was in him, yet he committed himself to him. This
familiarity of Judas with Christ, was of old prophesied of, and that to the
aggravation of his sin, Psalm. 41.9. It was thou my familiar friend, my
acquaintance, we took sweet council together. Meditate then on this particular;
The son of perdition is he that was constantly with Christ, one of his
intimate friends, of dear relation together, and this will aggravate it more,
if you consider Christ and his Apostles, not as a civil society, but a
religious one: Though Christ did not in his life time on the earth set up a
distinct Church from that of the Jews, but communicated with the Jews in all
their Church-Ordinances, yet his family was a religious and heavenly society.
He was preaching, praying and performing all heavenly duties, now Judas was as
much in all these holy meetings, as the other Apostles: Therefore it is said
Psalm. 41 9. They took sweet counsel, yea it is said, in whom I trusted; so that
Judas was admitted into all the secrets Christ had, yet the man thus in prayer
often, in duties often, in heavenly conferences often, he becomes a Son of
perdition; his heart was not right within him all that while: As for those
disputes, Why Christ would choose such an one, whom he knew to be an hypocrite,
and especially advance him to be an Apostle, seeing that the Scripture commends
such strict care, about the promoting fit and worthy men to that Office, we can
but give conjectures, no solid reasons, as the Ancients do.

This is but the beginning of honor Christ put upon him, for after they had a
while continued thus with him, then he instituted a new Office of Apostleship,
and gave some men this divine Commission and Office, the chiefest place in the
Church: For you must observe, as a good Antidote against the Anabaptists, who
because Christ chose Fishermen and illiterate persons to preach the Gospel,
conclude such persons may still preach, that there cannot be a stronger
Argument against them, then this instance of our Savior; for when Christ chose
his Apostles, they left their trades, they did not continue in their civil
vocations, but they followed Christ, whereas these men would that persons
should follow their trades, and yet preach always, whereas Paul bids Timothy,
though of extraordinary gifts, To give himself wholly to study and reading, 1 Timothy 4.13.

But secondly, Our Savior after he had called them from their ordinary
vocations, he did not presently make them Church^Officers, but as diligent
Interpreters and Harmonists show, They were two years with Christ under his
Discipline and information, ere they were appointed ^o this Office, and then at
last, when they were to exercise their Apostolical-Office to the whole Church,
they were endowed with admirable abilities from above, so that they could speak
in all tongues, and were filled with the Spirit of God, and infallibly assisted
by him, to interpret the Scripture of the Old Testament: But this by the way.
We see by degrees men were prepared to this Apostolical Office in the Church,
and Judas was one of these: Now this was the highest pinnacle of the Temple.
There was not a greater place of honor and trust, then to be an Apostle, they
are called the pillars and the foundations. Hence Paul begins his Epistle with
this Title, Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, which is as great a glory, says
Chrysostom, as when any Officer under the Emperor writes himself next in
place to the Emperor. It would be impertinent at this time, ^o expatiate in
the dignity and excellency of the Apostolical-Office. The Ancients said they
were Pedes Christi, oculi Dei, and Ecclesiae mammae, Christ's feet, Gods eyes,
and the Churches breasts. These had infallibility in Doctrine, had power to
work miracles, to expel devils, to open and shut heaven (as it were) and yet
the son of perdition is one of these Apostles.

He had not only the Apostolical-Office, but the gifts and qualifications of an
Apostle; He was one of those that returned with joy, saying, The very devils
were subject to them. He prophesied, he wrought miracles, he confessed and
published the name of Christ, he prayed, he performed all the heavenly duties,
that others did, neither do we read of any neglect in his Apostolical-Office,
nor is he blamed for defects in any religious duty, and certainly if he had
been guilty of any such omissions, the Apostles would have suspected him, but
we see when Christ said, One should betray him, they did no more suspect Judas
then themselves.

Christ's carriage was as full of sweetness, love and respect to him, as full of
comfort and encouragement to him, as to the rest, in an external dispensation.
When they returned from their spiritual circuit, Rejoicing (as you heard)
because the devils were subject to them; our Savior speaks indefinitely to
them all, Rejoice not in this, but because your names are written in heaven,
Luke 10.20. he speaks here, as if Judas his name were written in heaven, and
Luke 22.30. Christ tells his twelve Apostles, They should sit upon twelve Tribes
judging Israel. Little did men think that Judas would be cast out, and one put
in his room. Now lay all these together, and thereby will appear his eminency
and esteem in Religion, yet for all that he was a son of perdition; for
whereas Chrysostom and others from the forementioned Texts, would conclude
that Judas was once a true godly man, but afterward fell from his grace, that
is contradictory to the Scripture, as you have heard. And when our Savior
condescended to that low humiliation of washing the Disciples feet (mentioned
only by John; so that the same Evangelist, who does relate in most perspicuous
manner, the sublimest things of Christ, as appears Cap. 1. so he mentions
this action, which was of the lowest debasement) now in washing of their feet,
Judas is not excepted. Those hands of Christ which wrought so many miracles,
cured so many diseases, bestowed so many blessings, yet even these wash not the
face, or the hands, but the feet, the meanest part, and that of Judas, who was
immediately to betray him: But no wonder he lays aside his garments, and
girded himself with a towel, and poured water in a basin, seeing he formerly
laid aside the manifestation of his Divine Nature, being in the form of a man,
and poured out his blood for us; yea, it is thought by many, and those learned,
both by ancient and learned Writers (though opposed also by many learned men)
that Christ gave Judas the Sacrament also; Neither (say they) will this prove
that scandalous men may be admitted to the Lords Supper, because his sin was
as yet secret, and not public; and although Christ as God, knew him to be such
a secret sinner, yet Christ did not in his outward Office of the Ministry, act
according to the knowledge of God, but as a Minister under God in his Office.
Whether Judas received or no the Lords Supper? Those that affirm are many;
Those that deny are also many. Raynardus the Jesuit ( Lib. cui Titulus vitae
optimae finis pessimus) at large quoteth the Authors of both sides: Some make
it a problem, and therefore condemn Prateolus as too rigid, who notes those
with heresy, that deny his communicating with the other Apostles in this
Sacrament.

In the next place, Though thus eminent, yet consider these things to debase
him.

In all this eminency and profession of Christ, he was an hypocrite, he had no
true love to Christ, nor saving faith, as John 6. where at the beginning of
all, Christ said, One is a devil, the present tense is not to be neglected, and
the text says, Even then he did not believe, viz. in a saving manner: Oh what
cause of fear and trembling is this! Who can hear of Judas that preaches, that
works miracles, that is often in duties with Christ, yet he is not sincere?
and therefore you may observe, that our Savior in all his Sermons and
Parables, did press this as the sum of all, to look we build, upon a Rock, to
see that we dig deep in our building, that we be good ground, receiving the
seed in a deep and honest heart. No subject did our Savior so much insist on
as this, when yet we would think in those days, when Christ's teaching and
miracles were so visible, and outward encouragements to profess him, wholly
wanting, that none should follow him, but upon sincere and upright grounds.

In this time of his profession and communion with Christ, he lives in a
secret sin, though the Apostles knew it not, yet his own consceence could not
but condemn him. He was a thief, says the text. Christ had many contributers
to his sustenance, and that was put in a common bag for the maintenance of
himself and his Apostles. Now Judas he carried the bag, how this came about
it is disputed, Whether he desired it or no? or, Whether it was put upon him as
judged a fit and faithful man, the Scripture tells not? Howsoever we see by
this, as is to be showed, That it is a terrible thing to be in such a condition
of life, as is suitable to draw out the sins we are given unto, but of that
afterward. Judas having this great opportunity, he steals part of the
treasury, and keeps part of it for himself; What made him to do this? whether
because he was married and had a charge of children, as some conjecture; or,
whether because he had a covetous worldly heart, as the Scripture seems to
incline, is controverted. So that now Judas becomes a gross hypocrite, for the
very light of nature taught him not to impropriate that which was common to
others; he knew it was Christ's goods, not his own; yea many learned Authors
say, This was not simple theft, but sacrilege, for what was given to Christ
and his Ministry, was to an holy use, and therefore Judas was guilty of both;
and the grosseness of his hypocrisy is the more aggravated, if he did believe
Christ was God as well as man; How could he come into Christ's presence, and not
think Christ knows my falsehood, my theft, and all my secret wickedness.

His sin stays not here, but it swells into an higher nature; He will not
only steal in petty things, but he proceeds to betray his Lord and Master, and
that for a contemptible price. He grudged not long before, because of the
morsel he lost, the price of that precious ointment which was poured on
Christ, that was esteemed worth three hundred pence. Therefore to make up this
loss, he negotiates to betray his Master for thirty pieces of silver: His
readiness and greediness herein is observed by the Evanglist Mat. 26.14. Then
one of the twelve went to the chief Priests; then when he saw he had lost that
booty, his covetous wretched heart seems to make up this another way. Again, He
went to the chief Priests, he bespeaks them first; they did not send for him,
they thought not of this way, but he proffers himself, and he went to the chief
Priests, his known enemies, that he saw had all along endeavored to kill him.
Further, his wickedness appears in asking, What will you give me, and I will
deliver him unto you? He pretends no reason, no cause, as the chief Priests
did, That he was an enemy to Caesar; that he taught contrary to their law and
customs; so that herein Judas sin did more grievously then they. And lastly,
Covenants for thirty pieces of silver, a poor contemptible price, and all this
is done by one that was formerly an eminent Apostle.

He was the man, Matthew. 16.25. Then in stead of a godly repentance, he falls
into a dreadful despair of Gods mercy, and Christ's love. This was to put a
talent of lead upon the Ephah, as the Prophet Zachary expresses it, Zach. 5.8.
This despair was greater then all his former sins, and observe how that all
the while Judas was plotting and contriving his wickedness, his conscience
never troubles him, he could live a long time in thieving and stealing, and
commit abominable sins, and his heart never trembles; Though he heard our
Savior say, Woe be to him that should betray him, it had been better he had
never been born, yet he can boldly go on; yea, though Judas was in the head of
a band of men to take Christ; John 18.3, 5, 6. and as soon as Christ said, I am
he, such glory and terror came from him, that immediately they fell to the
ground, yet at this terrible passage his conscience does not work; but at last,
his conscience biteth like an Adder, and stings like a Serpent. Hearken to this
all you, who commit sin with jollity and security, you care not, you fear not,
what the Ministers of God threaten you with, you can eat and drink, and rise up
to play, so could Judas for a while, but at last, he cries out, I have sinned
in betraying the innocent blood. Oh take heed, as jolly and as bold as thou art
for the present, lest in this life, or to come, thou criest out, Oh I have
sinned, I have damned my Soul, yea I have betrayed Christ! For every wicked man
is a Judas; Whosoever will part with Christ for his sins, for the world, he
is a Judas; This son of perdition does thus roar within, that he has no
comfort, no quietness, then first he goes to the chief Priests, cries out of
his sin, and throws them the thirty pieces again. Here you see, A man may cry
out and weep for his sins, and make some satisfaction, and yet not for all that
truly repent; Even this son of perdition bewaileth his sins, and cries out of
them. Further see what little good this thirty pieces did him; he that studied
and plotted to betray his Master to have them, he cannot keep them, he
vomitteth them up. Thus it will be with every wicked man, that to get dishonest
gain, lies, steals, forsweareth himself: Oh with what pain and torment, with
what torture in thy bowels will thou vomit up all again! Lastly, His torments
are so exquisite, that for fear of hell, he throws himself into hell; He
departed when he threw away those thirty pieces of silver, and went and hanged
himself, Matthew. 27 5. Some learned men say, he did not hang himself, because
the Greek word may be rendered as well, He was suffocated and choked: They
say, God raised up a swelling in his throat upon his perfidiousnesse, which
immediately killed him; it must be so (say they) because Act. 1.18. it is said,
He fell headlong, and his bowels gushed out; now how could that be, if he
hanged himself? But it is answered, That though he hanged himself, yet at last
he fell down, and in his fall, his bowels gushed. Thus he who had no bowels to
an innocent Christ, his bowels gush out; The Greek word is used of Achitophel,
by the Septuagint; and although the same Authors say, that he also did not hang
himself, but God immediately struck him with such a swelling in his throat, yet
that cannot be, because it is said, He set his house in order before he did it,
whereas if it had been a sudden judgment inflicted on him, he not expecting
it, Why should he set his house in order? From this dreadful instance, and
terrible end of Judas, let all take heed: Oh let this son of perdition make
you children of salvation! What he would have written upon his Sepulcher, think
Judas says to you, (...), Whosoever looks on me, let him be godly: Oh let
his worldliness, his secret sins, his hypocrisy, make thee upright, and
full of integrity! Is there a more terrible example in all the Scripture then
this?

SERMON LXXI. Of the Son of Perdition.
JOH. 17.11. But the Son of Perdition.
WE have not yet sucked all the honey out of this honeycomb, Not observed all
the practical matter which is deducible from this sad Instance, He may be a
pillar of Salt to season us; As the people stood still gazing and amazed at
Asahell, wallowing in his blood, so may we with fear and trembling behold this
Son of Perdition: We may be admonished not only by good Examples but bad, Judas
his Perdition is a spiritual Anatomy-Lecture for us to look to our selves, and
to take heed of such Diseases that may endanger us which did him.

The Third Observation shall be from the Consideration of this Son of Perdition
in the respective condition he was in; He is in the company of the Apostles,
yet not truly of them, a Jay among the Doves, a Wolf amongst the Sheep, yet
though such an one prove deceitful, and an Apostate, we are not to condemn
Christ and his Apostles, we are not to censure them as all of the same temper.

Obs. That we are not to condemn the way of Religion and Religious persons,
Doct. We are not to condemn Religion and relisious persons though some amongst
them prove scandalous.
though some amongst them prove scandalous and deceitful; Would it not have
been horrible impiety to have broken out against all the Apostles and Christ
himself saying, look what they are, It Is as the Pharisees said, a company of
Impostors and Deceivers, They are all for their own ends, they are all
covetous, and though they pretend Religion, yet they are bypocrites, and though
they condemn the gross sins of the world, yet in secret they can be as bad
as any, would not such a tongue show that it was set on fire from hell, that
should belch out such things; It Is then of special consequence to know, that we
are not to love the strictness of Religion, the less, nor are we to prejudice
our selves against the way and persons of Godly men* if sometimes amongst them
there be such who made the pretense of holiness a disguise to act their
wickedness in: Think not the worse of the Apostles, because a Judas was
amongst them.

To bring this Truth home to your hearts, Consider these things.

1. There was never any such pure Society and company of holy men upon the
Earth but there were also some Hypocrites and insincere men mingled amongst
them; Either wilful convinced Hypocrites or else unsound men in the bottom,
and therefore when a Temptation came they discovered what they were; It Is in
vain to look for such a Church, wherein all the members of it shall be perfect
and pure; In the Old Testament we read of many eminent at least for a while in
the Church of God, but yet rotten at the Coar; Saul was in a remarkable manner
chosen by God to temporal government, he pretends much zeal for Gods people and
heartily himself to destroy the enemies of Israel, yea, the Spirit of prophecy
came upon him, but it became a Proverb, Is Saul among the Prophets? We were not
to condemn the Prophets, because a deceitful bloody Saul was amongst them:
Among the good Kings in the Old Testament, David, Hezekiah, and Josiah, We
read also of Jehu, who for outward appearance did many glorious things of
Reformation; The Text says, He did all things that were in Gods heart, yet for
all that he was not with David, a man after Gods own heart: He was a Meteor,
not a fixed Star, he was a picture, not a living man in Religion, he was
moved up and down as his carnal Interests did lead him; Again as there were
the good Prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah with many others, so there were also the
bad Prophets who came not in Gods Name, who prophesied peace, and sowed pillows
under wicked men's elbows, that they might sin the more securely; Should a man
therefore have cried out against all the Prophets that they were a deceitful,
self-seeking generation, and that it was no matter what they said, for they
drove on their own designs, to be Lords over all, to obtain great things; Thus
it was of old and in the New-Testament-dispensation though their outward
profession of the Truth was subject to many dangers, insomuch that there was
little encouragement to hypocrites we might justly think that (if ever) in
those primitive days all should have been upright, but there were even then
Foxes amongst the Sheep, John 2. Our Savior would not trust many that yet are
said to believe: Hence are these comparisons of the Church to the Floor,
wherein is chuff as well as wheat: To the Field wherein are Tares as well as
Wheat; To the Drag net wherein are bad Fish as well as good: Now will ye
condemn a Field of Corn because of some Weeds in it? Did not Paul complain that
he was in danger of false Brethren, and that many came creeping in to spy out
their liberty to have an occasion to accuse them; Did not Hymeneus and Philetus
make shipwreck of all? Did not Alexander the Copper-Smith withstand Paul, and
do him much hurt? 2 Timothy 4.12. yet judicious Divines think that it was that
Alexander mentioned in the Acts, who had almost lost his life, in his forward
appearance for the Gospel, make account then of that which our Savior says,
Mat. 18 7. It Is impossible but that offenses must come, there will be woeful
scandals even in the Church of God, but let not this make thee revolt.

2. As there have been such unsound hypocrites always in the Church, so it is
the great endeavor of the devil to tempt and to set on those that are most
eminent to throw them in the mire, for hereby he will promote his own kingdom;
The scandals and stumbling blocks of men reputed of in the Church are the
greatest advantage to the devil, Luke 22. Satan has desired to winnow you; As
Goliath challenged the stoutest Israelite thinking by vanquishing of him to
dismay all the rest; Thus the devil if he can overcome an Apostle, a Disciple,
then all the rest will easily yield; The devil desired to winnow them more then
all others; Not only the high places in temporal respects but even in the
Church are slippery and dangerous; Those that are lifted above others in
Religion, in parts, in esteem, they are more in danger then ten thousand of
other Christians, for if they fall they draw more with them: If a tall Tree
fall, it beats down all the shrubs under it; If a pillar of the house fall, it
endangers all the buildings; It is noted of the devil that he used the Serpent
at first to entice Eve, because that was more subtle then any other Creature of
the Field, and the devil still takes the same way, The subtlelest and most
notable Instruments he striveth to pervert them; Men of the best parts, the
greatest learning, the hottest zeal, It is such as he looked after: Thus in
Antiquity many of the Heretics were of great Learning, plausible Eloquence,
subtle Insinuations, specious Piety, and thereby they did the more hurt;
Therefore the more reputed thou art in the Church of God, know thy Condition to
be the more dangerous; The devil will never give over till one way or other he
make thee a Scandal; Let him that stands take heed lest he fall.

3. Men may through their corruptions actively take an occasion to speak
against the ways of Religion, or else there may be a passive occasion
administered to them, and we are greatly to distinguish between these two,
Divines call it Scandalum acceptum, and Scandalum datum; There are a generation
of men so devilish and malicious, that they will take an occasion to condemn
the way of Religion even for good things, for necessary duties, or at least
when they have no just occasion: Thus our Savior himself though never so holy,
so humble, so godly in his doctrine and life, yet the Pharisees took all
occasion to calumniate him, They say he wrought by the devil, and called him a
Friend to Publicans and Sinners; There are some wretched men that do what you
can they will be prejudiced against the Truth and Godliness, They will look
upon all the ways of Christ as so many deceits and impostures, and this
offense is called Scandalum Phariseorum by the Casuists; But then there is a
Scandal given, or scandalum Pusillorum, when those who appear for Religion do
such things as are indeed inconsistent with holiness, that can never be made
good by the Scripture, and of such it is that our Savior says, Woe be to him
by whom offenses come, Mat. 18.7. Whosoever shall offend one of these little
ones, it had been better a Millstone were hung about his neck, and he thrown
into the sea; For although it be also a sin in any man to be prejudiced and
alienated from Godliness, because of the sins of those that profess it,
neither will that be an excuse to them, yet because such put a stumbling block
in the way, therefore is the transgression great: Distinguish then between such
as through their wilful obstinacy will be offended, and from such who are so
through weakness and a real occasion given.

4. Such is the enmity of man to what is good, that he is glad to have any
occasion to blame the Truth with, whenas indeed they should mourn and grieve to
see any failings amongst those that are religious, they rather rejoice in the
discovery of such, and they think this is a good reason for their Impiety; Why
should they* come out from the common ways of the world? Do not many of those
that are so forward do thus and thus? And therefore they hope they shall do as
well as any other: The Apostle seeing this wicked disposition in the world
speaks notably to the godly, 1 Pet. 3.16. To walk with such a good Conscience,
that whereas the world will speak against them as evil doers, they may be
ashamed; So 1 Pet. 2.12.

These things premised, Let us consider the unreasonablenesse and sinfullnesse
of condemning Religion for some hypocrites therein:

For 1. Do thou not as well see many are sincere and walk unblameably? Does
not thy own heart tell thee that thou have no just cause to speak against them?
Do thou not sometimes wish thy Soul might do as well as theirs? Do thou not
with Balaam wish thou might die the Death of such Righteous persons? Shall
not the Graces and holiness of Eleven Apostles more confirm thee then the
wickedness of one Judas offend thee? Consider then how unreasonable thou art
that do only mind the weak places of the Wall, not ^he strong; Thou speak
of many that for gain and secret lusts have fallen off from God, but how many
thousands of godly sincere men can we tell thee of, who because they feared God
were neither terrified by threats, nor yet seduced by allurements to deny
Christ; Though a Judas did betray him, yet ^here are Millions of Martyrs who
have valiantly died in the Confession of him.

2. We are not to live by Examples but by Precepts, It Is an Old Rule; We are to
consider what the Scripture requires and commands, If that enjoin a life
separated and singular to the wickedness of the world, If that bid thee run
not into the same excess of Riot with them, such a strict way and profession
thou art bound to follow; Though all that go before thee be hypocrites, and
that go with thee; Though all the Apostles had been like Judas, yet Christ's
Truth had still been to be embraced; Therefore not men's lives but the Scripture
is to be ou^ Rule: If all men prove Hypocrites or Apostates, yet we are bound
to keep close to the Word, Let God be true and every man a Liar; It Is true the
life and conversation of others in sincerity and uprightness may be a great
inducement to holiness, therefore the Scripture often calls for a life of light
and holiness, that others may be won thereby, but yet every one ought to have
such an inward assurance both of the Truth of God and his Grace upon his heart,
that what Peter said presumptuously they are to acknowledge as a duty; Though
all men should forsake Christ, yet he would not; It Is not upon men that we are
to build either our faith or our godliness, but though all men should prove
devils, and there were none in the world but one man that would own Christ,
thou were to join with him.

3. If we should condemn Religion for the falsehood of some, we were to condemn
all the ways of Religion, and all parties in the world, and so to turn direct
Athiests, for look upon all the several ways and parties that are in the
world, Are there not some that are a reproach to them, that the wiser and more
sober persons in that way will not own? Wonder not then if the Apostle say of
some, that they are spots in their Feasts, Jude 12. And Romans 2. that they are
such by whom the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles; This has and
will be; It is impossible (says our Savior) but there will be offenses, viz,
considering the corruptions and sinful inclinations of men, but if you will
own no Religion wherein an Hypocrite may come in, you must do as Constantine
bad the Novatian erect a Ladder, and go himself only into heaven; Even in
heaven it self there were (as we may say) Judasses, for what were those
Apostate Angels that did not abide in the Truth, but left their first
habitation, but betraiers of all that glory and honor that was due to God:
Know then that to throw away Religion because of the hypocrisy of some few, is
to run the broad way into Athiesm.

5. It is not only sinful but very dangerous to thy own soul when thou art
prejudiced or leavest the true way upon such grounds; Thou do not hurt them,
but thou wrongest thy own soul; Those Disciples Joh. 6. that took offense at
Christ's Preaching they did not despise Christ so much as they damned their
souls, for says Peter then, whither shall we go, for thou have Eternal Life?
So then for thee to take up prejudices and objections against Christ's way,
because of some men's miscarriages, is to be a self-murderer, will thou destroy
thy own soul? and throw thy self into one extremity because others may in
another way undo themselves; Oh know it is an heavy judgment upon thee when
thou meetest with stumbling blocks* Those whom God loves he gives a better
heart unto them; Christ himself Luke 1. 1 Pet. 2.7. To those that believe is
indeed precious, but a stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense unto those
that do not believe; Oh then be afraid lest this be the beginning of Gods
judgment upon thee to be so prejudiced and offended by mis representations,
that thou shall never have an heart to love God and his way; Think not to do
them a despite, thou art the greatest Enemy to thy own soul.

6. If any under the pretense of Religion do act their iniquities quarrel not
at Religion it self, for that condemns such ways; Neither do those that fear
God own such for their members, yea, where Gods Order is put in practice they
cast such from them as a dishonor to God and a reproach to that holy calling
whereby we are called; If Achan do secretly steal a wedge of gold, when Joshua
comes to know it, he shall be troubled that troubled Israel, and glory shall be
given to God, 1 Cor. 5. They are commanded to cast out from amongst them that
wicked person, and if any walk disorderly, 2 These. 3.14. Note that man, and
have no communion with him, that he may be ashamed; Such are a burden, a grief
to those that are truly godly; David can even weep Rivers of tears because of
such; That place is observable, Joh. 13.21. Christ was troubled in Spirit, and
testified, and said, One of you shall betray me; Judas was a trouble and a
grief to Christ's Spirit, think not then that the truly godly own such, any more
then Job did the ^^res upon his body, or the Israelites did the Jebusites that
were thorns and goads in their side.

Lastly, Religion it self is the more to be prized, for this shows the
authority and command it has over men's Consciences, that none do ordinarily
commit heinous trespasses, but they are willing to put the vail of Religion
upon them, certainly this is so far from disparaging that it rather advances
Piety, as being that which has an universal Command every where, men cannot
commit iniquity before they blind their eyes with some religious arguments;
The Pharisees made account they did all for the glory of God; But you will say,
how comes it about that any prove thus scandalous in the way of Religion? Is
not the way of it as comfortable and as blessed as it did at first promise?
Has any thing that Christ said for our encouragement to follow him proved
false? Has he deceived any? so that they could say, The Land of Canaan was not
better then their old Egypt; No, in no wise, only This is one great cause of
men's miscarriage, They take not up Religion at first upon pure and sincere
motives; It Is not from a renewed and regenerated principle within, and
therefore it being not from a good and sure foundation, no wonder if at last
all fall to the ground; Our Savior spoke often to this Point, as being indeed
the sum of all; What is that which persuades thee, and prevails with thee
to follow Christ? Is it from an heavenly principle to an heavenly End? Go on,
and God will be with thee; But if some other carnal or insincere motive put
thee on, know that when the temptation comes thou will prove an offense,
Painting will melt away when it comes near the fire; The un-rooted Tree will
fall to the ground when the Winds shall shake it mightily.

SERMON LXXII. Of the Son of Perdition.
JOHN 17.12. But the Son of Perdition.
I Shall at this time finish the good Observations from so bad an instance. For
as through the perfidiousness of this son of perdition, though he intended it
not, God wrought the greatest salvation that could be, insomuch that in this
sense, we may call his fact an happy sin: So through a divine consideration
of this sad example, we may receive the greatest good, and with an holy skill
turn this poison into nourishment; for the sins and destructions of wicked men,
are written for our instruction, as well as the good life and mercies of the
godly: As Abel, though dead speaks, ^o Judas, though damned, cries to all, to
take warning from him.

Two Observations I shall briefly dispatch at this time,

The first, whereas you see Judas thus hopefully and forwardly beginning
leaving all with the other Apostles to follow Christ, and that in a contemned,
persecuted manner, yet at last dreadfully and finally to revolt from all,
Observe,

Observe. 1. That unless men are careful at first to look to their grounds and
motives, why they take upon them the profession of Christ's way, they will never
hold out, but one time or other forsake and revolt from all.
That unless men are careful at first to look to their grounds and motives,
why they take upon them the profession of Christ's way, they will never hold
out, but one time or other forsake and revolt from all. A sure and sound
beginning will ever have a blessed and happy ending, but when men upon slight
and insincere motives, look toward Christ at first, such build upon the sand,
and their fall will be great. Our Savior spoke many Parables, especially that
of the foolish builder, and of the stony and thorny ground, for this end, that
men should be well advised upon what terms they at first undertake for him.
Hence it is, that when some voluntarily proffered their service and obedience to
Christ, Christ presently informs them of the difficulty of that work, of the
contrariety of it to flesh and blood; that they had better never begin, then
afterward to fall off; hence he so solemnly bids them, to remember Lots wife,
Luke 17.32. and that he who has put his hand to the plow, and looks back, is
not fit for the kingdom of Heaven.

Seeing therefore this is often to be seen, though it be very sad, That many
who have been once zealous and hopeful for Gods way, yet afterward decline
totally, and are not the men they were: Let us consider, what it is to set
rightly at first upon the owning of Christ, to lay a sure foundation at first?
And

First, Then are our beginnings hopeful, when the Spirit of God in the
Ministry, or other means of grace did work upon us. When it was not mere
education under good Governors, when it was not the acquaintance and company
we had with those that feared God, but some inward experimental work of Gods
grace upon our own hearts. Alas, let a man be never so fervent, so overtopping
others, and even to admiration show himself in holiness, yet if it has not
been the work of Gods Spirit effectually moving upon his heart, he is but like
a Land-flood, which though swelling high upon much rain, yet when a drought
comes, will be presently dried up. It Is not mere nature, or external restraint
from sins, or any sudden motions in our own spirit, that will ever hold out.
We read 2 Chronicles 24.22. of Joash, who in his latter age did most wickedly
degenerate, when yet in his former times he was very forward in repairing the
Temple of God, and showed more zeal to Gods glory then the Priests did: But
what was the ground? Jehoiada the high Priest had a great hand over him, he
helped him to the Kingdom, and engaged him to God several ways, but when this
good man was dead, he becomes a Wolf, and puts Zachariah, Jehoiada his son,
that had been such a kind Uncle to him, to death, and that merely because he
reproved them for their sins: So that though here was some external
restraining of Joash, yet there was no internal renovation by Gods Spirit: Now
I make a sure foundation to lie in these two, The Spirits work by the Ministry
in an ordinary way, because one is the efficient, and the other the subordinate
and instrumental cause; Hence our conversion, our regeneration, and spiritual
begetting anew, is constantly attributed to the Word preached, as the ordinary
cause, and the Word preached is but as a dead letter without the Spirit: Oh
then run to the fountain of thy owning of Christ! What put thee upon
forwardness in this way? Was it the Spirit of God through the Word? then this
is of God, and will endure, I add through the Word, because of those many
delusions many have in them, which being not according to Gods Word, as they
come from darkness, so they will end in darkness. The Child misshapen in the
Conception, will ever after be a monster.

Then will beginnings and endings be alike, when grace is radicated and enters
^^ep enough into the soul. Though thou have never such affections, such
enlargements, yet if there be not a rooted and deep work of grace upon thy
soul, it will never hold. This our Savior pressed Matthew. 13. The seed that
grew up hopefully, miscarried because it had no rooting; and thus the house on
the sandy foundation was ruined, because the builder did not dig deep enough.
Hence the promise of Regeneration is Jer. 31. to put the Law of God in their
inward parts, in the most intimate and deep parts of the soul; and therefore
grace is called the inward man, and the hidden man of the heart: But o how
superficial and overly! How formal are most in this matter? They undertake to
own the ways of godliness before ever they have laid a deep foundation. Has
thy repentance been deep enough, thy faith, thy love been rooted enough? If so,
then the gates of hell shall never prevail against thee.

Good beginnings will have bad endings, when men profess Christ, not out of
love to Christ, and pure intentions to him, but from sinister and worldly
respects. Oh this covering and hiding will never hold! The Wolf will be at last
a Wolf for all it is sheep-cloathings; and this was Judas his case, his end was
not pure, his eye was not single, and therefore his Apostasy was inevitable:
To follow Christ for loaves, or to know him only after the flesh, will never
endure; All flesh is grass, Isa. 40 6. but the word of God abides for ever,
that is; not only the body of man is mortal, but all those ways of
righteousness and holiness, which are not indeed, regeneration will certainly
vanish. This is a great part of the meaning, if you compare this place with the
whole context, 1 Pet 1.23, 24, 25. Jehu begins with zeal as hot as fire, yet
his latter end was like Jeroboams, for he walked in his ways, and all because
his ends were not pure. Oh this is the sum of all! This is the soul and life
of all. Observe diligently thy heart in the intentions and motions of it: Is it
to have applause? Is it to be reputed of? Is it to accomplish great things for
thy self? Thus we may say of thy godliness, what is it thy body? Dust thou
art, and to dust thou will return; The time is coming thou will not have a
stone left upon a stone of that religious building, though once so many did
admire it.

Then hot beginnings will end coldly, when the judgment of a man is not well
instructed and informed in the truth. Hot affections, but a weak judgment will
quickly reel up and down, as a man that has strong vapors from his stomach,
but a weak brain: Therefore our Savior prays in this Chapter, That they may
be sanctified through the truth. Hymeneus and Philetus, when they made
shipwreck of the faith, then they cast away a good conscience: So that a sound
mind and judgment is a special preservative to perseverance: What is the
reason children are tossed up and down with every new thing? But because their
understandings are weak; and Ephesians. 4. we are forbidden to be like children in
this respect; As there must be a sound judgment in the truth, so a well
advised Meditation about the nature of grace, and how dear it will cost thee to
be Christ's Disciple. To come into the company of the godly before thou have
thoroughly bethought thy self, what is required of a Disciple? How much he must
do and suffer? What he shall meet with in the way? is the cause of great
hypocrisy. Our Savior does fully express this under two Parables, One of a
man going to war; and another who undertakes a great building, Luke 14 31.
There is none will set upon a war or building, but with much council, whether
he be able to go through with it, or no; Whether he shall not be mocked, as one
that began and could not make an end? Thus do thou reflect upon thy self, What
shall I go and join my self with those that fear God? Shall I be in the number
of those that will own Christ more strictly then the world? Am I fit for such a
great work? Am I mortified to all sin? Can I endure to lose all for Christ?
Do I love him better then all relations, and life it self? If I do not, it is no
climbing up this hill, I shall tumble back again with greater danger then ever.
I shall add no more particulars, because all miscarriages may be reduced to
one of these heads.

Use. In the first place of Instruction. Though zealous beginnings may terribly
degenerate, yet it is a blessed, and an happy thing to be working for God
betimes; Though a man called at the twelfth hour into the Vineyard, shall be
rewarded, yet it is a blessed thing to be one of the first in Gods Vineyard; to
be as Timothy was, godly in the youth. The wicked world, as they have many
Proverbs to encourage themselves in their wickedness, so this is none of the
vilest, A young Saint an old Devil: This Gerson calls a blasphemous Proverb, and
says, His heart did often tremble to hear men say, Angelicus Juvenis senibus
satanizat in Annis. Men take up this ungodly Proverb to procrastinate their
conversion, to delay their repentance, to discourage early lookings toward
heaven, as if all that did begin so soon, would turn devils at last. Though
Judas did thus play the hypocrite, yet Timothy, godly from the youth, did not.
Therefore begin even this day, this hour, only look thy beginnings be sound
and sincere.

2. Use of Exhortation, To take heed of proving a Judas, How odious is his
name? It Is a Proverb to express a treacherous, false hearted man, to say, He
is another Judas, and Judas his name is so abominated, that though in it self
it be a good name, signifying as much as one that confesses and praises God,
yet I think there was scarce ever any Christian would name his child Judas,
his actions are so abhorred, and yet for all this, How many are like Judas, and
so sons of perdition? Apply it but in this one thing, Judas his high iniquity
was, out of his covetousness to betray Christ for thirty pieces of silver, for
a little profit he would lose Christ. Now is not this the case of most wicked
men in the world? Whosoever loves any pleasure or profit more then Christ, he
is like Judas. The drunkard is a Judas, he sels Christ and his soul for his
drink. The whoremonger is a Judas, the unjust dealer is a Judas, all these sell
Christ, sometimes for less then Judas did. It Is not thirty pieces, but a less
matter makes thee betray Christ. Oh then that all inordinately carried away
with any sin, would say, What a Judas am I, I let loose Barabbas, and
crucify Christ!

The second Observation may be this, Whereas Judas had this condition befallen
him, which did draw out his corruption, and so was the means to undo him,
Observe,

That it is a very sad thing to fall into such a condition, Observe. 2. That it is
a very sad thing to fall into such a condition that draws out our peculiar
corruptions, we are most prone unto.
that draws out our peculiar corruptions we are most prone unto. This was the
poison to Judas, he being naturally inclined to unjust gain, has this office
of carrying the bag, and thus he has the opportunity of augmenting his
impiety. How he came about to be put in the Stewards place, men do but
conjecture. Some say, It was his earnest endeavor and plot for it. Others,
That Christ did it to engage him, and to make him more inexcusable. To be sure,
This was to him as Dalilah to Sampson; as Saul thought Michall would have been
to David; as the Ivy to the Wall; it was as Moths to the linen, even eating
him up, and consuming of him.

To open this, Consider,

That men are set in places, relations and habitations by God. All our
relations, changes and offices, they are wholly ordered by God, yea our very
places and habitations they are bounded; and certainly, if those things that
seem to be most casual, are yet by the ordering of a wise God, much more those
things that are of a greater concernment. Hence

Secondly, God does not only order all conditions and passages toward us, but
he does it in reference either to our spiritual welfare or disadvantage. Romans
8. To the godly, all things work together for their good; Whatsoever estate,
mercy, or condition they are in, it is the effect of their Predestination; so
that as Ordinances and Graces flow from their Predestination, so do all other
their outward mercies and conditions, only here is this difference, The Graces
of Gods Spirit are intrinsecally apt of themselves to prepare for happiness,
and so are the direct effects of it; but temporal mercies, they are not so,
but propter aliud: Therefore we are not properly said to be predestined, to
be rich, to be poor, to be married, to live a single life; as we are to be
holy, because these outward conditions are only indifferent in their natures,
but through the grace of God, they become very serviceable to their spiritual
good.

Thirdly, Though God has thus a wise ordering of all things, yet men by their
corruptions may throw themselves into such conditions, as may prove occasions
to sin unto them, and then those things are permissive only from God. Jacob
had the blessing, this was of Gods appointment, but his deceitful way of
obtaining it, was wholly of his own corrupt heart. David was appointed by God
for a Kingdom, but then the many sinful and carnal shifts he used that was of
himself. It Is true, the godly even from their foolish miscarriages, if humbled,
may be encouraged, God will work good to them thereby, as Joseph comforted his
brethren; It was not they but God that had sold him: But now to wicked men,
they for their sins are left by God, and therefore not taking Gods way in any
thing, they have their conditions in anger, and they become a snare unto them,
as Solomon had observed, That riches were given to some for their hurt. Thus
every estate, that a wicked man has, provoking God to leave him, does increase
his corruption; it is oil to the flame, He treasureth up more wrath against the
day of wrath.

Hence in the fourth place, That which a wicked man may so greedily long for,
and break through all difficulties to obtain, that may be the saddest judgment
to have in the world. Some men inordinately desire earthly greatness and
honor, and they have it, but Gods judgment they have with it. Some are
inordinate for riches and wealth, they will be rich, but then they drown
themselves in perdition Others with Rachel say, Give me children, else I die,
and her children make her die. So that as beasts leap and play in fat pastures,
which are for their destruction: Thus many a man he rejoices and blesses
himself in having of that, which when enjoyed is the immediate poison of his
soul.

Fifthly, Here is the difference between a godly man and a wicked, To the
wicked man his relations and calling are a total and prevailing temptation to
him, the fire kindles upon him, and cannot be quenched; It Is like hell fire,
that cannot be put out; But now to the godly man his calling and relations may
in part tempt him, be a sore thorn in his way to heaven, but yet he will
recover, he will watch and pray against his temptations. Though the world may
as Joseph's mistress solicit and importune him, yet he will refuse to lie with
her; or if this viper has fastened upon his hand, it shall not stay to kill
him, he will cast it off.

Use of Examination. Try your conditions, your relations, observe whether they
be not constant Dalilahs to thee: Again and again consider, Whether thy
condition be not a temptation to thee? It Is true, no godly man can be in any
lawful calling, but it tempts him to deadness of heart, to dull affections in
heavenly things, but if they do not wholly turn thee from God, then thy
conflicting in it, is a sure sign of grace. It Is made the wicked man's
condition, That his table shall become a snare, by that is meant, all his
dainties, all his worldly greatness and excellencies, and that such a snare,
as he does willingly yield unto. Therefore renew prayer constantly, that thy
heart, and the temptation be not lost together.

SERMON LXXIII. The Great Stumbling Blocks in Religion removed.
JOH. 17.12. That the Scripture might be fullfilled.
THose are the last words in the Text, and are brought in as a Second Answer
concerning the Objection that might be made against Christ's Faithfulness in
preserving those that were given him, For Judas perished.

To this was answered,

1. It Is no wonder, for he was a Son of Perdition.

2. The Scripture had a long while before foretold of this, so that we may
conceive this second Reason brought in upon a threefold account.

1. It would be a very great scandal and offense to have Judas one of Christ's
own Society to betray him; Now that they may be well fortified against such an
unwonted and horrible thing, he tells them this is no more then the Scripture
had foretold.

2. Seeing that the Scripture is Gods voice, and therefore that which properly
God does, the Scripture is sometimes said to do, as Gal. 3.22. The Scripture
foreseeing has concluded all under sin, that is, God foreseeing etc. did
conclude: Hence this passage may be brought in to show, that even all that
sinfulness and perdition of Judas, the consequent thereof did not fall out
casually, but by the wise ordering providence of God.

3. This may be brought in to prevent any such error as might be gathered from
our Saviors words, as if some of the Elect persons might perish; No (says our
Savior) he was none of them; The Scripture a long while ago had pronounced
fearful curses against him.

Now to understand this, Consider these things,

First, That the Scriptures which do most palpably thus foretell Judas his
perdition are Psa. 41.10. applied Joh. 13.8. Psa 69.26. Psa. 109.8. applied
Act. 1.20. Here you see are clear evident places containing a Prediction of
what would befall Judas, David speaks by way of bitter Imprecation against his
implacable and crafty Enemies, who set against God and his cause in him and
this was a Type of Judas: Indeed Junius relates this passage in the Text, not
only to Judas his perdition, but also to all those several places of
Scripture, which speak of Christ and his office in saving of his people, but
that seems not so accomodated to the Context.

2. These words are not spoken to take off the cause of perdition from Judas,
and to lay it upon the Scripture or Gods prevision, but only (as you heard) to
prevent the offense, the Disciples might take; Therefore Calvin says well,
that the Scriptures mere prediction is not the cause of an Event; Neither did
Judas perish, because the Scripture said so; Indeed no predictions whether
divine or humane, as Astronomicall, political, etc. are the causes of any
Event: Things are not therefore because foretold, but they are foretold because
future; This is true of prediction or prevision merely as so, not including
preordination in it.

Hence 3. The particle (...) that is taken two ways in Scripture, sometimes
denoting a cause, Sometimes an Event only, (...) and (...), as the Learned
instance in many places; Now here they make it to signify the Event only, that
the sense amounts to thus much, when Judas had betrayed his Master, and
perished in that wickedness, then were those places of Scripture fulfilled;
The Scriptures did not force or compel him, but when he had accomplished his
impieties, then was the Scripture fullfilled; Indeed Tolet makes it to be
causall, and Maldonate causall, apparently but not really; Jansenius grants it
may be causall, not in respect of Judas his sin but the end why God permitted
all this.

Lastly, Though Gods prevision and the Scriptures prediction be not simply the
cause of any thing future, yet because Gods prevision is never without his
pre-ordination, and that though wicked men are justly damned for their sins,
yet all these things fall not out without some antecedent Decrees of God;
Therefore we must understand this place as taking in Judas his Reprobation also.

Doct.
Obs. That so many contrary things to a Believers Expectation may fall out in
matters of Religion, that did not the Scripture foretell them, we should be
greatly offended; This hypocrisy of Judas was so heinous and monstrous, that
had not Christ forewarned them out of the Scripture, it had been enough to make
them stagger and reel; To think there was no such thing as Truth of Grace and
Uprightness; To cry out as he did, observing the deceitful ways of the world,
(...), etc.
O Virtue, I thought thou had been some real thing, but now I find thee to
be a mere sound of words, etc. What if one of the Apostles be thus false, then
surely there is no Truth or Religion in the world; It has always been thus in
the Church of God, such passages have fallen out beyond a godly man's
expectation, that sometimes with David they have been ready to say, It Is a vain
thing to be godly, they have doubted about God and his Word, and all has been
because they have not diligently considered that this is no more then the
Scripture has spoken of.

Let us Consider some particulars so hardly concocted without
Scripture-Information.

And first, That the way of Christ should have so much opposition and
persecution in the world; Did not a man Consider that every Page almost of the
Scripture foretells this, it would be enough to dishearten him, Mat. 10.^3.
there and in many other places Christ foretells their portion in this world,
They shall be ha^ed, that is the highest degree of men's spirits against them,
which rests in nothing but the utter destruction of those that are hated, Joh.
15.18. There also are serious Informations against this offense that might be
taken at Christ's way, and indeed by that passage it is a Sect that is every
where spoken against, Act. 26.22. It seems many were disheartened, it was
enough to keep a man off if it were said, None in the world likes this, you
will be the Object of every man's scorn and derision, and is it not the great
Temptation still in Heavens way, that so many troubles do abide those that will
live godly? They cannot bend and turn their Consciences as the world would have
them, They must oppose and discountenance sin, though it be never so
advantageous, and by this contrariety of their works to the works of the world,
therefore it is they are so much hated; Now these things are hardly born, a man
had need again and again go to the Scripture and inform himself saying. This is
no more then I read daily, then I am to look for, Hence 1 Pet. 4 12. Think it
not strange concerning the fiery Trial, as if some strange thing happened to
you; Though the afflictions be never so fierce, so terrible, yet do not think
this any strange matter, Say Christianus sum, as he did, homo nihil Christiani
alienum ^ me p^to, I am a Christian, and think nothing that may befall a
Christian is strange to me; Oh thus we would think that the way to heaven
should be a pleasant, smooth, and delight some way; That whenever we are in
Christ's way, there should be no Hills or Dales, no troublesome passages, but we
find the clean contrary, and this is a stumbling block to us, as David said,
such things were to him, till he went into the Sanctuary of God.

2. This is a stumbling block in Religion, That some of those who are eminent
in the profession of Christ should yet degenerate and turn Hypocrites,
Heretics, and Apostates; Oh these are sad Temptations, and cause many weak
ones to fall, when such pillars prove rotten, This was Judasses Case in the
Text; Better he had never been born even in this respect as well as others,
that hereby Religion was wounded, the souls of many endangered and the
Adversaries of Christ more confirmed and made obdurate in their wicked ways;
Therefore the Scripture foretells such sad things for Heresies, that they should
break out in the preaching of the Gospel, that such Tares should grow up as
well as the wheat, is again and again spoken of, 2 Pet 2.1, 2, 3. False
Teachers shall arise that shall bring in damnable Heresies, and though they be
thus damnable, yet many shall follow their pernicious ways; There is no
Heresy so deformed, but many people will follow it, and by this means the way
of Truth shall be evil spoken of; See this in our days; How greatly do the
Papists blaspheme that holy Truth of God by which we are saved, because of the
many Sects and errors which sprung up amongst us; They think this Argument
enough if there were no other, when they can say how violent is one Protestant
against another, condemning one another for Heretics, They all plead the
Spirit, and yet are opposite to each other, and certainly did not the Scripture
forewarn us of such things, it were enough to make the stoutest believer
sometimes at a stand, but 1 Cor. 11. The Scripture says there again, There
must be Heresies, That necessity arises both in respect of men's corruptions,
and also in respect of Gods wise permission, that so the approved and sound may
be made manifest; It Is no little part of a Christians wisdom in the
overflowing of Heresies, when men of several ways speciously pretend to Truth
and Piety, to know how to deport our selves, and so to walk that we do not fall
from our steadfastness: Now there is not a surer Buckler to keep off these
poisonous arrows from our breasts, then to strengthen our selves with powerful
Considerations out of the Scripture: Thus it must be, Thus it will be; The
Scripture again and again tells us of it, men of great Eminency and repute may
make shipwreck of their Faith, and through deceivablenesse and subtle
insinuations will draw many after them; Wonder not at this when it comes to
pass, That is notable to this purpose, Act. 20.29, 30. Though Paul himself had
instructed those Churches, yet he tells them after his departure that Wolves
would venture in amongst them, what a sad change would this be, But from whence
should they come? Even out of your selves will arise men; Thus these Toads and
Serpents would breed in Gods own Garden: As the Leprosy of Heresy is thus a
Scandal in Gods Church, So the Apostasy and revolt of such as were once
forward for the Truth; To have them degenerate, yea, sometimes to become
malicious Enemies against what they professed, this is very hard, Heb. 6. and 2
Pet. 2. mention is made of some who were endowed with eminent gifts, and much
outward Reformation, yet they are supposed to fall away, and so to fall as
never to recover again; Let it not then stumble thee if there be such who will
for earthly advantages betray Christ after much love pretended to him; That
will sell Christ for silver, Do not thou loath Religion for this; Do not thou
begin to say, Are there any Religious even in this world? Do not thou follow
them, thinking I may do, as they do? But rather tremble at such Instances,
considering how terrible their latter end will be.

3. When for the profession of the Truth and Piety we find our nearest friends
and such as ought most to encourage us to set against us, yea, to betray us,
and to work our Deaths if it were possible, though this be very hard to bear,
yet say as in the Text: This is done that the Scripture may be fullfilled; If
Christ himself complain it was not an open enemy, but thou my familiar friend,
we took sweet counsel together, that did lift up his heel against him, that is
proudly, contemptuously, and bloudily set against me,: Do not thou expect a
better condition then Christ thy Master, especially attend to that place, Mat.
10.34, 35. Luke 11.52. where the consequent of the Gospel preached is to set
the nearest relation one against another, so that for thy Godliness sake
neither Father or Friend may own thee, yea, the wife of thy bosom will betray
thee, such things have fallen out in times of persecution, and therefore be not
offended at that which the Scripture has foretold.

4. That Antichrist should prosper and prevail; even to the shedding of the
blood of so many thousand Martyrs, and yet meet with no remarkable judgment
would be an unanswerable Temptation, had not the Scripture foretold it; The
Scripture informs of a twofold Antichrist, a doctrinall one, such as John
speaks of, that denies Christ to be come in the flesh, and a political
Antichrist, or one that is chiefly so, in respect of Church Government, who yet
also shall be doctrinally Antichrist, of whom Paul speaks that he shall exalt
himself above every thing that is called God, and of which the Revelation makes
often mention, for although this Antichrist shall prevail, and the greater part
of the earth shall receive the mark of the beast, yet at last the time will
come when those joyful Songs shall be sung, that Babylon is fallen, and the
judgments of God are just, who has avenged himself upon the Beast; Let not
then Bellarmine glory in his temporal felicity as a mark of the Church; Let him
not say in such a daring manner, If the Pope be Antichrist, and the man of
sin aimed at in the Scripture, Why have not horrible judgments from heaven
overtaken him? All this is easily answered, The Scripture foretells he shall
have a time, and he must for a while make his garments red with the blood of
the Saints; But as certainly as he does this, so also shall his perdition come
as certainly; Wonder not at this, or be offended, for the Scripture must be
fulfilled.

5. The manifold exercises and conflicts that Gods own Children have sometimes
about the guilt of sin, and sometimes about the power of sin, makes them
think there was none so in the world before; Oh how shall they bear it, there
is no man's condition like theirs, you cannot hear one read of the like, say
they; But do not all these troubles arise from ignorance in the Scripture? Do
ye not read of David though sometimes on the Mount of Transfiguration, yet at
other times on the Mount of Calvary Is he not sometimes lifted up with the
light of Gods Countenance, and at other times so dejected and disquieted he
knows not what to do; And as for the power of Corruption abiding in us, Does
not Paul Rom 7. cry out, O miserable man that I am who shall deliver me from
this body of Death? and the Apostle Jam. 4.5. does the Scripture speak in vain?
The spirit that is in us lusts to envy, Even in the Godly there is a strong
provocation to envy, one of the vilest sins and most contrary to the Spirit of
Christ* Seeing then the Scripture does thus admonish us, Let not the Children
of God walk disconsolately, Let them not say God has forsaken them; Let them
still remember that the Scripture has forewarned them of such things, That the
devil is a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.6.

Use of Instruction, Has the Scripture by it is prediction forewarned against
all possible offenses that fall out, then, 1. See the truth and faithfulness of
Christ that hides not the worst things from us, he deals plainly with us,
What sufferings, troubles and persecutions? What difficulties and hardship we
shall meet with in the way to heaven, he tells us aforehand of them? The devil
and the world they come with their pleasures for the present, they tell us not
how bitter they will be at the latter end; But the Lord Christ he informs us
of the worst that may fall out.

2. From this prediction, we should arm our selves against all temptations
whatsoever. Being forewarned, we should be fore-armed. Oh how blessed is that
man, who under the greatest affliction can say, This I knew before; It is not
strange to me, the Scripture gave me warning of it, and has furnished me with
all due qualifications thereunto.

3. From the evil foretold being accomplished, assure thy self also, the good
promised shall be fulfilled. As the Scripture proves true in all the troubles
and miseries it speaks of; so it will be as true in all the comforts, honor
and happiness it speaks of. This is our sinful narrowness of heart, we many
times look to that evil threatened, not to the good promised: Oh we say, Now all
those texts I feared are fulfilled in me! not remembering that all the promises
shall also be accomplished; What shall the Scripture be true in one part, and
not in the other? Shall it be true to a wicked man, and not true to a godly
man? Are they not called The sure promises of God? As therefore thou art to
prepare for all that hardship and difficulties which will be in the way of
godliness; so do thou as assuredly expect and look for all those joys, that
peace and happiness which the same word of God affords to thee.

SERMON LXXIV. Of the Scripture.
JOHN 17.12. But the Son of Perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled.
A Second Doctrine from the reason alleged in the Text, That the Scripture
might be fulfilled, shall be,

That whatsoever the Scripture says, is sure to be made good. Our Savior
says, Matthew. 5. It Is surer then the heaven and earth, Observe. That whatsoever
the Scripture says, is sure to be made good.
and that every tittle of it is more enduring then the Heavens themselves. It Is
of great consequence to establish you in this point: For if the Scripture be
true, and will be made good in every particular, then the godly may lift up
their heads with joy, and the wicked bow down with fear and trembling.

To open this, Consider the expression, That the Scripture may be fulfilled;
The word of God is called the Scripture, which is as much as the written Word.
The word of God in respect of the accidental communicating of it, may be
divided into that which is Traditum or Scriptum; that which was immediately
delivered either by God himself, or inspired into the Prophets, to be
communicated to the Church, or else that which was commanded to be written, and
so to be a perpetual standing Rule, according to which the Church should walk
in (...) soever shall come to pass: And herein it will infallibly prove true;
for as we read of many predictions of old, they were accomplished at that time,
and in that manner, as God had foretold; so we may justly conclude for the
future, that it will be in the like manner. Whatsoever God has foretold by
the Scripture concerning a day of Judgment, and the everlasting torments of
the damned, that there shall be a Resurrection of the body, and that every one
shall give an account for what has been done here; Expect it, and believe it,
as surely as if it were already done; Oh what a deal of security and boldness
is there in sinners, because they believe not this! Did they think they heard
the sound of the Trump of the last day ringing in their ears, Arise, and come
to judgment? What holy fear and trembling would possess them? whereas because
they live for the present in jollity, and so many years the world and all
things have continued as they were, therefore they think there will never be
any change; such were those mockers Peter speaks of, 2 Pet. 3. saying, Where is
the day of his coming? Know then that all those places of Scripture which speak
of such a dreadful time will one day be fulfilled, never think that those
Texts will fall to the ground; thy lusts will prove a lie, thy pleasures a lie
to thee, but Gods word will abide for ever.

We have the promising part of the Scripture. The Land of Canaan did not more
richly flow with milk and honey, then the Scriptures abound with all kind of
promises both for this life, and that to come. This heaven is full of such
glorious stars. The Apostle 2 Pet. 1.4. calls them precious promises; precious
both in respect of the things promised, and also of the certainty and truth of
them. There is the grand promise of all the Charter of the Covenant of Grace, I
will be their God, and they shall be my people: and this is subdivided into
many particulars; so that there is not a good thing to be desired, nor an evil
thing to be avoided, but we have a promise for it; and certainly, if the word
and promise of a great man in place and power be able to refresh the heart of
an indigent man, how much more must the promise of the Almighty and holy God
revive those that depend on it? All the children of God are with Isaac called
the children of the promise, Gal. 4.28. so that they are the children of the
promise efficiently, as it was the mere promise of God, that gave them a
supernatural being, all humane power being as impotent for that purpose, as
Sarahs womb was to conceive; and further, They are the children of the promise
(as I may say) objectively, because they live on that, and are nourished by it;
and as they say in naturals, so it is true in spirituals, Ex eisdem constamus e
quibus nutrimur, The procreating and conserving causes are of the same nature;
hence we may read of the godly looking up to Gods promise in all their
difficulties, Psalm. 77.8. and when God stirs up himself to do good to his
people, it is because he remembers his holy promise. Insomuch that heaven and
salvation it self, is called, The hope of the promise, Act. 26.6. Though
therefore the people of God have not all the good things they desire in present
possession, yet they have them in promise, and Gods truth is bond and security
enough. A man that has not his estate at command, yet if he have it in sure
bonds and good security, looks upon himself as a rich man: Oh then the unbelief
and vile doubtings of thy heart! Are all the promises of God of no repute with
thee? Are they of no credit? Should they not as much assure thee as if every
thing were accomplished already? Hence as the Scripture when it speaks of a
future thing, uses the present tense, to show the certainty of it, as the
learned instance in many places; so should the faith of a godly man turn the
future tense into the present, and what God says he will do, to take as done
already.

There is the comminatory or threatening part. Here is Mount Ebal, as well as
Mount Gerizim. The Scripture has it is sting as well as honey. In this Ark
there is the Rod as well as Manna; Christ has not only a Scepter of grace, but
a Rod of iron; and those threatenings are far above the terrors of the most
cruel men that ever lived; for it is not only a threatening of bodily miseries,
but of hell, of eternal wrath and vengeance on the soul, as well as the body,
which no earthly man can do. Therefore whatsoever the word of God has said
against an evil man, let him look for it, as if he were already under that
doom. Is not Judas here called a son of perdition, yea is he not said to be
perished in the present tense, because of the certainty of it? Does not the
Scripture say, He that believes not, is condemned even already? Joh. 3.8. As
when God at first threatened Adam, In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall
die; This was made good, though Adam did not actually die at that time, because
he was put into a state of death, and every moment that sentence might be
inflicted on him. Thus it is with every wicked man, whatsoever curse,
whatsoever vengeance is denounced against thee, this night, this day, this
moment it may be fulfilled on thee.

The ground why the Scripture must be fulfilled, is plain, Grounds why.
Because it is Gods word, and therefore it is immortal like himself, it will
stand as he stands, for what should hinder it? There was no defect of knowledge
or wisdom in God, nor of power and strength, and therefore the word being out
of his mouth, who can contradict it?

Use of Encouragement to the godly. Use.
The Scripture has as many promises for thee, as thou can desire. It Is full
of glad tidings to thee that fear God. There is not a Chapter but it speaks
some good or other to thee. Oh do not think these things are spoken in vain,
and not to be good, to be true! What shall the holy Spirit of God become false
to deceive and delude thee? Far be such blasphemous thoughts from thee; Go
then and rejoice, say, I have enough, I have all things, the Scripture abounds
with all consolations, and not one drop of this precious wine shall be lost or
spilt to the ground; but on the contrary it speaks woe and trembling to wicked
men: Oh how well were it for you, if the Scripture were a book of fables and
lies! Then thou might eat, and drink, and rise up to play and sport, but at
the last thou will find every word of it to be true: Why then can thy bold
heart endure any longer? Is there not terror enough in the Scripture to break
it in pieces, though it were of iron. Thou will find at last God only true,
but man, and the world, and thy own heart a liar.

SERMON LXXV. Of the Truth of Scripture-Prophesies; And against Judicial
Astrology and Witchcraft; Showing the Vanity and Wickedness thereof, and of
Seeking to them.
JOH. 17.12. That the Scripture might be fullfilled.
I shall at this time conclude this Text which has been so fruitful in
spiritual matter, but before I come to make the last Observation let us
Consider,

In how many senses the Scripture may be said to be fulfilled, For there are
diverse ways of understanding this, and indeed there is scarce any thing more
difficult in Religion, then to make an happy reconciliation of the places
quoted in the New Testament with the Old; At the first view of many of those
allegations, you would think there were violent deflections of the Scripture to
another sense, then was intended, but we Christians believe that the same
Spirit which breathed on the Prophets, did also inspire the holy Apostles for
the right interpretation of them; Though therefore the Solution of every
difficulty surpass the ability of the most Learned Interpreter, yet we are to
captivate our understandings to the Truth of the Scripture, and not the
Scripture to our Understandings, and nothing will better facilitate a right
Understanding of Scripture-allegations then to know that the Scripture may be
said to be fullfilled two ways, In how many senses the Scripture may be said
to be fullfilled.


1. Properly. 2. Improperly, and by way of accommodation.

Properly, and that two ways, Either in a literal sense or a mystical sense;
A literal sense either is simply so when it is a mere prediction of what is to
come, and has no Type for the present to be verified in, of this kind or sort
are many Examples especially, Isa. 7.14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and
bear a Son, Matthew. 1.22. applied to Christ; This was only true of Christ and
his Mother, not applicable to any else, for as for Musculus and Grotius, who
conceive that this was done in a Type, and that same Virgin in those days did
marry and bear a Son, which was a Type of Christ is wholly improbable, and
diminishes this glorious Mystery of Christ's Incarnation.

As for the second kind of fulfilling which is a compounded sense of the Type
and Antitype that is often; Thus these things which were fulfilled about the
Paschal Lamb, the brazen Serpent, about Jonah, Solomon, and David, were also
applied to Christ as the Antitype; As also Hos. 11. that of bringing the people
of Israel out of Egypt unto Christ, Though these places also may be said to be
fullfilled in a mystical sense, and in this manner the Scripture speaking of
Judas his perdition, Psa. 41. and Psa. 109. is to be understood, for David in
those Psalms literally speaks of his present enemies but typically and
mystically this was to be applied to Judas, An improper or accomodatitious
application is, when the Scripture is said to be fulfilled because there
falls out something like that, So Christ Mat. 15.7, 8. repeateth that to the
hypocrites of his time, which the Prophet Isa. 29 13. applies to those that
lived in his time, viz. that they drew nigh him with their lips, but their
hearts were far from him; This explained observe,

Obs. Doct.
That it is a sure Argument and Demonstration of the Divinity of the Scripture,
That it does foretell things which long after do come to pass; Judas his
perdition in the Text was prophesied of many hundred years before; The truth of
Scripture-Prophesies.
As God endowed men with such illumination that they could tell what was done
many years before they lived, as appears in Moses his writing of the History
of the Creation, so it does no less wonderfully appear in a prediction of such
things as shall come hereafter, and therefore both the Old Testament and the
New have two Books that are wonderfully prophetic of what shall befall the
Church in after Ages; Daniel prophesied so in his time, and John did the like
in his Revelations.

To open this Doctrine Consider,

First, That it is only Gods property to foreknow things to come; I. It is only
Gods property to foreknow things to come
We matter not those wretched Socinians who deny any prescience in God, because
they say this would enduce an absolute necessity, and it would be as vain a
thing to think to avoid what God does foreknow as what he does preordain;
Therefore they take away one as well as the other, but this is impudently to
contradict the Scripture which does so often make prescience a property
belonging solely to God, observe that place Isa. 41.21, 22, 23. show the things
that are to come hereafter, that we may know ye are gods, and indeed he only
can know future things that only knows the hearts of men, and that the
Scripture attributes to God only; Indeed the Prophets who were but men, yet
they did foretell many things to come, but they were only ministerial in this,
It was God that revealed these things to them, so that it was not they so much
as God, and thus the Scripture reveals things to come because it is the word
of him who knows all things, and it is the writing of such who were immediately
inspired by the holy Ghost; Now one reason why God must needs foreknow what is
to come, is because nothing can ever be without his decree predictive of it,
and so because God knows what he will do, therefore he knows what shall be;
Therefore we need not with the Jesuits run to a scientia media, whereby God
knows all things they say from the infinity of his knowledge, comprehending
the nature of things antecedently to his Decree, their actions absolutely
future or conditionally only, for his knowledge is founded upon his decree.

Secondly, Although God only does originally and by his own property know
things to come, yet the devils they may foretell some things; II. Yet the devil
may foretell some things to come.
Not that the devils can of themselves foreknow any future casual thing, for
they know not the hearts and free wills of men, yet some things they certainly
foreknow, some things with great conjectures, certainly they know such things
which God reveals to them, and employeth them in to bring about, for seeing
even the very devils are Instruments of bringing about his vengeance, as
appears by that, when God commanded the lying spirits to be in the mouth of
the false Prophets, as also when they appeared before God as well as the
Angels, Job 1. Seeing (I say) God uses these as Instruments, no wonder if he
make known unto them what Service they have to do, and therefore they can
foretell things, yea, the Lord suffers false Prophets sometimes to foretell
things by way of judgment to a people, as is to be showed, for not only to
godly men but even to wicked men God has sometimes revealed things to come, as
to Balaam, and those Mat. 7. who said, Have we not prophesied in thy Name? But
besides this revealed knowledge the devils may probably foretell things to
come, partly as Austin well observes, because of their intellectual
acuteness, having such extraordinary quickness in theit understanding, and
this added to their long life which they have had ever since their Creation,
and partly because of their agility whereby they can quickly move from one
place to another, as it is related of Apollonius Thyancus, who being at Ephesus
when Domitian was murdered at Rome, cried out, Be of good courage, for at this
moment the Tyrant is killed. Historians write, that Posts came afterward that
did confirm all those things about Domitians Death; Now if this were so, then
it was by the help of the devil, who could quickly move so far, as that
Apollonius did many other things, and therefore is thought by some to be raised
up by the devils to oppose Christ, and draw off from him by false Miracles.

III. Predictions of three sorts.
Thirdly, Consider there may be predictions of three sorts; divine, such as are
of God himself, or by Prophets inspired by him, or diabolcicall predictions,
which are by Gods just judgments suffered to be upon a people, and these are
either by the devil, or by his Instrumenss, Witches, and Sorcerers,
Astrologers, and other kind of ways of Divination which are too common even
amongst Christians, or humane and natural predictions, which are from natural
causes to their natural effects; Thus the Astronomer may foretell the Eclipses
that shall be, The Physician can the effects of some Diseases, and so the
natural Philosopher may, but not with such certainty, foretell of drought or
much rain, as our Savior implies, Mat. 16.20. but this is only probable,
because many particular causes may interpose and alter all their prognostiques:
Thus also politic Predictions which wise men sometimes can presage about
Commonwealths; Though those are but Conjectures, as he said, Been qui conticet,
hunc tu perhibeto vatem optimum.

IV. How vain and wicked it is to go to Astrologers or Witches, or to be such.
Fourthly, Seeing that to foretell any thing to come be thus the property of God
and of the Scripture, Then by this we see, That all those who go to Astrologers
or Witches to know things to come, and all those that profess judiciary
Astrology, that will undertake to foretell not natural things but voluntary,
such as are merely subject to men's will, Do not only undertake a vain rash, and
false thing, but that also which is very abominable and wicked; It Is necessary
to speak to this, because there are many people look more to the fullfilling of
what such Prognostics and Almanacks say, then to the Scripture, as if Saturn
and Jupiter did reign, therefore the Earth must tremble, and not God reign; It
would require a great Volume to speak of this exactly, Only briefly Consider
these things. Against Astrology and Witchcraft Consider,


That it has been the Devils way always to disturb the Church, and endeavor
the damnation of many men's souls by making them credulous in these things; That
as Christ has set in his Church Pastors and Teachers to instruct in the way to
heaven: So the devil has raised his Witches, his Sorcerers, his Soothsayers
and Astrologers to seduce the world. Of old there were the Heretics
Priscillianists, that did bind men to the Stars, and made the body of men to
be compounded according to the Signs, yea, into this soul error Aquila that
famous Interpreter of the Scripture fell, for which he was cast out of the
Church of God; and Cardan rose to that high Impiety, as to observe Christ's
Birth, and made his power to do the Miracles he did to flow from the influx of
those Stars that he was born under. Some have not been so wicked, yet others,
as Petrus de Aliaco thought by the Stars there might have been prognosticated
the Birth of Christ; And Kepler contends, those Wise men by the Rules of
Astrological Art, might have presaged not only an Event of some great moment
but the Birth of some great Monarch; As if Christ were not born after an
extraordinary and miraculous manner; That the Heavens have influence upon the
bodies of men may not be denied, Though Pererins argues against those
Coelestes influentias, as I remember; Hence a man possessed with the devil is
called (...) lunatic, which some say was because the devil took the occasion,
that at what time of the Moon humors did most abound, then to disturb him, and
no doubt but that the Heavens were made for glorious ends* but not to be Books
to reveal what shall come to pass.

Therefore that you may rest satisfied, That the Scripture only can infallibly
tell what is to come to pass, and that it is a high wickedness and
presumption to run to Witches, Sorcerers, or judicial Astrologers, take these
following Arguments.

1. All those places of Scripture which forbid any resort to them; Consider
that place Lev 19.26. Ye shall not use enchantment nor observe times, So Lev.
20 27. Deuteronomy. 10.11, 12, 13. Especially take notice of that full and efficacious
place, Isa. 45.12, 13, 14. You see here by clear and plain Texts all such
predictions are an abomination to God, and if we should urge beside divine
authority humane, this would be enough to confirm us, all the Fathers speak
with much vehemence against them, many Councels have condemned such practices,
yea, diverse Heathens have condemned them, for the greatest Astrologers, Ptolomy
himself, as the Learned show, acknowledges no certain Truth can be foretold by
them, Tully wrote several Books de Divinatione, condemning such Diviners, as
lib. 2. de div. instancing that before a great Fight some Mice had gnawn the
Buckler of a Soldier, the Soothsayer concluded, the War would be fatal and
unlucky, as if (says Tully) because the mice did gnaw some Books which I had
of Platoes de Repub. therefore I should conclude that our Commonwealth should
be destroyed; The very Heathens abhorred such Divinations, and we read Act.
19.19. of many when converted brought their curious Books, and burnt them,
which is not to be understood of mere witchery and Sorcery Books, but of those
that are given to vain and cousening Arts; Otherwise the holy Ghost would not
have expressed those wicked Books under so vile a Name as (...) As Authority
does condemn, so Reason, as we may read at large in Pererius, Spanhemius,
Zanchius, and others. For

1 If the Heavens were true and proper causes or necessary Signs, yet no man
could prognostique certainly by them, because no man knows the number of the
Stars, nor the virtue and efficacy of them; The Scripture gives it as peculiar
to God, that he only knows the Stars, and calls them by their Names, but if
any man could certainly divine by them, he must know both the number of the
Stars, and their peculiar activity or influence, and the degree of that
activity, without which they may grossly err:

Again, If the Heavens be causes they are only Universal Causes, now from an
Universal indeterminate cause there cannot be any special particular effect
foretold; For besides Universal Causes, all particular interior Causes, which
are many and uncertain, must be known also.

Lastly, This would bring a Contempt of God, and mere Athiesm into the world;
The Scripture carries us out to God in all things, to his Wisdom, to his
Power, to his Justice, but these would bind us to the Planets, yea, by these
means the Scripture also will be despised and laid aside, so that all
profaneness will thereby be introduced, yea, and excuses for all Vice will be
pleaded how could they help it? Seeing they were born under such a Star, as
Austin reports of an Astrologer handsomely reproved by his Servant, He had a
Servant that stole from him, and this Astrologer his Master going to correct
him, he cries out, I could not help it, I was born under Mercury (They say,
those born under that Planet are given to stealing;) Thus by his Masters own
principles and Rules of Art he convinced him.

Object. One Objection they much urge, is that they often foretold what is true.

To this it is answered, And many things have been as false and untrue, and if
one thing fall out, it is more observed then if an hundred things prove
otherwise, besides when they foretell many things, it is hard if they cannot
foretell some one thing, as a blind man that shoots many arrows, may chance
once to hit the mark.

But then 2. If such things do come to pass, it is either by their express or
virtuall compact with the devil; and if not so, as Austin well observes it is
from a just judgment of God to thee, that thou should have wherewith to
stumble and fall, and undo thy self, Deuteronomy. 13.1. Thus a wicked Prophet may
foretell that which shall come to pass, and why? God does thus to prove and
try you.

Use, To abhor all commerce and resort to such persons, to fly from them as
from the devil; Thou breakest thy Baptismal Vow, if thou renouncest not such
Diabolical practices; Oh that going to such men should ever be owned by
Christians, by Protestants! Indeed Learned men observe, that such delusions
have prevailed in Popish and Anabaptisticall Spirits, but do not thou regard
such fopperies: How often (said Tully) did I hear such men promise Pompey and
Caesar, that they should live long, die a peaceable death, and in honor, when
yet the clean contrary fell out, and even* Lapide the Jesuit on c. 19. of the
Acts bewaileth, while he was at Rome how much they were given to this vanity,
while the Astrologers would promise some long Life, others 2 Cardinalship,
others the Popedom, and yet at last all miserably deluded.

Use 2. To admire the Divinity of the Scripture in this particular, That it
alone foretells of things to come, and it must be fulfilled, That speaks of a
day of Judgment, of an account to be given for every thing done in the flesh,
Believe this, and persuade thy soul of it as really as if it were done already,
when Dives was in hell, then he opened his eyes and saw where he was, but it
was too late, and thus it will be with too many.

SERMON LXXVI. The Joy of Saints handled, both as a Duty and Privilege, as
being one great end of Christ's Prayer, Command, Promises and Ministry.
JOHN 17.13. And now I come to thee, and these things I speak in the world,
that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.
OUr Savior having answered that great Objection, and offense about the
perdition of Judas, he returns again to his Disciples, for whom he was
pouring out this part of his prayer. And

1. He repeateth that Argument he had used, verse. 11. Now I come to thee: Here
is much efficacy in this, but I have already handled that fully. Only take
notice, That some understand not this of his local motion, or ascension to the
Father, but mental, as if his meaning was, by these petitions, I come to thee,
according to that old saying, Oration est ascensus mentis in Deum, but every eye
sees this improbable.

I therefore proceed, and in the words following you may observe, the
description of Christ's prayer at this time, and the end of it: His prayer is
expressed in that word (...), with the circumstance of place, in the world,
that is, in the ears of all; This prayer is not like that, when he went by
himself and prayed so earnestly about the passing away of the Cup, which the
Evangelist could never have related what it was, had not Christ revealed it.
Some there are, that because the word is (...) in the original, have concluded,
that therefore this was not mentioned by our Savior, as a prayer; nor is it to
be understood, but as a Sermon or Doctrinal Information. Thus because it is
said, verse. 1. (...), he spoke. Chrysostom says, it is not (...), but (...),
not a Prayer but a Sermon; and so Cajetan thinks it to be an informatory
discourse. But Christ's gesture of lifting up his eyes to heaven, and his
express words, calling it a prayer, verse. 9, 15, 20. do clearly confute that.
Neither are (...) and (...) opposite, but subordinate. A prayer that is public
may be doctrinally edifying the Auditor; and therefore both (...) and (...) is
used of Zachariah's prayer, or eucharistical song, Luke 1.64, 67. as also of
Christ's prayer, John 11.41. And this word might well be used by our Savior in
this Petition, because it was not a private prayer, nor merely petitionary, but
concionatory, and informing the Disciples of many excellent passages, whereof
one is expressed in the end, That their joy might be fulfilled. So then, one
main reason, why Christ did at this time so publicly and solemnly pray for his
Disciples, it was to fill them with comfort. That they might for ever remember
these words before his death Christ knew they must conflict with great
difficulties, therefore he provides suitable consolations* Observe,

Observe. That it is Christ's special will and care, that his people should walk
comfortably.
That it is Christ's special will and care, that his people should walk
comfortably. As Ahashuerus did not like to see Nehemiah look sadly: so neither
does Christ will that his people should walk with dejections and
discouragements, but abound in an heavenly and unspeakable joy. It Is a
dishonor to a Prince to have sighing subjects; Therefore in Nero's time to
weep or sigh, was a capital crime, and it reflects upon a Master to have his
servant walk with discontent: Thus it is a dishonor to Christ, and to his
Gospel, when those that fear God walk without hope or faith, still complaining
that their souls are disquieted and cast down within them. A Christians joy is
so greatly aimed at, that the sum of those valedictory Sermons, and large
farewell discourses Christ makes to his Disciples, was to establish them
therein, John 15.11. These things have I spoken that your joy might remain,
that it might be full. It Is not only joy, but a constant full joy he requires,
that it might remain: The people of God are not to think it enough to have joy
sometimes, though they are to bless God for any degree in the least
continuance, but they are to keep this fire always upon the altar of their
hearts, whatsoever may not continue with them, yet their joy must; Though we
cannot find thee always thriving, always healthful, yet we should see thee
always joyful; we should never find a Christian without this, let his
conditions and temptations be never so sad, and then it must be a full joy; not
a light flash, but such as shall fill up thy heart, that shall soak to the root
of thy soul, that no ordinary thing can remove thee from it. This point is of
great concernment unto the godly, who commonly think themselves Benonies, and
will not be called Naomi, but Marah; that with Rachel, refuse to be comforted;
that as some wicked men will not hear of the threatening, but put far from
them the evil day; so they stop their ears against the promise, and put the
good day of Gods grace out of their mind.

Now although I should first show, the nature of Christ's joy, what it is, and
how it is to be fulfilled in believers, yet I must first dispatch Christ's end
in this prayer, and all other his dispensations, viz. That the joy of the godly
may be filled in them. That Christ does really intend that his people shall be
joyful.
So that you are to look upon it both as a duty, and as a privilege. Not to
live comfortably is a sin, as well as not to live holily; and take heed of
quenching Gods Spirit, as it is a Comforter, as well as it is a sanctifier. For
that it is a main intent of Christ to have you clothed with the garments of
joy, will appear by these particulars:

I. Therefore was this prayer.
First, This solemn and remarkable prayer, which our Savior did make with so
much fullness of heart, was for this end, to fill them with joy. Though Christ
praid for impetration of the benefits mentioned in this prayer, yet the end why
he spoke this prayer so solemnly in the ears of the world, was that it might be
a perpetual standing stock of comfort to the godly. Therefore the Apostle John,
because the other Evangelists pretermitted this prayer, and much of his
farewell Sermons, is very large and exact in the description of it: so that the
Spirit of God thought it not enough to have it vocally pronounced, but also to
be committed to writing, that so all the generations to come might take comfort
from this prayer: If therefore the godly man consider, what Christ here prays
for, and who it is that does pray; The dignity of his person, the certainty of
being heard; if there were no other Scripture remaining but this, there would
be ground enough of joy. For the things which usually sad the hearts of Gods
children, are either from within or without; from without are all the
oppositions and cruel usages they meet with in the world by wicked men. These
are thorns and goads in their sides: These are wolves to the sheep, and where
they cannot suck their blood, yet they are briars and thorns, to tear and rend
their wool off. Now our Saviors prayer is sufficient to turn this water into
wine, he makes us to gather grapes even of these thorns. He shows this is
matter of joy, and not sorrow; for those sadding thoughts which arise from
within us, which indeed are the heaviest, as because of their corruptions which
are strong in them, their proud, earthly and unbelieving hearts, as also their
proneness and danger to apostatize one time or other, to suffer shipwreck; Our
Savior does expressly provide cordials against these faintings; The petitions
are so direct and complete against such decays, that thou may aforehand
with Paul triumph, and challenge any creature in the world, to hinder thee of
the Crown of Glory: Oh then in the midst of all thy perplexed thoughts within,
remember this prayer of Christ! Look not upon it as once spoken by Christ, and
so passing away; but know it is as efficacious and powerful in operation as
ever; length of time has not diminished from the virtue of it; if Christ were
now upon earth, and in thy closet or chamber praying with thee, it ought not
more to refresh and comfort thee, then when once in the flesh poured out by
him; yea some have thought, that the expression, Heb. 5. of Christ's prayer and
supplication with strong cries and agonies, has reference to this prayer,
though his tears and agonies, are not mentioned: Howsoever Christ always praid
with such zeal and fervency, that he was sure to be heard: See then, if the
want of any thing, which may discourage thee, may not be provided for in this
prayer; and shall Christ do it for this end, that thou may always have
comfort? And yet art thou dejected, What shall Christ die in vain, and pray in
vain? So certainly, whilst thou walk thus uncomfortably, it is as if Christ
had done none of these things, or else had done them in vain.

Secondly, Christ's care and will, that the godly should live comfortably, II.
Therefore is it so often commanded.
appears in those many commands, for to rejoice. So that there is no command
for any holy duty, or to avoid any sin more frequently enjoined, then to walk
with joy and gladness of heart, the people of God they doubt whether they may
rejoice, they think such barren and unprofitable wretches as they are, may not
apply comforts; They think this childrens bread does not belong to such dogs,
as they are; Oh but remember how indispensable and peremptory the command of
God is, that thou should walk joyfully before him! Phil. 3.1. Finally, my
brethren, Rejoice in the Lord; When he had exhorted to many duties before, he
keeps this sweet wine to the last. Finally, I have no more to say, this is
the sum of all, do such and such duties, but still remember to rejoice: Oh to
pray dejectedly, to do holy duties, but with a sad heart, this is to mar all!
As in alms, so in all other duties, God loves cheerfulness; but he says,
Rejoice in the Lord; Thy joy must be in heavenly objects, and from spiritual
motives, from Evangelical privileges; some joy in their honors, some in their
pleasures, some in their lusts, as the swine delights in mire and mud; but the
joy of Gods people is in and through Christ: Therefore he says, That my joy
may be fulfilled in them, not the joy of the world or the flesh: Hence verse. 3.
it is made the sure character of a Christian indeed, who has more then the
outward form of religion, that he rejoices in Christ Jesus: But as if once
speaking were not enough, see how the same Apostle doubleth it, Cap. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, Rejoice. Certainly there is
something in it, that the Apostle ingeminateth it, Again, I say, Rejoice, he
knew how hardly the people of God are brought to rejoice; How can they that are
thus afflicted, that have so many exercises, bid them Rejoice, you may as well
bid an heavy log fly up into the air? Alas, they are so oppressed and hardened
in heart, that they can no more rejoice, then a stone speak: But the Apostle
will hear none of these excuses, I say it again, Rejoice, and that always, let
your condition, your temptations be what they will, let the times be what they
will, yet rejoice always; so 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. Rejoice everm^re; Do not think it
arbitrary or left to thy choice to walk joyfully. No, awe thy heart with the
command, that as thou dare not lie, steal, commit adultery, because God
commands the contrary; so neither dare thou walk with distrust, unbelief and
discouragement, because Gods word is against it.

III. And for this end are the promises.
Thirdly, Christ has provided for the Christians comfort not only by commands,
but also by promises. The Scriptures are like a pleasant garden full of the
sweet flowers of the promises, therefore called 1 Pet. 1.4. Precious promises;
you may observe, that the promises run through the heart of the Scripture, as
those four rivers did paradise, to water and refresh it. Hence it is said, That
we through the Scriptures might have consolation and comfort, Romans 15 4. Hence
David in all his tribulations found the word of God sweeter then the honey or
the honeycomb. There cannot be any strait, any grief, but there is a peculiar
promise against it; so that if at any time thou art disconsolate, either
public or private afflictions lie sore upon thee, remember the promises,
encourage thy self from them: Oh walk not as if this world were such a
wilderness, that God had provided no fountains to refresh the barren soul! As
it was a custom amongst the Jews to give a cup of wine to the condemned person
to refresh and comfort his spirits, Therefore it was the height of malice in
the Jews, when in stead of such a cup they gave Christ gall to drink. Thus God
has also appointed in his word so many precious and glorious promises for his
children in every condition, and the devil on the other side, he would give
them gall to drink: If then thou would live with heavenly joy, let the
promises be thy meditation day and night.

IV. And the Ministry of the Gospel.
Fourthly, Christ has provided for the comfortable life of his people, by
appointing a Ministry in his Church, among other ends, for this, to comfort the
afflicted soul, and to pour oil into the hearts of such as are wounded. They
are to be sons of consolation, like Barnabas to the children of sorrow for
their sins; so that it is one of the greatest parts and work of the Ministry to
publish glad tidings, and to preach the acceptable year of the Lord to such as
groan under the burden and prison of their sins; Christ himself accounted of
this in his Ministry above all other things, Isa. 50 4. He has given me the
tongue of the learned, to know how to speak a word in season to him that is
weary: Oh it is not every one that can deal with a tender conscience; we must
have an Eagles eye, and a soft hand; so that our work is not only to convert
the profane, to build up the converted, but to be daily comforting and
exhorting the afflicted in soul! And o that there were many upon whom we might
dispense this part of our Office? You are apt to say, Ministers preach nothing
but damnation, they will not comfort such as lie a dying: Oh there is nothing
more desired by them, then to meet with such humbled souls, to whom they might
milk out the breasts of consolation! To such they say, as in the Canticles, Eat
o friends, yea drink abundantly; but it would be a woe to us, if we should
tender these comforts to wicked and impenitent men. There is a notable place to
this purpose, Ezekiel. 13.22. where God threatens the wicked Ministers, because
they strengthened the heart of the wicked in promising of him life, and made the
heart of the righteous sad. When therefore we have to do with the contrite
heart, we withold no comfort from him, as the Apostles style themselves, 2
Cor. 1.24. Helpers of the believers joy: So that in this is our study and
labor seen, as well as in Doctrine and reproof.

SERMON LXXVII. Of Joy and Comfort, Snewing how many ways the Spirit of God
works it in the hearts of his People.
JOH. 17.13. These things I speak in the world, that they might have my joy
fullfilled in themselves.
It Is Christ's special Care and will (as you have heard) that his people should
walk joyfully, Several Demonstrations have been thereof, Christ's Commands to
rejoice in his promises, his Ministers are appointed for their joy.

In the next place, This will appear true if yeu consider the works of Gods
Spirit, and Christ's end of sending them into his Church; V. Christ's care that
his people should walk joyfully appears, From the works of the Spirit, and
Christ's end in sending him into the Church.
The Spirit of God is not only to convince of sin, To sanctify and make
holy, but it is also to comfort; Hence he is four times called the Comforter,
Joh. 19.16.26. Joh. 15.26. Joh. 16.7. Even those who plead to render the word
Advocate, and not a Comforter, yet it comes to this at last, Seeing the end of
all his actions is to bring Consolation into the afflicted Soul, That as the
Spirit of God moved at first on the waters, to make a lightsome and glorious
world, so he does on the waters of the broken in heart, to make as it were New
Heavens, and a new Earth there, where was nothing but horrid confusion; That as
the devil is the Prince of darkness, is always accusing and troubling the
godly endeavoring to bring them to horror and despair, Therefore he kept the
possessed party about the solitary Tombs, and endeavored that the Incestuous
person should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow; So on the contrary the
Spirit of God is wholly to comfort, to support, to revive, and to make glad the
grieved in Spirit, insomuch that the Hebrews have a Proverb, Super maestum non
cadet Spiritus Sanctus, for this Reason say some Learned men the Prophets
before they could prophecy sometimes took an Instrument of Music to play on,
as Elijah, Isaac would eat of Venison, to refresh his Spirits before he did
prophetically bless his Children, Howsoever the Spirit of God being expressly
called a Comforter, it is plain, that in all his operations and workings he
intends solid and true joy, called therefore Joy in the holy Ghost, not only
objectively but efficiently, because it is wrought by him, and indeed we need
the Spirit of God to comfort us, for we cannot attain to this joy by our own
strength, That as we need the Spirit of God to regenerate us, because dead in
sin, So also to comfort us because under the guilt of sin, We are like so
many Judasses and Cains; Naturally we are a barren wilderness, not only in
respect of graces, but also of Consolations; Look upon many afflicted and
tempted Children of God, No Friends, No Ministers can comfort, Read the
Promises, apply them never so powerfully yet they cannot be comforted, till God
work it in them.

How many ways the spirit of God is a Comforter to Believers.
Now the Spirit of God is a Comforter to his people several ways.

1. By way of Instruction and conviction, It informs that it is a sin not to
believe in Christ, that it is not humility but frowardness when we keep off
from the Promises; That as it would be self-murder not to eat or drink, so
it is Soul-murther not to eat or feed on Christ, 1. By way of Instruction and
conviction.
which is called believing, Joh. 6. Hence this Spirit of God is said to
convince the world of sin, Joh. 16 9. And wherein, or what sin especially?
Even because they would not believe in Christ; Oh this is a special mercy,
when the Spirit of God has by the Gospel so far convinced thee, that thou
see it thy duty to believe, to rejoice, for who is there when once feeling
the burden and weight of sin, does not with Adam run and hide himself, does
not conclude, his sins are greater then he can bear? It Is not for such a wretch
as I am, to have a drop of water to refresh me, much less a drop of Christ's
blood, yea, his whole blood; Hence when we come to a tempted Christian, we may
admire at the subtleties and strong Objections he can bring against his
comfort: Never did any Heretic more subtly and pertinaciously oppose the
Truth of Christ, then such an one will object against the Promises, So that you
heard it was the tongue of the Learned, Isa. 50.4. that could know to speak a
word in season to such wearied persons, yea, to this day are not the Protestant
Writers conflicting with the Papists about the particular application of Christ
to every Believer, asserting that it is every Christians duty to say with Paul,
Gal. 2. who loved me and gave himself for me; Now this particular appropriation
of Christ to a man, is the foundation of all joy and peace: And do not the
Papists bring all those Objections that a tempted Christian is apt to produce,
Such as these Gods Promises they are indeed true, I doubt not but God is able,
only I question my self whether I have such conditions and qualifications as
are required for the Promises? Again the Promises are general, whosoever shall
believe or repent, shall find mercy, but my great fear is, whether I do truly
repent or believe; Yet again, They object, as Bellarmine, the heart is
deceitful: how many have persuaded themselves, they do repent and love God,
when indeed they do not, and it may be I am such an one.

Lastly, They doubt not of Gods power (they say) or of his ability to pardon
all their sins, and to justify worse sinners then themselves, Only here is the
Question whether God will or no, God has no where in his Word said, Thou such
an one, thy sins are forgiven thee; These and the like Objections which Popish
Writers urge with much vehemence, The tempted Christian presses with great
strength, because such are in a contrary disposition to believing, and so feel
nothing but sin in the guilt of it, and Unbelief does as much deceive and
disturb the soul, as Melancholy or madness will the fancy.

I have been large in this, to show what mighty and gracious work of Gods
Spirit, that is, to instruct, and convince the heart of this duty, to believe
and rejoice, to be able to say, God delights not in these perplexed thoughts,
as he says of these superstitious duties so these immoderate fears and
dejections, Who has required these things at your hands? I shall answer for
unbeleeving sorrows as well as carnal mirth, for those dejecting fears and
unquiet troubles of soul, Thou art to fear hell and damnation as well as for
Licentious jollities.

6. By directing into the way of comfort.
2. The Spirit of God does not only inform of the duty of Comfort, but also
directs unto the way of comfort; It does lead into the true way of
Justification, Joh. 14.16. The Comforter will teach you all things, and bring
to your remembrance; As he is the Comforter he will teach them what way to
take, that they may have true Consolation, for as by nature it is an ingrafted
principle in all to desire happiness: Ask any man in the world, and he will
answer affirmatively to this Question, So every man troubled and humbled for
sin would willingly have comfort, as the lame man would to walk, the blind
man to see, but how to have true peace with God, there is the difficulty; As
there were above an hundred Opinions amongst the Philosophers, wha^ was the
summum bonum, So there are great disputations about that Righteousness whereby
we are justified, the ground of peace, So that it is an heavenly skill to be
directed into the right way for comfort, Heb. 6. The babe is unskilful in the
word of Righteousness, As the young Child though it cries for the breast,
yet knows not how to come at it; Before the Gospel was purely preached, how
many false ways were observed to comfort the afflicted conscience, how many
Pilgrimages, devotional prayers, and several penitential practices were
enjoined, to comfort the timerated heart through sin, but all these were like
Jobs miserable Comforters, Physicians of no value; The souls Mountebanks that
instead of healing did inflame and enrage the wounds more; Therefore as to the
infant newborn, it is a great matter to fall into the hands of a good Nurse,
for the education of it and care about it; No less is it, for people when once
awakened through the guilt of sin, and deeply wounded for their iniquities,
to have such spiritual Physicians that can prepare them the true
Gospel-cordials, and direct them into the right way for Consolation, This is
the Art of Arts, Nothing being more tender and to be handled with more
c^rumspection then a wounded Spirit; These are therefore two distinct benefits,
to be convinced of the duty to walk comfortably, and to be dire^^ed into the
way of it, for who is not here out of the way? Does not every one think to
obtain comfort by working and not believing? Do they not labor to qualify
themselves sufficiently first, and then go to Christ? Do we not think by works
to come to Faith, and not by faith to works? To do enough to comfort our selves
and then go to Christ for comfort: This is the preposterous course that every
afflicted soul does naturally take? Oh then as the wise men when they saw the
Star that directed them to Christ, rejoiced with exceeding great joy, so when
the Spirit of God shall direct thee by the word into this supernatural way of
rejoicing bless God for thou might have wandered through dark and
uncomfortable ways into hell it self.

3. The Spirit of God is given by Christ to comfort us Causali^er, that is, it
does by a mighty efficacious power work joy in the soul; Is bids the heart
rejoice, 3. By a mighty efficacious power.
and it will rejoice; Neither greatness of sins, sense of unworthiness,
weight of Temptations, oppositions of Satan shall discourage; But as it is said
in Job, when he speaks peace, who shall make Trouble? So it is here; When God
commands the heart to be quiet and to rejoice before him, who can forbid it?
Hence Gal. 5.22. Joy and peace are made the fruits of the Spirit; It Is only the
God of all Consolation and Father of all comforts that comfort us in
tribulations, 2 Cer 1. So that as the Almighty insuperable power of God goes
to make a gracious heart, so also it does to give a comfortable heart; That God
who made Iron to swim, and the waters of Jordan to go backward, he also and he
alone makes the heavy heart to sing for joy; Oh therefore pray for this work of
Gods Spirit, though thou can not of thy self rejoice, yet the Spirit of God
can make thee joyful.

4. The Spirit of God is a Comforter by witnessing and sealing unto us that we
are the Children of God, 4. By witnessing to us that we are the Children of God.
for then we have joy in the fullness of it when we have assurance, not only
resting on Christ for Salvation, but assured that we are in him: Now this is
the proper work of Gods Spirit to witness unto us, Romans 8. and to seal unto
us, Ephesians. 4 30. when the Spirit of God does thus assure, then the Oil of joy
does overflow, On the contrary many of Gods Children do therefore walk in
darkness, and are like the Passengers with Paul in his Voyage, tossed up and
down with waves and tempests, not seeing the Sun for many days, and all
because they have not this sealing and witnessing unto them, had they this,
then they could with old Simeon say, Lord, let thy Servant depart in peace, I
can live and die comfortably, when he has thus seeen the Salvation of God;
Hence he is called the Spirit of Adoption, which being sent into the hearts of
the Godly makes them to cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6.

VI. From the end for which Christ came into the world, and wrought what he did
for us.
Lastly, The Spirit of God comforts them by blessing the Ordinances, and making
them successeful to them; These are like Jonathans eating of honey, like Elisha
feeding himself to go a long journey: The Gospel is a Gospel of comfort, The
Sacraments Seals of Comfort, The Preaching of the Word instrumental to increase
joy, Prayer is an heaven to the Soul; Now the Spirit of God blessing these to
the godly soul, does thereby fill him with heavenly Consolations, That as
Christ in Prayer had his countenance changed, shining like the Sun, and his
garments with glorious Light, and as Moses in his Communion with God, had his
face shining so as to dazzle the eyes of his beholders; Thus many times the
children of God in these duties, have soul-transfigurations, and are so full of
joy that they can scarcely bear it, despising the pleasures of this world for
such spiritual joy. Thus you have heard it is Christ's will, we should have
completed joy in us, because of the holy Ghost.

But in the next place, if we consider Christ himself, for what end he came
into this world, and what he has wrought for us, this makes it evident that
Christ left nothing unwrought that might procure our joy, for what are his
three Offices but to procure our peace, Did he not as Priest make an atonement
for our sins? Did he not as Prophet reveal the good pleasure of God about our
Salvation? Did he not as King subdue all our enemies? Now what is the fruit of
all this, but joy and peace; Therefore he is called our peace, and the Prince
of peace, Isa. 9. yea, Is he not still our Advocate ever-living to make
Intercession for us, and can any other thing then honey distill from these
sweet Combs?

Use of Exhortation To the people of God, Awe your selves with this Duty; As
Jonah said, he did well to be angry, so you think you do well to be thus
immoderately grieved with Peter, You bid Christ go from you because you are a
sinner, you plead for your unbelief, you argue for your troubles; Is not this
to oppose the comforting spirit of God within you? Did not Judas murmr and
cry? but because there was no faith and holy joy, therefore he became
miserable, 2 Cor. 7.10. you see there is a sorrow opposite to godly sorrow, and
that is when it is not in the manner, God has appointed: There is a repentance
to be repented of, There is a grief thou must be grieved for, how many sad
thoughts and tears will require more sad thoughts and tears.

Use of Instruction on the contrary, It Is Christ's special will that all who
live wickedly should have no comfort; Woe to ye that laugh, and there is no
peace to the wicked, Isa. 57.21.

SERMON LXXVIII. The several Sorts of Joy, and the Nature of Spiritual Joy:
Showing also how far it transcends and differs from Worldly Joy.
JOHN 17.13. That they might have my Joy fulfilled in themselves.
THese words are the final cause of Christ's solemn prayer for his Disciples.
Wherein you have,

The Benefit it self described, and the Manner of possessing of it.

The Benefit it self is, My Joy.

This may be understood Actively and Passively; Actively, for that joy which
Christ might take from his Disciples, being preserved in purity of Doctrine and
Unity amongst themselves. Thus some understand it, and parallel a like place,
Phil. 2.2^ where Paul bids them fulfill his joy, which was the joy he would
take by seeing their happy agreement; but because it is said in the Text, That
this joy may be fulfilled in the Disciples themselves. Therefore it is more
consonant to understand it passively of that joy, which the Disciples took in
him, and the benefits flowing from him: So that it may be called Christ's joy,
both effectively, because he is the Author and giver of it; as also
objectively, because it is in him, in divine and holy things, not in the world
much less in the pleasures of sin.

Now the Manner of possessing is, that it may be (...), filled up, that they
might have a good measure of joy, overflowing, he would have every part of the
soul filled with it, and every kind of joy, yea degree of it; some
superficial joy for the degree of it, or some transient joy for the
continuance of it does not answer our Saviors prayer, it must be filled up.

Lastly, Here is the Subject recipient of it, in themselves. This (say some) is
spoken oppositely to worldly joy, to such as men take in the pleasures of the
world; these are but in the face, in the countenance, they are not cordial and
hearty.

Observe. 1. Observe. There is a joy in Christ which his people are to have
fulfilled in them.

A three fold joy.


That there is a joy in Christ which his people are to have fulfilled in them.
As they are to be filled with grace, so with consolations, and one flows from
the other, though not naturally: It Is of great concernment to treat of this
joy, because the people of God look upon it as a thing above their reach. They
are convinced of repentance, of humiliation; but not of walking joyfully.

There is a threefold Joy:

Natural Joy, which is an implanted affection in a man, and of it self simply
considered is not a sin.

a Sinful Joy, which runs into two streams, either when the Object is
wholly unlawful, when it is a forbidden Tree, and we may not eat of it; And
thus to rejoice in our evil doings, to take delight in the ways of
wickedness, this is a wicked joy, that will end in tormenting sorrow, and it
argues a wretched distemper of the soul, otherwise it would find sin to be
terrible and bitter, but through the corrupted constitution of the heart, it
comes about that they delight in sin, as distempered stomachs do in coals,
ashes, or such dross. Again, there is a sinful joy, when the Object matter
is lawful, but then we exceed in the measure, in the bounds or limits, we
over-joy. The water runs over the bank, and then it gets soil, and it is as
hard to rejoice in these things, and to sin not, as it is to be angry, and
sin not.

gracious and an heavenly Joy, when the soul delights it self in God and
Christ, in all heavenly Objects: For though to wicked men these things are a
burden, yet to an heavenly heart they are the most connaturall Object: They are
the proper center of the soul, as David often professes his joy in the Lord:
It Is of this we are to speak of, only we must inform you something of joy in
the general. The Philosophers speak of a threefold affection suitable to one
another: There is Love, which is carried out to an Object that is good simply
considered: There is Desire which moves to some good thing, but absent, and
not yet obtained: And then there is Joy, which arises from the obtaining and
possessing of it: And answerable to these, there are Divine Graces, and
supernatural works of Gods Spirit in the soul.

There is the Love of God, which next to Faith, is of the greatest glory and
activity in the soul.

2. There are Desires and earnest longings after God, to which hunger and
thirst, a promise is made, of being fully satisfied.

3. There is Joy, which arises from the enjoyment of God, only you must know
there is Gaudium viae, a joy we have while in the way to Heaven, which admits
of much increase, and meets with much opposition; and there is Gaudium
Patriae, a joy in Heaven, where the soul will then be so filled, that it cannot
receive any more.

To know the nature of spiritual Joy Consider
To know the nature of this Joy, Consider,

That the efficient cause of it is only God. The Spirit of God is called the
Comforter, as you heard, because he alone pours it into the heart, as the
Heavens only give rain, and it is called Gal 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit,
which does imply, that it comes solely by Gods Spirit, and that there is
excellent sweetness in it: Lusts are called the works of the flesh, but this
with other Graces, The fruit of the Spirit. Hence it is, that as in respect of
Regeneration, the Spirit blows where it lists: So also in respect of
Consolation, How many of Gods children walk with much consolation, and abound
in much joy. And others again, go bowed down, and greatly tempted, not
obtaining comfort, though they would give a world for it: So that as the
Husbandman cannot have rain when he would, nor the Merchant wind when he
would, neither can the godly have comfort when they would, as appears by
David, praying so earnestly for the Joy he had lost; It Is the fruit of the
Spirit; Therefore joy does not flow from Graces exercised, as by a natural
resultancy, as heat does from the fire, and light from the Sun, but by Gods
voluntary dispensation of it. The Schoolmen use to say, That a man does not
merit (that is their proud phrase) by rejoicing in God, or good things, but by
his Love, which was antecedent, and from which joy (they say) flows by a
natural necessity; But the Scripture makes these two, Love and Joy, two
distinct works of Gods Spirit, and that they are separable, experience
confirms it; for many men that are high in Grace, are low in Comfort. As the
tall Mountains have few flowers on them, or Mines of Gold little grass
covering them.

Secondly, To this Christian Joy is required a knowledge of God, and faith in
him, as revealed in the Word. As there cannot be any love or delight in what we
know not; so neither any joy. The bruit beasts have no joy properly, because
they have no knowledge; They have a natural delight, but that is not truly
joy. Infants may have grace, yet have no actual joy; Therefore when John
Baptist a babe in the womb, did leap for joy, it was extraordinary; and this is
the reason why ignorant and carnal men are wholly destitute of all heavenly
joy. They have no knowledge, no spiritual illumination; so that as the blind
man cannot delight in pleasant colors, nor the deaf man rejoice in curious
music, neither can the natural man rejoice in heavenly and holy Objects; for
he knows no better, he is not acquainted with any other Comfort or
Consolation, but what is in the bowels of the creature.

Thirdly, There is required a sanctified and heavenly frame of heart. For such
as a man is, such is his joy. The voluptuous man rejoices in his pleasures,
the intellectual man does so rejoice in his studies, and finding out of truth,
that some have forgot their time of food, yea have not attended to their lives,
so great has their joy been in such contemplations. Thus the people of God,
being made new creatures, and made partakers of a Divine Nature, they now
become to love and delight in those Objects, which once they hated and
abhorred; They find all the Consolations from the creatures contemptible in
respect of God, concerning whom they say with David, The Lord is my portion,
and whom have I in Heaven, but thee, and in earth, in comparison of thee? The
old Rule is* Simile gaudet simili; The heavenly heart delights in heavenly
Objects. Heaven it self, and all the Glory of it, do not, or cannot affect a
wicked man, no more then fine flowers or pearls do a Swine: So that this duty
of rejoicing in God, is altogether impossible to an ignorant carnal man, they
can no more in their souls thus be raised up to God then in their bodies they
can fly in the air. As our vile earthly bodies must be made spiritual and
immortal, ere they can be filled full of agility, and be enabled to meet the
Lord in the air: So these souls of ours must be renewed and sanctified, ere
they can take any delight in that which is good.

Fourthly, This Christian Joy requires some kind of possession, at least in
some degree of Christ, or those good things we long for. Propriety and
possession is requisite to joy. To know of never so many excellencies, if a man
have them not, it does but increase his misery. The famished Lepers knew there
was food enough abroad, but till they were replenished, they could not rejoice
in it. What joy has a poor man to hear of many others that are rich; the sick
man of many others in health? If they have not such things in peculiar
possession, it advances them not at all. Hence full and completed joy is
only in Heaven, because there is full and complete fruition of God; Then we
are come to our journeyes end, we cannot go further, or desire more then we
have: But in this life, our joy may be daily filling our hearts; There be many
vacuities to be filled up; There be many desires still to be satisfied; so that
we are to grow in our joy, as well as in knowledge and in grace. But yet
because even in this life, God is the God of his people, and they are said to
have him, and to enjoy him; and so Christ is said to dwell in their hearts; yea
the Father and the Son are said to be in them, to sup with them, to take up
their mansions with them, to dwell amongst them. Hence it is that even in this
life they may have unspeakable joy. Therefore when the soul has left the
presence of God, or is under many sad and black temptations thereby, as we see
sometimes in David, and in the Church: Oh the anxieties, and perplexities that
it is filled with! Therefore in the Devils there is no capacity of any joy: For
although they have a self-love, and though their wicked desires be many times
successful in tempting of men, and destroying of their souls, yet they cannot
rejoice, because the state of misery they are in, cuts off all hopes from them:
If therefore the godly would live joyfully, let them take heed of interrupting
their communion with God; see you do nothing to eclypse this Sun; If God hide
his face, all your comfort will presently wither.

The transcendency of this Joy above all worldly Joy.
In the next place, Consider the transcendency and excellency of Christ's Joy
above all worldly joy. It cannot be denied, but that many wicked men spend
their lives in jollity, they seem to be the only merry men, and godliness is
decryed for Melancholy, for moping, and for that which will undo a man: But
true joy in the Lord surpasses all humane and worldly joy.

The soul can more intimately and fully receive it is object then the body can.
Bodily and worldly pleasures are received in by the senses, which are but
narrow doors and gates of the soul; but the soul of a man, what it receives,
it does let in with greater abundance: Hence if the Object be finite, and a
mere creature, it cannot fill the heart: the heart is too bigg for it, only
God is more then the heart can comprehend: Therefore all the pleasures, and all
the joy that any man can take, though he set himself to it, as Solomon did, yet
are but like the joy of tickling, or scratching, comparatively to those immense
joys and consolations, which God vouchsafes: Hence our Savior says, Your
hearts shall rejoice, John 16.22. This heavenly joy is like Elisha's oil, that
multiplieth exceedingly, and stays not, till thy cruises fail to receive it.

This heavenly Joy surpasses worldly in the pure and unmixed Nature of it.
It Is joy without sorrow; It Is honey without any gall, called The fruits of Gods
Spirit, because of the sweetness of it, as the Apostle says, Perfect love
casts out fear, tormenting fear. Thus joy from Christ, and in him, expels
dejections, troubles of heart. No sooner does this Sun arise, but all black
and noisome vapors are dispelled. Here is a joy that is like the Elementary
fire they speak of, pure and unmixed, here are no mixtures to debase it, or
allay it: But as for those worldly delights, it is as a mad man that teareth his
own flesh, and yet laugheth while he does so; So thou eatest and drinkest, and
make merry, while thou damnest thy own soul.

It surpasses in dignity; for this Joy is in God himself, it is in the highest
good that can be. There cannot be a greater cause or motive to rejoice in; but
as for the creatures, they are broken cysterns, they are limited in their
comforts, they have their vexations as well as their delights, but above all
they are below man; He debaseth himself, when he takes delight in these
sublunary things; they were made for him, not he for them: It is as ridiculous,
as if a man should delight in childrens baby-clouts: Oh do thou remember of
whom thou art born, and thou will take the best things to rejoice in.

Heavenly Joy surpasses in the certainty of it. The joy which God creates in
the soul cannot be taken away by any, but God himself; Though sickness come,
though poverty come, though afflictions arise, yet all these cannot take away
his joy, yea in death it self many times he does most abound and overflow,
whereas all worldly joy under such calamities are turned into wounds, into
howlings and tremblings, so that they know not what to do.

It surpasses in the Universality and Extent of it. Joy in God is all Joy,
because God is an Universal Good; There is no want, but he can fill it, no
misery, but he is a peculiar remedy to it, whereas the Creatures have their
peculiar Joys, Health is one Joy, Wealth another Joy, but no one Creature has
all Comforts in it.

It transcends in the Fullness and Degrees of Joy. Solomon speaks of worldly
Comfort, That even in laughter the heart is sad. Even Seneca could say, Think
you of those many that laugh, any one has true Joy, Res severa est Gaudium.
Dig to the bottom of the heart of these merry blades, and you will find
terrors and fears there.

Use of Instruction, Which is the way to get true Joy; A life in Christ, Use.
a life of holiness, Omnis vita est propter delectationem, Judge not jolly,
bodily delights, worthy the name of Joy. These will turn to bitter howlings and
gnashings of teeth: Oh what a bitter alteration will death make upon you! Now
laughing, then roaring; now excessive in drinking, then crying for a drop of
water to quench those eternal torments.

SERMON LXXIX. The Excellent Effects of Christian Joy.
JOH. 17.13. That my Joy might be fulfilled in themselves.
IN the next place Let us Consider the Effects of this Christian joy, and they
are admirable.

First, It does dilate and enlarge the heart, so that the Soul rejoicing is far
more capacious then otherwise it would be: Some have died they say for joy,
because of the too much dilating and dispersing the spirits; The Saints
glorified in heaven enjoy more then ever they could here of God, because their
hearts are more widened and prepared, Our Souls are narrow and straightened
within us till joy does extend them; A man of a joyful spirit is like a Vessel
of a broad mouth, that receives far more of God and Christ then a dejected
unbeleeving person, so that when we are commanded to set open the doors that
the Prince of Glory may enter into us; It Is joy that will thus prepare us; It Is
the complaint of many of Gods Children of their narrowness and straitness of
heart, that they have no room for Christ; Fears, they fill the heart, Worldly
cares they also fill, so that as men in a Consumption complain of a stopping
and straightness in their breast, they have much ado to fetch their wind;
Thus do the Children of God, oh they have such stoppings upon their hearts,
that they have much ado to pray, or to do any heavenly duty; Now joy is an
excellent opener, That removes these sinful obstructions, so that this should
make thee endeavor after a joyful life, it will make thee dilate in all
dimensions of grace; Thou will be a Christian of a higher pitch, or like
Daniels Tree whose branches spread themselves abroad exceedingly.

2. This Joy makes a man active and serviceable to God, Neh. 8.10, The joy of
the Lord is your strength; Weak hands and feeble knees which are the
Instruments of action and motion are attributed to fear as the cause of them;
Thus on the contrary Joy makes strong hands and firm knees; The Incestuous
person when almost swallowed with sorrow could no more vigorously serve God
then a piece of wood, whose moisture is not yet dried up, would be useful for
building: Hence any service done to God that is accompanied with dejections and
sorrow, has a kind of uncleanesse in it, as we have a notable expression,
Hos. 9.4. Their Sacrifices shall be unto them as the Bread of mourners, all
that eat thereof shall be polluted, Lev. 11.1. Persons that mourned for others
that were dead, were accounted unclean, and thus does all sinful sorrow and
dejection, it makes thy duty unclean, it polluteth thee, for God loves not
only a cheerful giver, but cheerfulness in all duties, and therefore we read
of Gods severe threatening for the neglect of this, Deuteronomy. 28.47. One great cause
of all those heavy Curses there mentioned, is because they did not serve the
Lord with joy and gladness of heart; Add to this, Deuteronomy. 12.7, 12. as also
Deuteronomy. 26.14. where the person offering Sacrifices was to make this
Protestation, that he had not eat thereof in his mourning: If you say, God is
of such infinite purity and holiness, that I being full of infirmities have
cause to tremble before him; We grant it, yet remember the Psalmists Advice,
Rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2. That is the fat of the Sacrifice; Oh then thou
that complainest of thy dullness, listlesnesse and lukewarmnesse in Gods
Service, whose duties look like Pharaohs lean Kine, and though they swallow
down many fat opportunities as these did the fat Kine, yet remain withered and
ill-favored still; Consider whether unbelief and sinful dejections are not
like Ivy to the Tree, or like rottenness in the bones, so Solomon calls Sorrow.
The bones which are the chief strength of a man, if they have rottenness in
them, how weak must that man be? Consider then whether thy want of heavenly joy
be not the cause of the evil upon thee, whether that do not make thee a barren
Wilderness and a parched heath, whether thou had not fulfilled all Relations
and opportunities more fruitfully, if this Joy had been fulfilled in thee.

Christ's Joy fulfilled in the heart does consume and expel all carnal and
worldly and sinful joys: He that rejoices in the Lord cannot rejoice in sin,
because the Objects are clean contrary, no more then a man at the same time can
with one eye look upward and with another downward; A body may as well be in
two places at the same time as the soul be intensly affected with two contrary
Objects, so that if thou complainest of the pronenesse of thy heart to rejoice
in earthly and worldly things; Know there is no such medicine to cure this as
heavenly joy, as they say, fire will drive out fire, so joy will expel joy,
Joy in the Lord, Joy in the world, What made David profess so much joy in God,
but the heavenlinesse of his heart, and this greater joy put out the less: As
the Sunbeams will the fire; Seeing therefore a man cannot live but he must
have joy in something, Do thou pray and endeavor that the joy of the Lord may
take up thy heart, for when this Sun is in thy soul, the Stars cannot be
seen; David says, At Gods right hand is fullness of joy, Psa. 16.11. If then
the Soul have already fullness, it does not desire any other Object; If a man
have the Ocean, he wants not the stream; If a man have the Sun, he needs not
the Candle; Thus he that has fullness of joy in God, wants not the joy of
other creatures; Insomuch that he who has this heavenly joy may be said to be
in Heaven while he is here on earth; No life comes so near to that of the
glorified Saints in heaven as an holy life accompanied with this joy; If there
can be an heaven upon this Earth, this is it; This is the Mount of
Transfiguration that changes a man's heart and his countenance, that makes him
say, It Is good to be here; Oh what enemies are we to our selves; Thou make
thy house, thy chamber* a prison, yea, an hell by thy distrustful fears, when
every place would be an heaven.

This Joy of Christ will exceedingly wean a man's heart from the world, it will
make him undervalue all these earthly things which the world so much admireth,
Psa. 4.7. Thou have put more gladness in my heart, then in the time their Corn
and Wine increases; If then the soul have more joy and gladness in Gods
presence and in his favor, then in all earthly contentments whatsoever: no
wonder if the heart he loose from the one and fixed upon the other; As he that
has eaten honey finds an unsavory taste in other things compartively, or as
he that has stddfastly beheld the Sun, is so dazeled with the luster thereof,
that he cannot see other inferior Objects; Thus the heart that is once
ravished with the sweetness and glory that is in God and Christ, knows not
how to stoop to these inferior fading joys; No man then sets so loose in heart
from earthly Comforts as he that has this heavenly joy; Every thing tempts him
to his loss, Shall he lose his fatness and sweetness by embracing the
Creatures.

This Joy of Christ will facilitate all holy and religious actions; They will
make us think the time short, and grudge the work of God is so soon over; Your
worldly joy is called pastime, and thus is heavenly, upon a better account,
When a man rejoices in the Sabbaths, and calls them a delight, then they do not
as those worldly wretches in the Prophet Amos, c. 8.5. say, when will the time
be over that we may be buying and selling? There is nothing makes the duties of
holiness so burdensome to thee as want of joy, if they were matter of delight
thou would with joy wish that the Sun would stand still, be grieved to give
over, Isa 61.3. It Is called the Oil of Joy, as the Oil makes the Wheel go
speedily or the yoke easy; so does a joyful heart; The voluptuous man, The
worldly man thinks not the day or week long enough to enjoy his delights, much
less does the godly man the time of enjoying of God; Hence Eternity does not
glut the Saints in heaven and make them weary of God.

6. This Christian Joy will bear up the heart above all afflictions and
tribulations; Thus Jam. 1. They are to account it all joy when they fall into
tribulation, and 1 Pet. 1.8. he speaks of those who for the present were in
heaviness through manifold temptations, yet at that time did greatly rejoice,
and that with joy unspeakable and full of glory; They could glory over all
their tribulations; This joy you heard is compared to Oil, and that will
always keep us above the waters: Oh how happy is it when thy Temptations do
not devour thy joy, but thy joy takes away the sting of thy Temptations; This
made the Martyrs and Confessors find thorns grapes, and thistles figs; Oh we
think that it is impossible ever for such weak and infirm wretches as we are to
go through such Trials as the Godly have done, but if we had their joy it would
be no more to us then it was to them.

Joy as it is participated in this life increases more hungring and desire
after the object we desire, to have more of it still; Take any Object of
delight which we do not perfectly enjoy, and oh how it quickens and stirs up
the appetite to have more still, for although perfect joy does fully satiate
the desire, and extinguish all thirst, because as Aquinas says well, Gaudium
se habet ad desiderium, sicut quies ad motum, and so when the stone is come to
the center, it moves no further, yet because in this life we have not a
perfect fruition of God, only have some bunches of the Grapes of Canaan, not
Canaan it self; Therefore the sweetness we have in God or Christ does more
stir up the desire after God, as you see in David, those inchoate enjoyments of
God did make him restless and impatient for further Communion with him; Hence
David exhorts to taste how good God is, if once we had but an experimental
sweetness of the Excellency of his love, we should still be breathing after
him, as David, Psalm. 119. My soul breaks for the longing it has to him at
all times; But especially the heavenly joy produces this admirable effect so
contrary to flesh and blood, that it makes a man look for the coming of Christ,
and hastening it in his prayers and desires, as that which will complete his
joy, Here sorrow and joy will be mixed together, but there is pure and unmixed
joy, and that to all Eternity; Oh what a wilderness, what a place of banishment
is this world to such a tempered heart; This is the valley of Tears, and that
is the mountain of joys.

Now to all this may be Objected, That it cannot be a Christians duty to be
always rejoicing, for many times they lie under sad Temptations, especially
there are times and seasons when God calls to mourning; Is any man afflicted,
let him pray? Is any merry, let him sing Psalms? And Solomon of old said, There
is a time to weep, and a time to laugh; David also says, Psa. 126.5. Such as
sow in tears shall reap in joy, which implies a time of tears only. To this
Consider these things.

1. It may not be denied but that there are some times wherein God does in a
peculiar manner call to the duty of mourning, fasting, and humiliation;
Insomuch that the Prophet Isay complains that when God called to mourning,
they went to their mirth and jollities, Isa 21.12. And thus when God shall
plainly afflict thee for any sins thou have committed, as David with the loss
of his Child for his Uncleanesse; In such cases it is our duty to be humbled
and to mourn under his hand; But these humiliations and fastings lie in the
abstinence of that natural and lawful joy we might take in the Creatures, not
in spiritual Joy: In days of humiliation it is a duty to rejoice in the Lord,
and such joy will like fire melt and thaw the heart; This joy that is so useful
must not be laid aside; But then that joy in the Creatures which at another
time would be lawful, is in such a season sinful; It Is not lawful then to joy
in Wives, in Children, in outward comforts, but to mourn before God, as those
who by their sins have deserved the loss of all; So then there may be a time
when this outward worldly though lawful joy is to be denied; and in this sense
Solomon says, It Is better to go to the house of mourning then of laughter,
because such sad objects may be sanctified to spiritual meditations.

2. Consider this, That spiritual Joy may then most abound, when that
soul-humiliation and godly mourning is put in practice; No grace of Gods Spirit
is contrary to one another, The same spirit that works joy does also prove
the spirit of Supplication and mourning on his people; Now as joy and trembling
may stand together, Psa. 2. and joy and fear, Act. 9.31. So may godly sorrow
and joy consist together, so that it is never unlawful to rejoice in God no
more then to love or to believe in him.

Use of Instruction, To inform us of the great concernment of spiritual Joy, We
may say it is the life and marrow of Religion, It Is the Spur and goad to all
holiness; Therefore how deceived is the world that looks for joy and
consolation some other way, Honors, Wealth, and Greatness will afford thee no
true solid joy, yea, all these things will turn to gravel and wormwood in thy
belly; As the Manna that was preserved for the Sabbath day did only last, If
any kept that which fell in one of the six days above the Command, it turned
to pollution immediately, and thus it is here; Whatsoever Joy is treasured up in
reference to heaven, that will always abide, it will never forsake thee, but
what is only in reference to these earthly things, it will vanish; Oh then say,
thy Beloved is the chiefest of ten thousand above all other worldly Comforts
whatsoever.

SERMON LXXX. That the Word of God preached and received, does inrage the
wicked world: And Reasons thereof.
JOHN 17.14. I have given them thy Word, and the world has hated them, because
they are not of the world.
IN this 14th verse our Savior urges a special and powerful reason, why God
the Father should in a peculiar manner keep them, which was hinted, verse. 11.
and that is, the worlds hatred of them: So that this Petition has a great deal
of equity and righteousness in it; They will be exposed to the malice of the
world, and that for thy cause, because they have believed in thy Word. The
world will be no preserver or conservator of them, therefore do thou keep them.

In the words therefore we have, 1. The Argument of the Petition, The world
hates them. 2: The Causes of this, which are twofold,


1. Their Receiving of, and Obedience unto Gods Word.

2. Their Segregation or Separation from the world, the life and manners of it,
which is amplified by the pattern, or example thereof, Even as I am not of the
world.

I shall take the Heads in their order. And

First, The Cause of their hatred in the world, in those words, I have given
them thy Word, where by the antecedent is necessarily meant the consequent, for
Christ's giving or preaching the Word of God, unless they received and obeyed
it, was not enough to procure hatred; Therefore they are both expressed verse.
8. Christ's giving them, and their receiving of the Word. For the Pharisees, and
many enemies to Christ, who were of the world, and the greatest part of those
that did oppose, did yet hear. The Gospel was tendered to them, though they
made themselves unworthy thereof. And thus when the Orthodox say, That the pure
preaching of the Word, is a note of the Church: By that they understand also a
visible, external accepting of it, otherwise the Word may be preached to
Barbarians and Heathen, who may hear, but scorn and reject the Gospel, and
therefore cannot be a Church.

This then being supposed, we see the cause of the Apostles miseries and
oppositions in the world, not because they were thieves, robbers, or seditious
persons. But because they did embrace the Doctrine of Christ, all the words of
this reason are emphatical, (...), I have delivered them, so that Christ herein
does faithfully discharge his duty, he did not neglect it. And

2. (...), Given, or delivered them; which implies, that the Apostles
themselves could never by their own strength, have found out this heavenly
Doctrine. There must be a revelation of ^t from above, Christ must come from
the bosom of the Father to give it unto them: They themselves could not have
invented it; No, though in stead of illiterate Fishermen, they had been the
Grandees of knowledge, the Platoes and Aristotle's of the world.

3. I have given them, (...); He that is the true (...), the Word of God, does
deliver Gods Word, and he says not mine, but thine, partly, because Christ in
his mediatory administration refers all to God, to the Father, My Doctrine
is not mine, but his that sent me, and I come to do my Fathers will; and
partly, hereby to engage God the Father more, for being it was because of his
Word, and in reference to him, the more was he to preserve them. From the words
explained observe,

That the Word preached and received by people, Observe. That the Word preached
and received by people, does greatly enrage the wicked of the world.
does greatly enrage the wicked of the world. No other reason is here mentioned
of the worlds hatred, but this. Who would think that the men preaching of so
holy a Doctrine, and such glad tidings of salvation, and men obeying it, not
wronging, injuring, or troubling others, yet should meet with so much
opposition! But thus it has been, and thus it will be. In Tertullian's time,
To be a Christian, was to be a Publicus hostis; and though, as that acute
Father pleaded, The Christians were no Albinians, or Barutians, such as
embroyled the Civil Estate with wars, yet because they were Christians, this
was enough. The very name was a crime, and this made so many Fathers make such
excellent Apologies in their behalf. Of this opposition from the world, our
Savior informs them, when he first gave them their Commission to preach,
They should be hated of all men; Never any went about such an unwelcome and
unthankful piece of service, as they did; Therefore they were as sheep amongst
wolves; and whereas it might be thought, That the Apostles being men, though
greatly assisted by God, might miscarry through ignorance, inconsiderate
passion, etc. We shall find it befell even Christ himself, that he in his
Ministry, though he wrought such wonderful miracles, that might astonish them;
yea though those miracles were useful and profitable, not for curiosity, yet
what reproaches, what slanders did they cast on him, calling him a wine-bibber,
a friend to sinners, yea an Imposture, one that had a devil? and never ceased,
till at last they put him to death in the most scornful and reproachful
manner.



First, Gods great and special love to them, That God has taken care to send
such, is more then the creating of a world for you, or vouchsafing all the
temporal mercies you enjoy: Hence it is so often spoken of, 2 Chronicles. ult. and in
other places, that God sent his Prophets rising up early. This is spoken as the
great love of God to them. And then

Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some Apostles, some Pastors and Teachers: Oh then, how
ungrateful and wicked is the world, which does no more regard this love of
God, and purchase of Christ in the Ministry! Hence by the Prophet God
promises, That he would give them Pastors after his own heart, Jer. 3.4.
Though he feed them with the bread of adversity, and drove them into corners,
Isai. 30.20, Hence when God threatens a people with his uttermost wrath, it is
to remove the Candlestick, and to make the Vision cease, and to make no Clouds
to rain upon them. How much would people complain under a drought, and want of
Rain, if for many years together there should not be so much as a Cloud seen;
But the gracious heart would think, the removing of Christ's Ministers not only
the taking away of Clouds, but of the Sun and Stars in Heaven.

Secondly, God and Christ who are thus the cause of their Office, has
appointed them their work, and endowed them with abilities thereunto. Their
employment is to publish the Word of God, which is twofold,

1. The Word of the Law, to convince men of sin, to inform of duty, to make
them sensible of their undone and damnable estate they are in. Thus they are
first to be wise Phisicians to detect and discover the disease, the danger and
cause of it.

Then secondly, There is the Word of the Gospel, which are the glad tidings of
Gods favor, and Reconciliation with those that are humble and contrite before
him. This is to publish the acceptable year of Jubilee, to such as were
spiritually indebted, and under the thraldom of Gods wrath. This is a work in
it self absolutely necessary; for what does a sinner more want then these two
things, the Law in it is use, and the Gospel in it is use. Men in their temporal
necessities respect the Physicians, the Lawyers; but soul necessities are not
apprehended; And as the necessity of it is so cogent, so the dignity and
excellency is admirable. As the Soul and Heaven do far exceed all earthly
things, so does this subject all other.

God and Christ do justly expect, that the world should with all gladness and
obedience receive these his Messengers. For shall God purpose so great love,
and Christ at so dear a rate purchase such Officers, and must not the world set
open the doors to receive them? Shall not they cry, Blessed are the feet of
such as bring the glad tidings of the Gospel? Are they not to be affected, as
the Galatians once to Paul, To pull out their very eyes to serve him?
Certainly, if David did so celebrate Gods goodness in creating Heaven and
Earth, and appointing the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the field for
man's use, much more ought we in this great matter of the Church.

Though so much love be in this Institution, and God expects so much
thankfulness and obedience, because of it, it may make us tremble to see, how
little entertainment their Office and work has in the world. We speak not in
regard of their outward honor and esteem: For as Paul says, so ought we pray,
men might do no evil, though we be accounted as reprebates, 2 Cor. ult. but we
complain of the unsuccessefulnesse of it, in respect of the divine operations
of it; We take up our Saviors complaint, That light is come into the world,
and men love darkness rather then light, John 3. Oh this is that which the
Scripture does so bitterly complain of* Who has believed our report? and I
told them the wonderful or great and honorable things of my Law, and they
accounted them a strange thing, Psalm. 119. This sad usage in the world, made
Paul cry out, That they were the offscouring of the world, worse then the dust
of the feet, and were made a spectacle to the world and Angels, 1 Cor. 4.9.

The Devil knowing the excellent end and use of this Office and work, does by
himself, and all his instruments oppose it. He rages, and the world rages,
when this work is set up: So that as when Christ sent his Disciples to preach,
he saw Satan fall like lightning. Thus if it were in his power, he would have
Christ and his Officers be thrown down. As they are to destroy his works, and
dispossess him, so he labors to do to them. It being thus thou, that in the
Ministry we may see Gods great love, and man's great wickedness.

Let us consider the cause, why it should thus stir up the wrath of men, Why
the preaching and receiving of the Word does enrage wicked men.
that they should be moved like so many hornets. And

This work of the Ministry is contrary to the Nature and inclination of the
world. That as the Sun is burdensome to the Owl, and other night-birds, and
sweet smells to swinish creatures. Thus is the glorious Gospel, and the precious
favor thereof abominable to corrupt men: They can no more love godly and holy
preaching, then fire and water can agree; therefore the more thy heart and
tongue is set against it, the more thou discoverest that hell, which is in the
bottom of thy heart. Now the true preaching of the Word of God is contrary
unto the world in these respects, 1. The very nature and frame of their hearts,
admits not of Christ's word, till regenerated. The old house must be pulled down
even with the very foundation of it. Thus Jam. 1. God is said to beget by his
Word, and our Savior here, Sanctify them by thy truth. Now this is directly
contrary to man's nature, to account all that he is, and all that he does
damnable, to judge every thing he has done fit fuel for hell, so as to have
no comfort in any thing he has done. It was a mystery to Nicodemus, a master
of Israel, but it is not only a mystery to natural men, it is that which they
hated, they cannot abide; For Solomon says, Every man's way is clean in his own
eyes, Prove. 16.2. To come then to people, and tell them you are all out of the
way to Heaven; There is nothing good in you, unless you be new creatures, even
all new, you cannot be saved; new hearts, new affections, new thoughts, Will
not this be a two-edged sword in their hearts? Shall they leave their former
course? Shall not they speed as well as others? This is a Doctrine not to be
born, this is durus Sermo, when indeed they are duri auditores, and so let not
the Word have that penetrating power it would.

As it is opposite to their natures, so to their lives and conversations, Ephesians.
2. Paul there describes what kind of men the Ephesians were, and that it might
not be thought their peculiar wickedness, he says, They walked after the
course of this world, and therefore Romans 12. The command is not to be conformed
to the fashion of this world: Can flesh and blood then endure, that the
Ministers of God should damn to hell? The lives, the manners, the daily customs
and practices, that generally men live in. When Moses did but in a fair way
reprove two Israelites, that were quarrelling, how frowardly did they answer,
Who made thee a Judge over us? Exodus 2.14. And so the Sodomites to Lot, they
judged it all Lordliness and domineering; and is not the same stubbornness
still reigning every where? All reproofs, all denunciations out of Gods Word,
are judged to be the pride, the lordlinesse, or the malice of the Minister;
Wonder not then if the faithful preaching of Gods word, meets with such
violent opposition; for they persuade a life, a way, directly contrary to what
the world delights in.

It Is opposite to that way of worship which men take up by natural reasonings.
The Prophets did not only reprove for moral impieties, but Idolatry and
superstitious Worship, Who has required these things at your hands? And our
Savior his Doctrine was salt to the Pharisees, it corroded and fretted their
sore hearts, he lays the axe of his Ministry to the root of all their
superstition, and proves that to be abominable which they did so highly
advance before men. Insomuch that Christ's first coming into the world, because
of his severe Doctrine and reprehensions, is Mal. 3. described to be as
terrible as the day of Judgment, Who shall abide the day of his coming? And
why? Because he shall sit as a refiner to purge the house of Levi. Austin did
much complain what a difficult matter it was, to take off people from their
superstitions and vain customs, Veh tibi torrens moris humani, quis resistet!
Certainly, such will say no less to powerful and faithful Ministers, then
the devils to Christ, Why art thou come to torment us before our time?

The preaching of the Word must be opposed, because the powerful obedience
thereunto brings all calamity and persecution. They shall be hated, as well as
the word is hated. Now to be troubled, reproached and despised is contrary to
men's temper, who loves applause and glory. Hence some, though they are said to
believe, John 2. yet would not confess Christ, because they loved the praise
of men more then of God: And our Savior says, How can ye believe who seek
glory one of another? Pride and love to be esteemed of in the world, does
disdain all good preaching.

The Word preached meets with opposition, because the instruments are men
subject to infirmities, especially if faithful. So that though they do not
hate them for their infirmities, yea the more profane and dissolute the
Minister is, they like it the better; yet because the Apostle says, We have
this treasure in earthen vessels, they are men and not Angels, therefore they
quarrel and oppose Paul himself, though an Apostle, and giving mighty
demonstrations of Gods Spirit in him, yet he was despised, and slandered,
though not so guilty of humane infirmities, and that because he was faithful,
Am I become an enemy, because I tell you the truth? Gal. 3. Oh this is it,
because we preach the truth, because we meet with men's corruptions, and cannot
bear sin: This is that which raises up malice.

The world has not received the Spirit of God, and therefore all the glorious
and wise things of Christ are but foolishness and useless to them. They have
not that spiritual anointing, they are not taught of God. Hence it is that
they rage and revile those things they know not, or understand. Therefore till
God give them eye salve, and seeing eyes, no other thing can be expected.

Use.
Use of Instruction. Wonder not if in all ages this be true, the Word is purely
preached and obeyed by some, therefore the world hates and rages: For what,
will a Tiger and a Wolf lay aside their natures? Will the Devil cease to be a
Devil? But woe be to those that make Christ the foundation-stone, to be a stone
of stumbling and offense; Woe to thee that find light made darkness, and
life, death to thee.

SERMON LXXXI. Of Suffering for Christ's Cause, And how it engages God to take
care of such as so suffer; Also the Duty of Ministers about Preaching Gods
Truth,
JOH. 17.14. I have given them thy Word, and the world has hated them, etc.
A Second Observation may be.

That when the People of God suffer not for any Faults of their own, Observe.
but because they own God, and profess his Truth, This is a great obliging of
God to take care of them; For our Saviors Petition is founded upon this
equitable and just Consideration, The world hates them; But why? Not for any
wickedness or injuries they have done, but merely because they have believed
in thy Word; If so be they had opposed and rejected the Word of God, and had
ordered their lives according to the course of this world, They would have been
the worlds darlings, all men would have spoken well of them, but now it was for
Gods sake, and his Gospels sake, that they were thus maligned, so that if we be
hated in the world upon Christ's account, and because of Gods Interest we are
sure to have his special care and protection.

To open this doctrine Consider these things. Concerning which Consider,


First, That it is possible for those who acknowledge Christ to be hated and
persecuted in the world, not for their Christianity, but for their other gross
impieties, 1. It is possible Christians may be hated not for their Christianity
but their gross impieties.
and if so, then they cannot take that joy, or expect that protection which God
does promise to his; Therefore the Apostle Peter speaks excellently to this, 1
Pet. 4.14, 15, 16. where having showed how happy, yea, and how g^orious a thing
it is to be reproached for Christ's Name, because the Spirit of Glory rests
upon them, The world scorneth and despises them in their low estate, but the
Spirit of Glory rests on them, he adds a Caution, Let none of you suffer as
a Murderer, as an evil doer, as a busy body in other men's matters, but as a
Christian, that is, Let him look that he do not for any wickedness of his
justly procure civil punishments, but only let him keep to his Christian
profession, and if that be all his fault, then let him not be ashamed;
Therefore he adds, Let such an one commit himself to God as to a faithful
Creator: Why Creator? But because God looks upon such Sufferers as his
Creatures, it is because of my Image shining in them, I cannot be a faithful
Creator and not take care of them, says God; To this purpose our Savior
often, because it is not the mere sufferings but the cause and motive that is
all in all; If ye be persecuted for my Names sake, and for Righteousnosse sake;
This must be the ground else we cannot plead the promise of assistance.

2. It is ordinary for them that suffer for Christ to be charged with diverse
crimes.
2. As it is possible for a Christian to suffer for his own iniquities, so
nothing is more ordinary in the world, though a man do suffer merely for
Christ's sake, yet to charge other crimes upon him, and to pretend other grounds
of their malice against such then mere Christianity: This is good to be
observed, for if the Persecutors say true there was never any holy man or
faithful Servant of God suffered, but they made the condemnation just, and
thought at least some of them that they did God good service, as our Savior,
Joh. 16.2. Were not the Prophets of old, whose blood was shed by Jerusalem?
traduced as busybodies, as Troublers of Israel, as public enemies, and in
Christ's time; Though the Sun was not more free from spots then he from sin or
any miscarriage in his Ministry, yet what accusations did they frame against
him, and Joh. 8. It was not for the good works, they said, they stoned him, but
for his blasphemies, So Joh. 18. If this man were not a malefactor, we would
not have delivered him to thee; The Martyrs also when so many thousand of them
died willingly for Christ, yet by their Enemies they were represented as the
vilest of men; So that as they did with their bodies, put them in Beasts skins,
that so Lions might devour them more greedily; Thus they defamed them, and laid
heavy crimes to their charge, that so they might have the more just ground to
condemn them; So that when a Christian suffers as a Christian, and when as a
busie-body, must not be determined by their Enemies, nor by the greater part of
the world, but by Gods Word, for they think all zeal against sin, rashness,
and madness, and all reproofs of wickedness, a busie-medling more then needs,
Gods Word therefore must be the Star to direct in this.

3. Those that suffer for blasphemy may be so far seduced as to think they
suffer for Christ.
Thirdly, It must be also granted, That a man suffering for those things, which
are against Christ, which are palpably contrary to his Doctrine, yet may be so
far seduced as to think he suffers for Christ; This is ordinary with all
heretics, who have judged themselves Martyrs, and made all their sufferings to
be for God; when yet they blaspheme God; Does not the Papist put his sufferings
upon Christ's score? Does not every Heretic entitle God to his Cause? Do not
the Socinians who yet with their whole might oppose the Deity of Christ,
prerend great obedience so and adoration of him, as a constituted God? We grant
then that men may be horribly deluded in their sufferings; They may give their
bodies to be burnt, and not have true and sound Faith; They may be acted by an
heretical spirit, and yet endure great miseries, as the Circumcelliones out of
a mad contempt of Death, would make men kill them: But these also have not
Christ's promises belonging to them, unless it be Gods Word indeed, and truly
so, for which the world hates them, they are not within the Ark; It Is true,
Even such who suffer in such deluded ways, may have great comfort, may find
much consolation within, but it is the devil that transformeth himself into an
Angel of Light; It Is such comfort as mad men have that laugh and are pleased in
the midst of their misery, for God will never give comfort but to his own
Truths, The Spirit of God is not a Comforter, but where it first leads into
the Truth; Indeed the confidence and comforts many have died with in their
errors, have been a stumbling block, but this is to be ignorant of Satan's
devices, and the potent operations of strong delusions upon men's souls.

4. The best Christians that live have many infirmities cleaving to them.
It cannot be denied but that even the best Christians who are hated, and do
suffer in the world, have yet many imperfections cleaving to them, and do
discover many infirmities of the flesh, so that as none can be perfect in love
of God, or in any other grace, so neither in enduring the hatred of the world,
oh how hard is that Rule of our Saviors, Mat. 5. when men revile to be
patient, when men curse to bless, and to render all good for all evil? These
things do so transcend humane power, that many miscarriages, several
indiscretions, and many carnal fears are apt to interweave themselves; Now when
the matter or cause of our sufferings in Christ's, and for his Name, and if the
heart be mainly set for God and his honor, though subject to weaknesses, such
may plead Christ's assistance for all that, neither may they fear, Christ will
disown them, because of such adhering infirmities; Do we not see the Scripture
commending some as eminent, when yet at that very time there was some
imperfection; Abraham's Faith so highly commended, Romans 4. yet had some
diffidence mixed with it; Jobs Patience so greatly exalted, yet had some
impatience breaking out, God then takes not notice of thy weakness but of thy
Grace, and the godly sufferer may comfort himself, that though he has
imperfections, yet it is not for them the world hates him; As Bradshaw that
holy Martyr said, Though he was a sinner, and had many Infirmities, yet his
Enemies did not put him to death for them, but for the quarrel of Christ, which
he had espoused, and the Truths of Christ which he preferred above his own life:

The Grounds of Gods endearment to protect such as are hated for his Name sake
are

1. Gods propriety and interest in such, It Is not their lives or Liberties are
aimed at so much as his Name, his Glory, his Truth; Now God cannot but love
what is his own, and that infinitely; Therefore it has always been the
Custom of Gods people in their Prayers to make their trouble to be in
reference to him; What will thou do for thy great Name? said Joshua, c. 7.9.
And David, It Is time to work, for men have made void thy Law; So it is thy
Temple, thy Altars they have polluted, and hence God accounts all the malice
and madness of men discovered against his people as done to him, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? Act. 9 4. Could they do that to God which they do to
his Name, they would; Therefore the people of God may strongly and comfortably
urge, that it is not their good, their peace is the quarrel, but because of
something of God in them, as the Basilisk hates the picture of a man because
it hates a man himself.

2. God has put such a natural storge into all Creatures, that what is their
own they will defend; The Hen will save its own little ones and venture for
them, The Mother will save her own child: Now shall God put such a property in
all Creatures to save their own, to protect their own, and shall not God much
more? Yea, God makes his affections to be more tender then a mothers, such may
forget even her sucking Infant, Isa. 49.15. but God will not, yea, does not God
show his care in providing for all Creatures, because they are his Creatures,
who feeds the young Ravens, who preserves the Sparrows Life, Is not all by
Gods Providence? Oh then what specal care will he show to his spiritual
Creature, which cost far more then even the natural Creature did: It would be
a dishonor to God if he should not take care of such; We see amongst men it is
counted matter of honor to remember them that have suffered for their sakes;
What said David to the Priest that escaped Saul's sword when so many were
bloudily devoured by his Sword, I have been the Cause of their death, stay with
me, and thou shall fare as I fare; Thus will Christ say, I have been the cause
of all thy reproaches and miseries in the world, Stay with me, and I will
protect you; To forsake a man that has been undone to maintain thy cause, or
thy credit, would be great dishonor; And does it not more belong to Gods
honor that such as have denied all their worldly comforts for him, that he
should regard them? What will not God suffer any to seek him in vain? and shall
they suffer for him in vain? Besides it would discourage all to stand for his
Word, Should he forsake them, who would set out upon this spiritual War with
the world upon his own charges? It Is true, we are to say after all is done, We
are unprofitable Servants, and when we have suffered here, we might suffer in
hell hereafter, but Gods Grace and goodness will not regard our merits, but
his fidelity and promise.

Use of Direction to the people of God, to order their Conversation so wisely
and holily, that if possible the hatred of the world may be for their
godliness; Let them slander, reproach, and pretend what they will, yet do thou
enjoy this comfort within; O Lord, it is for my obedience to thee; It Is because
I own thy Commands, I dare not comply with the evil ways of the world; To be
able to say as Christ, For which of my good works do thou stone me? For what
is it that thou reproachest me? This is to shine as stars in a dark night: Dogs
may bark at the Moon, but that stays not its course; Go on in the midst of
all the reproaches of the world, Let thy holy life torment them, let them be in
a rage that they have nothing justly to charge thee with, and then say with
Jerome, I thank God that I am worthy to be one whom the world hates; We know
the worlds opposition engages Gods protection, and the Lord will account all
that is done against thee as done against his own Majesty.

The last Doctrine, In that Christ says, He had declared or given Gods Word to
his Disciples.

Observe.
Obs. That the Ministers duty is to deliver only Gods Truth to his hearers;
Christ twice says this, I have delivered thy words, and in another place, My
Doctrine is not mine, but my Fathers which sent me; Thus Paul 1 Cor. 11. That
which I have received of the Lord deliver I unto you; We should preach only
Traditions in this sense, not Popish unwritten Traditions, but that doctrine
which we have received; Hence Paul so pathetically exhorts Timothy 1 Timothy 6.20.
Keep that which is committed to thy Trust, not that which he had invented, not
that which came out of his own heart, but what was deposited in his hands,
Aurum accepisti, aurum read, Religion is not res ingonii but doctrinae: Now in
this the Ministers of God are to deliver,

1. His word, his Truth in opposition to what is the word of man, what is a lie
and a falsehood; The false Prophets are often reproved for venting the
Imaginations of their own hearts, and in the New Testament some are severely
taxed for bringing in damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2. Look we then, that what we
build be gold and silver, not hay and stubble: That what we preach be Wheat and
not Chaff, meat and not poison.

2. We are to deliver it purely, Some though they preach the Truth, yet they
defile it by their additions, the Apostle Paul testifies that he was not in
the number of those 1 Cor. 2.17. who corrupt the word of God, that use
sophisticate and counterfeit ways to adulterate it as men do their wine and
wares, but as of God and in the sight of God, Oh what holy trembling and fear
should be upon us lest our preaching should be like N^buchadnezzars Image, some
part of gold and silver, but the rest of Iron and Clay.

3. They are to deliver it universally, as Paul said, he had not withheld from
them the whole counsel of God, Act. 20. 27. To speak all that God commands,
not to hide or withdraw any thing either for fear or flattery, The threatening
part as well as the promising, to vent the Prophecy though it be the burden of
the Lord.

4. They are to deliver it upon an holy end or motive; That the truth might be
believed, the people edified; To preach Gods Word as it is our Opinion, our
Interest, our advantage is sinful, yet how apt are we to regard a Truth as it
is ours more then Gods.

Use of Exhortation to people, to receive the Word of God with adoration and
reverence, how prone are people to entertain errors or corrupt Doctrines, To be
more affected with the wit and words of men more then the authority and divine
nature of the Word.

SERMON LXXXII. Of Wicked men's hating the Godly, the Causes, Effects, and
Properties of it.
JOH. 17.14. And the world has hated them, because they are not of the world.
THe next thing to be considered is the Argument it self used by our Savior in
this Petition, Keep them by thy special protection, why? because the world
hates them; And I shall take in the second Cause into the Argument, Because
they are not of this world; For I have spoken already about these things, from
verse. 11. I shall add what was not then mentioned.

In the Argument you may take notice of the Subject or persons that do hate,
and they are said to be the world, that is, wicked men called the world,
because they are the greater part of it, and because they retain the wicked
inclination of the world minding only worldly things; Now though the world be
many times, and it may be here taken for that Society of men that is
Heathenish, and does not believe in Christ, thus the Church and the world are
opposed 1 Cor. 5.10. yet we may extend it further, even to such as do outwardly
profess Christ, but in works do deny him, as is more to be showed.

2. There is the act it self, hate, (...), The word is in the preterperfect
tense, It has hated them already, though they had not much tormented it by
their preaching, but it would more hate them, when Christ was removed, and
their preaching more universal; It comprehends all times, it has, it does,
and it will hate them, and hatred you heard was worse then anger, being more
fixed and permanent? The cause of this is, because They are not of the world,
for as love is to its like, so hatred is to that which is unlike and contrary;
In the Scripture some Learned men say to hate is sometimes taken to love less,
not an absolute hatred, but a respective love, Mat. 6.24. He will love one, and
hate the other, i. e. less love, And for this end they bring that place, Romans
9.3. Jacob have I loved but Esau have I hated, where they would expound hate of
a less love, but whatever may be said of the former place, this latter will
admit of no such Exposition, as the Context will easily evidence.

3. The Scripture speaks of a good hatred, Romans 7.15. That which I hate, I do;
So we are commanded to hate our Father and Mother, to hate our own lives, Luke
14.26. Joh. 12.25 for Christ's sake; David also said, He hated them which hated
God with a perfect hatred, i. e. a full complete hatred, he had no love at all
to them, that is, in respect of their wickedness and their incurable enmity
against God, though in other respects he pitied and loved them.

Lastly, There is a wicked and evil hatred, of which the Text speaks.

Obs. Doct.
That the wicked men of the world have and will always hate those that are
godly; It has been so of old, and will be so to the last wicked man that
breaths; No sooner were there a wicked man and a godly, but this hatred broke
out into all cruelty; Cain hated Abel, and why? because his own works were
naught and his brothers good, 1 John 3.12. No less will serve then the blood
of Sheep, such cruel Wolves:

Consider,
To open this Doctrine Consider these things,

I. That there is a twofold hatred.
First, That there is a twofold hatred with the Schoolmen, One is called Odium
inimicitiae, an hatred of enmity whereby a man wills evil to him, because it is
his evil; Even as amor amicitiae, a will of friendship wills the good to a
person loved, because it is his good.

2. There is another kind of hatred which the ancient Schoolmen had no Name
for it, but afterward it was called Odium abominationis or offensionis; When a
man is offended at, and hates such an object that is evil, but not the person,
yea, we may love him dearly; Thus the Child hates the death of his Father
Odio abominationis, but loves his Father, yea, because he loves him,
therefore he hates his death; Now that hatred whereby the world hates godly
men, is Odium inimicitiae, it comes from an inward irreconcilable displacency
to the godly, it is terminated upon their persons, because they are such, and
therefore they are said to be of the devil, representing his nature, and are
the Seed of the Serpent, which has an imbred enmity against man, so that
though never so much evil should befall the Godly; Their goods spoiled, their
Names blasted, yet as long as they live, and because they still are alive, the
world will hate them.

II. The Causes of it.
Secondly, The cause of their hatred may be reduced to two Heads: 1. The
contrariety that is between the nature and actions of the Godly, So that they
do not love any godly man, no nor such as never had any commerce with them or
meddling with them; There is an Odium natural, which arises from the nature of
things, Such an antipathy is often mentioned by Writers, the Serpent that is
young though never hurt by any man, yet because they know them of such a stamp
they cannot love them; It being natural, they cannot give any Reason, Hoc
tantum possum dicere, non amo te: You do not love him, why did he ever weary
you? Did he ever speak to you? No, but yet he cannot love him, so that as love
consists in the consonancy and convenience of the good thing loved; Thus hatred
is in the dissonancy and contrariety of that to us which we hate.

The 2d cause of hatred is Ignorance, when men know not that Excellency and
worth which is in such persons, and the just cause of love, which if we did we
should quickly lay aside our hatred, and truly in a great measure the world
hates because of their ignorance; They know not what Godliness is, nor what
godly men are; They know not their lives, their aims, their ends, but judge of
them as hypocrites, proud, and minding only self ends, and therefore their
hatred increases; Thus the Apostle says, If they had known what Christ was,
they would never have crucified him, 1 Cor. 2.8. and so they are said, to speak
evil of the things they know not, Jude 10. Do thou then rail and deride at
godly men, It Is thy blindness and folly, Thou know not their close walking
with God; Thou understandest not the heavenly privileges they enjoy; Thou do
not conceive of their humiliation for their infirmities, judging themselves
before God worse then thou can judge them; Oh if thy eyes were open, thou
would say, these are the Servants of the most high God; Oh that my latter end
might be like one of theirs, and of such men the world is not worthy.

III. The effects of it.
Thirdly, Consider the effects of this hatred, and that is in three steps and
degrees.

1. An inward willing of all evil that may hurt them, and that because it is
evil To will a man some evil for his good may be lawful, as when David
prays, Put them in fear O Lord, that they may know themselves to be men, Psa.
9.20. Thus the Church of God may pray for afflictions upon those Enemies that
are curable, That by their afflictions they may repent and be humbled before
God, but hatred has not this goodness: It wills evil because it is evil, and
for evils sake; It rejoices in the evil that befalls a godly man, as part of
its own good and happiness; Thus it is with all wicked men, they rejoice as if
some great good had befallen them, when some great evil has come upon the
godly.

2. Their hatred breaks out into all all hard, censorious, and uncharitable
speeches, all slanders and contumelies, into cruel mockings, as the Apostle
calls them, Heb. 11.36. The hatred in the heart will soon be seen in the tongue,
as the disease within is discovered by the Tongue; The Apostle Jude v. 15.
speaks of one end of Christ's coming, viz. to execute Judgment on men for all
the hard speeches which ungodly sinners were guilty of; David speaks of wicked
men's tongues, that they were like Rasors and sharp Swords, men that breathe
Hell Fire every time they speak, This is a fruit of their hatred,

And Lastly, It breaks out into actions as that which consummateth all their
wickedness; It was hatred killed all the holy Prophets, crucified Christ, and
put to death so many Millions of Martyrs; Before this hatred no good man, no
holy man could stand.

Obj. But you may ask, How can a man hate a good man whom he knows to be
good, seeing it is ordinarily said, No man can will evil because it is evil;
And to hate a good man because he is good, implies, That the will can refuse
and detest its proper Object.

The Answer is, We are said to hate godly men, as wicked men are said to hate
God: Now God as he is good and full of all loveliness, so cannot be hated, but
as he has that which a wicked man looks upon as evil to himself, so he hates
him; Thus as God is a holy God, one that will not acquit a sinner, that will
render to every man according to his works, So the wicked hate God* In like
manner the wicked man hates a godly man, because his Godliness is that which
is contrary to him, an evil to him? It discovers thy naughtiness, It reproves
and rebukes thy Impiety, and upon this reason he hates him, yet, the wicked
man does not only hate a Godly man, but all things that belong to him, and
every thing a godly man loves he hates, Godly Ordinances, the means of Grace,
and all because a Godly man loves them; All Praying and preaching he hates,
All godly Order and Government in the Church of God he hates, because these
things are loved by a Godly man, As love loves not only the person but all
things that belong to him, so does hatred the contrary.

In the next place Consider the Properties of this hatred.

It is a Causeless One, There is no just and true ground of such bitterness;
IV. The properties of it.


Hence our Savior, Joh. 15.20, 21. applies that of David to all the godly,
They have hated me without a cause: Indeed if you do regard the contrariety of
wicked men to what is holy, this is a necessary cause, but it is not a just
cause, for this indeed deserves the clean contrary; Had the Pharisees a Cause
to crucify Christ? Had the Galatians a Cause to become Enemies to Paul? Oh no,
Those thou hate should be accounted of as Jewels by thee; Those thou revilest
and reproachest the delight of thy soul should be to them; It is a causless
hatred.

It is an universal hatred; For seeing he hates a Godly man for his
Godliness, then he must needs hate it wheresoever he sees it; Indeed some
Godly men either through the power and place they have, or for other Reasons
are not so subject to the effects of wicked men's hatred, but the heart is full
of poison and venom against the one as the other, for he cannot be a good man
whom wicked men do not hate one way or other; Woe be to you when all men speak
well of you; This hating of Godliness is called hating of the Light, Joh.
3.19. Now all Light is offensive to soar eyes; Thus the Godly man lives, but
he must have his portion: Be afraid if wicked men love thee as seeing nothing
of God in thee, they think thee like one of themselves, if I did my duty I
should be more opposed.

implacable irreconcilable Hatred, Genesis 3. There was at first an Enmity put
between the devil and his Seed, and the Woman and her Seed: Though wicked men
may sometimes flatter and applaud, yet the sting is still in the heart; Safety
and opportunity would quickly make them vent their poison; You see though Saul
sometimes melted to David, saying, O my Son David, thou art more Righteous then
I, I have sinned, yet for all this David would nor tempt him, nor go home with
him: The Sheep may not think the Wolf ever minds good to her, Therefore our
Saviors advice is good, but very strange, Beware of men, Mat. 10.17. He says
not, Beware of Lions and Bears, or Serpents, but of men, as if these were worse
then all.

It Is a cruel hatred, who is able to reckon up the several kinds of torments
that wicked men have invented to excruciate the godly with; No death for Christ
would satisfy the Jews but what was most ignominious and painful; Heb. 11.
Some were sawn asunder, This was like that Command of Nero, Ita feri, ut se
mori sentiat; It Is known to all that read Ecclesiastical History what
exquisite torments have been invented, that the Martyrs might not simply die,
but die as many Deaths as they have parts of body.

Obj. But you will ask, Whether every godly man is thus hated, Though some may
be, yet are all?

Ans. It Is the inward disposition of all wicked men to hate those that are
godly, but then the effects of it may be restrained, sometimes for fear,
because those that are godly may be advanced to places of honor and power;
Though even then all wicked men have not been able to refrain; David
complains that Drunkards made Songs of him, and when he was in his afflicted
condition, with what scorn and contempt did Shemei revile him? So that if we
respect the habitual inclination of the heart, no godly man can be loved by a
wicked man; though there may be an outward restraint; Again, sometimes God may
so work the hearts of wicked men, that for some time and in some exigences they
may love the godly, and refresh them; It Is Gods promise that when our ways
please God, even our enemies shall be friends with us, Prove. 16.7. What a
strange thing was that, that when the Israelite was so transcendently hated by
the Egyptian, yet God should give them such favor that the Egyptians should
lend them their Gold and their Jewels, yea, while all that multitude went away,
not so much as a dog to bark at them, so that though the ordinary Rule be for
the Godly man to be hated, yet God may at some time preserve some Godly men
from the strife of tongues, he can change Esaus bloody heart to melt toward
Jacob, and he can command Laban to speak kindly to him, thus he promised
Israel, they should find mercy in the eyes of them who led them captive.

2. Though the world may hate godly men, yet it is not necessary that every
godly man should be hated by every wicked man; Those Godly men are most subject
to hatred, who by their Office and Calling set themselves most against vice;
Therefore godly Magistrates and godly Ministers are more exposed to hatred then
private Christians, for they are not called to control sin, and stop the
current of it as public Officers are; Therefore let all such as intend to be
godly in discharge of their trust, not matter the hatred of wicked men, Lay
that down for a foundation, for as the shadow will accompany the Sun, so will
malice and backbiting the godly actions of holy men, yet some are more hated
then others: Obadiah could live in Ahabs Court for all Jezabels malice, when
Elisha's Life was greedily sought for

Therefore 3. In the hatred of the world God has a special regard to his
Children, he lays no more on them then they can bear; The strong Christian
God calls to more dangerous combats; All had not such oppositions as Paul
had, Some are like Vriah, put in the forefront of the battle; The devil shall
cast some of you into prison, Rev. 2.10. It Is but some of them; Thus James was
beheaded, and Peter was imprisoned, when the other Apostles were not touched;
God does wisely order the affairs of this world, even wicked men's tongues and
hands are bound up, and they are let loose as God pleases.

4. Even amongst wicked men there is much difference, Some are far more
bitter and cruel then others, Some have more Conviction, Some have better
Natures, Some are of a more noble disposition, for although that Seed of Enmity
be in all wicked men, yet in some it is more stifled or diverted then in others,
when Herodias sought the death of John Baptist, Herod for a long time preserved
him; Thus as all weeds have not the like noxiousnesse, so neither is every
wicked man like to another; Every one is not a Cain, an Absalom, a Nero, or a
bloody Bonner.

But then Lastly, Take heed that if thou have not so much hatred of the world
as other godly men have, that it be not for want of godliness, because thou
art not so zealous against sin, Thou art more complying with or conniving at
the wickedness of others; This is to buy the worlds good word at a dear rate,
Thou had better all the world speak against thee then to have God and thy
conscience accuse thee for not doing thy duty.

Use of Exhortation to the godly, Be not discouraged or weakened in thy duty
for the malice of the world, Let them rage and rave, but do thou continue in
thy service to God; This fear of men and their malicious outrage, has made
many a man wound his conscience, and grievously dishonor God; Oh but consider,
Am I afraid of a man's tongue that is mortal? and shall I not much more tremble
at Gods condemnation? Can a man damn thee? how many have had sad trouble at
their Death? They did not their duty for fear of displeasing men.

SERMON LXXXIII. The Application of the foregoing Observation, both to the
Godly and the Wicked, tending to Encourage and Rejoice the one under all their
Sufferings, and Deter and Reclaim the other from all their Oppositions.
JOHN 17.14. And the World has hated them, because they are not of the World.
THe Worlds hatred (you have heard) to be the godly man's Portion, The one are
Sheep, the other Wolves. I now proceed to show, What is the Duty of Christ's
Disciples under the worlds hatred? For it is no mean skill to take the poison
from these enemies, and to make wholesome medicines of it, as Physicians do about
Vipers; yea, it is one of the great miracles that Christ has enabled all
believers to perform. For we read, when an Heathen suprized a Christian, and
beat him with much cruelty, and with great scorn asking him, What great wonder
his Master Christ ever did? The believer replies, even this great miracle, That
though you use me thus cruelly, I can heartily forgive you. What then was
spoken to the Disciples in an external, temporal manner, may be verified in a
spiritual sense, That they shall tread upon Serpents, and if they drink any
deadly thing, it shall not hurt them.

The duty of Christ's Disciples under the worlds hatred.
Let this make thee examine thy self, Whether there be not some sin thou art
guilty of, that hereby God would humble thee for? The Hebrews call an enemy an
observer, because his malice puts him upon a diligent observing of all thy
ways, and therefore if there be any wickedness, any failing, to be sure, he
will reminde thee of it, which made the Heathen say, That he who would be good
needs either a faithful friend, or a better enemy. It may be then, those
sins, those failings, that no friends, no Sermons meet with, thy enemy may
inform thee of: So that thou may say, thy enemy has been the best friend in
the world, yea his railing words have done thee more good then many Sermons;
Not that they intend good, no more then the horse-leech, but to satisfy their
own lusts, only thou by heavenly wisdom do turn their evil into good, but if
so be that upon examination thou find thy self free; Yet

Consider, whether it be not for some other sins, that such men are made
adversaries against thee: For you must know, God has a wise ordering of all
men's hearts and tongues, even in reference to thee; and as David when Shimei
railed on him, said, 2 Samuel 16. The Lord has bid him, So whatsoever wicked men
do concerning thee, thou must say, The Lord has bid him. Now though David was
not guilty of those sins Shimei reviled him with; neither did the Lord bring
him in distress for his quarrel with Saul, as Shimei thought, yet David had
other sins, and other transgressions, for which he might be afflicted, and so
looked upon Shimei as a scourge to humble him for them. Therefore say, Though
the things laid to my charge be false, yet there are other failings, other
infirmities that the world knows not of, which God strikes at by this man's
tongue, or rather the devil in that man.

Thirdly, Do wicked men hate thee? Take our Saviors rule, so contrary to flesh
and blood, Mat. 5.44. Love them that hate you, pray for them that persecute
you; and in other places, Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good,
Romans 12.21. This is that peculiar lesson, which the Christian Religion only
teaches. Neither Aristotle or Tully thought it a duty, but rather a simplicity
not to be avenged upon enemies. But the Scripture is much in pressing this
duty, and that as a special sign of grace, wherein we shall as children of God
represent our heavenly Father, who makes the Sun to shine upon the ungodly as
well as the godly. All the wicked men of the world, they hate God as well as
thee; and it is in his power to destroy them all, immediately in a moment to
send them to hell; yet with what patience and loving kindness does he bear such
adversaries, he gives them food, raiment, and manifold preservations; so Christ
even when we were enemies died for us, which the Scripture makes a forcible
argument for us to forgive others, This is a kind of perfection to do so, Mat.
5. ult. Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect; He calls this patience
and forgiving disposition a perfection; If then they rail, do thou bless; if
they curse, do thou pray, this is to pour living coals upon their head, as Romans
12.10. which some understand in a good sense, it will melt the man, as Saul was
under David's kindness, and as you see fire will at last melt iron, though never
so tough; or others in an ill sense, as if when thou have done thy duty, God
will severely punish them; This is the way to bring fire about their ears. Take
heed therefore of private revengefull thoughts, these are unbeseeming a
Christian, God makes this his Property, Vengeance is mine, Deuteronomy. 32.2. Although
the Heathen could say, Revenge was sweeter then honey; and so it is to a
natural man, but it is far sweeter then honey to a gracious heart to be able
to conquer his revengefull disposition; private revenge is unlawful, yet a
seeking to the Magistrate for to punish offenders, or to obtain right, is a
duty, only take heed of revengefull thoughts in the pursuing of it.

Fourthly, Does the world hate thee for Christ's sake? Why the godly should
rejoice when they are hated for Christ's sake.
Then rejoice and be exceeding glad, Mat. 5, 12. And that for several Reasons,

1. As it follows in that Text, Great is your reward in Heaven. The more
vilified and debased here, the more glorified and honored in Heaven: So that
wicked men, while they think to do thee a mischief, they are isntrumental to
thy great glory. They make thee more happy, and more glorious; It Is as if a man
should be angry with another, and in stead of stones he throw precious pearls
and diamonds at him, which the man takes up and enriches himself with; or as if
a man threw bread at a dog, in stead of being hurt by it, he is glad of it, and
takes it up, and eats it. Thus it is with wicked men, their reproaches, their
slanders and oppositions make thee more refined and blessed; all these will be
like so many crowns of glory set upon thy head: As the waters did not drown the
Ark, but lifted it up nearer to Heaven.

2. Rejoice, because hereby God honors and puts a glory upon thee, that thou
should be one who shall be reproached and vilified for him. Admire the
goodness of God herein, and say with David, I will be more vile still. Thus
the Apostles went away rejoicing, they were accounted worthy to suffer for
Christ's Name, Act. 5.41. Phil. 1.29. It Is said to be Gods gift to suffer for
him; To you it is given. It Is a privilege and an honor to lose any thing for
Christ's sake; as Nazianzen said, He was glad he had something to loose for
Christ's sake: And so zealous were the primitive Christians of the glory of
Martyrdom, that many were so dejected because God called them not to it, that
they needed consolatory letters to satisfy them. Though the world look upon
them as disgraced and miserable, yet God honors thee, and this thou art to
judge of, as the greatest mercy and dignity that ever befell thee.

3. Rejoice, because God and Christ will hereby be indeared unto thee, and give
thee larger supplies and provisions of comfort. Nihil crus sentit in ligno,
quando animus est in Coelo, I will be with thee in the fire and water, says
God. Was not Peter singing of Psalms in the prison: Oh then know this is the
time of Gods peculiar love, of his more merciful approaches to thee, thy
winter will be thy summer, thy outward troubles will be accompanied with the
most inward joys. This is Gods way, when the world most slanders and accuses,
to give the believer strongest evidences of his Justification within. The godly
were most enlarged in soul, when they were shut into straightest prison, and
they had most of a bright glorious Heaven, when they were plunged into a dark
dungeon, thy incomes will be rich, when thy expenses shall be great, the more
men frown, the more will God smile on thee.

4. Rejoice, because hereby is a conformity to Christ, and to all the holy men
that have gone before thee. So in Mat. 5.12. Rejoice, because so persecuted
they the Prophets of old? and Romans 8. it is made the effect of our
Predestination, to b^ conformable unto Christ in these afflictions, they are an
effect of Predestination. These troubles and reproaches God from all eternity
appointed thee unto, as by which he would glorify thee. They came from that
spring of the great love of God, which he had toward thee before thou had any
being; so that hereby thou art made like to Christ, a glorious Disciple does
not beseem a crucified Savior; neither rich and adorned members become an head
crowned with thorns; How many have gloried in being like some great and famous
men in the world? How much rather is this an honor to be reproached as Christ
was, to be slandered as Christ was, the Disciple must not expect to be above
his Master.

5. Rejoice, as having an opportunity of the exercise and increase of grace.
The horse neigheth at the battle and warlike sounds, as being glad of the
occasion. A valiant man delights in the occasions of his activity. The Pilot
shows his skill in times of danger and tempests. Know therefore that when the
world hates thee, God then calls thee out to a spiritual combat, thou art then
become a spectacle to God, he beholds what excellent graces thou will show
forth, what faith, what patience, what fortitude, what heavenly-mindednesse.
Now if ever there is a time to show thy spiritual might and courage, yea here
is not only an occasion to put forth thy graces, but an opportunity to discover
thy unfeigned love to God and Christ, to own Christ, when all the people would
make him a King is no trial, but to stand to him, when they cried away with
him, Crucify him; this is a good evidence, God will then say, Now I know thou
love me, when these many waters the world throws on, are not able to quench
it, though father hate, though friends hate, though all hate, yet this does not
discourage thee in thy love of God; What a comfortable evidence is this of thy
true grace: Nay, in some sense thou do exceed the Angels in doing Gods will,
for though they be zealous and active in obedience to God, yet they meet not
with oppositions in their service. They are not subject unto the reproaches and
contempts of wicked men of the world, and therefore in this thou art more then
an Angel.

Lastly, Rejoice, because God might have left thee to be such a malicious enemy
to godliness, as thou see they are. Every time thou hear, what slanders,
what malicious words the wicked of the world vent against thee: O bless God,
and say, I might have been left to such a spirit, I was such a devil my self
once, I opened my mouth against such as fear God, as well as he! Oh blessed be
God that has changed my blackmore-skin, that has given me another heart! when
Paul met with wretched adversaries, that blasphemed him and the Gospel, he
preached: No doubt but he reflected upon himself, I was such a mad blasphemer
once, I persecuted the godly once, I delighted in cruel vexings of them
heretofore; And now how great is Gods goodness to me, that he has had mercy
on me; If thou blessest God that he made thee not a Serpent, a Toad, or that
thou were not a natural fool, or a mad man, How much rather, that he has not
given thee up to such a vile malicious disposition?

The next thing is to give Cautions and Arguments of admonition to the wicked,
who thus hate Christ and his Disciples. Cautions to the wicked.
And

Let them know it is a causless hatred, yea it is an hatred where the greatest
love and delight should be. And that upon two grounds, For

1. They are such who would bring them to everlasting salvation, if they were
not prejudiced, their exemplary life, is it not a light shining before you,
that beholding their godly, holy and pure conversation, you may be thereby wone
to glorify God? The counsels, admonitions and spiritual help they would
vouchsafe to thee, should make thee prize them more then all outward comforts:
Do ye love such as can make you rich, prefer you to places of honor, supply
your necessities? Oh how welcome should such be to you, that would give you
many an helping lift to Heaven! Why then is thy hatred so causless? Is it
because they desire thy salvation? Is it because they pray for thee, they mourn
in secret, for so David professed, Rivers of waters ran down his eyes,
because men kept not Gods Law? Were thou not a stone and adamant these things
would turn thy heart toward him?

2. They are such for whose sake thou enjoyest many blessings: It Is because of
them the ship thou art in, is not drowned; God keeps up the world, in
reference to them, therefore the hedges are kept, because of the Corn in the
ground; The innocent deliver the Island; for Lot's sake Sodom was spared a long
season. These stand in the gap, when Gods overflowing tempest would carry all
before it.

Consider that thou do not hurt them yea thou increasest that which makes
them so hateful to thee. For by this means they walk more closely with God,
they separate themselves from the world. It Is a mercy to them, they have this
hatred, otherwise they might comply too much, and ensnare their souls, and
symbolize with men's wickedness: Now how absurd is thy hatred, by that thou
make them more holy, and so advancest that which is so abominable to thee?
Thou art to them as a fyle to the rusty iron; thou art to them as Lazarus dogs
tongues were to lick his sores whole; thou art Gods scullion to wipe and keep
his vessel clean, who would not think thou should rather do, as that
persecutour, that would not let him die, saying, he envied him the honor of a
Martyr? Thy very hatred should make thee leave hating and opposing, because
hereby thou make the godly man more glorious and happy.

Consider hereby thou hurtest thy self, and not them; As the dog that bites the
stone for rage, or a man that shoots an arrow at a brazen wall, and that
recoileth back, and kills the Archer; thy hatred, thy cursings will fall back
upon thy head; It Is not the godly man only, but thy self and thy own soul thou
hate; See whether those many curses and miseries thou have, be not the fruit
of thy hatred, thou art a tormentor and troubler to thy self; Though Achan
troubled Israel, yet he troubled himself and his own house also.

Remember that it is a devilish thing, thou art more wicked then a man uses to
be; Not to obey or yield thy self up to godliness is a grievous sin, but to
oppose is a devilish thing; Thou do the work of the devil if he were
incarnate, he would speak and do as thou do.

5. Remember the woeful and heavy judgments which remarkably follow such men,
Who ever hardened himself against the Lord, and prospered? This Christ meant
when he said, he that stumbled at this stone should fall, but upon whom this
stone shall fall, he should be beaten in pieces; Christ will fall on such that
oppose him, and they shall not have the least mercy.

Use.
Use, Does the world hate Gods people, then admire the goodness and power of
God, that keeps up a poor Church in the midst of such violence, that preserves
a few Lambs among so many Wolves, Bears and Lions in such a Wilderness as they
are in; We justly admire Gods power in putting bounds to the sea, that it
overfloweth not the Land, much more admirable was that goodness of God in
preserving the Israelites when the waters were on every side; Oh how much more
is God to be praised that keeps his people with any safety, any liberty, Should
wicked men have their will, food, and raiment and life would be thought too
good for thee.

SERMON LXXXIV. Of Conformity to Christ in not being of the world, And in his
Sufferings.
JOH. 17.14. Because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
THE Last particular considerable in this Verse, is the exemplarity of Christ
or the Disciples conformity unto Christ, They are not of the world as I am not
of the world; Which words are repeated in the 16. verse, and therefore have
some weighty and great matter contained in them.

In the words we are to take notice,

1. What it is to be of the world.

2. How Christ was not.

3.The similitude between Christ and his Disciples herein. To be of the world,
is to partake of the manners, life, and conversation of the world, to have the
spirit of the world in a man, What it is to be of the world.
and this is oppsite to the Spirit of God, and to all heavenly things, so that
both the inward inclination, and outward conversation is wholly worldly, as our
Savior says, he that is of the earth, is earthy; That as bodies in whom the
element of the Earth is predominant, do naturally fall downward, so that soul
which is thus principled and habituated in a worldly manner, does mind only
earthly things; this is to be of the world. To be in the world is another
thing: Our Savior and the Disciples were in the world, but not of it: A man
may be in the water for some good end, but the fish are properly of the water
because that is their Element, and they have a watery Constitution.

2. Christ is said Not to be of the world, How Christ is said not to be of the
world.
Now that is a higher degree then the Disciples can be, for Christ as God is no
ways of the world, and then take him as man, yet being conceived by the holy
Ghost he was not of the world in a natural way, 1 Cor. 15.47. The Second Adam
is the Lord from Heaven, opposed to the first Adam, who is said to be of the
Earth earthly.

And then 3. If it be taken for the wickedness of it, Then Christ was never so
of the world, Therefore here is a difference between Christ and his Disciples,
for though they were not now of the world, yet once they were plunged in sin,
and corrupted through pollutions as others were, but Christ never was of the
world in this sense,

Therefore in the last place, the particle of similitude (...) is not of
equality, as if the Disciples were in every respect not of the world as Christ
was, but in some resemblance only.

The words thus explained two Doctrines arise,

The not being of the world is that which makes wicked men hate the Godly; If
there were sutablensse of Naturee and Manners, then like would agree with like;
Hence 1 John 3.12. when the Apostle instanced in Cains murder of his Brother,
because his own works were evil, he says, v. ^3. Marvel not if the world hate
you, Never wonder at that, but rather if it should not hate you; Our Savior
speaks notably of this to his Brethren, Joh. 7.5, 7. For they did not believe
in him though so greatly acquainted with him, and saw his Miracles; The world
cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of it, that the works
thereof are evil, It cannot hate you; No wicked man can hate another, viz. in
respect of fundamental principles, as a Godly man is hated; It Is true, wicked
men may be at deadly fewd one with another, but it is not from contrary
principles of nature, but from matter of profit and injuries or wrongs done: As
the Dog does not hate another, yet for bones and other matters they will be
ready to kill one another: Though therefore Herod and Pilate cannot endure one
another, yet that opposition was upon carnal Interests, it was not like that
hatred which was to Christ: Therefore when such Earthly Interests are removed,
they can heartily embrace one another, but the wicked man can never love the
Godly till his Nature he changed, till he become godly also, as the wolf can
never love a sheep, unless he be made a sheep.

To open this Let us Consider What it is not to be of the world. What it is not
to be of the world.


It consists in Doctrine to be believed, Such are not of the world who receive
those hevenly Truths that the world cannot reach unto, yea, that it scorneth
and derideth: When Peter made that Solemn Confession; That Christ was the Son
of the Living God, It was told him. Flesh and blood had not revealed this to
him, Mat. 16.16. There is a worldly Religion, worldly Doctrines, such as are
suitable to the principles and Interests of the world, and these are readily
embraced; The world loves such Preachers, and such Doctrines, 1 John 4. 4. The
Apostle John speaking of the Antichristian Spirit that was coming into the
world, says of such Teachers, They are of the world, therefore the world
hears them, but we are of God, and he that is not of God hears us not;
Therefore there is a remarkable opposition, 1 Cor. 2 12. between the Spirit of
the world and the Spirit of God, For by this only we come to know the things
that God has given us. Then therefore are we not of the world when God shall
so enlighten our minds by Faith, That we do assuredly believe those Truths God
has revealed in his Word, that neither our corrupt Reasons, nor our Education
to the contrary, nor the Opinions of the most men and great men in the world
shall make us go contrary, and certainly the Lives of men are so worldly,
because their Understanding is so, We receive our Religion not as it is revealed
of God, but as we can any ways turn it to our corrupt ends.

Not to be of the world is to be Regenerated and born again; To have another
Nature then what we come with into the world, another not substantially but
qualitatively, whereby we are said 1 Pet. 1.4. to be partakers of the divine
Nature, So that though at first made of the dust, yet now we fly up to Heaven,
as the vapors though arising out of the Earth, yet ascend up to Heaven, and
follow the motions thereof, Joh. 3. and 2 Cor. 5.17. A man must be born again,
or from above, and he is made a new Creature, Old things are past away; This is
to be above the world, not of the world, and indeed seeing the Soul is not
naturally of the world, being created by God, why should thou voluntarily
debase it, and make it a Servant to every worldly Object, to love the world, To
delight in the world, To be ensnared by the world; Oh pray for this Divine
Nature, beg for Regeneration, for till this be done thou art all over earthly,
a worm is as good as thou art, Thy Love, thy heart, thy thoughts, thy all is
nothing but earth.

Not to be of the world is to have an Heavenly Conversation; To live as one
whose heart is with Christ already in Heaven; It Is not enough to be once
regenerated, but the progress of our Lives is to be spent on Heavenly motives
and Considerations; As the Fowls of the Heaven, though they light upon the
Ground to eat their meat, yet immediately fly up again; Thus it is with the
godly, though they take the lawful comforts of this world, yet their hearts are
presently off ascending to God; Thus the Apostle Our Conversation is in Heaven,
Phil. 3, 20. And because we are risen with Christ, we set our affections upon
things above, Col. 3.1, 2. See our Lord Christ, he was not of the world, Did he
not manifest it by his conversation, when he made it his meat and drink to do
his Fathers Will, when he was always either praying to God or preaching to the
people; Oh then do thou endeavor after this life. Though thou art in thy
Family, in thy Trade, in thy Calling, yet be not of the world, because the
choicest part of thy self is from God, Thou can say, what are all these to
the favor of God? They are good to use but not to enjoy; They are good sauce
but not good meat, a good Inn but not a good home.

Not to be of the world is to partake of other joys, other comforts then the
world knows of, and so to be exercised with other Temptations then the world
understands, with other joys; Therefore it is said, It has not entered into the
heart of man to conceive of this, 1 Cor. 2.9. It Is called Joy unspeakable in
the holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 1.8. David acknowledged, God had put more joy in his
heart then worldly men could have in all their abundance, Psa. 4. Alas, what is
thy carnal mirth and delight to that admirable and unspeakable joy which the
godly find in God; This is a joy that will hold in tribulations and death it
self, when in such a Drought the wicked man's stream is quite dried up, his
temptations also are such as the world accounts madness; To be in spiritual
desertions, to have no sense of Gods favor, to fear himself a damned Castaway,
to have no rest in his bones day or night, To be assaulted with the devils
buffetings, to be filled with hideous thoughts, These things the world also
knows not, and therefore they count them melancholy and mad, Such as by their
too much poring about Sermons and good Books put themselves out of their wits.

Lastly, They are not of the world in respect of their Conversation, Romans 12.
they are not conformed to the fashion of the world, The one goes Westward, the
other Eastward as it were, Their words and language are different, their
actions are contrary, What the Righteous man loves, the wicked abominateth,
and what the wicked loves the godly man abhors; Thus as they say of the
heavens, the primum mobile has one motion of its own, and the inferior Orbs
a contrary motion to that; Thus the godly man he moves one way toward heaven,
he presses hard thither, The wicked man he makes as much haste to hell, So as
there were two struggling in the Mothers womb, which increased her pain: Thus
there are two striving upon the face of the world, an Isaac and an Ismael, a
Jacob and an Esau, the Seed of the Woman and the Seed of the Serpent: This
enmity will not be extinct in this life.

Use of Exhortation to the godly, Remember what ye are, Not of the world,
Therefore take heed of worldly affections, worldly hearts, For where your
treasure is there will your heart be also; If it be in God, in Heaven, there
the heart will be, If in Earth and in earthly things, there it will be; You
tremble at the commission of gross and grievous sins, you think hell it self
would immediately devour you upon such sins: Be afraid of the world, Let it not
be a Dalilah to thee, a Judas to thee, by kissing thee to destroy thee,
Consider therefore God has put gall into all worldly comforts, therefore every
creature, every condition in the world has a sting in it, that thy soul should
be more on God; Thou can never live quietly till above the werld, In heaven
only there are no storms, no waves, no disquietings, and this life thou may
attain unto; He that is not of the world. The troubles of the world hurt not
him, the losses of the world grieve not him, The vexations of the world
disquiet not him; But because we are still of the world in part, we are not
completely and perfectly out of disquietnesse, Therefore in this life we remain
in a combating, conflicting way that heaven may be the sweeter.

That it is the honor of Believers that they are like Christ, They are not of
the world as he is not; What a glorious condescension was this, that he who is
the God of all the Earth, and has all things at his command, yet be in the
world hated, scorned, and at last crucified, That it shall be no better with
him then it was with us; Hence our Savior added this, as I am of the world,
both for consolation and information, Information, that they should look for
such hatred, misery, and trouble as they saw him grapling with, such a
contradiction of sinners as he sustained, and then also for consolation, They
could not think much if the Disciple were not above the Master, so could they
expect to be more loved of God then he? Could they think to walk more wisely
and holily then he did? It must needs bring much comfort, when we shall
Consider that it can never be so bad with us but it was worse with Christ; Are
we hated? so he; Did he seem forsaken of God? So may we be.

To open this Consider That there is a twofold conformity and likeness to
Christ. There is a twofold conformity to Christ.


The first is active, the second passive.

An active conformity consists in the Imitation of Christ and resembling him in
our lives; That as Christ lived, so we endeavor to do; 1. Active.
Although there be some things wherein it is impossible for us to imitate him,
as in his actions, which he did as God, yet in those things which he did as
being under the Law, we are to conform to him. We are to be humbles, meek, and
patient as he was; We are to do Gods Will and to seek Gods glory as he did; Let
the same mind be in you (says the Apostle) which was in Christ, Phil. 2.5.
Christ's life and death was chiefly satisfactory and meritorious, but
secondarily it was exemplary, being as a Copy to write after; Thus Paul bids
them be Followers of him as he was of Christ, Phil 3.17. Heathens have
prescribed to have some grave, sober man in our minds always, to think him
present, but behold a greater then all men, even Christ himself; Check thy self
when impatient, discontented, repining at sufferings, saying, Did Christ do
thus?

2. There is a passive Conformity of which the Text speaks; To be like him in
his Sufferings, To have the same hard measure in the world as he had, Rom 8. 2.
Fassive.
We are said to be predestinate, to be conformable unto Christ in this very
particular; What befell Christ God has so ordered that it should befall us, Not
indeed for the same end, for Christ's Sufferings were not for himself, or
because he had sinned, but to make an atonement to God for us; But our
sufferings are for our sins not to satisfy Gods justice, but to humble us, and
to make us in some measure to feel how much Christ suffered for us, what the
wrath and anger of God was he endured for us; This passive resemblance then
unto Christ in his state of humiliation God has ordained all believers unto;
That as it behoved Christ to suffer, and so to enter into Glory, Thus it does
behove every godly man through many Tribulations to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; As he had a Crown of Thorns before a Crown of Glory, as he must drink
of the Brook, and then lift up his head, so it must be with all his Disciples,
and this is matter of Comfort though otherwise grievous to flesh and blood.

The comfort of being like Christ in suffering,
Hereby we see that we may be never the less loved of God, though greatly
afflicted in this world: For was not Christ (though dearly beloved of his
Father) yet delivered up to the cruel mockings and rage of men? Did not he cry
out, My God, why have thou forsaken me? We may read but of one Son of God
without sin, but not of one without chastisement, even Christ himself drank
deep of that Cup; Do not thou then doubt of thy Sonship or Interest in the
Fathers love because of the present afflictions that are upon thee; Christ was
a man of sorrows, and yet God from Heaven said, This is my well beloved Son in
whom I am well-pleased.

because hereby we are ascertained of our Conquest over them, That no
tribulation shall separate God and us, for Christ has undergone these
conflicts as our head, he has taken the sting out of all; They are not
judgments, they are not to destroy, the nature of them is wholly altered
through Christ, for as Christ would be baptized to sanctify that Ordinance for
us, so he would be afflicted and troubled to sanctify them to us; Thus we may
argue, if no troubles or afflictions could overcome him, neither can they us.

because hereby Christ is fitted to help us and pity us; He himself knows
what the worlds reproaches are, and therefore will the more compassionate us;
This the Apostle urges, Heb. 5. We have a High Priest that is tempted like us
in all things, sin only excepted.

Use of Instruction, What cause the people of God have to triumph in all their
hard usages from the world, Say not, were ever any thus contemned, and abused
as I am, yea, a better then thou, even Christ the only Son of God? Do thou
rather look on it as an honor to be made like unto him, he blessed when he was
reviled; Be like Christ in his graces, as thou art in his tribulations, thus
shall thou be hereafter like him in glory.

SERMON LXXXV. Shows, Why God continues his Children in this world of Sin
and Sorrow, and does not take them immediately to Heaven? And also, How far
it is lawful for a man to pray for, or desire, to be taken out of this world?
JOHN 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that
thou should keep them from the evil.
IN the former verses our Savior having prayed for the preservation of his
Disciples, he does in this verse in a particular manner express the Manner of
that preservation, he prays for; Not that God the Father needed any such
instruction, but this is spoken for the edification of his Disciples, and the
building them up, who happily did not yet understand how they were to be
preserved.

Now this preservation is set down two ways; 1. Negatively, then Positively.

1. Negatively, I pray not that thou should take them out of the world. 2.
Positively, but that thou would keep them from the evil.
In the negative part, we may consider the thing denied in his prayer, That God
should take them out of the world, for so God might take them, either by a
miraculous and sudden translation, as he did Henoch and Eliah, or by a violent
death through the hands of their persecutors, or in a natural ordinary course,
but says our Savior, I pray not for this, (...); The word is for the most
part used of an interrogation to question about any thing, but sometimes simply
for rogation, or a mere bare asking and petitioning, Observe. That though God
love his people, yet that does not necessarily infer, he must keep them from
all misery in this world, and place them immediately in happiness with himself.
as often by this Evangelist. From this Negative part we may observe,

First, That though God love his people, yet that does not necessarily infer
he must keep them from all misery in this world, and place them immediately in
happiness with himself. This is good to be taken notice of, for we are ready
to think, that if God love his children, he should presently do that for them,
which will be their chiefest happiness, especially this being in his power to
do it when he will; to suffer his children to be grapling and conflicting with
troubles in this world, when it is but his word speaking, and crowns of glory
may be set upon their heads, seems inconsistent with Gods love, as she argued
to Sampson, How can thou love me, and hide any thing from me? So says humane
reason, How can God love me, when yet he keeps Heaven and eternal glory from
me? But Gods love, and his childrens calamities in this world may well agree
together. You see our Savior when he intended the greatest good for his
Disciples in his Petition, yet corrects and moderateth his prayer, not as if he
would have them mediately translated to glory, he is content they should be
awhile in the fire, to have their dross purged away; God could do many things
for his people, which yet he will not, he could immediately upon their
conversion crown them with eternal glory; or else give them perfect and
thoroughly sanctified hearts, that they should not complain and groan under any
distemper of soul, he could make the world to be a Paradise to them, so that
the way to Heaven should be no longer straight, and narrow, but broad and
easy. Thus God could do, but it pleases his wisdom to take another course,
and to appoint a Wilderness to go through, ere we can enter in Canaan.

Quest. Why God does not presently take his beloved ones to himself out of this
world of sin and sorrow
Now let us consider, Why Gods love does not immediately take the godly out of
this world; for seeing God loves them, and they love God, we should think,
that love would not rest, till it had the nearest conjunction that could be.

In this matter, we may give several Reasons:

First, Because there is a necessity of the presence of godly men in the world,
that they may promote the Kingdom of God, and bring others to the knowledge of
God. This is especially true of the Apostles, Answ.
as Apostles, and so of all those that have any Office and Ministry in the
Church of God. These are as necessary as the Sun to the world, as the Stars
in a dark night, as salt to season and preserve from putrefaction, and even all
believers in a private way are to use their gifts for the reducing of others;
and by their examples to give such a glorious light, that others may glorify
God in the day of their visitation, but this does principally relate to them,
as Apostles, had they been immediately carried up to Heaven, where would have
been the leaven put into the three pecks of meal? Where the mustard seed sown,
that would grow up into a great Tree? If the Apostles were the Planters and
Founders of the Church, it was necessary that they should continue for some
time in the world; The world was a wilderness, that could not immediately be
made a garden; It was the Devils habitation, he could not suddenly be
dispossessed: So that God having service for his people to do, no wonder if they
must continue in this valley of misery. Paul speaks fully to this Phil. 1.14.
To abide in the flesh is necessary for you, but for him it was better to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ; and between these two, he was in a great
straight: So certainly, it were better for the people of God, especially for
the Ministers of the Gospel, who are like Vriah in the forefront of the
battle, and exposed to more hatred, to be with Christ in Heaven, there they
shall be free from all this virulence, and oppositions of the ungodly, but yet
if we regard the world, and the people with whom they live, then their life and
presence is very necessary. This then is the first reason Gods people have work
to do, a course to finish, and so they must not look to have wages before they
have labored in the Vineyard.

God will not presently take them out of this troublesome world, that hereby
they may be exercised, and made stronger in their graces. As God would not
immediately put the Israelites into Canaan, but did lead them into many
dangers, and assaulted them with many enemies, that so their valor in
themselves, and their dependence upon God might be more discovered; God will
not train up his children idly; no sooner does he make them his, but he lets
the world and the devil loose upon them; and why is all this? but to draw out
their graces, to teach them all spiritual military Discipline, as Ephesians. 6.
they are to fight as the good soldiers of Christ, and to put on the whole
Armor of God, because they wrestle not with flesh and blood only, but
principalities and powers. The world then is a field wherein spiritual battles
are to be fought. The Lord he is the Spectator, and beholder of them. Thus it
is also compared to running a race, where there is no time to be idle or sit
still, but to have thoughts, and the whole heart upon the Crown they strive
for: Expect then exercises, and occasions to draw out faith, zeal and heavenly
fortitude.

God will not take us presently out of the world, but leave us here com^ating
with the relics of corruption, that so being humbled therein, we may the more
esteem Christ and his righteousness. When we read Romans 7. of a Paul
captivated by his lusts, and miserably crying out, What shall he do? See how
powerfully this drives him to Christ, I thank God through Jesus Christ. It Is
true, in Heaven we shall give all glory and honor to Christ as that Mediator,
who has brought us thither: So that Christ shall never be forgotten, no not to
all eternity by the godly, yet in Heaven that particular manner of
Justification we have here on earth shall cease; for now Rom 4. Justification
is of the believer, but a sinner, and one that is not able to stand upon his
own terms before God. Therefore Christ is his righteousness, and he desires
with Paul to be found in him (Phil. 3.) not having his own righteousness; so
then Gospel-righteousness, and our evangelical Justification differs from that
in Heaven, which will be for inherent righteousness, but it has pleased God
in this life to exalt imputed righteousness, and to place the cause of all
hope and joy without us: Therefore that we might for a season be sensible of
our unworthiness, and be groaning under our corruptions, thereby to be longing
after Christ, to magnify his love, and all that he has done for us, it is
necessary we should be kept in this conflict here below, for we are much
affected by sense and experience; when therefore every thing within us cries
out for a Christ, and the grace of God through him, when we feel our selves
sinking, and even dropping into hell; This will make us importune for the
favor of God, as Christ was experimentally tempted, that he might know how to
have compassion on us, so God will have us experimentally find the bitterness
and weight of sin, that so we may the more love Christ, who did bear Gods wrath
for us.

God will not take his people immediately out of the world, that so his
goodness, mercy and providence, his wisdom and faithfulness may be the more
discovered to us. In Heaven there the Church is at rest, it is out of all
danger, there are no waves, no rocks: So that the Wisdom and Providence of God
in keeping his Church there, is not at all discovered; When the waters were
dried up, there was no necessity of an Ark for Noah. The Lord therefore will
have us in these dangers and temptations, that so his care and love may be the
more manifested; yea the greater the dangers are, the more is his faithfulness
discovered, In the Mount God will be seen. Is it not an admirable thing to
consider how God has preserved a Church, a people faithfully to serve him,
when hell and the world has conspired to destroy them? But God by this means
has been made known to the world. The Artificers skill is seen about his
metal, when it is in the fire. The Pilates art is manifested, when his Ship is
on rocks and waves, and under many tempests. Though the world be a place of our
dangers and temptations, yet it is the glass to represent the glorious
Attributes of God, and the effects thereof to his children, where God is known
not only by Adonai, but by Jehovah, even by every name.

God will have his people to be in this world, that so Heaven may be the more
welcome, that they may desire that eternal glory the more earnestly. The
laboring man that has wrought hard, is glad at night of his resting time. The
Scripture calls Heaven a rest, Heb. 4. There remains a Rest for the people of
God. Oh how welcome will it be after all the troubles, calam^ties and miseries
thou have been tossed with, at last to have Rest! Here in this life, thou have
no Rest, sin troubles thee, the world troubles thee, thy own heart troubles
thee, but there remains a Rest: And how happy must that be to thee? We are
Pilgrims, and it is their blessedness to get home at last. God therefore will
have thee lie under all kind of conflicts, spiritual and temporal; he will
create one exercise after another, that thou may say, We have no abiding
place here. Should all things be according to our carnal desires, we would with
the Reubenites take up on this side Canaan, because the ground was pleasant and
rich; Never did those endangered passengers in Paul's Ship desire more to get
to the haven out of all their dangers, then we are out of all these troubles
into Heaven.

God will not immediately take us into Heaven, because it is fit that we who
have served sin in this world, should serve God as much in this world. Thy
life has been a reproach and a dishonor to him. It Is fit it should bring
glory to his Name: Though it be thy loss to be kept from Heaven, though every
day be thy great hinderance, yet for Gods glory thou art to deny thy self.
Remember thou have given up thy self to serve sin, Remember how much service
the devil has had from thee; so that if thou love Gods glory more then thy
own, thou art to be willing to spend thy self for him, as thou have done
against him.

God does not remove His immediately out of the world, because of the
dependencies and relations that They have. Children need their godly Father,
the wife her godly husband: So that although it be better for them to be in
Heaven, yet not for theirs. Indeed when they have finished their course, then
they are obedientially to resign, as our Savior said to his Disciples, If ye
loved me, you would be glad (Joh. 14.28) because I said, I go to my Father: So
we all ought to rejoice in that our friends are taken out of this world into
glory, but yet so far as their presence was comfortable and necessary to us,
we may grieve; God would not have the old bird killed with her young ones, and
he that would have mercy showed to the fowls of the air, will much more show it
to his people. It is true, God in his wisdom many times takes his own children
betimes out of the world, even too soon for them (we would think) being in the
prime of their service, and too soon also for their children and dependents on
them, but therein God is even merciful, though for the present we do not
perceive it. For this you know, God has determined in mercy the time of our
abode in this world; Thou can not follow me now, said Christ to Peter, but he
should in his time, John 13 3^.

It Is not always best to have the best good immediately, but in it is time.
It Is true, to be with the Lord, to be freed from sin is best in it self
absolutely considered, but then respectively; if this and that be considered,
quoad hic and nunc, it is not best. God does every thing beautiful in his
season. None could be more loved of the Father, then Christ himself, he came
from the bosom of his Father, yet till he had finished his course, he is kept
from him; We say, even the best and holiest thoughts, or desires may come in
unseasonably into our hearts, and so not be best at that time. As the child's
duty is not to learn the best book at first, but what he is most capable of;
Though Heaven and glory be best, yet not at this time for thee partake of it.
So that when it is best to go out of this world, must be left to the wisdom of
God.

Quest. Whether it be lawful to pray for death
But you will ask, Is it never lawful to pray unto God, that he would take us
out of the world? May we not desire to die, and to be freed from sin? Are we
not to pray that Christ would come? To this I answer,

Answ.
First, It Is never lawful to desire to go out of the world from impatiency or
discontent, because we have troubles and vexations in this world. Thus Elijah
sinned, when he prayed to God to take away his life, for this was through the
discontent then upon him: So Job, when he breaks forth into those dreadful
imprecations about himself, expostulating with God, Why life was continued to
such, who sought for death more then for hid treasures. Look then to this, that
no impatient discontented thoughts make thee weary of this world.

Secondly, Earnest desires to be with God, and hearty affections for eternal
glory are lawful and a special duty. Thus we are to pray, Gods kingdom may
come; and thus the Saints are said to long for and hasten to the coming of
Christ, 2 Pet. 3.12. Thus if we speak abstractedly, take the thing in it self:
Our hearts ought to be so heavenly, that we are to be as pilgrims here, longing
for heaven our rest.

Thirdly, It Is never lawful, absolutely and peremptorily to desire of God,
that he would take us out of this world, though our hearts be heavenly, but
with submission and resignation. If Lord I have done my work, I have finished
my course, as we see Christ in this Chapter, I have done the work thou gave
me to do, therefore glorify me. Austin expresses this disposition well, when
he said, O Lord, if I be yet necessary to my people, I do not refuse to live
(not refuse) because in another place he says, Some godly men have need of
patience to live, as others to die. It must be always therefore conditionally.
If you object, Many Martyrs (for I mention not those Circumcelliones, that
would force men to kill them, hereby glorying in a contempt of death) who
willingly offered themselves to the persecutors, when none accused them. To
this some say, They were some Heretics that did so, not the true Christians.
But yet Histories record it of true Christians, and then that was an
extraordinary spirit in them, which as we cannot condemn, so neither must we
imitate, we must live by precepts not examples, no not of holy men.

Use. Do not thou break out into impatient discontents about any exercise or
temptation thou art afflicted with, say not, Why does not God remove it from
me, or me from it? Consider this in the Text, I pray not thou should take
them out of the world; What did Christ say, when Peter drew out his sword?
Could not I pray for legions of Angels, and the Father would send them to help
me, but the Scripture must be fulfilled? So do thou say, God could deliver me
from all these troubles, he has thousands of ways to put me into rest, but I
open not my mouth, because thou Lord do it. Indeed if they should never be
taken out of this world, if thy troubles were eternal, as the torments of the
damned in hell, thou may justly cry out in the horror of thy soul. But God
has put a period, he has set his time for thy being in this world, when thou
art ripe, thou shall be cut down, and carried into Gods barn. When thy service
is done, then God will call thee to glory.

SERMON LXXXVI. That it is a greater Mercy to be kept from Sin and all Evil
in our Afflictions and Troubles, then from the Afflictions themselves.
JOH. 17.15. But that thou should keep them out of the Evil.
THis is the positive part of Christ's Explication of himself in his Petition
for his Disciples, viz. to keep them from the evil, (...).

Sometimes this is applied to the thing or matter which is evil, as in the
Lords Prayer, Mat. 6.13. Deliver us from evil.

2. To Persons, Thus often in the Scripture, Mat. 12.45. So it shall be to that
wicked generation in that day. Sometimes it is applied to the devil as the
Original of all wickedness, who also tempts to it, So Matthew. 13.19 Then comes
the wicked one, 1 John 2.13. Ye have overcome the evil one. Now there are some
who limit this to the devil, keep them from the devil, because it is with the
article, (...) but that is not necessary, as appears, Matthew. 5.37. Whatsoever
is more then this comes, (...), So Mat. 5.49. Resist not evil, (...), that
cannot be the devil, for we are commanded to resist him, but we may take the
word generally both for sin and the devil, and sinful persons, That the sense
may be thus, Though I pray not that thou should keep them free from all evil
and afflictions, yet I pray that they may be preserved from sin thereby, that
whatsoever may befall them, yet they may not sin, and here we see also that
it is Gods gift to keep men in their afflictions that they sin not; Otherwise
they would undo themselves, and through many tribulations they would go not
into the Kingdom of Heaven, but of hell, from misery here to misery hereafter.

Obs. That it is a greater mercy to be kept from sin and all evil in our
Afflictions and Troubles, Observe.
then from the afflictions themselves; This is a special Truth, for whose
heart is not troubled about the Affliction more then the Sin? Whose heart is
not more upon the passive evil he suffers, then the active evil he does? Whose
soul is made so spiritual that no vexation, or pain and loss in body or Estate
does affect him so greatly, as the sinful distempers and troubles of his soul
does.

But to open this Consider,

1. That it is Gods special Gift and his power only that keeps his people from
sin in their afflictions: For did not God sanctify, Did not God teach as
well as chasten, the Evil of Sin and the Evil of Punishment would always go
together, the time of our trouble, and the time of our transgressions would
never be separated; When David could say, That out of very Faithfulness God
had afflicted him, that before he was afflicted he went astray, This was wholly
from the Grace of God, for how many in their distress are like Ahaz, that then
did worse then ever before, for certainly Afflictions to wicked men are like
the fire or pouncings to ill and unsavory Herbs, the more they are med^ed with
the more they stink: As the damned in hell, their Torments make them rage and
blaspheme against God, Thus it is with the wicked on the Earth, their present
troubles draw out their corruptions; They are more impatient, more
discontented, and never more evil then when they have the greatest cause to be
exceeding good; But to the Godly it is otherwise, that light which burns the
wicked enliveneth the Godly, as the fire in Nebuchadnezzars Furnace did lose
the bonds that the Worthies were bound in, and made them at Liberty, when it
consumed the ungodly; Thus Afflictions many times set the Godly at Liberty from
their sins, loose their hearts more from the world, but how comes this about,
it is the mere Gift of God, Did not God support, as Christ did Peter, in these
waves, we would presently be overwhelmed; Oh then reflect on thy self, Has
any trouble? Have any Afflictions made thee more humble and more upright? Has
Believing outed thee from the world and earthly things, know that it is God that
has kept thee from the evil.

The Scripture speaks of it as a special favor, when God will be with us in
our Afflictions, so that we shall not be left to Temptations; Therefore we are
constantly to pray, Mat. 6.13. that God would deliver us from Temptation; Now
although prosperity and outward mercies are a Temptation, yet the Scripture
does for the most part call Afflictions only Temptations, because we are so
hardly able to keep our Integrity and holiness in them, We can hardly overcome
flesh and blood, or conquer our selfish Inclinations so, as to lie humbly and
with deep Resignation into Gods hand: Oh then what great thoughts of heart
should there be that such a Condition, such a straight, such an Affliction be
not a Temptation to thee, that God do not leave thee in it; It Is a special
mercy to be kept from a Temptation but a greater in it; This is miraculous like
those that were in the fire, and yet not burnt. There is not a more comfortable
evidence of Gods love when thou shal^be bruised and broken with many
afflictions, and yet they are not able to stir up corruptions in thy heart;
Never forget to pray, That as Temptations and Afflictions shall come on thee,
so Gods suitable Grace and tender Preservation may accompany thee; Though Christ
prayed thus for the Apostles to be kept from the evil, yet Peter gradually
though not totally or finally was left by God in his Temptation, when he was
surprised with fear, how grievously does he deny Christ with bitter curses and
swearings? Here Peter was not quite from evil, though so far as Christ prayed
for him, he was preserved, viz. that his faith might not fail; Oh by this sad
instance we see if God withdraw his Arm from us how dreadful our Estate would
be; That thou have not blasphemed God and his Providence, and charged God
foolishly in thy streights, bless and praise God for it, and remember that
self confidence is the great sin to provoke God to leave thee to the evil of
temptations, as we see in Peter and Hezekiah; Take heed of going out of Gods
arms, of letting go his hand or provoking him any way.

Afflictions and Tribulations do not of themselves make us holy, but they work
according to the subject exercised with them; Indeed naturally to every man
unregenerate they draw out corruption and sin, and Physic to an incurable
disease, does but hasten Death, and fire to wood, and such like Combustibles,
does not refine but consume; The more a muddied Pool is stirred, the more
noisome it is, and thus it would work even in a godly man, did not grace live
within him as well as sin: Yet even to a godly man it is a very difficult
thing not to have the waves of his heart rise high when these winds and
tempests have blown upon them, and for this reason it is, that the more
troubles are upon us, the greater assistance and discoveries of grace we need,
and therefore there is more comfort in this prayer of Christ then the heart can
conceive; Here is a provision made for thee in that which thou do most want,
for if the least temptation, the least Evil fall on thee, if that fall upon thy
heart it will press thee to hell, should not God support and sanctify it, a
gnat will choke thee as well as a Camel, God only moves on these deeps, and
makes them fruitful.

In the next place Let us consider the Grounds and Reasons, why it is more
blessed to have preservation from sin the evil of an affliction, then from the
affliction.

Because an Affliction is but a particular temporal Evil, but Sin is an
infinite, universal Evil: Sickness depriveth of Health, Poverty of Wealth,
and thus every Straight does but oppose some temporal particular Good, that is
the Creatures Good; But Sin is an Universal Evil, it depriveth of God, and
it divesteth of all Glory and Happiness, so that as Anselme said, It ought to
be our Resolution, That if Hell were on one side, and Sin on the other, we
ought rather to choose Hell Torments then Sin, and the Reason is because
Sin is an Offense and a Dishonor against God; God is infinitely more then
the Creature, and his Glory and Honor is more worthy then all we are: It Is
better the whole World should be annihilated, and destroyed, and come to
nothing in all its Comforts then that the least glimpse of the Glory of God
should be Eclipsed: Oh then whosoever had rather sin then be afflicted, he
prefers himself above God, he prefers himself above Christ, and he sets
up his own particular Safety and Security above Gods Glory: Oh then that we
could be more afraid of Sin then we are of Troubles; This is but the
deprivation of some limited comfort or particular advantage, but sin
depriveth of God the Fountain of all comfort.

Job 36.21, Elihu though he erred in the Application, yet in the general
urges this as a Sign of one not rightly constituted toward God, when he bids
him Take heed, because he had chosen Iniquity rather then affliction; We see
the ordinary discovery of Hypocrites is to commit any sin that they may avoid
trouble; Thus Matthew. 15. The temporary Believer he withers when the Sun
arises to scorch: This has been the great Cause of the Apostasy of so many
Thousands when the Evil Day has come upon them, They have not been able to be
vilified and reproached and abhorred for Christ, and therefore are there so
many Exhortations to presevere, and to overcome, to hold out to the last, so
that thou can not discover the rottenness, and the guile and deceit of thy
Heart more then by being willing to commit any sin, to avoid thy immanent
Dangers, and therefore what (...) mercy is it when God shall so sanctify thy
heart that in these waters of Afflictions thou can see a full manifestation
of thy Graces; In them thou do perceive how upright and sincere thy Soul is
to God, That all thy fear is, thou may not offend or displease God, Thou do
not so much think of thy own grief and pain as that thou should do any thing
to grieve the Spirit of God.

Because then we may have the Presence of God, and the comfortable enjoyment of
him; Whereas if we sin in them, we are every ways miserable, we have no
comfort within, and God will give no Comfort without; The Scripture speaks of
many precious promises to the godly in their Troubles, that He will be with
them, that he will never forsake them, insomuch that as their Tribulations
abound, so the Consolations of God abound much more, 2 Cor. 1.3 Now all this is
while we are holy and heavenly in afflictions; The best part of our life may be
that which was in outward exercises, David never had more of God, neither did
his Faith and Holiness more abound then when tossed up and down with Troubles:
But oh how sad is it when thou shall by thy Unbelief, distrust, and other
sinful ways offend God, that now thou have no Comfort within, nor any from
God, who is the God of all Consolation! It Is sin only is the sting of an
affliction, God and sin will not be together, but God and Afflictions are
often together: No marvel then if thou art thus to fear sin more then any
trouble, because trouble is not trouble, if sin be absent, a gracious heart
in afflictions has an Heaven within, though it may have an hell without.

because Afflictions are for this End to remove sin, to subdue corruption,
and to mortify lusts; Thus they are said to work the blessed fruit of
Righteousness, Heb. 12.11. though for a time they seem grievous; And God
says, It Is the fruit of Jacobs Trouble to purge away his sin, Isa. 27.9. Now
then, If Afflictions and Chastisements be for this end to conquer sin, to
make thee more holy, Woe be unto thee if they increase and multiply sin in
thee; Think with thy self, God lays these loads upon me to kill my pride, my
worldly-mindednesse, to quicken me up against deadness and dullness: Now how
shall I ever behold God if the clean contrary be found in me, If Unbelief and
Frowardness do overcome me: Do not then so much matter Affliction as Sin,
for Afflictions may be sanctified to thee; They may be made happy Instruments
of Grace and Holiness to thy Soul, but if sin be drawn out, then the end of
afflictions is lost, and how shall thou be helped when that which is to cure
thee shall augment thy disease.

Job though his Patience be so greatly celebrated, and he at the first did so
graciously resign himself into Gods hand, yet when his Troubles were
continued, and sorely oppressing of him, then he breaks out into much
Impatience and bitter Rebellion against God; Hence the Psalmist speaks notably,
Psalm 125.3. The Rod of the Wicked shall not always rest on the back of the
Righteous, lest they put forth their hands to Iniquity: Here you see, there is
a very great danger that even a Godly man under constraint and sore Afflictions
may be tempted to iniquity may do that which he never thought possible to do,
yea, which will be a continual hell unto him; Oh then how comfortable and sweet
a thing will it be to come out of thy Afflictions, thy Heart not condemning
thee for impatience or any sinful distemper.

Because the latter of these are made to the Godly the Effects of Gods Love:
Whom I love I chasten, says God, Revel 3. And Hebr. 12. If ye he without
Chastisement ye are not Sons but Bastards; But to be left to Sin, and to
have thy Strength taken from thee to resist Temptations, argues Gods great
anger; It Is that way of Displeasure which he uses to Wicked men, To give them
up to strong Lusts to believe a Lie, and to have hardened Hearts lest they
understand; Although we see God may for a while being incensed and provoked
leave even the Godly themselves unto the evil of a Temptation: Thus Peter was,
David and Hezechiah were: Know then that God frowneth on thee, his Anger is
gone out against thee, when thy afflictions increase thy sin, God does not
ordinarily do thus to his people, but Troubles and Afflictions they are but the
Effects of his Love, and by them he fitteth and prepares them to be polished
Stones in that Heavenly Jerusalem.

Use 1. of Instruction, To show the Vanity of the Spirits even of those who are
most holy, for who is not taken up with the less neglecting the greater? In
Afflictions is not thy whole Soul spent how to remove them, how to be freed
from them, and how few are thy Thoughts for the Sanctification and Preservation
from the Evil of them? Thou think with thy self, Oh when will the hand of
the Lord be over? Oh that this burden were taken off, and in the mean time
praiest not, watchest not, lest this should any ways distemper thee, and make
thee sinful.

Use 2. How foolish they are that will run into any sin so they may avoid
danger, That will bow their knees to Baal, worship the golden Image ere they
will venture any misery; What says our Savior to such, They that will thus
save their lives shall lose them, God frustrates their earthly Expectations,
and then Oh the woeful horror sin will leave upon them, They will find a
wounded Spirit worse then any calamity in the world; They will wish, O that
they had been wracked and tormented in their bodies, so that they had never
committed such sins as wrack and torment their Souls: David when he had lost
all heavenly joy, and all his desirable things did perish, could then tell you
that sins guilt upon the Soul was worse then all the miseries and troubles that
ever he did undergo.

SERMON LXXXVII. That God has determined a precise time to every particular
man in the world, how long he shall live.
JOHN 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, etc.
THough we have gathered the full vintage of this Text, yet there remain some
gleanings, of which we may say with the Prophet, a blessing is in it.

Two remarkable truths there are implied, the first in the Negative, the second
in the Positive part. In the first, in the Negative, I pray not that thou
should take them out of the world. We may observe,

That God has the dominion and immediate disposing of our being and
continuance in this world. When his day is come, when his Decree is expired,
Observe. That God has the dominion and immediate disposing of our being and
continuance in this world.
then none can withstand; when he commands to return to the dust from whence we
came, or shall say, This night thy soul shall be taken away, there cannot be
any gainsaying. This truth is the more to be regarded, because it has been
doctrinally agitated by learned men, Whether there be an immovable term of life
in this world prefixed to every man? and then practically it is of great
concernment, as is to be showed.

Propositions explaining this truth.
That God has not only determined a general or specifical time for all in the
world, but an individual and peculiar for every man or woman, a general term of
life God has provided, so that none shall live beyond it. No man ever lived a
thousand years. In the beginning of the world, then men were longer lived, but
in Moses his time, we see him affirming the ordinary bounds of a man's life to
be threescore and ten, Psa. 90. For in the wilderness by their wickedness, they
brought short days upon themselves: So that all creatures have a general term
of life. There is the maximum quod sic, though some live longer then others.
Thus men have bounds in the general, they cannot outlive. But this is not
enough, God has appointed to every individual man, his continuance in the
world, so that it is God that takes him out of the world, when his time comes.

Though God has thus appointed our continuance in the world, so that in
respect of his providence, none could live longer or shorter, yet if we respect
second causes, and speak according to them, so we may truly say, such might
have continued longer in the world. Hence wicked men are said, not to live out
half their days; and Solomon says, Be not over-wicked, Eccles. 7.17. Why
should thou die before thy time? Wicked men many times by their wickedness,
drunkenness and uncleanness kill themselves, and sometimes provoke God to
destroy them. But though they are said not to live out half their days, yet
that is to be understood in respect of second causes, not Gods appointment; for
so it was their whole days.

Though God has appointed the times of our abode or removal out of the world,
yet this decree and appointment is brought about in the use of means. We are
not to apprehend such a decree in God, that we shall live such a time, let us
do what we will, eat or not, it is no matter for the use of the means. This is
wretchedly to dishonor God; for though Gods will does not uncertainly depend
upon thy will, yet his appointment is with great sweetness and condescension to
second causes, both natural and rational, so that they are moved by him
according to their natures. Therefore when Paul had a revelation, That none in
the ship with him should perish, yet he tells them, that unless they continued
in the ship with him, they should perish, Act. 27.31.

Therefore though God has appointed the bounds of our life in this world, yet
he has kept it secret from us, he lets none know (unless by special
revelation) the times of their death. And therefore there is a duty imposed
upon all, that they use the means of life, Thou shall not kill, reaches first
to a man's self, and then to another: Hence to live cheerfully, to use the help
of the Physician are duties; Christ said, The sick need the Physician, Mat.
9.12. as for secret things they belong to God. The soldier knows not,
whether he shall conquer such an enemy, scale such a wall, yet because his
General commands him, he is ready to obey, and thus though we cannot tell, such
means shall prolong our lives in the world, yet Gods will cannot be neglected
without great sin.

God has determined the time of our being in the world, out of justice and
wrath to the wicked, out of mercy and wisdom to the godly. It Is anger to the
wicked, for all the while they live, they increase their sin, they treasure up
wrath; so that it had been well for them, if they had been cut off by death
long before. They live to make hell the hotter for them, when they die. But to
the godly the time of their abode is limited in mercy. The righteous is taken
away from the evil to come, Isa. 57.1. The shepherd drives his sheep to a
refuge, before the storm arises. The jewels are safely put up, when the house
is in danger; when Simeon had seen and embraced Christ, then he had liberty to
depart. The word is used in Scripture sometimes of those that are dismissed out
of prison, or are dispatched, when their errand is done, or freed from a flux,
or such disease that is upon them; and certainly, in these respects it may be
applied, when God takes his out of the world, it is because they have finished
this work, and death freeth them from this world that was like a prison to
them, yea and now a stop is put to all those lusts, that were like a bloody
flux running from them; so that the time when God takes his out of the world,
is from much wisdom and great mercy: They shall not go sooner, nor yet later
then he wills; and thus many times they are like that happy man, Cui sine
lassitudine peractum est iter.

Proofs of the point.

1. From Scripture.


Now that it is God that continues and takes out of the world, appointing every
one their set time appears by evident Texts of Scripture, Job 14.5. where a
man's days in particular, are said to be determined, the number of his months,
and his bounds beyond which he cannot pass; he speaks here of every man in
particular; it is not worth while to answer the cavils against this place. So
that as God has appointed a set time for governments, and when that period is
come, then all the world cannot hinder a change, as Dan. 5.25. God has numbered
thy kingdom, and given it away. Thus he does also to every particular person.
Not that men may neglect means, or do what they list, but he has ordained this
in and by the use of the means. Thus Act. 17.26. God is said to determine the
seasons, and the bounds of our habitation.

Argum. 2.
2. God has appointed the time of our abode in this world, because he is the
daily preserver and keeper of us. Should not he continue the breath of life, we
should presently fall into the dust, out of which we came. Thus Act. 17.28. In
him we live and move, and have our being. Thus we could not stir the foot, nor
move the tongue did not God enable us; conservation is a daily creation. Hence
Daniel tells that great Belteshazzar, though a mighty Monarch, Dan. 5.23. that
he did not glorify God, in whose hand his breath was; If God do but blow upon
the richest, greatest and healthfullest man that is, he is immediately
scattered, as when we blow upon a little dust; yea neither food would nourish
us, or the creatures afford any sustenance did not God give a blessing to them,
as you may see Exodus 23.25. He will bless thy bread, and thy water, and take
away thy infirmities from thee. Thus when the pillars of the house are removed,
that must presently fall into rubbish, so when God takes away his arm man
runs into nothing; and be David be, even to admiration, so affected with
Gods providence in his constitution, shall not the same care be showed to his
dissolution? Ps 139.16. he speaks there how curiously his body was wrought,
even like any tapestry or needle work, and that all his members were in Gods
book. Solomon says, There is a time to be born, and a time to die. But as the
one is from Gods appointment, so must the other be.

3. It Is God only that appoints the time of our being in the world, Argum. 3.
because even those deaths that seem to be the most casual, and so we would
think not at all under Gods providence, yet are expressly attributed to him. All
casual murders, they are by the peculiar appointment of God, though men that
are instruments did not intend the death of such, that God is the God of death,
as well as of life, appears Ps. 68.20. To him belong the issues of death; if
by issues be meant, the evasions and escapes from death, it asserts this truth,
That it is God only who appoints when a man shall die, and when he shall not,
some are now taken out of the world, some at another time, and all at the mere
pleasure of God. But if you understand it, as some learned men do in this
sense, To God belongs the goings out to death, then it is more plain, and indeed
this is more consonant to the text, for the Preposition ^ will persuade this,
and the use of the phrase, Jer. 15.1, 2. where some are said to go out to
death, and others to captivity: so that the Psalmists meaning will then be, To
God belongs salvation, which he will show to his people; but as for the wicked,
he has many ways to bring them to death. Thus you see, to God belongs the
whole disposing of us, the continuing or taking us out of the world. To this we
may add a parallel place, Psalm. 31.15. My times are in thy hand, save me from
mine enemies. They cannot destroy me, when and where, or how they please, that
as it was with our Savior, he had his hour, wherein he was to suffer, so that
till then, all the power of men and devils could not apprehend him. Thus it is
with all men, they have their hour: Even those that by the greatest hap come to
their death, are yet said to be delivered to it by God himself, Exodus 21.13.
cum Deu. 19.4, 5, 6. If a man cutting of wood have the head of his hatchet fly
off, and kill another, God there says, He delivered that man into his hand.

4. We must acknowledge God does set bounds to every man's life, Argum. 4.
because the time of their death is called their day in a peculiar manner, viz.
that day God had appointed for them. Jer. 50.27 We unto them, when their day
shall come, that day wherein God had appointed them for slaughter, and Ps.
37.13. The Lord will laugh, for he sees that his day is coming. That look, as
God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the whole world, so he has
appointed a particular day for every man, which is his particular day of
judgment, then he is adjudged either to hell or heaven. Thus Nathan tells
David, When thy days shall be finished; and certainly this is of dreadful
consideration to every wicked man. Thou have thy day of death appointed, thy
hour of dissolution is coming, it is thy day. Now thou have a day of jollity, of
mirth and quietness, but remember this thy day is coming. Thou have heard of the
day of such a man's death, and such an one, and so thou have thy day of death
likewise.

5. If Gods providence reach to the least* and minute things that are, Argum. 5.
much more to the taking of a man's life out of the world Mat. 6. The Sparrow
falls not to the ground without Gods providence. Not a bird is killed without
his appointment, and shall man die without it? yea the hairs of our head are
numbered; and shall not an hair fall from an head without his appointment, and
shall the head it self? This is so clear, that we would wonder any learned men
should deny a prefixed term of our life.

Lastly, Our abiding in this world must be of Gods appointment, because all the
providential passages and works of God, are subservient to his predestination.
Argum. 6.
So that our predestination might have been frustrated, if God did not appoint
all our lives in this world, so Paul and Manasses, and Austin with many others
might have died before they were converted, or else when converted, but plunged
into foul sins with David and Peter, then they might die in them, and not
recover out of them, but Gods predestination will prevent this, because our
birth, our living and dying are to the godly effects of their predestination.

But let us come to the practical Use of this, because it is very fruitful, and
as for the second Observation, That the world abounds in wickedness, and so
is ready to infect and damn every one therein, that may be amplified in the
following verse. And

Has God appointed the time of thy going out of the world, then labor and
work hard in his vineyard? He continues thee here, till thou have finished that
service he has appointed thee for. Thus our Savior would not have his
Disciples taken out of the world, till they had seasoned and enlightened it with
their good doctrine: If therefore God continues thy life in this world,
because he has more service and work for thee to do, then take heed thou art
not idle and negligent. Oh it will be very uncomfortable to thee, to have the
night come on thee, and thou can work no more, when yet thy conscience shall
accuse thee. This I have not done, and that I was to do Our Savior says,
Blessed is that servant whom his master when he comes shall find so doing,
Luke 12.47. Should you send your servant upon matters of life and death, thy
child or friend lies a dying, and he in the way fall asleep or go to idle
games and pastimes, how unsufferable would it be? How greater will thy guilt
be, for thou art commanded to strive, to enter in at the strait gate, to take
the kingdom of heaven by violence, thy soul lies at the stake, thy happiness
is engaged, yet for all this thou live unprofitably and unfruitfully. Oh
think how sad thy account will be! Thou must go out of the world, thou can
not stay any longer, and thou will cry out, Oh give me more time! Oh give me
longer space, my soul is not set in order! I have not done this, or that
service for thee.

Does God appoint us our time in the world? then we are not to be sinfully
dejected about the fears of death, either naturally or violently, either in an
ordinary way, or from the violence and persecution of others, for the time of
thy departure is in Gods hand. No power in the world can send thee sooner to
the grave then God has decreed; Many of the servants of God have greatly
labored under the fears of death, especially in times of persecution, and rage
from adversaries. How prone have men been to fear men more then God? Now whence
did all this arise, but from want of faith, that to God belong the issues of
death? Nothing can destroy thee sooner then God has appointed; What care did
Herod take to kill Christ? yet that could not be; and so Pharaoh to destroy all
the male-children of Israel, yet one must be kept that would be a means to
destroy Pharaoh; Live then above the fear of death, say, My times are in Gods
hand, it is not as man will, but as God wills.

Do not wilfully abuse this Doctrine to sinfulnes, contempt of means, or
neglect of duties for this poison many have sucked out of this flower, they
would not hold, That God has prefixed a term of life, for this, they think,
would overthrow all use of means, all neglect of prayer, whereas this supposes
and establishes them rather, for God who has appointed the end, has also
appointed and commanded the means, and suppose we could not reconcile Gods
providence, and man's liberty in the use of the means, yet seeing the Scripture
reveals the one, and commands the other, it is good for us to rest therein.

Be content under the hand of God, that takes thy dearest relations out of the
world. Imitate Job, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken. Art thou the
Judge of the world? Art thou the preserver of men? Why then do thou murmur if
God do what he pleases herein?

Let the jolly and wicked sinner know God has appointed his day. Thou shall
not be always eating and drinking, and making merry in this world. Oh what a
confounded man will thou be, who have no other hope or comfort, but what is of
the world!

SERMON LXXXVIII. The Heavenly man much improved by much considering that he is
not of this world.
JOH. 17.14. They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
OUR Savior had immediately before in the tenth Verse urged this Argument in
his Prayer for his Disciples, and here we see within so little a space he
repeateth it again.

Though therefore we have handled this already, yet because it is repeated
again, and it is well observed that those things which our Savior did more
then once say they have some notable Excellency, and deserve a second
Consideration, according to that old Rule, Pulchra sunt bis dicenda; And in the
Hebrew there is often a Gemination of the Word for the more Efficacy and
Certainty; Because I say it is thus repeated by our Savior who had infinite
Treasures of Wisdom within him, who was the (...), and could not be
straightened in words, Therefore let us also have a second improving of it: You
see the Argument that it is twice repeated, They are not of the world, God is
entreated to preserve them because they are not of the world even as Christ is
not.

The Explication of this you have heard already, Therefore I proceed to the
Observation.

Obs. That it is good for the People of God often and often to meditate on this,
Doct.
That they are not of the world; This is a Truth that unless unfolded and
drawn out, We can never see the Excellency of it, unless you rub and pounce
this matter into powder, you can never find the sweetness of it if you do not
as they did to the Sacrifice open it and cut it in pieces, laying every part by
it self methodicaly, you cannot see the inward excellency of it: The people of
God are not of this world, they are in it but not of it, They are (...) and
(...) Sanctified and set apart from the common use of the world, as in the Jews
Pedagogy, Vessels and Garments, and Persons were set apart only for a sacred
use; Hence they are compared to Stars that shine in a dark night, thus are
they in a crooked Generation, Phil. 2.15. As the Stars are not compounded of
sublunary matter, neither are they capable of such destructive alterations, The
Godly man's often remembering that he is not of this world is of great use.
as sublunary and material things are, So it should be with the Children of
God.

Now there are two main Grounds and Reasons, or Springs from whence the people
of God should so often reflect upon this, That they are not of the world.

1. Instructing to duty.


The other is of Consolation and Comfort.

The due Meditation of this will abundantly instruct to duty in these
particulars.

1. To heavenly-mindednesse.
First, It will make us heavenly-minded, and take away that predominant
earthlinesse in us which makes us incline downwards; The ^one does not more
naturally fall to the ground then our Souls till regenerated move to earthly
things; Now the Apostle argues to the People of God Col. 3.1, 2, 3. If ye be
risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, and set your affections
upon them: Oh this is a great matter, when not only our mind and tongue but
our affections are set on things above; The Affections are like wings to the
bird, like fire among the Elements, it assimilates and turns every thing into
fire; Thus where the believer affectionately remembers he is not of the world,
he cries out as the Maid ready to be ravished under all inordinate and worldly
thoughts, What do you come to overwhelm me for? He runs away as Joseph from
his Mistress, how can I do this and sin against God? The Apostle speaks in
the Name of all Believers, Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation is in Heaven; Thus as
the Sun in Heaven though the Beams of it shine upon Dunghils and noisome
Jakes, yet it is not defiled; So the Godly though they live in a noisome,
sinful, and wicked world, yet they are not stained therewith because their
Conversation is in Heaven, and as the Bird as long as she soars on high is out
of all danger from the snares and gins of the Fowler: Thus the Child of God as
long as his thoughts and his affections are kept above, and are out of reach,
they receive no defilement from these things below; Oh then let the Believer
remember he is not of this world, and this will inflame him, it will be a fiery
Chariot to carry him up into Heaven: But because to be heavenly-minded is a
general, and particular things do most inform and affect, Singularia sunt, quae
pungunt.

Which consists in these particulars.
Let us branch it out in particulars, and show you wherein a Godly man,
remembering he is not of the world does express his heavenly Conversation, and
that emptieth it self into these streams.

1. He mortifieth and moderateth his affections to lawful things.
First, He mortifieth and moderateth his heart and affections even to lawful
things, 1 Cor. 7. The time is short, Those that marry must be as if they
married not; Grace does alter the pallat of Nature, so that like old Barzillai
they take not that delight which once they had in the comforts of the world;
Nature is content with few things, but Grace with the one necessary thing which
is God himself; If then thy heart be like a water overrunning the banks, and so
be muddied, stop thy self, and remember thou art not of this world, and
therefore thou dare not over-love or over-desire, or go beyond thy bounds;
Thou have indeed these mercies but as if thou had them not; Truly this is an
excellent discovery of an heavenly heart, when this Ivy does not so cleave to
thee as to consume thee; When thou can so eat, drink, and enjoy all earthly
and worldly Comforts, that yet thou do not distemper and disease thy soul.

2. Worldly things are but secondary and less principal.
Secondly, An Heavenly Heart is in these worldly things, when they are made but
the secondary and the less principal; They are the Stars not the Sun; This
our Savior makes a fundamental qualification to every Disciple; He that
loves Father or Mother more then me is not worthy of me, Matthew. 10.37. The
Godly man therefore has Christ lying nearest to his heart, There must be
nothing above him, equal to him, as David expresses this predominancy often,
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And My Soul breaks for the longing it has to
thee at all times; And God was his Portion; The Light of his Countenance was
better then Life, and all Earthly Comfort.: If therefore thou remembrest thou
art not of this world, Earthly things shall be admitted only to the Court of
the Temple, not to thy heart which is the Holy of Holies; They are kept at the
bottom of the Hill not suffered to come up to the Mount; There is no man if
not truly regenerated, though never so great in parts and expressions of
Religion, that gives Christ the better part of his Soul; That gives the
Superiority to him; As in the Sacrifices of old, all the fat was to be burnt
unto God; Oh then awaken thy self in this matter, if thou art not of the world
then God and Christ are in the uppermost room of thy heart, They are more unto
thee then ten thousand Creatures; To say, thou ar^ no profane person, no
wicked person, is a poor and a small matter; But art thou one to whom Christ is
more then Wealth, then honor, and all Greatness?

Thirdly, 3. He will not sin against God to obtain great advantages.
The man that remembers he is not of the world dares not sin against God to
obtain the greatest advantages here below; This does necessarily follow from
the former, For if once he be so heavenly as to love God and Christ better then
all, then he will do nothing that he may lose them: He will not be so foolish
as to take Dirt, and to lose Gold: Hence those Hearers that had the Cares of
the world choking the good Seed, and those Apostates that fell off in
Persecution, all these did serve Mammon, and not God, for when it comes to
this, here is an offer and choice, either I must lose God or this worldly
advantage: If thou will take the present world and leave Christ, this cannot
stand with an Heavenly heart: I do not speak of some particular passages, for
the Flesh sometimes overcomes the Spirit, but of an habitual and constant
course; Therefore it was a full discovery that Moses was not of the world, when
he chose the Reproaches of Christ rather then all the Treasures of Egypt: This
an earthly heart would never have done.

Fourthly, The man that remembers he is not of the world, desires not, 4. He
affects worldly things no further then by them he may be serviceable to God.
neither rejoices in worldly things any further then thereby he is made more
serviceable to God and instrumental te his glory; All these earthly things they
are Talents, and we are called Stewards, Now the Steward looks not upon the
money and Rents he receives as his, he rejoices not in them as his own, He is
to improve all for the best to his Masters use; Thus the heavenly Christian
does, This Health, This Life, These parts, These Comforts they are none of
mine, I am but a Steward, I must give an account what improvement I have made
of them; This is a notable discovery of thy heavenlinesse, when thou art thus
affected.

Fifthly, He that Considers he is not of this world, 5. Labors to keep his
heart holy in the midst of earthly business.
his Heavenly-mindednesse is discovered, in that though he be in the midst of
all these businesses, yet he labors to keep his heart holy and fervent; His
Shop does not dead his heart, his worldly affairs do not dull the Edge of his
Spirit, but he can delight in God, call him Father, be fervent and effectual
in Duties: Not but that the most Heavenly man which is finds and complains
of much deadness and dullness: They can be affected with worldly things but
not Heavenly, only they are sensible and complain of this dead heart; That as
they mourn over a dead Friend, a dead Child, so they do over a dead heart,
only herein they strive and labor, that no worldly thing may any whit abate
their Affections to God, That they may cry out, and say, O Lord, how gladly
would I be enjoying of thee, but that this world will not let me; Truly these
strivings and resistings of the world do very much argue thy spiritual and
heavenly heart.

Sixthly, The Heavenly Heart would not be always in the conflicting part of
Grace, but in the triumphing part which is the more heavenly work, 6. Would
fain get to the triumphing part of grace*
for as one Star differs from another, So one part of Heavenly work is more
excellent then another; To grapple with Lusts, to fig^^ with sin, this is
Heavenly work; But to enjoy God, to rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of
Glory, this is more Heavenly: Now the Israelites did not so much desire the
destroying of the Canaanites, that they might be refreshing themselves with the
Milk and Honey of the Land; As the People of God groan to be above an earthly,
a proud heart, lustful heart, that they might enjoy the sweetness of grace.

7. Longs for Christ's coming.
Seventhly, The Heavenly Heart considering it is not of this world does
therefore long for and hasten the Coming of Christ; We are daily to pray that
Christ's Kingdom may come, and the Godly are described by this Expectation, Heb.
2.29. They look for, and hasten the Coming of Christ; 2 Pet. 3.12. The Church
cries, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly; She prays vehemently, as if she could
not stay till he did come? That as Sisera's Wife stood looking out of the
Window expecting her Lords Coming in Triumph, Thus do the godly, and therefore
they are to lift up their Heads, Mat. 24. Then their Winter is over, and their
Summer is come, Then shall there be no more sins, no more cares, no more
clogs nor troubles, thou shall take thy leave of all these.

8. Delights in those things that increase a spiritual life.
Lastly, He that is not of the world delights in such things that do either
beget or increase spiritual and Heavenly Life; Now all the holy Ordinances of
God are appointed for this end, Prayer, Preaching of the Word, the solemn
Assemblies, holy conference, all these things are like Wood to keep the Fire
always burning; You may see the Expressions David uses about the Ordinances,
The Word was sweeter then the honey and the honeycomb: In his Banishment there
was no earthly thing troubled him so much as to be restrained and kept from the
Solemn and Divine worship of God; That heart must needs grow cold and dead,
that is not often enlivened by these, it will quickly be like a barren
Wilderness, if these Clouds drop not on it; The same Word that begat thee unto
a spiritual Life, must increase and continue thee therein.

It Is good to reminde our selves often that we are not of the world hereby to
press our selves to a Nonconformity and Noncompliance with it, Romans 12. Be
not conformed to the world but transformed in your mind; We are not to love or
delight in what the evil world does, We are not to do as they do; Though it be
the greater part, and though a multitude go that way, yea, though all the world
go in an evil way, and though but one man yet thou will not symbolize with it;
And truly this we ought to press upon our selves, how often are we ready to
say with that man concerning the Mass, Eamus ad communem errorem, Let us go to
the common Error, Who will swim against the stream? Who is like that River
Alpheus that though it empty it self in the Sea, yet keeps its own sweetness,
and is not infected with the saltness of that water? Oh what a comfortable
Testimony of grace is it, to be such an one that the world neither by its
flatteries or its frowns is able to put thee out of a good path.

The frequent meditating on this, that we are not of the world will make us
admirably love and commend the Grace of God: For whose heart will not move
within him when he shall consider how many thousands of the world live and die
in that worldly disposition, yet God has separated me from it? Yea, how many
of thy acquaintance, of thy Kindred, of thy near Friends, are yet of the world,
and thou art not? So that the experimental knowledge of this will fill thy
heart and mouth with joy and praises; God has in this done more for thee, then
if he had given thee the whole world.

The knowing and thinking this that they are not of the world will make them be
content and patient under the afflictions and troubles they meet with in the
world; For seeing they are not of the world they matter not how it is with
them; Their happiness and misery is not bound up in this Orb; They are
Pilgrims and Strangers, and no wonder if such do not matter the accomodations
they find in the way; II. Often reflecting upon this will bring much
Consolation, Considering
If they come to an unfurnished Inn they will make a shift, they will say, it
is but for a night, and thus if we are not of the world, though God lay this
chastisement upon us, though he raise up that trouble against us, yet it is but
a night, they are not of this Country, and therefore cannot be undone here.

In the 2d place, The often reflecting upon this, that we are not of this
world, will bring much consolation: For

1. Hereby God will take the more special care of us, 1. Gods taking the more
care of them.
and vouchsafe the more powerful protection unto us, We are not of the world,
Therefore under all the wrongs, troubles, and injuries of the world, we are to
look up unto God, if God love his own Name, he will do good to such who are
serviceable to all his. 2. Their being quaiified as that come under Christ's
Fraier.


2 Here is Consolation, Because they have the fit qualification of theso who
come under Christ's Prayer; You see that which makes Christ so earnestly commend
them io his Father, is because they are not of the world, The effectual fervent
prayer of a righteous man prevails much, how much more will Christ's prayer?

3. Here is Consolation, That because we are not of the world, 3. And that God
will ere long take them out of the world.
therefore God will at last take us out of it to Eternal glory; The godly are
of heaven, and heaven is their proper place; That as it is said of our body,
Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, So, of heaven thou art, and to
heaven thou shall return.

Use of Exhortation to the Children of God, Art thou not of the world then
dwell on this, improve this, do not make thy self like a worldling, Are they
proud, passionate, earthy, envious? Do thou abhor to be so, Shall such a man as
I make my self like the vile ones of the Earth? Neither be thou daunted,
because the world revileth, rages, and walks contrary to thee, Shall the
Star leave its glory and come to be a clod of Earth? Say with the Olive Tree
and Fig Tree, Shall I leave my fatness, and become a bramble or a briar? It Is
the envy and malice of the world that sets against thee, such soar eyes cannot
abide any dazzling luster.

Use 2. of Admonition to those wicked men that are of the world, not to think
it strange if there are some who dare not run into the same excess of Riot
with them; Do not complain of their rigidnesse and singularity, that they have
no good fellowship with them, and so are not fit to live in the world; How can
two walk together except they be agreed? unless there were the same natures,
the same principles, never think there can be the same hearts, yea, do thou by
them be admonished and hasten out of this world by an heavenly change upon
thee; It Is no staying in this Sodom, in this Babylon.

SERMON LXXXIX. Of growth in Grace, showing that, and how many ways, a Godly
man may be more sanctified.
JOHN 17.17. Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth.
HItherto our Savior has prayed for the preservation of his Disciples in this
world from the evil thereof; We now proceed to the second main general part of
his Petition, which is their Sanctification.

So that in this verse we are to take notice of the Matter it self prayed for,
Sanctify.

2. The Subject, Them.

3. The Instrumental cause, Through thy truth.

4. The Description or Explication of this, Thy Word is Truth.

We will conjoyn the Matter prayed for, and the Subject together, Sanctify
them.

The word to sanctify is of a large signification in the Scripture; but to our
purpose, here are two principal ones,

First, To sanctify is often to consecrate and set apart to an holy use; and
thus many expound it, that our Savior does by this prayer commend them unto
God in their Ministerial labor; That as the Priests of old were sanctified by
many external Rites, so are the Disciples in a spiritual manner by Christ at
this time; and this appears probable by the verse following, As thou have
sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world. This
therefore is part of the meaning, but I shall refer the considering of that
notion to the next verse.

The second general and frequent use of the word, is to make inwardly holy, by
renewing all the parts and abilities of the soul, to walk in an holy manner;
and in this sense it is partly to be taken here, because the Word of God is the
instrumental cause of it.

Quest.
And if you ask, How could Christ pray for the sanctification of his Disciples,
who were already sanctified?

Answ.
To this the Answer is easy, That he prays for the continuance of, and
increase in sanctification, That they may be more and more increasing in
holiness; for no man is come so far, that he cannot go further, he is not at
the utmost of holiness. Hence we see the Scripture speaking of, or supposing
persons already godly, does yet exhort and command Sanctification still, 1 Thessalonians. 5 23. I pray God sanctify you wholly, and preserve your whole spirit,
soul and body blameless. Here those that are already sanctified, yet are
prayed for, to have a further degree, and deeper rooting of Sanctification.

So Ephesians. 4.23, 24. There he writes to such as are already converted, That
they be renewed in the spirit of their mind, and that they put on the new man;
yea to these Disciples our Savior speaks, Matthew. 18.3. Except ye be
converted, etc.

By this you see, That even those who are sanctified or converted, may be more
sanctified, and converted more closely to God: For although it be true, That if
Sanctification be strictly taken for the same with Regeneration, then it is the
infusion of a supernatural life at once: So that as a man is born but once
naturally, so we may say, he is regenerated and sanctified but once; yet take
it more largely for the improving and increasing of grace thus put into us;
then we are to be more converted, and more sanctified daily; and in this
respect, Sanctification is said to differ from Justification, because the
former does admit of degrees, and is more or less, but so is not Justification.

Observe. That whereas the Disciples, though already sanctified and made holy,
yet are prayed for, that they may be more sanctified. We may gather,

That the most holy men that are, are yet to be more holy. Observe.
It Is not enough to be once called or converted, but we are to grow in grace.
As it is not enough for a child to be borne, but he must grow up to be a man.
Thus Revel. 22.11. He that is holy ((...)) let him be holy still; and 1 Cor.
7.1. Perfecting holiness.

This is a very necessary point, for our Savior John 15. says, He chooses
us, that we may bring forth more fruit: Do thou increase in thy faith, in
thy heavenly-mindednesse, in thy zeal? Thou can bless God, when thou find
thy health and bodily strength better, when thou find thy estate increase,
and why then art thou not more desirous, and rejoicing to see thy heart grow
better, to see thy soul more sanctified? And indeed concerning the former
things, our Savior says, Which of you by taking care can add one cubit to
his stature? But here by fervent and constant prayers, we may add many cubits.

But to open this Doctrine, Let us consider, How many ways a godly man may be
more sanctified.
How many ways a godly man may be more sanctified, and that is seen in several
particulars.

First, He may be more sanctified intensively, by adding more and more degrees
to the grace he has received. Our Love, our Faith, our Patience, even all our
Graces are capable of augmentation. It Is not with us; 1. Inrensively.
as with Christ, who received the Spirit without measure; so that Christ could
not be more holy then he was; he could not do any thing more obedientially to
God, 2. Extensively.
then he did, nor love God more then he did; but we may all cry out with that
man, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief; Lord, I love, help my want of love:
Therefore James 1.4. we are exhorted to let patience have her perfect work;
Even as Apelles upon all his Pictures would write Faciebat non fecit, because
he would still be perfecting it; thus are we to all our graces. Hence are those
daily exhortations, To grow in Grace: Even a Paul, even the tallest Giants are
to grow in Grace. Paul says, He knows but in part, 1 Cor. 13. and then he
can but love in part, and believe in part: Oh then, this is of great
concernment, to think that thy best graces may yet be made far better! Thy
Grace is nothing to a Paul's, and a Paul's is nothing to the Law, or the Rule,
Look to it then, and be as desirous to grow in Grace, as ever thou were to get
into the state of Grace.

Secondly, We may be more sanctified extensively, in regard of the Objects
about which our Graces are to be exercised, and in respect of our Relations.

1. There is an extension in respect of our Objects of Grace. As we are bound
to do better then we do; so to do more then we do. What godly man is there,
that can say, he has done all things God required? Art thou not guilty of many
omissions of duties? Thou have not reproved, mourned, prayed for others; Thou
have not done that spiritual and temporal good thou should. Paul excused
the Philippians that they would have done good, but they wanted an opportunity,
Phil. 4.16. But how many times have we an opportunity, and we want hearts? John
could write to that pious Gaius his Host, 3 John verse. 2. to wish that his body
may be in health, even as his soul prospered. What a glorious commendation was
this? It was better with his soul, then his outward man. Now we cannot say
thus of our selves, because we are not diligent and industrious to do more
then we do. Certainly, every godly man may be astonished, when he shall
consider, how broad the Commandments of God are, and how narrow his heart is
grown in doing more then thou have done.

2. Thou may be sanctified extensively, by the Relations that thou do
take upon thee, when made an Husband, a Wife, a Minister, a Magistrate, here
thy holiness is to extend further, God requires more of thee, and that
godliness which would have served thee before, will not now. While the
Apostles were private men, they needed not that Sanctification which they were
to have as Apostles. Hence we see the Apostle diligently in his Epistles,
informing Husbands, Wives, Children and Servants of what they have to do: And
certainly, the grace of our Relations is an excellent evidence of our holiness
in the main: If the Heathen could say, He was not Bonus vir, that was not Bonus
civis, not a good man, that was not a good Citizen: So may we say, He is not a
good Christian, that is not a good Minister, a good Magistrate, a good Husband,
a good Servant. The Apostle bids Archippus fulfill his Ministry: And thus
Ministers are exhorted to look to the flock over which God has set them. Oh
then see, if thou may not be greatly sanctified in thy Relations, if they
may not be filled with more Wisdom, Patience and exemplarity of Conversation!
Alexander wept, because there was no more Worlds, he wanted work. But to be
sure, thou have more then ever thou can turn unto: Every Relation requires a
new grace, or a new exercise of grace: So that here is no time for thee to sit
down, or to be still, as if all thy enemies were conquered.

3. In the deeper radication of grace in our hearts.
Thirdly, We may be more sanctified in the deeper radication of Grace in our
hearts. It Is a Philosophical Dispute, Whether accidents are intensed by
addition of degrees, or a deeper radication of them in the subject? We may
conclude, That grace in the heart is both ways improved, and for the rooting
of it in the soul: This is so great a matter, that the temporary believer is in
this respect as well as others, mainly differenced from the true believer.
Though they had some root, yet they had not root enough, and the unwise builder
did not dig deep enough; for this therefore the Apostle prays, even in
reference to such as were already rooted in Christ, that they may be more
rooted, Colos. 2.7. Rooted and built up in him. And to this purpose are all
those Exhortations of being steadfast and immovable, of being strengthened,
stablished. settled, 1 Pet. 5, 10. as there the Apostle prays remrkably.
There is no man has laid so sure a foundatinn, but he may make it more sure:
No man is so established, but he may be more established: Is it not a terrible
thing to see the fall of many Cedars in Lebanon, of many Stars from Heaven?
And why is all this? They were never established deep enough, they never took
more root downwards; like unwise builders, they attended to make a glorious
upper-room, and stairs in the house, but mattered not the foundation; and
certainly, though the child of God, even of the lowest form, be so far
rooted, that he shall never fall away, yet this establishment and stedfastness
of his, is not by his own power and strength, it is God that keeps him, neither
is it continued, but in the constant daily exercise of holy means: Oh then
every day be endeavoring after this, Lord, grace is not rooted in me enough,
it is too superficial! Oh that I could say, I no longer live, but Christ within
me! Oh that it were like leaven diffusing it is power over me, the Promise is
Jer. 31. I will write my Law in thine inwards parts, in the midst of them! So
that grace shall be habituated in thee, and sink as deep, as ever original sin
did in thee.

Fourthly, We may be more sanctified Subjectively, 4. Subjectively
that is every part of the soul may be more thoroughly sanctified every day: as
in that place, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Hence to the converted Ephesians, the Apostle
exhorts, as you heard, both a further renovation of the mind, and of the will
and affections, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. In the mind, How greatly may we be more
sanctified, have more illumination, more heavenly knowledge of God and Christ?
Thou art to grow in knowledge more and more; Paul was once like a child, but
he became a man; The Apostle Heb. 6. does severely reprove those that continued
babes, and were not carried on to further perfection. It Is both a shame and a
sin, that thou have yet no more knowledge, and heavenly understanding, by the
Ministry thou have enjoyed so many years. Again, the mind is to be more
sanctified by a more firm and solid faith, the Apostle then directs, That they
should be steadfast and sound in the faith, not tossed up and down with every
wind of doctrine. Their increase of faith may be both in the Objects believed,
though for the things necessary to salvation, the knowledge of them by the
Spirit of God is promised to every believer, yet there the superstructions in
Religion, which according to the means we enjoy, we are to believe. Therefore
the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. shows his earnest prayer to come to the
Thessalonians, that he might perfect what was lacking in their faith; which
could not be meant in regard of foundations, but superstructures; not
essentials, but additionals. Thus they are to grow in the doctrine of
believing, but then in the manner of believing, that is the proper way for all
to grow. To believe more certainly, more firmly, more practically. Therefore
though the fundamentals of Religion cannot be augmented: No necessary truth to
salvation can be revealed, which was not known before, yet it may be more
strongly and clearly believed. And this is the end of all Authors, that write
against Heretics of all sorts, not to bring a new Religion into the world, or
new Articles of Faith, but to cause a more clear and firm assent to those
things, which the subtilty of Heretics had obscured. Further, Their minds
are to be more sanctified by holy thoughts, heavenly-Meditation: For what godly
man does not perceive vain thoughts creeping into his soul, as the Froggs did
into Pharaoh's Chamber, whether he will or no; and as for a fixed
heavenly-Meditation, it is an unknown duty amongst Christians.

Thus as the mind is to be more sanctified, so we might show all other parts
of soul and body. The will of a man is to be more bowed, and made more vehement
and powerful in the things of God. To overcome those velleities and incomplete
wishings which are so apt to undo us, To go beyond Paul, as Paul himself
desires to overcome himself, Romans 7. What I would not, that I do. To have this
no longer, but what I would, that I do. And for the Affections, who is not
sensible, what further Sanctification they need? Sanctified anger, sanctified
desires, How beautiful and comfortable would they be? Who does not find them
overrunning and going beyond all bounds, so that nothing can order them within
their limits? The Body likewise, though that be the brutish part, yet the
Apostle prays for the sanctification of it, which is then done, when it is no
more instrumental to sin; the eyes, the hands, the tongue have an holy watch
over them, and are employed for God. Thus you see that every part of the whole
man admits of further Sanctification. A man cannot look over all that he has
and does, as God did on his works, and see all exceeding good, so as to rest
thereupon, and work no more. We may see every day more to be done, and so
never come to a full Rest, till we are in Heaven.

Fifthly, We are to be more sanctified Objectively, that is, Those objects
revealed in the Scripture, we are to partake more of, to receive more sweetness
and fullness from. Does not the Apostle pray for the Ephesians, of whom he
affirms the glorious privileges of the Gospel? Yet Chap. 1.17, 18, 19. That
their eyes may be enlightened to know what is the exceeding power of God to them
that believe. And again Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your
hearts, that ye may be able to comprehend what is the breadth, and depth, and
length of Gods love. And lest it should be thought, that we are able to do this
to the full, he adds, And to know the love of God, which passes all
knowledge; Yea, the very glorious things of the Gospel, even in this life are
such, 1 Cor. 2.9. That eyes have not seen, neither has it entered into the
heart of a man to understand. There is as much in God, in Christ, in Faith, in
every Scripture-truth, that thou may make it new to thee every day. Christ
may be a new Christ, Heaven a new Heaven; for every divine Truth is like some
stately and magnificent Palace, wherein every room affords thee some new wonder
and delight; and this is the reason why John 4. Christ says, He that drinks
of that water, which is Christ, shall never thirst more: Oh then this is our
great sin and our hindrance also, that such dainties are in the Gospel, and
we do not suck them out! There is no heavenly promise or comfort, but if thou
did go to draw out of it, thou would find it a deep Well, which can never
be drawn dry: Oh then know, if Christ and holy things do not ravish thy soul,
it is because thy heart is narrow! How can a vessel with a narrow mouth, receive
all the water of the Sea into it?

SERMON XC. The Contraries to Growth in Grace. A Comfortable Advertisement to
such as mourn under their Sense of not Growing; With Reasons of the Necessity
of Growing in Grace.
JOH. 17.17. Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth.
THose that are already sanctified may yet be further sanctified, and that in
several particulars, as you have heard.

There remain some other Instances to be added, wherein this increase of
Sanctification may appear.

And the first which is also very remarkable is, 5. Efficienter.
That our Sanctification is to grow efficienter, by way of inviting, exhorting,
and bringing home others to it; For thus we are more sanctified when we are
enlarged to sanctify others instrumentally; This some take to be the meaning,
Joh. 15.8. where Christ tells his Disciples, that herein his Father is glorified
if they bring forth much fruit; And verse. 16. I have ordained you that you
should go and bring forth much fruit, which is in respect of their ministerial
emploiment; So then if thou ask how may I be more and more sanctified? The
Answer is ready, Be sanctifying others actively and instrumentally: Think it
the greatest honor in the world if thou art a means to make others holy, for
though God would use no means or Instruments in the Creation of the world, yet
he will in the Creation of the New Creature: Now Ministers they are by Office
appointed to sanctify others: The word or Truth which is the Instrument of
Sanctification is published by them; Therefore a sanctified Minister does
desire nothing more then to have a sanctified people, he desires that it may
be a Vineyard, a Garden, not a Wilderness that he is to till and look to, he
cries out with Rachel in a spiritual sense, Give me Children, else I die; All
his Study and Sermons tend to this, that his Hearers may be sanctified, and
certainly if Christ himself endured all that reproach and shame for Souls, he
desires to have the same mind that was in Christ; That as Christ is promised
to see his Seed after the Travel of his Soul, So does he pray, that after all
his pains and endeavors he may see an holy Seed; So that your Sanctification
is that for which we pray and preach, yea, private Christians in their way are
to increase in their Sanctification by promoting it in others, Psalm 51. when
David had recovered out of his sin, then would he teach transgressors their
ways, When one Disciple was converted, presently he goes and calls his
Brother: Oh the admirable Zeal that Paul showed to his Kinsmen after the Flesh,
that he could wish to be an Anathema for them! You that are Parents grow in
this active Sanctification, Let not God alone by Prayer until your Children be
sanctified: What a Comfort would it be unto you to be both the Natural and the
Spiritual Fathers of your Children: Thus ye that are Masters grow also in
Sanctification by Sanctifying Servants, by having a Sanctified Family: Oh it is
to be be feared thou know not the Worth and the Excellency of a sanctified
Estate, or the danger of an unsanctified one, that art no more diligent to call
others out of it, if rightly apprehensive herein; Thou would do as the Angel
did to Lot, while he lingered and tarried in Sodom, pull him out by violence
as it were, that he might not perish; Philosophers say, There is this
difference between those Creatures that are generated of putrid matter, and
such as come of their kind, that the former though they live and move, yet
cannot generate the like, or propagate individuals, because they come of putrid
matter, and certainly it is thus here: Those that are indeed born of God, and
have that Divine Seed in them, all their Care and Delight is to bring others
into the same estate and condition also, but then those who profess holiness
from carnal and corrupt ends, they care not for this work of Conversion in
others, like Adulterers that respect not Children but their lusts.

Secondly, We may be more sanctified in the better improving of the means of
Sanctification, For God he has appointed spiritual Ordinances, the good
managing whereof will greatly advance the Principles of Sanctification within
us: Now the Ordinances are Prayer, Hearing of the Word and Sacraments, and
whatsoever holy Institution Christ has appointed and decreed for to make us
better; The way therefore to be more Sanctified is to pray better, to hear
better, and indeed it would be well if thou did set upon the Reformation of
thy Corruptions, but not only of them but of thy Duties also; Not only to
resolve I will be proud no more, and earthly no more, and passionate no more,
but I will not pray so formally, so coldly, nor so negligently as I have done
any more; A man that grows better in his Health, eats his meat better, and
does digest it better; And thus if thou will proceed from Holiness to
Holiness, Thou will pray with more Zeal and Faith, hear with more attention
and fear: It Is impossible you should ever grow in Sanctification unless you do
begin to amend in your duties, As the Disciples were mending their nets, else
they could get no fish.

Thirdly and Lastly, We are to be more sanctified in respect of Continuance and
Duration; It is not enough that thou were once made holy and Righteous, but
thou art to continue and persevere therein to the end; For how many did begin
in the Spirit, but yet have ended in the Flesh? You have a terrible Instance
Hebr. 10.29. where a man said to be Sanctified by the Blood of Christ is yet
said at last to tread under foot the Blood of Christ, making no account of it:
It is true this man was not truly Sanctified, for then he could not have so
totally apostatized, for he had some imperfect and inchoate motions of
Sanctification, He was an Embryo and did prove abortive, and thus all the Ages
of the Church have given sundry and sad Instances of such Hypocrisies and
Apostacies: Therefore the Apostle John Revel. 22.12. after the diverse Visions
and Revelations he had about the Church, he concludes, Let him that is holy be
holy still, Let him continue and persist in his Holiness, So that whatsoever
changes and alterations there may be in the Church, yet thou art not to change
or to vary in thy Holiness, Growth in Sanctification illustrated by the
contraries unto it, which are these,
and certainly such is the opposition, and so great are the Contrarieties to
all Sanctification in Heavens way, That it is a wonder of wonders that a man is
not deprived, does not lose all, or be discouraged out of it.

In the next place Let us illustrate this Growth in Sanctification by the
opposites and contraries to it, and they are,

Idleness, Negligence, or Security; He that is idle in his outward Calling can
never expect to increase in his Wealth, Poverty comes like an armed man upon
such, and thus it is with him that is lazy in his spiritual Calling: As Solomon
observes of the Sluggard, He passed by and saw his Field full of Thorns and
Briars; Thus it is with every one that lives negligently, his whole life will
immediately be filled with all kind of vice and folly. Want of Exercise does
breed Diseases in the body, and so neglect of spiritual Exercise does consume
the Soul, Idleness and further Sanctification can be no more consistent then
light and darkness together.

Barrenness, This is the fruit of Idleness: As the Apostle says, He that
does not work let him not eat, Let him starve if he will; This is also true
here, He that will not labor in a spiritual manner, he shall not eat, he
shall neither have more Grace, or more comfort, Barrenness in one that looks
to Heaven is a very heinous sin, Heb. 6.7. The Earth which drinks in much
rain, and yet is barren, is nigh to cursing; Did not our Savior say to the
Fig Tree that had no fruit on it, Never fruit grow on thee more, Matthew. 21.12.
So that God punishes barrenness with barrenness: It Is thy sin to bear no
fruit, and it shall be thy Curse; How severely was that unprofitable Servant
dealt with, who though he did not imbezill his Masters Talent, yet because he
hid it in a Napkin, and did not improve it, Therefore he is commanded to be
cast into utter darkness, Matthew. 25.30. Tremble then under all manner of
unfruitfulnesse and unprofitablenesse, Say, How does this agree with Growth in
Grace?

Apostasy and declinings in godliness, which are either gradual in the truly
godly, or total in him that appears to be so only, Rev. 2. Gods great
Controversy with some of those Churches, was because they fell from their
first love, and they are commanded to strengthen the things that are ready to
die; This is to be a very Antipodes to increase in grace, when thy Sun does
not stand still, but go backward, and still more backward; Oh fear these
Consumptions of the Soul, Thou have not the life, the vigor, the zeal of Grace
once thou had, thou art not the man thou were once; Thou art like Sampson
that has lost his strength, like old Barzillai that can not take thy wonted
delight in heavenly things, Oh be afraid of these languors, and repent from
whence thou art fallen; But the godly Soul may be hereupon dejected, and
question whether ever it were truly sanctified or not, for they find much
decay; They have often dead and cold hearts, yea, they are not as lively as
they have been, They are even turned into stones, and are like Idols in
Christianity, having eyes they see not, and hearts they understand hot.

Despise not this Chastisement of God, yea, make an advantage of it; To feel
the disease is the way to be cured; Bless God that has done thus for thee,
that though thou do not grow in grace, or increase, yet thou see this
decay, and bewailest it; A man that sees he goes behind in his Estate, and
lays it to his heart, he will be careful to prevent it betimes.

Know these humiliations and bewailings are a kind of further Sanctification
in thee, For to grow in Grace is to discern more and more our Imperfections, to
be acquainted with all the need and wants that we are in; As he that grows in
Learning sees how much he is ignorant of, and thus he that grows in
holiness, he sees himself more unholy then ever, he thinks he has less
Grace then ever, because he is more tender and discerning then he was before;
As a man recovering out of a disease is more sensible of pain and his weakness
then he was in the height of his sickness.

There may be a growing in gifts and parts, and a growing in Graece; This
distinction is greatly to be marked, for a Christian through bodily distempers
and old Age may decay in parts, not have the memory, nor the activity, or the
hot affections he had once, and yet be a more mortified and solid Christian,
for Grace will not cure a man of bodily Diseases or of Old Age, and because the
Soul does work dependantly upon the body, as the body it is Instrument does
decay, so are the Souls Operations impaired thereby; But be not discouraged,
this is not a decay in Grace, it is only in parts and gifts, or a bodily
constitution, which though comfortable mercies, yet are not Essentials to
grace; On the other side there are too many that increase in Knowledge, that
are enlarged in parts, but decay in grace, yea, their corruptions and lusts
grow with them.

Distinguish between a further Sanctification in respect of the solidity of it,
and the affectionatenesse of it; Every decay in affection is not presently an
abating in grace, for godliness lies chiefly in the mind and will, If these
be solidly established and really bent for God, Though affections be not
passionately and sensiby put forth, yet thou may grow a more sound and firm
Christian.

There is difference between a further Sanctification, and the certainty and
evidence of it; Many a Christian grows in holiness, yet he is not sensible
of his growth as in nature a man grows, yet does not perceive it; What our
Savior spoke of the spreading and growing of the Gospel, is true also in
respect of Sanctification, Mar. 4.27. It Is as if a man should cast Seed in the
ground, and should sleep, and rise night and day, and the Seed spring up and
grow he knows not how; Thus the godly they shoot out in grace, when yet they
do not perceive it, yea, sometimes they are tempted to the clean contrary.

Let this then quicken thee up to make the more haste for the future; Let this
stumbling make thee get ground, Sometimes a David, a Peter, are left to fall,
that they may rise and go the faster; After some diseases the child grows
more then ever, The Traveller that has overslept himself, doubles his pace;
Thus let thy very decaies do good to thee.

Reasons.
In the third place Let us Consider the Reasons, why that it is not enough to be
sanctified, but we must be more and more holy every day.

We are not sanctified to stand still there, We are yet in the way, we are not
yet come to our journeys end; Hence our Christianity whilst in this Life is
compared to running in a Race, We are not come to the term and end of our
Sanctification, when we are first converted, We are but put into the right way
to happiness, we are but beginners; We have much work to do ere we shall
receive a Crown of Glory: You see that glorious Saint Paul, who labored more
then they all, yet Phil. 3.14. I press toward the mark, forgetting the things
that are behind.

We are further to be Sanctified, because there remain Relics of corruption
still to be subdued, Sanctifying grace does expel sin but by degrees, Even
as the heat by degrees does expel the cold; Now the Apostle tells us, Gal. 6.
what is in the hearts of all the godly, There are lusts rebelling against the
Spirit, and there is a law of sin in our members, If then Sanctifying grace
do not increase, sin will increase, If we be not further sanctified, we shall
be further corrupted; The heart of a man is immediately susceptible of one of
these either grace or sin; If then there be not more grace, there will be more
sin, you cannot stand at a stay; If you swim not against the stream, the stream
will bear thee down.

This is the end of all those afflictions and chastisements which God lays
upon us, that we should be more sanctified, John 15. Every branch is purged
that it may bring forth more fruit; These are like the compost laid on the
ground, these are the plowing and the harrowing of the ground to make it more
fruitful; The fire is to make the gold more pure from dross; The winnowing is
to separate the Chaff from the Wheat, and thus are all Gods Dispensations which
come in Severity to thee; They are to sanctify thee more, to make thee more
Heavenly-minded.

This is one great end of the Word, and the Preaching thereof; Sanctify them
by thy Word, and Ephesians 4. We are to be edified, to a full stature in Christ, by
the Officers in his Church, So that as the Sun and the Clouds help to make the
Ground fruitful, as the Wind filling the Sails of the Ship makes it go more
swiftly, So should the Ministry and Ordinances; Oh what knowledge and grace
should thou have attained to by this time, Let thy profiting appear to all,
as Paul said to Timothy.



It Is Gods promise that such who are godly shall grow more holy, Isa. 40.29,
30, 51. They shall renew they shall mount up like Eagles; So Hos. 14.6, 7. That
as it is a curse upon the wicked to grow worse and worse, so it is a blessing to
the godly to grow better, If God will bless their outward store, make their
oil increase, much more their graces.

Use of Exhortation to stir up your selves in holiness, Endeavor after more
grace then thou have, yet oh bewail thy leanness, thy barrenness; Use.
In how many things may thou be bettered still? Thou do greatly deceive thy
self if thou think now I may sit down, I have gone far enough.

Use 2. to confute corrupt Opinion of most men that do not like this
forwardness and strictness in the way to Heaven; Can a man be too godly, then
he may be too happy as well, and have too much of Heaven: Does not our Savior
pray here for his Disciples sanctified already, yet to be more sanctified; Do
we not daily pray that Gods grace may come more into our hearts, why then are
we displeased to see it does increase.

SERMON XCI. Of the Causes of Sanctification, and in particular of Gods Word as
the Isntrumental Cause.
JOHN 17.17. Sanctify them by thy truth, thy Word is Truth.
WE are now come to the Manner, or rather the Isntrumental Cause of our
Sanctification, and that is Truth, Sanctify them by thy truth. Some understand
this (...) for as much as (...), truly, sincerely; and so those that limit this
Sanctification to their Ministerial Separation for to preach the Word of God,
make it an opposition to Legal Customs. For whereas the Priests of the Old
Testament, being to enter into the Sanctuary, did not only first wash their
hands and their feet, but put on glorious Garments. Thus (say they) Christ
prayed that those Apostles, whom he was commissionating to preach the Gospel
over the whole world, might be, though not externally sanctified, yet
internally, by a more plentiful and copious enjoyment of the holy Ghost. But
this is too much restrictive:

Others there are that understand it finally, (...) for (...), Sanctifi^ them
to the Truth, that they may be fitted and furnished to publish it.

Others by truth understand Christ, who is the essential Truth, but the words
following demonstrate, what is meant by Truth, even The word of God; So that
our Saviors purpose is to inform, what is that saving Medium, and instituted
Organ of our Sanctification, even The word of God From hence observe.

Observe. That the word of God is the instrument of our sanctification.
That the word of God made known to us, is the instrument of God to our
Sanctification. It Is by this waters side, that a godly man being like a tree
planted, does bring forth much fruit. Are any lusts too strong for thee? Are
any corruptions too powerful? This is a two-edged sword to be the death of
them. Art thou dull, cold and lukewarm in matters of Religion? This is the fire
to inflame thee. Art thou fainting and dejected with diverse temptations? This
is the Apothecaries-shop, that has all kind of refreshments for thee, no
disease but may be cured, no doubt but may be answered. Hence the Scripture is
commended unto us, 2 Timothy 3.16. for that which is profitable to instruction,
correction, so as to make a man of God much more a private Christian perfect
and thoroughly furnished to every good work.

The explication of the point The necessity of learned officers in the Church.
But this Point deserves some Explication.

First, We say the Word of God made known unto us, is thus an instrument; and
this brings in the necessity of Officers in the Church, who by their Gifts
and Ministry are to interpret and publish the Word of God to us. For if the
Scriptures be kept in the Original Tongue, they are unknown to most people,
and so are like a Candle under a Bushel, or like a Fountain sealed up. God
therefore who has appointed his Word as a Rule, has also given gifts to men,
that there may be such, who shall divide this Word aright, and give his
children fit meat in their due season; So that if a man ignorant of the
Tongues, should have a Bible in Hebrew and Greek, What good could he get by it,
till translated and interpreted? This is like a veil upon the Scripture, and
therefore does as much hinder our understanding, as if we had a veil upon our
hearts: Hence it has been the good Providence of God, to raise up such able
and willing men, who have been ready to translate the Scripture into all kind
of Languages, that so every Nation might have it in their known Tongue. We say
therefore the Word of God made known to us is thus powerful.

Secondly, We say it is Isntrumental: Now there is a twofold Instrument, The
Word is Gods instrument, and faith is man's.
as to our purpose, both which meeting together, the Word produces it is
complete effects, There is Gods Instrument, that which he has appointed on his
part; And then, There is that which is Isntrumental on our part, and that is
Faith. As in the forementioned place of 2 Timothy 3.16. The Scriptures are
able to make thee wise to salvation, through faith: So that as Christ, who is
the essential Word of God, dwells in our hearts by faith. Thus the Scriptures
the revealed Word of God, become effectual to us by believing, The Word did
not profit the Israelites, because not mingled with faith, Heb. 4.6. So that as
the Word of God is a necessary instrument on Gods part; Thus faith is a
necessary instrument on man's part: Whenever God causes his Word to be
published, be thou ready to prepare a believing heart. This is that which
diffuseth the Word through the whole soul. The Word is Bread, but it is faith
that eats it, and digests it. No Sermon can ever do thee the least good,
unless Faith write it down in thy heart. Go home believing such places of
Scripture, and this will antidote against sin: If humane Faith can turn a
man wholly upside down, How much more may divine Faith?

Thirdly, We say it is Isntrumental, therefore the Word of God preached, The
Word is not the principal or efficient, but the instrumental cause.
is not the principal, or the efficient: No, though we have ten thousand
Teachers, and they all like Angels, yet truth could never sanctify us, unless
God give a blessing to it; and therefore you see here, Christ prays to God,
that he would sanctify them by his truth, intimating, That though they
understood it never so clearly, and remembered it never so firmly, yet if God
bless it not to this sanctifying use, they are like a Rock under much rain,
that never brings forth any fruit, and in three particulars we must necessarily
acknowledge Gods efficiency. The necessity of Gods efficiency.

Without Gods blessing men may by the Scriptures through interpretation be
corrupted.




First, Though men be never so expert and diligent in the Scripture, yet if God
bless them not with a seeing eye, and a spiritual understanding, in stead of
being sanctified by the Word, they are through mis-interpretations corrupted:
Does not the Apostle Peter tell of some, who through their ignorance did wrest
the Scripture to their perdition, 2 Pet. 3.16? There are many Heretics and
erroneous persons, who are full of Scripture, will allege many places of Gods
Word, but putting their corrupt glosses upon it, it is no more Gods truth, but
man's error, and therefore are not sanctified by it, in which sense Luther
called the Bible, The Heretics book, because they would all confidently
boast, they grounded their opinions upon that Book, when indeed it was upon
their own corruptions: Oh then, besides frequent knowledge and excellent memory
of the Scripture, know a further thing is requisite, even the Spirit of God to
lead thee by this Rule into the truth, else it is with the Scripture, as it was
with that pillar in the wilderness, it was light to the Israelites to guide
them, but darkness to the Egyptians.

2. The Word of God is not blessed to sanctify our affections, and reform our
corruptions, unless God come in as the principal, cause. As the Prophets
servant could do no good in raising the dead child, till the Prophet his
Master came; so though thou take up the Scripture, read such a place an
hundred times over against that very sin thou live in, yet it does not
sanctify till God set it home upon thee. Nicodemus was grossly ignorant about
the work of Regeneration, yet no doubt being a Master in Israel, he had often
read that promise, That God would take away an heart of stone, and give an
heart of flesh: and does not sad experience tell us, of many that have great
knowledge in Scripture, yet they live profanely and grossly? It Is true, such
men are to look for greater condemnation then others, but yet how common is it
for such who know, and read the Word of God, yet not to be reformed in their
lives thereby. Though they look in this glass, yet they wash not those
loathsome spots that are upon them, conclude the Scriptures are not in their
proper use to thee, till they have reformed thee from such sins, as thou did
formerly live in?

3. The people of God, though they have a spiritual life within them, yet under
desertions and temptations find not the Word of God effectual for joy and
consolations, till God bring such texts, and such promises close to their soul.
That we, says Paul, through the Scriptures might have consolations, 2 Cor. 1.
And David does often acknowledge, That the word of God did comfort and revive
him; but let a godly man groaning under the guilt of sin, hear the sound of
the Gospel a thousand times over, yet he will remain like dried bones, and a
parched wilderness, till God sanctify it: Oh how often have the people of God
desired comfort and assurance, read over the promises again and again, gone to
the Ministers of the Gospel to have oil poured in their wounds, yet not the
Law, but even the Gospel has been made a dead letter, till the Spirit of God
does comfort in and by it, the Word then of God, though instrumental, yet is
but isntrumental, it is not a principal.

Isntrumental Causes are physical, natural or moral.
Fourthly, When we say it is Isntrumental to Sanctification, we are to
distinguish of instrumental causes: For there are Physical and Natural
Instruments, which work by an inherent and natural power, and there are Moral
Instruments, which work by the sole institution and appointment of another. Now
the Word of God is not instrumental to Sanctification in the former, but in the
later way. The Word does not by any inherent virtue and efficacy in a natural
manner purify the heart, but by Gods appointment and his voluntary
cooperation, when and where he will; For if it did work thus naturally, then
wheresoever the Word is preached, it would sanctify, it would heal: As the
fire wherever it is, in one Country as well as in another, it does burn, but
experience does confute this, Are there not two hearing the Word of God, the
one is sanctified, the other not? At the same Sermon one is humbled, made
tender; The other is more obstinate and hardened: Whence comes all this
diversity under the Word preached, but because it is not a natural instrument?

Again, If the word of God did convert and sanctify naturally, then the grace
of God could not so much be amplified and magnified, which yet the Scriptures
do. Though it be Gods goodness, that the Sun shines, the fire burns, yet
we do not speak of it, or call it his grace, but if the Word of God ever touch
and heat any man's heart, if it ever reform his life, this is the mere grace of
God. By which it appears, That the Word of God is instrumental only by Gods
institution, and where he commands it to work, there it works; where he
requires it to break down all oppositions, there it hurrieth all down before
it; Insomuch that sometimes the most unlikely and prophanest enemies to
godliness, they are changed by the Word, One cause must not be opposed to other
causes.
and those that are very ingenuous and civilly disposed, remain in a perverse
opposition.

5. When we say, The Word of God is isntrumental to our Sanctification, this
is not to be opposed to those other causes, which God has appointed. Grace is
the efficient cause, and Christ the meritorious cause, only this is the
medium; God who could convert immediately, and reach home to our souls, as he
did to the Prophets by an immediate Revelation, has taken this way. That as
it is the goodness of God in natural things, though he be the first and
universal cause, and so could do all things immediately himself, yet he has
ordained second causes, who have their derived causality. Thus it has pleased
God in the Government of his Church, to use means and external helps, the Word
and Sacraments, thereby to work grace, when yet he could change the hearts of
men immediately, or communicate himself to his Church, as he did once without
Scriptures; When therefore you hear many oppose the Scripture to the Spirit,
and the Ministry in the Church to Christ's teaching, this is absurd and tends to
the division of those causes, which God has so wisely joined together. The
Spirit and the Scripture must not be opposed, nor Christ's teaching and the
Ministers; for that Rule is true here, Quando duorum unum est propter aliud,
sunt ut unum.

Sixthly, The Word thus made known, The Word is the ordinary means.
is the ordinary means both of our beginning and increase in Sanctification.
Two things are couched in this particular, 1. It Is the ordinary means; so that
what God may do in extraordinary cases, is not for us to dispute, but
ordinarily there is no other way to beget and increase grace but this. Neither
may we say this is dishonorable to God, to bind him to one way; for it has
pleased himself to appoint the communication of his grace by the Word
ordinarily; so that as in natural things, he will give light to the world only
by the Sun, though he could do otherwise; Therefore the Sun was not made
till the fourth day, to show us, that God could give light to the world without
a Sun. Thus it is also in spiritual things, though God could otherwise
communicate his graces, yet he has pleased to appoint this ordinary way: So
that there is no expectation of the Spirit, but in the Word, as the Word can no
ways avail without the Spirit, and it is the goodness of God that he has
commanded all spirits to be tried by this Rule, and if not conforming to it, to
reject them, which could not be, if the voice of the Spirit could be heard any
other way, but in and by the Scriptures, we then are bound to come to this
pool; if we will have the divine moving not of an Angel, but of the Spirit of
God. As the Israelite that would escape death was to keep within his doors, and
those within the Ark, who would enjoy Gods Protection. Thus must such keep
within the bounds of the Scripture, who expect Gods Spirit to guide them. But
although we are thus bound to expect Sanctification only in this means, yet we
cannot say, that God has bound himself to work these effects always, for
though he will not ordinarily dispense his grace, but in this way, yet he will
not always accompany this way, yea it is the savor of death to many, 2 Cor. 2
16.

Hence in the seventh place, The word of God, The word to some through their
wickedness becomes an instrument of greater sinfullness.
though it be ex se and quoad institutionem, an instrument of Sanctification,
yet to some accidentally through their corruption, it becomes an instrument of
greater sinfulness and wickedness So that commonly there are no greater
sinners under Heaven, then in the Church, and in the Church none greater then
where the best and most powerful means of grace are. It was thus with the
Jews, Col. 6. who enjoyed besides the ordinary Ministry of their Priests, the
instructions of extraordinary Prophets, and yet the truth of God did not
sanctify them; But go (says God to the Prophet) make their eyes blind, and
their hearts hard; and this our Savior did apply to their posterity also, who
enjoyed Christ himself, and saw all the wonderful miracles he did. This is a
dreadful and terrible thing to consider of, when in stead of sanctifying, God
shall say, Harden them, blind them, and make them more wicked by the truth.
It Is not the Word works thus of it self, but wicked hearers through their
unbelief, and unprofitableness, provoke God to give them up to believe a lie;
and for the abuse of heavenly light, they are given up to vile affections, To
many cursed sins, which is a greater judgment then to be cast into the mouth of
wild beasts, for they will only devour the body, but these will damn the soul.

Use of Direction to all the people of God, whose burden and grief it is, that
they have no more holiness, who cry out like the horsleech, It Is not enough,
and their souls refuse all comfort, because they cannot climb up this hill to
Heaven faster; let such be directed to take the right way; How willingly is the
earthly man ready to hear how he may get more wealth? and the languishing man,
how he may get more health and strength? Why then should not thou rejoice to
know which is the way to purify the heart more? Few know the divine efficacy
of Gods Word, but such who set themselves to get the virtue of it. And that
this may be isntrumental to your Sanctification,

In the first place, Remember faith, without which it can do no more good then
excellent medicines, if they be not applied, set faith a work, and then the
word of God will powerfully work upon thee. It Is with thee as thou believe.
Believe, and those high mountains of lusts shall be thrown down.

2. Bring an humble, tender and trembling heart at the teaching of it. Such an
heart King Josias had, and he is commended for it, yea Ezra 9.4. it is the
character of the godly to tremble at his Word. The hard heart, no more then the
hard Rock, can receive the seed sown into it.

3. It Is not enough to receive the Word of God at first, but keep it there. The
Apostle Peter calls it, the ingraffed Word, the Word that turns us into the
nature of it, that we are walking Bibles, as great Scholars are called walking
Libraries. David said, He had hid Gods word in his heart; This is the leaven
that will diffuse it self.

4. Rest not in the bare hearing, but join earnest and fervent prayer, that the
Spirit of God may teach inwardly, while the Word does outwardly.

Use 2. Of Instruction, How terrible a thing it is to see men grow more wicked
and ungodly, by how much the more plentifully they enjoy the Word, that the
Word should work contrary to it is nature upon thee, that this light should put
out thy eyes, that this life should bring thee to death? Oh the rivers of water
that should run out of our eyes for this matter, and yet is there any more
common judgment then this! Oh bewail and cry out for fear of it, Lord every
thing I take does me more hurt!

SERMON XCII. Of the Truth of the Scriptures.
JOH. 17.17. Thy Word is Truth.
THis is a Description or Explication of what was meant by Truth, Thy Word is
Truth; which is a Proposition.

Wherein you have, 1. The Subject. 2. The Predicate.


The Subject is described by its Name and Nature, with the propriety thereof,
Thy Word.

The Word of God is sometimes called (...) and sometimes (...); It Is called
Gods Word because spoken by him, and that two ways.

Either 1. Immediately, when God himself spoke, as unto the Patriarchs of old.

Or 2. Mediately, when he inspired the holy Prophets, and made them to publish
his Word.

It Is called at other times (...), All Scripture is given by Inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16. So Search the Scriptures, and in many other places: This is a
Description of Gods Word from the accidental form of it as it is put into
writing.

Sometimes God did govern his Church by his Word as revealed only; Thus it was
with the Church at first, In this latter Age he guides it by the Scriptures
only; There is no other Word of God, but what is written; In Christ's time there
was both, for there were the Books of the Old Testament, and they were Gods
written Word, and what Christ while on the Earth did with his own mouth speak
to the Church, that was the Revealed Word and Will of God; We read not that
Christ wrote any thing but once upon the Ground, and what that was, though
there are many and several Conjectures, yet none can certainly tell: But what
Christ spoke and did, the Evangelists afterward being guided infallibly by the
divine Spirit of God, did commit to Writing;

Object. If then you ask, What Word of God it is our Savior does here mean?

I answer, Both the Word that was written, the Scrip^ures, that were the
Oracles of God committed to the Jews, and that Word which he did manifest to
his Disciples, of which he had spoken ver. 6.

Some indeed by Word understand Christ, and it is true that Christ is the
Essential Word of God, and so also the Essential Truth, but the Context does
evidence it, that he speaks of the Revealed and Preached Word: Now this is
called Gods Word, because whether immediately delivered by God; or commanded to
be written, It Is still Gods Word, Speaking and Writing are but accidental to
it: It Is the same Essential Word, as it is the same man, though he alter his
Garment, and the same wine though put in diverse Vessels: The Word of God
written ought with as much Faith and Reverence to be received, as if God did
immediately speak it from Heaven, and though it seem incredible, yet our
Savior confirms it, Luke 16.31. that he who does not believe the Scriptures,
the Word of God written would not believe though there were miraculous ways of
publishing it.

In the next place we have the Predicate, its Truth; Interpreters judge this to
be taken out of the Psalm 119.151. They are therefore said to be Truth, not
true in the Abstract, to show the Fullness and Universality of Truth in them.

Doct. The Word of God is Truth.
Obs. That the Word of God is Truth.

This Doctrine if believed may work wonderful changes in the minds and lives
of men, for Certainly the Foundation of all Heresy and Impiety, is because
Gods Word is not received as true; In the Scripture it is often called the Word
of Truth, Colos. 1.5. 2 Timoth. 2.15. James 1.18. And sometimes Truth in the
Abstract, 1 Peter 1.22. 2 Peter 2.2.

To Open this Consider, That it is not my purpose at this time to prove the
Verity of the Scriptures, I am only to show in what sense, and wherein it is
true, and the nature of this Truth.

We take it for a principle granted by Christians, that the Word of God is
true, and although Learned men have by unanswerable Arguments demonstrated the
Truth of the Scriptures, yet that was to Heathens and Pagans, or that were not
Believers of it; It is true the work is necessary also to those that are
Christians, to make their faith more solid, certain, and clear, and the rather
because there are some wretched men rose up of late that cry down the
Scriptures, and that pretend to be above them, yea, that bid us prove the
Scriptures to be Gods Word, but I am not to deal with such at this time,
Certainly every good Christian having received this principle into him, does
find such authority and Divine Majesty coming from the Word, that he does no
more desire Arguments to prove the Scripture to be the Word of God, then he
would have another Sun to see this Sunshine: Austin long ago speaks of
such a disposition with great Indignation, O Lord, Thou have taught me to
abhor all such who say, In how many particulars Gods Word is true.
Vnde scis hos Libros esse Canonicos? This then being laid down as a sure
Foundation, Let us proceed to show in how many particulars Gods Word is true.

I. In regard of the efficient Cause God.
And First, It Is Truth in regard of the Efficient Cause, God and Christ who are
the Author of it, so that the Scripture can no more lie then God or Christ
could. The Scriptures then are the Truth of him who is the Supreme Truth, So
that as Truth it self cannot be false, so neither can Gods Word; Humane Truth
is Truth, but yet because every man may err, Therefore we cannot have such a
Faith in it, Cui non potest subesse falsum, but when we come unto Gods Word,
and his Truth, it is impossible that there should he any Error.

II. It Is the Rule of all Truth.
Secondly, It is the Rule of all Truth; That as God is the primum principium
essendi, of giving being to all Truth; so the Scripture is the primum
principium cognoscendi, the first principle to teach and inform us: The
Scripture then is true, because all Divine Truth flows from that, and every
thing is true so far as it is commensurated according to that Rule;
Whatsoever men say, whatsoever Reason says, whatsoever Traditions and Customs
say, yet if against Scripture, away with all; This is the Standard of all
Truth, all Truth (I say) necessary to Salvation, It is the Christians
Metaphysics, Ethics, and Politiques, the Rule of all Speculative and
Practical Truth, To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according
to this, it is because there is no light in them, Isaiah 8.20. Therefore it is
so often called a Light unto our Feet; If this principle were kept too; Neither
Superstitious Traditions on the one hand, nor subtle Delusions of pretended
Revelations on the other hand could ever have molested or troubled the Church.

Thirdly, It Is true materially, that is, all the matter contained therein is
true, The Historical part, The Dogmatical part, The moral part, III. It Is true
materially.
The predicting part, all contain un-erring Truth in them, Whatsoever Doctrine
is there revealed, it is to be received without any further disputing or
asking, How can it be so? The first Truth has said it, therefore the
Understanding must submit; If it be made clear, Thus says the Lord; then all
must yield, and so for the Threatenings of it whatsoever God says against the
wicked man, all the evil that is there said to come upon him doubt not of the
Truth of it, though for the while a wicked man may live in all ease and
jollity; It is not so much a Threatening as the Truth of it that makes it so
dreadful, what were the Names of Hell and Damnation, of a Day of Judgment, if
there were not Truth in them, and thus the promissory part is full of Truth:
Though a Godly man be cast down with many Temptations, weaknesses, and
Discouragements, yet the Truth of Gods Promises should be a Pillar of Marble to
him, and a brazen wall; He may sooner fear the falling of the Heavens, and the
removing of the Earth out of its place then doubt in the least of the Truth
thereof: Hence Gods Word is said to be like Silver seven times refined, So that
there is no error, no dross, or falsehood mixed with it: It it true in the
matter of the Scripture, in the Historical part especially, there are some
appearing Contradictions, and to some Learned men they have been insoluble, but
this arises from the weakness of our Understanding, not from the Scripture it
self: As there is no defect in the Sun because the Owls Eye cannot
steadfastly look upon it, yea, as God himself, So the Scriptures, because they
have most Truth in them, so are most intelligible, if there were capacious
Subjects, as the Sun is Maxim visibilis, if there were a fit Eye to behold
it.

Fourthly, It is true in respect of the Adjunct or quality of it; IV.
Qualitatively.
Truth is an affection cleaving to a Proposition, and thus the Word of God is
true qualitatively, yea, the Truth of the Scripture is affirmed by all to be
more firm and strong (though not so evident) then any thing in the world: Those
things we receive by Reason or by Sense, are nothing so true and firm as those
that we receive by Faith: It is said indeed, that all Truth consists in
indivisibili, and so nothing can be truer then another; This is graeted in
respect of Truth it self, But then if you do regard the Foundation, or the
Cause of Truth, so is one more certain then another; Thus all the Truths of
Faith are transcendant to those of Reason and Sense; We are more securely to
rest in what God says then in what we know or feel, and the reason is because
the Truth of these latter things is founded only upon a Creature, but of the
former upon a Creator, upon God himself: Oh that we did thus believe Gods word!
what manner of persons should we be; who could terrify the Godly? who could
trouble their Spirits, if this were received? And for the wicked, with what
Fear and Trembling would he go up and down? Oh the Scripture is true that
speaks against such sins, that discovers my wickedness, it is so true I cannot
deny it.

Fifthly, It is true Instrumentally, Because the Spirit of God directs us into
all Truth, and this is chiefly the intendment here; V. It Is true Instrumentally.
The Scripture is in Gods hand, and by the Spirits working leads us into all
Truth, we are all in darkness till the Scripture like the Sun does arise;
Man lives in Errors, he is nothing but a Lie, till the Scripture inform, but
though the Scripture does shine, yet as the Sun cannot make a blind man to
see, so neither does the Scripture of it self, till God give a Seeing Eye.

The Scripture works only Objectively, but the Spirit of God Subjectively,
preparing and fitting a man by it; So that as to an Archer there are two things
that are necessary, The Mark to aim at, and an Eye to see: What could an Archer
do without Eyes? Thus it is with us in all our Actions: The Scripture that is
the Mark, and therefore Sin is called (...) because it misseth of the Mark,
and then the Spirit of God that must give the Eye, Light, and Wisdom unto the
Understanding: The Scripture then is Truth, because by it Gods Spirit does
direct and lead us into all Truth.

There is a threefold Truth we cannot attain to without the Scripture.
Now there is a threefold Truth that we cannot attain unto without the
Scripture.

1. True Doctrine. 2. True Piety and godliness. 3. True Consolation and
Comfort.
The want of the first Truth causes Error and Heresy, The want of the second
Hypocrisy and profaneness, The want of the third Distrust and Despair, and
happy is that man who has this threefold Truth, and indeed one begets the
other, True doctrine begets true Godliness, and true Godliness true
Consolation.

1. True Doctrine.
For the first, Only by this Truth are we guided into true Doctrine, whatsoever
is brought in contrary or beside this, though he were an Angel he is to be
accursed, Galat. 1. This is the Rule, and so what is not according to this must
be oblique and crooked: Therefore never expect Truth from that man who is not
diligent in the Scriptures, the Rule of Truth: This has been the Cause why
most Heretics have either accused or despised the Authority of the
Scriptures, because they know that this Sun and their darkness could not
consist together; They saw their Doctrines, and the Scripture could no more
stand by each other then the Ark and Dagon; Therefore they would rather fall
out with Scripture then with their own Opinions, as if their own hearts and
Consciences were more infallible then the Bible, and as if they were not to be
made conformable unto the Scripture, but the Scripture to them.

2. True Piety.
2. Only by the Scripture do we come to true Piety and Godliness; You see in
this Text Sanctification is by the Truth, and James 1.18. God does beget us by
the Word of Truth, and many times David does commend the Word of God for this
Effect, that it forwarneth man of Sin, That it gives the Simple
Understanding, and that even young men may be cleansed from their lusts by
taking heed to Gods Word, Psalm 119. We see by these Texts that there is no
Regeneration or true Reformation but what is wrought by and through the
Scripture; Therefore Conversion is called the writing of Gods Law in a man's
heart, So that this makes it clear, that though many Heretics may live civil
and externally Religious Lives, yet they have no true Godliness, for false
Doctrine begets false Piety, when there is falsum in Intellectu, that must
necessarily produce malum in voluntate; And the Reason is plain, because
Godliness is nothing but Truth incorporated, Truth digested, Truth put into
practice; It is Gods Law in the heart (as you heard;) Hence as Poison can never
nourish a man, or afford good Health, So neither can any false Doctrine help to
any true Piety or Holiness: Men may have seeming Devotions, but as the Serpent
though it shines and glisters, yet is full of inward Poison, so whatsoever
external Acts of Piety, Zeal and Charity Heretical men may put forth, yet by
them they cannot be Sanctified if their Errors be Fundamental: It was Jeromes
Speech, Raro Hereticus fuit pudicus, and Vbi male creditur, ibi nec been
vivitur; but that is not to be always understood of their External
Conversation, for many Heretics have been admirable in their Externals: They
have had a Sheeps-cloathing upon them, and like the Panther have allured
others, because of their color, till they had devoured them: Know thy Error
will make thee more proud, loose, and it may be at last outwardly profane and
contemning of Integrity, for God will not bless any thing that is not of his
own Institution to spiritual Ends.

3. Only by the Scriptures come true Consolations, So the Apostle, 3. True
Consolation.
Through the Consolation of the Scriptures, 2 Corin. 1. No man has true solid
Joy but the true Orthodox Godly man: It is true, that as the devil may
transform himself into an Angel of Light, of Truth, So also of Consolation, and
many Erroneous persons in their way have a great deal of comfort and joy, yea,
they have said they never had so much peace and case as since they have taken
up such ways, but as their Piety was a counterfeit one, so is their joy; The
holy Ghost that leads into Truth, and is the Author of Sanctification, makes
such only to rejoice in him, and gives them this Fruit of the Spirit.

6. The Scripture is said to be true oppositely to all the Opinions, Doctrines,
VI. The Scripture is true oppositely to all the Opinions, Doctrines, and
Religions that men set up by their own fancy.
and Religions which men set up by their own fancy; For every man is said to be
a Liar, and the Antichristian Doctrines which many are delivered up to believe,
are called a lie by the Apostle, 2 These. 2.11. Turcisme, Paganism is a lie,
Popery, Heresy are Lies; Though they may be never so much pleasing to flesh
and blood; Though men carried by humane Arguments may dote on them, as they did
about Diana's Temple, yet all is a lie, yea, in practical things whatsoever
seduceth thee to do otherwise then Gods Word commands, this is false, Sin
lies, the world lies, the devil lies, for all that they do is contrary to
Gods Word; That says; What will it profit a man to win the whole world, and
lose his soul, Mar. 8 36. That says the pleasures of sin are but for a
season, Luk 13.3. Now thou will not believe this Truth, but thou hearkenest to
the world, to thy own heart, and all these betray thee and lie to thee.

Therefore let the Use be to persuade and assure thy self of Scripture-Truths,
walk and live according to the directions thereof.

SERMON XCIII. The transcendent Properties of the Scripture.
JOHN 17.17. Thy Word is Truth.
The excellent properties of the truth of Scripture.
IN what sense the word of God is said to be truth, we have declared. Let us now
come to the Properties of it. And

1. It Is the truth of God, a divine truth. In the Text it is called thy truth;

1. It Is the truth of God.
So that Divine Truth must needs transcend Humane or Natural Truths, as much as
God is above man. In humane Authorities, we say, Thus says Aristotle, Thus
says Plato, or thus say such Fathers and Councels, but in divine things, we
must say, Thus says the Lord; for because it is divine, or of God, it has an
immediate dominion and awe upon the conscience: So that whereas in humane
Authorities and Philosophical Disputes, we may boldly argue against them, we
may bring our videtur quod sic, and quod non, yet where truth comes to us as
from God, there must be an immediate submission, though our reason and sense
and all the world should contradict, yet we must say, here is a greater then a
Pythagoras here, Deus dixit: Therefore observe, the Prophets they do often
repeat this, Thus says the Lord, because nothing could amaze and humble their
hearers so much, as that God said it; and indeed when once it is received as
Gods truth, then the heart does readily obey, as 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. you may there
see wherein the truth preached does work in it is due and proper manner, even
when it is received, not as the word of man, but of God. Divine truth will have
divine operations, but when received as man's truth, it has but humane effects,
such as Tullies Orations, or Demosthenes had upon their auditors, which is like
the influence of the Moon, that does not give true heat and life, but the word
of God works like the Sun, not only in respect of penetrating light, reaching
into all the inwards of the soul, but also vivifical heat. It makes men live a
spiritual and heavenly life, whereas moral truths help only to an external
honesty. It Is true, that which Ambrose said, Omnis veritas est a Spiritu
sancto, Every truth is of the holy Ghost, even natural and humane truths are.
But as God is the author of nature, and yet of grace in a more special way: so
the Spirit of God is the author of all truth; but in a more peculiar manner of
Scripture truths: Therefore all Scripture is said to be given by inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16. Consider then, the truths we deliver you out of Gods word are his
truth. Thus says the Lord against the heretical person, Thus says the Lord
against the profane person: Oh if it were only men that say thus, it might be
easily rejected, but it is God that speaks it, and therefore none may oppose!

2. It Is infallible.
2. Because it is Gods truth, therefore it is infallible; it is so certain, that we
can never be deceived, whosoever believed according to Scripture, and lived
according to Scripture, that a man was never confounded or ashamed, he will
never have cause to wish, Oh that he had taken another way! Oh that I had done
otherwise! Thus David, Psalm. 119. Then I shall not be confounded, when I have
respect to all thy Commandments. Have a conscientious respect to Gods Word in
thy Religion, and in thy conversation, this will prove infallible, this is the
Israelites cloud, and pillar upon their Tabernacle, we are to go when that
goes, we are to stand still, when that stands still; This is the Star that
will certainly guide us to Christ; All divine faith is infallible; in
Philosophy, in humane Authorities we may be deceived, but in the Scripture we
cannot. Venture all upon the truth of Scripture, it will never deceive thee,
when thou will find Satan and the world liars.

3. It Is an eternal Truth; Even as God does abide for ever, so will his truth,
3. Eternal.
Mat. 5. Heaven and earth shall sooner pass away then one iota or tittle of it.
Truth will abide when these heavens and earth shall not abide at least not in
the same manner as they are now, and excellently to this purpose speaks 1 Pet.
1.23, 24, 25. being born of the incorruptible word of God, for all flesh is
grass, but the word of God abides for ever; and this is the Word which by the
Gospel is preached to you, Scripture-truth abides for ever, whereas all
errors and false ways, though they have overflowed for a while, yet presently
they withered again. What is become of the Manichees, Arrians, Pelagians,
Nestorians, and those thousands of Heretics? They had a time of glory, a show
in the world, but then died, neither lamented nor desired; Scripture-truth will
prevail, even as Christ the essential Truth. As the Sun will at last get the
better of all clouds and foggy mists, and cannot always be in an eclypse; so
it is with the truth of God. All errors are like men, mortal, they pass away; if
any error be so strong as to hold to threescore years, it begins like man to be
full of pain and sorrow; They are compared to hay and stubble, these will not
long continue; They are like David's rich and great men in the world, like the
grass upon the house top, not only homo, but haereticus est bulla; Truth will
continue in the field, when all errors will lie prostrate and conquered, and
have no other burial, but that of an Ass, as that despised King had.

4. It Is an universal Truth, within the bounds of Religion; I do not say, 4.
Universal.
that all philosophical and mathematical truths are in the Scripture, but all
soul-saving truths are, as 2 Timothy 3. The Scriptures are able to make thee wise
to salvation. There is nothing for doctrine, or for practice, but that can
guide thee. This sufficiency and perfection of Scripture-truth, we do justly
maintain against the Papists, who as they foolishly set up their lighted tapers
at noonday, so they add their traditions to the Scripture; but it is often
said, we may neither add to it, nor detract from it: therefore it is abundantly
sufficient: Now it is good with Tertullian, to adore this fullness of the
Scripture for thy faith and doctrine, to believe as thou read, to worship
God as thou read: As the child in the womb is nourished only by the mother,
through her nourishing: Thus the Church of God is instructed, nourished and
enlivened only from God by the Scriptures. We read the Manna fell from heaven,
but there fell a dew before it to constringe and bind the earth: Thus truth
falls from God, but the Scripture is like the dew to keep it together, that it
may be for our use; Let not then tradition, custom, antiquity, multitudes, nor
such Gorgons heads lifted up by men terrify thee, but follow the word in thy
faith and worship, where that stands still, do not thou go further, where that
goes, do not thou stand still. And as for faith, so for thy life, know that
has all practical truth in it, necessary to salvation, that teaches, and that
only, how to repent, how to be converted, how to believe in Christ, how to
pray, how to hear, how to be in the world, yet to have a conversation in
heaven. That teaches thee how to be godly in thy relations, a godly father, a
godly child, a godly master, a godly servant. Now this most people are greatly
faulty in, they will be of no Religion, but what the Scripture commands, yet
they will live otherwise, and do otherwise. When thou see an heretic thou
will bring Scripture against him; And is not Scripture against thy profaneness
and impiety? as well as there are damnable heresies, so are there damnable
wickednesses in men's lives.

5. Supernatural.
5. It Is a supernatural Truth. Many of the truths revealed in Scripture are
such, as no Plato's, no Aristotle's, no wisdom of man, though raised beyond
Solomon's, could ever have attained unto, such as the doctrine of the Trinity,
of the Nature, Person, and Office of Christ, of the Resurrection, of a day of
Judgment, and the state of men afterward. The former of these especially could
never be discovered by natural light; even Adam though created after Gods
image, yet needed a revelation of these. We have no innate or acquired
knowledge about them, and though many worthy Divines have endeavored to prove
the Trinity by reason and humane similitudes, yet the surest and most evident
way is the Scripture; so that we may say of them all, which Austin speaks of
one of them, viz. Of Christ's being God and man, If you can give a reason, it
would not be mirabile, and if an example, it would not be singular. It Is true,
there are many things in Scripture, which we know by natural reason, as that
there is a God, but the knowledge by reason is nothing so evident and firm, as
that by Revelation; so that the truth of God, being in the chiefest parts of it
supernatural: It Is no wonder, that the wisest Heathens became vain in their
imaginations, and that their greatest Religion, was their highest impiety, and
within the Church. The more men have forsaken Scripture, and pleased corrupt
reason in the doctrinal part, and corrupt fancies in the worshipping part; They
have been very erroneous and absurd; hence the truth of God is called a
mystery, and said to be revealed, because man's reason could no more attain unto
it, then a dwarf can reach to the heavens, Zacheus must get upon this Tree to
see Christ: Hence no others have been able to endure the glorious luster of the
Scripture, because errors are natural, the Scripture supernatural. All
heresies have run up and down from one age to another, like Cain fearing
least every Text of Scripture should kill them: Do not then judge of
Scripture-truths by thy carnal reason? The work is above thy natural
understanding.

6. A holy truth
6. It Is a godly holy Truth; The holy Scriptures they are called, and well may
they be so called, for nothing is a stronger argument to demonstrate the Divine
Authority of Scriptures, than the holiness thereof. Take all the moral books in
the world, they do as much come short of the holiness of the Scripture, as
coals do of the glory of the Sun. Plutarch, Seneca, Epictetus, these will
teach you to have the clean skin of morality, but not the inward life and sound
vitals of holiness; What transcendent holiness does the Scripture teach us?
such as the men of the world know not; Holiness in our natures, first of all,
Regeneration, neither the name nor the nature of it, was known amongst the
Heathens, they knew not man's natural pollution, neither did they see a
necessity of such an internal renovation.

Again, Such holy duties the Scriptures teach, that not only the doctrinal, but
the practical part of it, is a mystery to flesh and blood, such are faith in
Christ, love to our enemies, self-denial, and a readiness to take up the
Cross. Many of these duties are accounted folly and madness by wise men after
the flesh. It teaches an heavenly life, fellowship and communion with God, to
do all things from holy principles, and to holy ends; so that the holiness
that is in the truth of Scriptures should much affect us. But oh how few read
and delight in the Scriptures, because of the holiness in them? You read them
for dispute, or to know the History, and to be able to hold up Arguments; but
who is there, that thinks this, the truths of Scripture are holy? They are to
make heavenly and pure, they will forewarn of sin, they quicken to grace, they
inflame to faith and love: Oh mind this, all Scripture-truth is for holiness!
As meat is not to be looked upon, but eaten and digested.

7. A precious truth.
7. They are precious excellent Truths, and therefore compared by David to fine
gold, and by Solomon preferred above all jewels, Prove. 3.15. The Apostle also
compares true Doctrine to gold, silver and precious stones, 1 Cor. 3.12. and
they are called precious promises, as a precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.1, 4. These
show in what high degree and dignity the truths of Scripture should be with us.
Austin said, Veritas Christianorum was incomparabiliter pulchrior Helena
Graecorum; If they did strive about her, How much more ought we for the truth
of God? The Prophet complained of old, None pleaded for the truth, Isa 59 4.
neither were valiant for the truth, Jer. 9.3. The truths then of the Scripture
should be more unto us, then any earthly comforts whatsoever: You see Christ
makes this one main end of his coming into the world, to bear witness unto the
truth, John 18 37. Ann thus the Martyrs, they thought Gods truth more worth
then their lives, and how many millions have willingly endured the worst of
deaths, to bear witness to the truths of the Scripture? So that it is very
strange, how such a spirit of delusion should be upon men, to make no matter of
true Doctrine, to think Heresies and Errors are nothing. Certainly, the godly
Martyrs, that burnt at the stake, had other thoughts of it; and the Scripture
does commend it as the great mercy of God unto a people: Therefore God
promises Jer. 33.6. He will reveal abundance of peace and truth; and in many
places, truth is still joined unto peace, as if all the peace and earthly
advantages in the world were nothing, if we might not have the truths of God
also. Therefore the Apostle John told that elect Lady, He had no greater joy,
then to see her children walking in the truth; and the Spirit of God is
promised, as the greatest mercy we can have, John 16.13. That he will guide us
into all truth. Natural truth is precious, What pains and travel have many used
to find that out? They have dispossessed themselves of their goods to find it
out; yea they have been so ravished in the contemplation thereof, that they
have forgotten to eat their bread, and have wholly neglected themselves, and
all pleasure. Hence in their Sacrifices to Apollo, whom the Heathens made God
of truth, they cried out, (...), Truth is sweet, Truth is sweet. Truth is the
natural food to the soul, as meat is to the body; but then divine supernatural
truth, which does so immediately concern our salvation and eternal happiness,
how precious and dear should that be to us? In other things ignorance is not
damnable, but here to miss of the truth is to fall into destruction. It
profits not a man to measure the heavens and the motions thereof. To understand
all the Laws of Nations, with their cases thereupon; or with Solomon, to be
able to speak of the nature of all things, if a man want the knowledge of
Scripture-truths.

Lastly, This truth, though precious, 8. A bitter truth.
yet because it is opposite to a corrupt heart, It Is very bitter, and makes most
men enemies to it. It Is a truth requiring holiness, hatred of sin,
mortification of lusts; and because it is so, therefore the vain corrupt hearts
of men love errors and lies, or deceits by the devil and sin, rather then
the truth of Scripture. Thus Christ John 8.40. told the Pharisees, They thought
to kill him, because he told them the truth. And Paul, Gal. 4.16. Am I become
your enemy, because I tell you the truth? The Ministers of this truth are
compared to light that is offensive to sore eyes, and salt that does grieve and
vex the wounded man. Indeed truth, if rightly considered, is not grievous, but
to do otherwise then obey truth. It Is not the threatening of hell and damnation,
that should be so grievous, but the punishments themselves. They cried out of
our Savior, saying, It was an hard speech, of what he had spoken, but it is an
harder thing to lie roaring in hell-flames to all eternity.

Use. Is the word of God thus Truth, then be possessed and filled with it? Let
truth be in your minds, truth in your hearts, truth in your lives; Take heed
of all errors and heresies, they oppose the Doctrinal Truths of the Scripture:
Take heed of all profaneness and impiety, they oppose the practical Truths: Oh
remember, if Gods word be truth, then woe be to thee, thou art in a lying way,
in a seduced and damnable way; Only know it is not enough to have a general
knowledge of Scripture-Truths, but endeavor after a particular practical
discerning of them; The Scripture calls it knowing the Truth as it is in Jesus,
Ephesians. 4.21. and the acknowledging of the truth after godliness, Tit. 1.1.
Tantum scimus, quantum operamur; We know no more in Gods account then we put in
practice; Take heed then of being in the number of those Romans 1.18. who hold
the Truth in unrighteousness; Say as the Apostle in his Ministry, 2 Cor.
13.18. So thou in thy whole particular conversation, I can do nothing against
the Truth, but for it; This would be a Preservative every way.

SERMON XCIV. How requisite a sound mind and a holy life are to a Minister of
the Gospel; And of Christ's peculiar love to, and care of such.
JOH. 17.18. As thou have sent me into the world, even so have I sent them into
the world.
THis Verse begins a New Argument or Reason why the Apostles need
Sanctification by the Truth; It Is drawn not from the general Consideration as
they are Believers, but from the particular Relation they were in,
commissionated with Office to preach the Truth of God.

Before I enter upon the words, the Coherence of this Argument with the
Petition does deserve some Consideration, though the particle of Connection be
not expressed, yet it is to be supposed, howsoever this follows next in order
upon that Petition, and therefore there cannot be but Coherence of the matter.

I shall not trouble you with the Conjectures of Interpreters, but pitch on
that which is easily acknowledged to be very genuine and plain.

And first, Whereas Sanctification by the Truth is desired for the Apostles,
because they were to be Officers in the Church, and Ministers of the Gospel:
Whence Observe,

Doct. Truth and holiness are requisite in Ministers of the Gospel.
That Truth and Holiness are requisite in the Ministers of the Gospel;
Sanctify them by thy Truth; Why? because they are sent to preach the Gospel,
and they have thy Authority; This is the reason why Christ though he called his
Apostles immediately from their worldly calling, yet it was two years, as
Chemnitius in his Harmony computeth, ere he sent them out to preach, but kept
them in his Family, and under his Instruction, that so they might attain both
to true Doctrine and an holy Life; This was represented Exodus 28.30. by the
Vrim and Thummim, which were to be on the Breastplate, Light and Perfection,
sound Doctrine and Integrity of Life; Hence the Apostle in the Qualification of
Ministers requires doctrinall abilities, that he be apt to teach, and can
divide the Word of God aright, as also many practical Qualifications for holy
and unblamable life, 1 Timothy 3.2. The Scripture compares the Ministers of God
to Stars, and that both for their light and purity, differing (as Philosophers
say) from the substance of sublunary things.

1. Let us Consider the Grounds why they are to be endowed with Truth, Why it
is requisite Ministers should be endowed with soundness of judgment.
and to have a sound mind.

From the Quality of the Office; Their Office is to preach the Truth; They are
appointed to declare the Word of God, and that only not humane Inventions, not
the thoughts of their own heart, for if Christ himself avoucheth this, that his
doctrine was not his own, but his that sent him, and does still refer all to
the Father that sent him, how much more ought the Ministers of God to declare
what they read, and what they have received of God by the Scriptures, not
their own conceits; Thus the Prophets of old began their Sermons with Thus
says the Lord, and the Apostles begin their Epistles with their call and
office, Apostles and Servants of God; Seeing therefore they have such an Office
and Trust that requires in the very Essentials of it nothing but Truth, they
ought earnestly to pray for it; They are called the Light and the Salt of the
Earth; Now if the Light be dark all the body is dark; If Salt has lost his
Seasoning, it is good for nothing; By their Office they are to be the Ministers
of Truth, as Paul said, I can do nothing against the Truth, but for it, 2 Corinthians. 13.8. This is a Minister after Gods own Heart that is thus qualified.

subordination of their Office; Christ has not sent them to be Masters and
Lords over men's Faith, to propound their own Dictates, and to anathematize such
as do not immediately obey, No, They have a Ministerial not a Magisteriall
Office, for though in respect of the people they are Guides and Overseers, and
Shepherds, yet in respect of God they are Ministers and Servants; They are
under Christ the Head, and so must not deliver any thing but what they have
received; They may not make Articles of Faith, they cannot appoint the worship
of God, They cannot institute new Sacraments: It Is spiritual Treason in them to
do: this They are like the skillfull Gemmary that does not make the Jewel,
only by his skill does discover which is true, or like Solomon that did not
make the true Child, but by his Wisdom did manifest it, So the Ministers of
the Gospel though never so Learned, never so holy, yet they of their own
authority cannot make any new Truth or new Ordinance, Therefore they are
compared to Ambassadors that are bound up by their Commission; To Stewards not
Masters in the House; The Scripture is called Gods Testament or Will, Now the
Lawyer may not add or take away from it, though he has never so much skill
and knowledge, it would be sinful forgery in him to do so; Thus Beloved, we
Ministers are bound up to Gods Word as that last Will: he has appointed how he
will have his Church governed, how it must believe, how it must worship, and it
must be high Sacrilege to add or detract from it; Therefore if
Scripture-Truths be thought too much above Reason; if they be thought too
strict or precise, to contrary to flesh and blood, blame not us; It Is not our
truth, we did not make the Bible, It Is not our Scripture.

Effects of the Ministry, or the Ends why God has appointed it, and certainly
the Sun may as well be without Light and Heat, as the Ministers of the Gospel
be without Truth.

Conversion and Regeneration; to make men reform their lives upon just and holy
Grounds. This can never be without Truth, James cap. 1. He has begotten us by
the Word of Truth; Lies and false Doctrines can no more convert then dirt can
make clean, then darkness can give Light: An erroneous or heretical Minister
may pervert many but not convert, he may subvert the Souls of thousands, he may
glory in this, and rejoice in the multitude of Disciples, but all this while
they are sent of the devil, and they do his work, destroy souls; The Ministers
of God are like public Springs if they be performed, instead of refreshing,
they kill, instead of giving the bread of life, they give stones and serpents.

promote the work of grace begun; It Is to water where any Seed is sown, as
Ephesians. 4.11. to bring us to a full stature in Christ; Now a Minister without
Truth can no more help forward the growth of the Godly then a dead Mother can
nurse her Child; We increase in grace, by the same way we are converted, and
therefore they who think by an erroneous Ministry to advance their Heavenly
Life, do as if an hungry man should get up to an high Hill, and think by
swallowing down the wind to live and grow stronger.

direct and guide the tempted and troubled Soul, to speak a word in season to
him; But now a Minister without Truth is like a Physician without skill, Come
to the diseased wounded Soul that lies under this doubt and that Case of
Conscience, he knows not how to direct him, yea, such do more trouble the
godly, as God complains of the False Prophets, Eze. 13.22. they made sad the
heart of the Righteous, whom God would not have made sad.

prevent Errors and false Doctrines, at appears, Ephesians. 4. That we henceforth
be not led aside with every wind of doctrine; Men destitute of solid grace are
as apt to be carried away with errors, as chaff with the wind; A sound
Ministry is appointed to reprove these, as the Sun is to dispell darkness, but
if the Minister be seduced himself by error, how can he lead others into the
Truth? Will not our Saviors Proverb be made good, the blind lead the blind,
and both fall into the ditch; Thus you see the necessity of Truth.

Why Ministers must be holy.
In the next place there must be Thummim as well as the Vrim; There must be
burning as well as a shining light, as John Baptist was: and holiness of life
is required of the Minister.

For his own sake, his condemnation will be the greater, for he sins against
greater light and knowledge, he knows his masters will, he sins against a
peculiar engagement, because he is bound to draw nigh to God; Oh the confusion
that will be when he has preached to others, he himself to become a Castaway;
Attend to thy self and to thy doctrine, to life, 1 Timothy 4.16. as well as
studies, Suth are like the water in baptism that after it has been in a
Sacramental way is thrown into the kennel; No condemnation like theirs, they
are from the pinnacle of the Temple thrown headlong into hell.

In respect of others, For a godly life is a Testimony to confirm the Truth we
preach, when we preach there is a God, there is a day of judgment, and live
accordingly, this confirms to all, that we our selves believe it to be a
Truth, an holy life is like a miracle to confirm our doctrine; As the Apostles
were endowed with Miracles to establish the Truth they preached, they could
cast out devils, tread upon Serpents, and take no hurt, if they did eat any
deadly thing; Thus it is a wonderful thing to confirm the Truths we preach,
when though we live in the temptations of sin, and tread upon Serpents, yet
acquire no spiritual hurt to our souls.

Our holy life will awe and keep in fear the Consciences of wicked men; Not
only powerful and sound preaching but conscientious and unblamable living will
awe men's Consciences; Why did Herod fear and reverence John Baptist, though he
was a King? but because he was a just and a holy man, Mark 6.20. Thy godly
mouth will stop their mouths and convince their consciences.

by the devils polecy, who has always stirred up Instruments to traduce their
lives, to lay such things to their charges as they were never guilty of, and
why? because if that be once received, that they are wicked hypocrites, they
can never do any good; Christ's life was traduced, that he was a friend to
sinners, that he kept company with Publicans; You see they quarrelled even at
his life; Athanasius was traduced for an Adulterer by the Arians, and this has
always been the custom of the devil and his Instruments to throw so much dirt
and mire upon the godly Ministers of Christ, that men have not known what they
are; I could tell you what the Papists say about Luther and Calvin, that you
might think they were the vilest Monsters that lived, and this is because a
godly life is a great conviction in the world, and aweth even the Enemies
Conscience.

Use of Instruction, What is the duty of people even to follow Christ? Use.
In this Prayer, he being to send out his Apostles, this he desires as a chief
thing, Truth and Godliness, a sound mind, and a godly heart, and the Apostles
thought this to be of so great a consequence that when Ministers were ordained
and set apart to the work, They spent that day in fasting and prayers; You
cannot discover wicked and ungodly men better then in this, they care not what
a Ministry they live under, or whether they have any at all; The more
erroneous, the more profane and loose he is, they like him the better; Is this
to pray as Christ did for thy Sanctification? God makes it a great judgment
when he removes faithful and wise Pastors, and sends foolish and wicked men
in their rooms.

2. Where God does settle a Ministry rightly qualified, prize it for the works
sake, See whether the Ministry has been a converting, instructing, and
edifying Ministry to thee, Fear lest thou lie under a spiritual Curse or some
Soul-judgements, that so no preaching can do thee any good.

A second doctrine observable from the Coherence of the Apostles mission, with
Christ's Petition is,

That Christ has a peculiar love and special care of those who are in
Church-Office according to his rule and way; T Doct. 2. That Christ has a
peculiar love of those who are in Church-Office according to his rule and way.

In what particular Christ's care is showed to his Ministers.


Such as are sent by him are under his proper care and protection, he does not
only pray for the Apostles as believers, but as in that office,

To open this, Consider in what particulars his care is shown to his Ministers.

It is to guide and lead them into the Truth, instructing them with wisdom
and ability to that work, Christ calls none to his work, but he gives them
answerable abilities; Though the Apostles were at first ignorant and
illitera^^, yet how gloriously did he furnish them with gifts and power to do
Miracles before he sent them to preach unto the world; Now though the Officers
of Christ in their Succession have not the promise of such infallibility, yet
because of their office and call, they discharging their duty, and using the
means God has appointed, God will more peculiarly go along with them, and
bless them then private Christians, else why should the Scripture give them
the name of Guides and Light? Why should he command the people to submit
themselves to them, and that he who despises them despises God, for though
these places prove not infallibility, yet they do, that God has appointed this
orderly way, and that he who would expect Gods blessing must make use of their
guidance and Ministry.

in clothing them with inward strength, and corroborating of them so by zeal
and heavenly fortitude, that they will discharge their Duty though men rage and
oppose; The Apostle speaks excellently to this purpose, 2 Timothy 1.7. God has
not given us the spirit of fear, but of powar, love, and a sound mind,
Therefore he must not be ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord; Paul he desires
the Philippians, to pray for him, that he may preach the Word boldly; God
promises Jeremiah to make his forehead like brass, and not to be afraid of
wicked men; And thus Micah cried out, I am full of the power of God to tell
Jacob his transgressions. Mic. 3.8.

and defending them in the midst of their wicked Enemies; Hence Christ is said
to hold these Stars in his right hand, Rev. 1.17. and the prayer of Christ must
needs be heard which he instanceth in in this Chater, They are not of the
world, and the world hates them, therefore he prays God would keep them, and
it is wonderful to see how God has preserved his faithful Ministers in all
ages, though some have died for the Truth.

Lastly, He is with them in blessing their labors, and giving increase to
their planting and watering, as Christ promised, I will be with you to the end
of the world; By their labors he pulls down the Kingdom of Satan; As soon as
the Apostles preached Satan began to fall like Lightning from Heaven.

Now the Grounds of this peculiar love are,

1. Because they have the same general call and Office, as Christ himself
has; As thou have sent me, I have sent them; Though there be many particular
differences, yet in the general they agree; Christ was sent to publish the Word
of God to bear witness to the Truth; and because of this the world opposed
him, reviled him, and he endured great contradiction of sinners; It was
therefore Christ's own case, and then he will pity such as are tempted like him.

2. It Is his work and emploiment they are about, They go out in his Authority,
They act in his Name, They preach him as the Messiah, They endeavor to bring
all into Obedience to him, and therefore he will have a tender special care over
them.

3. Their work is a difficult and dangerous work; The Office is if faithfully
discharged contrary to the lusts and ways of all men; No wicked man can love a
true and godly Ministry, no more then soar eyes can endure the Sun.

Use of Encouragement to the godly Minister, to go on with his work, maugre all
the opposition and contempt of wicked men; It Is not their work but Christ's,
They are not their own but Christ's, Let them not fear while he is at their
right hand.

Use 2. How grievous a sin it is to oppose and set against the Ministry of God,
and that when faithfully discharging their duty, because they preach the Truth,
and press to a godly life, this enrageth thee: To such they are commanded to
shake off the dust of their feet.

SERMON XCV. Of Christ's Mission to the Office of a Mediator.
JOHN 17.18. As thou have sent me into the world, so also have I sent them into
the world.
HAving considered of the Coherence of this Text with the preceding. We come
now to the Argument, or Matter itself, and that is taken from the peculiar
Relation and Office, that they are put in.

Now this their Office is described,

1. From the Nature and Quality of it, It Is a sending. They did not of
themselves intrude into it, or go without a Call, but they were sent.

2. There is the Efficient Cause, or the Person sending, I sent them (says
Christ.)

3. There is the Subject, who were sent, and that is the Disciples.

4. The Term to which, of their sending, and that is into the world.

Lastly, Here is the Example and Pattern, Even as the Father sent me into the
world. Not that there is the same likeness in every particular, but in the
general, they both agree in this, that they have a Call from God.

I shall treat in order, and first begin with Christ's mission, which is made
the Pattern of the Apostles, and do observe,

That Christ was sent of the Father, and did not of himself undertake that
Office, Observe. Christ was sent of the Father, and did not of himself undertake
that office; he was employed in, while on the earth.
he was employed in, while on earth. Christ himself would not be the Prophet,
Priest or King of his Church without a Call, or Commission from the Father
thereunto. Hence in John's Gospel, he does so exceeding often mention this,
That his Father sent him, still resolving his Doctrine, his Authority, his Will
and Works into him that sent him. Therefore not only the twelve Apostles are
called so, but Christ himself is called an Apostle, Heb. 3.1 Consider the
Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus. An Apostle is as much
as one that is sent; and thus Christ is there called an Apostle; and therefore
some make a mystery in that John 9.7. when Christ cured the blind man, he bids
him, Go and wash in the pool of Siloam, which is by interpretation sent, says
the Evangelist, as if hereby our Savior would teach, that he was the Messiah,
that was to be sent into the world. That our Savior did expect a sending, or a
Call, appears notably Heb. 5 4. No man takes this honor upon himself, but
he that is called, speaking of the Priesthood; Of Christ's Commission consider
these things.
and so also Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest.

But let us explain this, for this truth is profitable unto us, seeing it was
for us, that he was sent. And

First, Consider, that though the three Persons are equal in Nature and
Dignity, they are all God and infinitely blessed for evermore, yet the
Scripture does represent unto us an order in their operations ad extra to
usward, especially in the work of our Redemption, one operation is
appropriated to the Father, another to the Son, and another to the holy Ghost.
To the Father is constantly applied the sending of Christ his Son into the
world, as at the second verse of this Chapter, Gal. 4.4. In the fullness of time
God sent forth his Son; and 1 John 4.9. it is the Father that sends him: So that
the original of all our peace and salvation is the love of the Father.

2. That which is appropriated to the Son, is to be sent; To be the Person
that shall procure our Redemption. And

3. To the holy Ghost, that he is sent both by the Father and the Son, for the
application of those benefits which he shall procure for us: Therefore the
Father is said to send him, Joh. 14.16. and Christ says, He will send him,
Joh. 16 7. Thus he is called, The Spirit of Christ, as well as the spirit of
God, because now he is sent by Christ as a Mediator. The holiness in Adam was
wrought by the Spirit of God, as the third Person in the Trinity, absolutely
considered, but now it causes holiness in believers, relatively as the Spirit
of Christ; So that in Gods dispensations about man's salvation, there is an
appropriated order in the operations of the three Persons.

The mission or sending of Christ here spoken of, does not relate to him, as
the second Person, but as he is Mediator, for so as he is the Son of God, he is
not sent but begotten, And thus the Scripture when it speaks of him in that
respect, calls him, The only begotten Son of God; but this mission is in
time, and of a voluntary dispensation, whereas the other was natural and of
eternity, Christ was always the Son of God, but not always sent to be the
Mediator of his Church, unless in the purpose and decree of God: So that this
sending of Christ respects him as God and man, and denotes that incarnation of
his, with the discharge of all those duties, that thereby he undertook.

Gods sending of him, does signify the authoritative Mission and calling of
him to that work. The Apostle diligently presses this, Heb. 5.5. that Christ
glorified not himself, but was called by God to his Priesthood, called of God
to be ^ Priest after the order of Melohisedech; yea Chapter 7.21. the Apostle
presses this, that he was made an High Priest by an oath, The Lord swear, and
will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever: And certainly, this must needs be
of great comfort to us, when we shall read that Christ was so solemnly
invested with this power to forgive sins, to sanctify our natures, to procure
our salvation. Things that are done by those that have not a Call, are said to
be null and invalid, they have not powerful efficacy and success, but Christ
was authorized by God to be thy Savior, he had his Commission to do it, he
would not take this work in hand, till he was called unto it.

The Father did not only call him thus to this wonderful employment, but he
did qualify and fit him with all abilities for that work, he poured out his
Spirit upon his humane nature without measure. So that as those in the Old
Testament, when called to any Office were anointed: Thus Christ had not a
temporal, but a spiritual Unction, Psalm 45.7. there God is said to anoint him
with the oil of gladness; Therefore Joh. 6.27. the Father is said to have
sealed him to this work. Thus Christ acknowledges, when he says, a body thou
have prepared for me; the meaning is, he had an universal fitness for the work;
and this also is of great comfort, that Christ is not only called to be our
Savior, but he is qualified with all sufficiency thereunto; there is nothing
that a poor humbled sinner could desire in a Savior, but there is a treasury
of it in him, Col. 1. It pleased the Father that in him should all fullness
dwell: Oh then, why do not the people of God believe more firmly, and walk more
comfortably? What do they want, which is not in this Christ? Shall Christ send
his Officers to work, and endue them with proportionable power, and shall not
the Father send him with all fitness and fullness to that work?

In that Christ is said to be sent, there is implied, that the fountain from
which our salvation does arise, is the mere good will and pleasure of God the
Father. So that although our Justification, Sanctification and Glorification be
to be attributed to the merits of Christ, and it is for Christ's sake that we
enjoy them, yet the sending of Christ into the world, and giving him to become
our Mediator, is wholly from the absolute good pleasure of God; Christ did not
merit his Incarnation, he did not merit that he should be sent into the world:
No, this is said to be Gods love; Not that hereby we are to make comparisons,
as if the second Person loved us less then the first, as the Socinian would
divide, but to admire the great love of either in their distinct operations.
That conceit also is vain of some, that say, God upon the fore sight of the
will of Christ's humane nature, to become our Savior, and presupposing this
determinate choice, did therefore appoint him to be our Mediator: This, they
think, will reconcile Christ's necessary Obedience, and his free will together;
but then the Scripture would not have attributed it to Gods love, and to the
Fathers love, but Christ's love as a man, which yet it does not.

In that Christ is said to be sent, there is implied, that he is under an
Office and Obligation of faithfulness and trust. So that as it lay upon the
Apostles faithfully and diligently to accomplish their Office; thus also it did
upon Christ, and therefore he does so often call it the command, that he had
from the Father, implying, that if he did not accomplish all that for which he
was sent, he should be guilty of unfaithfulness and disobedience; and here also
is contained much consolation; for why should the believer doubt of Christ's
willingness and readiness to pardon, sanctify or heal him, seeing that Christ
is under a command to do this, he is betrusted with this work, he would be
found blameworthy, if he did not accomplish all that he was called unto? As
it is thy duty to believe in him, so he has voluntaily submitted, to make it
his duty, to give thee rest and ease.

Though Christ be sent, and be thus under command, yet we are not to think that
this is done against his will, as if the Father did compel him to this work
against his desire: No, how readily does he profess his coming into the world,
Lo, I come to do thy will, O Lord, thy Law is within my heart? Psalm. 40.8. So
that though the work was bitter to the humane nature, which appeared in those
prayers he poured forth with so much agony, If it be possible, let this Cup
pass away, yet he offers himself with all willingness to do this work: Oh no
wonder, if this dispensation be called a mystery, not only in respect of the
revelation of it, but also, because of the incomprehensibleness of it, we are
never able to comprehend this length, and breadth, and depth of love which is
in Christ Jesus.

We may consider of a twofold Office Christ was sent to, which yet cannot be
well distinguished, because one is contained in the other.

1. There is the Office of a Mediator, whereby he was sent to be a Savior of
his people from their sins; and this is the sending the Scripture so much
speaks of.

But 2. There is a sending as a Prophet, to teach and guide his Church, and of
this kind of sending the text speaks; for we may not think that this is the
meaning, that as the Father sent Christ to redeem the world and purge it from
it is iniquities, so the Apostles were also sent to be Redeemers and Saviors;
but as Christ was to be the great Prophet, whom the Father would send to be a
light to the world, so he did appoint the Apostles, as subordinate lights, to
take away the ignorance and profaneness that was in it. Christ then is sent as
the great Doctor and Teacher of his Church, who does not only externally teach,
but internally, by giving a seeing eye, and an understanding heart.

These things are implied in Christ's Mission, now let us consider the
Properties of it.

The necessity of Christ's being sent.
Take notice of the necessity of it. Had not the Father sent his Son into the
world, there had been no difference between the damned Angels and mankind: The
world had been an hell, though the world had many Platoes and Aristotle's, many
Alexanders and Caesar's, yet all this is nothing, if Christ had not been sent
into the world: Oh then, look upon this, as the foundation of all truth and
consolation, Christ is sent into the world! We could not have had a drop of
comfort, any more then Dives in hell a drop of water, had not Christ been sent
into the world.

The mercy, grace and goodness of God, that it was his only begotten Son he
sent. He sent Prophets, and he sent diverse Messengers, but never was such
mercy, as when he sent his Son, Heb. 1. The very Angels, though the benefit of
his sending did not directly belong to them, yet for this they sing, Glory be
to God on high, on earth peace, and good will toward men. Though God is good
in giving food and raiment, in creating the world for us, yet all come short of
sending his Son to us.

Christ's Mission is the original and root of all the Church Mission that is. As
the Father has sent me, so I have sent you. So that Christ being sent, is
thereby made the head of his Church; all Church Power is seated in him, as the
original, and therefore all the Missions of Church Officers now, is reduced to
this, as the fountain of all; Therefore they are the Ministers of Christ, the
Ambassadors of Christ, they administer all things in his Name, and every thing
is done by his Authority. It Is disputed in Politiques, In whom all civil power
is immediately and originally seated, whether in the people, or no, or in the
supreme Officers? But here in Divinity about Church Power, the Scripture does
easily resolve it, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. All power is given me in heaven and in
earth; Therefore he appoints Officers and Ordinances in his Church, and so the
Ministers of God have their Church Power from Christ. Though the people may
choose and design the man, and Church Officers put him into the Office, yet the
Office and Power it self is of Christ.

Take notice of the compleatness and perfection of this Mission, Heb. 1.1. God
who at sundry times spoke by his Prophets, and by several w^yes, does now speak
only by his Son. So that since Christ's mission, we are not now to expect any
other extraordinary missions, Christ he came as the fullness of all; and as he
said, That all those who went before him, were thieves and robbers, viz. who
pretended to be the Christ, and did not come in his Name, so all those are that
shall come after, which come not in his Name; What a sad judgment are the
Jews, once the people of God, delivered up unto, that look still for a Messiah
to be sent, and so have a veil upon their eyes and their hearts?

Consider the seasonableness of the time when he was sent, Gal. 4.4. Its called
the fullness of the time. When the Church of the Jews was become like a
wilderness or a dunghill, when all the former Prophets were forgotten, when
there was an universal blackness upon the Church, then Christ was sent: Even as
Moses was sent to the people of Israel, when their oppression was doubled. God
sent Christ seasonably.

Consider the manner of his sending, it was in an humble, low and contemptible
way in the eyes of the world, none took him to be the Messiah, to be the light
of the world; Though he was sent, how few did believe in him, because of the
outward meannes in his way? And some think the Prophet alludeth to this, Isa.
8.6. They refuse the waters of Shiloah that go softly. They neglected Christ,
and looked to external power and glory.

Use 1. Is Christ sent by the Father, then take heed how you refuse him? The
Apostle aggravateth this, Heb. 10.28. We may refuse men for their errors,
their falsities; We may pretend many excuses, but how can you reject Christ
still speaking by his Word to you?

SERMON XCVI. Of the Public Office of the Ministry, Some Distinctions
concerning it, And the Necessity of a lawful Call thereunto; Also showing
wherein private Christians should exercise their Gifts both ordinarily and in
extraordinary Cases.
JOH. 17.18. As thou have sent me into the world, even so have I sent them also
into the world.
WE have handled Christ's Mission, and the matter imported in that Expression.
We come now to the Apostles Mission, wherein there is considerable, 1. Their
Office under this notion of sending. 2. The Person sending, I have sent them.
3. The Subjects, Them. 4. The Term of their Mission, Into the world. 5. The
Pattern, As the Father has sent me: They have the same common vocation, Every
particular will afford its proper usefulness.


And 1. Let us begin with their Office, It Is called a sending, This does imply
that they did not intrude themselves into it, They did not usurp upon the
Office, but they were called and lawfully authorized thereunto; It had been
sinful presumption in any of the Apostles to undertake that Office till Christ
gave them this Commission: There is no difficulty in the words, only it is
questioned why our Savior speaks in the preterperfect tense, I have sent them,
seeing they were not yet sent to publish the Gospel to the whole world, for
that was not done till his Ascension; But it is answered, that it is ordinary
with the Scripture to put one tense for another, and besides, Christ had begun
already to send them, though not into the whole world, yet into Judea, and Luk
6. he had already given them the name of Apostles, which is as much as those
that are sent, yet because after his Ascension he then enlarges their
Commission, To preach to all Nations beside Judea. Hence Joh. 20.21. Christ
there speaks in the present tense, As my Father has sent me, even so I send
you: So then the Apostles did not undertake their ministerial Office before
they were sent, Observe. None may undertake the public Office of the Ministry
without a lawful Call thereunto.
and for this end are called Apostles: Salmasius thinks he gave them this
Name from the Captain of the Jews at that time, for in their Synagogues the
Governors thereof have their proper Messengers belonging to them who were
called Apostles. From this Observe,

That none may undertake the public Office of the Ministry without a sending
or authoritative Call thereunto; If Christ did it not (as ye heard) and the
Apostle Heb. 5. is diligent in observing of that, much less may any men do it
for the very word sending does imply a superior, who has power to send, and
also the inferiority and passivenesse of those that are sent. Therefore Romans
10.13, 14, 15. You have there a Ladder like Jacobs reaching from earth to
Heaven, where calling on God requires believing, believing requires hearing,
hearing requires preaching, and preaching requires sending: See here the
golden Chain of our Salvation in an ordinary way, No calling no faith, no faith
no hearing, no hearing no preaching, no preaching no sending: They are all
required in their peculiar way with the same necessity, and therefore take heed
of endangering your souls by despising the lawful Ministry of Christ, How shall
they believe says the Apostle, without this?

But to inform your judgments in this Point, because it is a necessary Truth,
and many errors are about it for your good, not for our own self-advancement,
as some are apt to think, we shall take this Method.

1. Give some Distinctions to clear the Point. 2. Show you the distinct office
of the Ministry from other callings, and the necessity of a lawful Call
thereunto; Not that my purpose is to handle all those things which belong to
that Famous Commonplace in Divinity, De ministerio Ecclesiastico, but to touch
on those things that most relate to this Text,

Did. 1. There is a twofold sending.

Mediate and Immediate.


And first Consider, That there is a twofold sending, a mediate and immediate
sending; an immediate sending is when God or Christ does in an extraordinary
and peculiar manner give some a Call to this office; Thus the Prophets of the
Old Testament they were immediately sent of God, and this immediate inspiration
and extraordinary gifting of them was enough to authorize them, though they had
no Call in an ordinary manner from men, when they said, Thus says the Lord,
then they showed their Commission, and thus the Apostles they were likewise
immediately called by Christ, and they were gifted in an extraordinary manner
thereunto, They had no such gifts at first, but Christ bestowed them on them;
In ordinary sendings or missions, there men must first try and examine gifts,
and see them before they confirm any in their office, but Christ that can make
Children of Abraham out of stones, can also make Apostles out of illiterate and
rude Fishermen; This immediate and extraordinary sending is now wholly ceased,
even as the gifts of Miracles; and therefore though our Divines do sometimes
say, Luther, Calvin, and those first Reformers had an extraordinary Call, their
meaning is not as if they were put into their Church-office by an immediate
call of God, only there were extraordinary qualifications of them, by stirring
them up to such zeal and corroborating of them to go through such a work as
they did. In the next place there is an ordinary mission or authorizing, and
that is to be perpetual in the Church, according to such Rules, as Paul lays
down in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, which are a directory concerning the
Churches Government to the ends of the world; This ordinary sending we are now
to have, though the Apostles had an extraordinary.

Did. 2. The substance of the Ministerial Office is the same with that which
every Minister has.
Secondly, Consider that though the Apostles had many personal and
extraordinary privileges, yet the essence and substance of their Ministerial
office, is the same with that which every Minister of the Gospel has, For
Matthew. 28. there the substance of their office is to preach and administer the
Sacraments, which is the duty of every Pastor in the Church; We may not then
argue from the extraordinaries of the Apostles to every Minister, but from
their substantials, as thus, The Apostolical privileges were to behold Christ
with their eyes, and thereby to witness the truth; To be infallible in their
doctrine, to be illimited, not bound to one place more then another, to work
miracles, etc. Now these were necessary for the infancy and first plantation of
the Church, Signs being for those that do not believe, and so it is not
necessary ordinary Pastors should have them, but then there are the
substantials of their Apostolical Office, which was to preach the Word, to be
authorized thereunto, these are belonging to every Pastor, and in this they are
Successors to the Apostles, Mat. 28. ult. I will be with you to the end of the
world, and 2 Timothy 6.14. where in one place God promises, and in another place
Paul is required to keep those Church-Ordinances till the end of the world, how
can this be otherwise? but in the Pastor of the Church, who are in this, though
not in their extraordinaries the Apostles Successors.

potestative preaching by way of office, and a private, wise, and humble,
charitative emploiment of our gifts one Christian to another; When we say, that
only men may by way of office preach; We do not thereby prohibit or exclude,
Those Christian duties and improvements of gifts in p^rier and admonition
either in Families or one toward another, so that there is no Christian though
he has never so good gifts, but he has opportunities enough to improve them
in a private way for Gods glory, without usurping that office; There are many
Texts of Scripture that show how fruitful and active private Christians should
be in their way, to do good one to another, Col. 3.16. Let the Word of God
dwell in you richly, with all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another; It
is your duty to be exercised in the Word of God, and to admonish one another
out of it, so Heb. 10.24, 25. There they are to provoke and exhort one another
to do good; We should in a brotherly way all take care of one another soul,
and this is that Christian Communion so much commended in the Church of God, so
1 These. 5.11. Comfort and edify one another even as ye do, he commended them
for doing so, only in this necessary duty consider how the Scripture hints and
directs you, Rules for private Christians exercising their Gifts.
You must eat of this manna according to Gods appointment.

You are in the use of your gifts privately to carry your selves so as not
thereby to neglect the public Ordinances; To think that such private
Admonitions or Exhortations, or seekings to God are enough, we see how the
Apostle joyneth them together, Heb. 10.24, 25. when he exhorted them to provoke
one another to do good, he adds, not forsaking the Assembly, as the manner of
some was; Even in the Apostles days, when there was such purity of Church
Ordinances, and admirably gifted Officers and Gods presence with them, yet they
were not to forsake the Assemblies, and observe how the Apostle brings them
in upon the improving of their gifts in a private way, as if it were a great
Temptation, when we employ them respectively to others, thereby to neglect the
public Ordinances.

take heed that thereby you do not justle out the Office of the Ministers, or
because of your gifts to neglect the public Office Christ has appointed, for
the devil is busy both ways either by profane sottishness and ignorance, to
make men despise the Ministry, or by self-conceit and pride of their own
abilities; This the Apostle also provides against, 1 These. 5.14. when he had
commanded them to edify one another, lest it might be thought, what need we
any Ministers then? See how affectionately he adds, and we beseech you to
know them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord; They must not
for all their Gifts and improvements neglect that, So in the same Chapter, 19,
20, 21. verses; where private Christians are commanded to prove all things, and
not to Quench the Spirit; They must stir up the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit
in them, yet so as not to despise Prophesyings, that is the ministerial
Interpretation of Scripture, as the word to prophecy is commonly used.

in such duties, and in such matters as are not above them: They may pray
together, humble themselves, exhort one another out of the Word of God in
profitable things of Edification, but to determine the most controverted Points
in Religion is far above their strength; Therefore let every one imitate
David's Humility, to walk humbly and not to exercise himself in things that are
too high for him; The Apostle does often antidote against pride and conceit, as
if we did know things when we did not, and as the matter must not be above
them, so it must be in that which is necessary and profitable, How many trouble
themselves about Universal Redemption? which is not only a Doctrine above their
capacities, but they might do better to find their own interest in Christ's
Death; Certainly if Christians would meet, as of old they were wont, not to
dispute in high, unprofitable Points, but how to be more holy, more mortified,
to walk more godlily in their Relations, then their meeting together would be
for the better and not for the worse, But now Christ's Sheep do run into many
bri^rs of Disputations, that they almost lose all their wool; Therefore the
Apostle speaks excellently to this purpose, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. he had pressed to
godliness in Relations, and then says, Let no man teach otherwise then the
Doctrine which is according to godliness; If they do, there comes no good of
such Disputes, but envyings, strifes, and carnal dissentions amongst one
another: I was willing to add thus much, because it is thought that we would
monopolize the Spirit of God, as that we envied the gifts and graces of God in
others; No, God forbid, this only we would direct them, so as their liberty may
not be turned to licentiousness: Even by the Canonists who were no ways much
favorable to private Christians, yet they did allow them charitativam, though
not potestativam admonition; There is therefore no private Christian, no nor
woman, but they may be instrumental to the converting of Husbands and Children
yea, with the Woman of Samaria be a means to bring the knowledge of Christ to
others; Yea, several women Phebe, Synticke, Evadias, and others, are mentioned
in the Gospel for their great isntrumental service in the propagating of
Christ's Kingdom, yet who will conclude from their improvement of gifts they
might lawfully take the office of Preaching.

a Church under Persecutions or not constituted, and a Church constituted; That
may be done in times of Persecution which may not in settled times of the
Church; We see in case of extreme danger every man is a Magistrate, and may
kill when assaulted rather then be killed; but it does not therefore follow
that every man may lawfully take upon him ordinarily the office of a
Magistrate; The Sabbath might be broken in regard of necessity, and our Savior
from this excuses David for eating the Show bread, which was lawful only for
the Priests to eat: Thus we read of two private persons that were a means to
convert the Persian King, and others, once to the Christian Faith; Though these
when they had opportunity sought to have their office confirmed, and so if that
Instance so much pressed Act. 16.8. of the Disciples preaching the Gospel upon
the Persecution, could be manifested to be understood of private Disciples and
men out of office (the contrary whereof there are strong presumptions for) yet
it would prove no more, but that in case of Persecution, when believers are
scattered up and down, it is lawful for them to declare and make known Christ
and his Truth; But what is this to a Church constituted, and walking in an
orderly way?

necessary and profitable, and that partly in respect of the Ministers
themselves, and partly in respect of the people; On the Ministers part,

1. He can with the more quietness and comfort satisfy himself in his work;
You see the Pharisees they questioned Christ upon this very Point, By what
authority he did these things? Mat. 21.23. Now our Savior he supposes that to
be necessary, he does not say, What matter for a Call or Authority? I have
Gifts, but he goes to prove that he had authority from God; Certainly to live
in such a way wherein the Conscience of a Minister is not satisfied, that it is
a lawful office, must needs be disquieting of him, especially when there are so
many that say they have no Call, or that their Call is Antichristian, Is it not
necessary to a Minister to be informed that by the Scripture he can justify
his Call and office?

2. It Is necessary because then he may expect Gods blessing and protection;
When Christ says, I will be with you to the end of the world, and he that
despises you despises me, this is to be understood of such as are in Christ's
office, Joh. 10. Does not our Savior severely reprove such as come not in by
the door, calling them Thieves and Robbers, Gods protection and defense will go
along with his Ministers only.

2. On the Auditors part, for when they are convinced that such are the
Ministers of Christ, They will 1. Hear with the more reverence and respect,
even as Christ himself says, A stranger Christ's Sheep will not hear.

2. They may justly expect spiritual success in their Labors, that God will
bless the Ministry with such spiritual issues, God has promised, That it may
be a Ministry of Life to them, and they may feel an experiment of Christ
speaking in them.

5. They will account of them (as Paul says) as the Stewards of God; They will
have them in high account for their office and works sake.

Lastly, They will tremble at their unthankfulness and unfruitfulnesse under
their Ministry, for certainly if those officers whom Christ himself has
appointed for thy conversion and reformation can do no good on thee, never
think that otherwise will help thee; No, though men should arise from the dead
to preach to thee; what greater symptom can there be of thy eternal damnation
then to be unprofitable and unreformed under Christ's own officers, such ground
is nigh to cursing; If their Gospel be hid, it is hid to such as perish, and
Joh. 8. therefore ye are not of God because ye hear not his Word.

SERMON XCVII. That the Scripture appoints a Distinct Office of the Ministry:
Shows, wherein the Call to the Ministry consists; And that none may enter
into that Office without an Authoritative Mission. Also what the Ministry of
Preaching is, and whether Reading be Preaching.
JOHN 17.18. Even so have I sent them into the World.
THere remain some further Distinctions to be propounded before we proceed to
the proof of the Doctrine. And

The word Preaching may be taken either largely or strictly; largely, for any
declaration of the truths of God, as occasion and opportunity shall serve; or
strictly, for a Ministerial Preaching, by way of Office. The Greek word (...),
though it be most commonly used of such who preach by way of Office, and among
the Heathens (...) is an Officer, yet in the Scripture it is sometimes taken
more largely, as Revel. 5.2. An Angel is there described (...), crying with a
great voice; but more particularly, I observe it once, and but once used of a
private Christian, manifesting Christ and his actions, Luke 8.39. The man out
of whom Christ had cast devils, is said (...) to publish throughout the whole
City, Whether reading be preaching.
what Christ had done for him. It was a great controversy not long since,
Whether reading was preaching? Many to excuse their ignorance and laziness did
maintain reading of the Scripture was preaching. Now to this it is answered,
That if Preaching be taken largely for any declaration, or publishing of the
Word of God, no doubt but it is preaching, but yet it is not that ministerial
preaching which is enjoined the Officers of the Church, To preach in season and
out of season, to divide the word of God, and that with such faithfulness and
ability, that the Apostle cries out, Who is sufficient for these things? This
was more then to read the Scripture. If therefore preaching be taken largely
for a publishing of Christ occasionally to others, no doubt many ought to
preach in that sense. Thus the woman of Samaria, published Christ to her
neighbors, and Andrew called his brother Philip before they were put into the
Apostolical Office. Heinsius. Grotius.
So many private men have writ learned Tractates for the defense of the
Christian Religion, and some of great learning have made Annotations upon the
Scriptures, though some of them have delivered much corruption. Yea amongst
those that are private, not invested with the public Office, we are to make a
great distinction. Some are merely private, some are by education and abilities
in order to the public. Now such may publicly preach either by way of trial,
or else by the approbation of those that can judge and ought so to do, Act.
13.15. we read there; The Rulers of the Synagogue, called unto Paul, if they
had a word of Exhortation to speak to them; Suppose they did not look upon Paul
and his company as Officers, yet this proves no more, then that private men by
the approbation of those that rule in the Church may occasionally preach. And
this we read in Antiquity, That Pantenus and Origin did catechetically preach
the Doctrine of our Christian faith, before ordained into the Office of the
Ministry. The Question is not about such, no, nor of private men, if
doctrinally and practically qualified by Church Officers, would submit
themselves to trial, and so be authorized to do what they do. That is another
matter to the Question in hand.

2. Vocation to the Office of the Ministry, consists in these things.
That which we call the Vocation or Authorizing of one to the Office of the
Ministry, consists in these things,

1. An inward Qualification of the person, with such gifts as God requires,
and they are reduced by Paul to two heads, they are Doctrinal for his learning,
that he be apt to teach, that he can divide the word of God aright, etc. as a
workman that needs not to be ashamed, that he be able to convince
gainsayers. I. Inward qualifications.
These gifts require Learning and Knowledge. So that a gift to pray well, or to
speak about plain doctrinal things in Religion, though with much affection and
zeal, is not the whole Ministerial gift; for the Apostle requires more; viz.
such sound knowledge in matters controverted, that he may be able to convince
gainsayers. And

Qualification, is for his life, that it be holy and unblameable. Therefore the
sin of a Minister is greater then another man's, by reason of his Office.
Hence the same Sacrifice was appointed for the Priests sin, as was for the
sin of the whole Congregation, Levit. 4. To this qualification, some had an
inward promptitude and readiness of heart, with an holy zeal being moved by God
to this work. Now although this may be granted in some, yet the Apostle
requires it not as a necessary qualification; yea it is the duty of some to be
called to the Ministry, who through their modesty or fear fly from it, as much
as they can. Thus Moses refused the Office he was called unto, insomuch that
the anger of God is said to be kindled against him, Exodus 4.14. And Jeremy out
of the sensible apprehension of his weakness ( Jer. 1.6.) did refuse that
prophetical Office, till God did encourage him; and in Antiquity, there was a
Canon made against those that should any ways mutilate themselves by deforming
their noses or ears, that they might not be in the Ministerial Office.

Secondly, II. Outward.
Their Calling partly lies in the electing and choosing of such a person;
Though Christ immediately appoint the Office, yet the person must be designed
by man.

There must be an Examination and Approbation of his Gifts by those who are in
Church office: For this end the Apostle does lay down so many properties of
those who are to be made Elders, which were not to any purpose, if they were
not to be examined; yea, it is directly set down in the Office of Deacons, which
is an inferior Office, 1 Timothy 3.10. Let them first be proved, and then let
them have the Office of a Deacon, and when Timothy is enjoined, 1 Timothy 5.22. To
lay hands suddenly on no man, lest he be partaker of others men's sins. This
infers the great examination and trial he is to take of them.

Lastly, There is the confirming them in the Office, by laying on of hands with
fasting and prayer. This is the constant example of all that were set apart to
the Ministerial Office, that we read of in the Scripture, Act. 14.23. and
therefore who may presume to do otherwise, when not one instance can be given
to the contrary? I do not here dispute in whom this constituting or ordaining
power is seated, it is enough that we see it always done by those that were
Officers in the Church.

Distinct. ult.
In the last place, There may be a twofold unlawful entering into this Call:

1. In respect of corrupt aims and ends, and many other defects.

2. In respect of the very Essentials: So that he is not a Minister, or put in
office at all. These two are greatly to be discerned. Many men may go
unlawfully into the Office, fail in many particulars, yet partake of the
substance of the office, but others may usurp it so, that they have not the
very Office it self; and this is very necessary to observe, For where the
Office is null, and no Ministry, there the administration of the Sacraments is
according to the received opinion void: As the Papists argue, Because we have
no Ministry, we have no Church, no Sacrament. Though in these accusations the
Protestants sufficiently defend themselves. But certainly, it may justly be a
great shaking to private persons, that if the Ministry they live under be not a
true Ministry, thus their Baptism is not a true Baptism, the Church they live
in a true Church; for though a Ministry be not necessary to an Essential
Church, as in times of persecution, when believers are scattered up and down,
yet it is to an Organical Church, according to that definition of Cyprian,
Ecclesia esset plebs adornata clero.

That there is a distinct O^fice of the Ministry
In the second place we come to show, That there is a distinct Calling of the
Ministers from the people, so that men may not as they please invade it, nor
look upon Christ's Ministry as a mere humane invention. The chiefest Arguments
brought by the Learned to confirm this, are

From the distinct and different titles, that the Scripture gives them. They
are called (...) scopi, Overseers, Elders, Pastors and Teachers: They are
called lights and guides: They are said to be over them in the Lord; So that
it is plain, that the Scripture makes this clear distinction, some are Rulers,
and Guides, and Shepherds, some again are to be ruled, and are under, To the
Bishops and Saints at Philippi, Phil. 1.1. Thus the whole Church is divided
into it is Officers, and those that are governed. It Is a wonder that any can
contradict these clear places; neither may we think that the Scripture gives
them these names without reality, as they did by scorn to Christ, calling him,
King of the Jews. Certainly, if there were not such distinct relations, then
the Apostle might as well call the people Guides and Elders, and exhort such
who were over them to submit to those that were under them.

The Scripture does attribute hereby unto them distinct work and imploiment.
They are to feed them, they are to preach to them, they are to watch over them,
they are to admonish, rebuke and cast out unruly persons; they are to give
themselves to reading, to be in these things, as the Apostle calls it: Now if
this did belong to all, every one would be bound to leave their Calling; for he
that is in this Office, is commanded wholly to attend to it.

They are under a peculiar charge and account. Their estate is more dreadful
then others, if they be found negligent. Woe be unto me (says Paul) if I
preach not the Word: So Heb. 13. they are said to give an account, and it is
desired they may do it with joy, and not with grief; If there be no Ministerial
office, then we are not responsible for the souls of men.

The people are required to do distinct duties to them, to hear them, to obey
them, to submit themselves to them, to esteem of them as the Messengers of God,
yea, to have them in high estimation for their works sake. Certainly, none can
impartially read the Epistles of Paul, (therefore I need not name the
particular places) but he must be convinced of the distinct Office of a
Ministry, and the peoples duty thereunto.

In the third place, we are to prove, That none may enter into this Office
without an authoritative mission.
That none may enter into this Office without an Authoritative Mission. And

Here is constant example and pattern of the Church in the Apostles times. We
cannot read of any that undertook this Office, but they were solemnly set
apart to it, Acts 14.23. and in other places. Now if in the primitive times,
when yet Christians were so eminently gifted, there was a solemn setting of
them apart, How much more in after ages? Neither can any one example be brought
to the contrary, I mean of taking an Office in the Church without a Call: Now
is it not far better to follow the presidents of Scripture, then to go after
our own thoughts? especially when Christ himself, though so admirably gifted,
yet would not undertake this Office without a Call, as the Apostle does
diligently consider it, Heb 5.7.

Timothy and Titus, does lay down several Qualifications, which ought to be in
every Minister: Now what necessity is there of this, if so be those who are to
ordain them, were not to attend thereunto? The very mentioning of such
properties, is for this end, to show, by what rule they should go by in their
Ordination, who would not think himself qualified, who would not say he had
gifts, if they were not to be examined and judged in that matter?

If it were not necessary there should be an authoritative Ordination of men to
that Office, why should the Apostle with such diligence leave Titus at Crete to
ordain such, if so be their gifts and abilities had been enough? It was an
absurd thing to leave him there to appoint them for that Office, Tit. 1.5. The
place is considerable, because by that you see plainly, Elders were not to
intrude themselves, but were to be set apart by Titus.

Yea if there were not such a duty upon Church Officers in confirming of
others, why should the Apostle likewise to Timothy use that severe and
dreadful adjuration? 1 Timothy, 5.21. where Timothy is charged before God, in
reference to this matter of laying on of hands, as well as other things, and
Christ and the holy Angels, that he do nothing with partiality, nor be too
hasty herein, lest we partake of other men's sins: How could this be, but that
men are not of themselves to intrude thereunto, otherwise their sins would be
upon their own heads, who go without a Call?

Lay hands suddenly on no man; In that negative command is contained an
affirmative, as Walleus well observes, viz. with deliberation and good advice
to lay hands on those that are sufficiently qualified: so that there is not
only an example but a command, and that laying on of hands is not a mere
accidental Ceremony, appears, in that by this action he describes the whole
confirmation in that Office, which Synecdoche could not be, unless it were
either an essential part, or a proper and inseparable adjunct. Certainly these
Arguments may satisfy any that are not contentious. This has been ever both
in the Apostles days, and since their time, a constant custom, judged to be
grounded upon the Scripture. Neither may we look for such cogent and clear
demonstrations in matter of Church order, as in Fundamental Doctrines. If any
desire further insight, he may peruse those several learned Tractates that have
lately come out to confirm this Truth.

Object. But you will say, If a man have Gifts and Abilities, why is not that
enough?

Answ. I answer first, Christ had Gifts, and yet he would have a Calling. In
the primitive times private Christians did abound with Gifts, yet they were to
be set apart for that Office.

2. Gifts in civil offices and relations, do not give Power and Authority to do
a thing: A private Lawyer may have as good, or better gifts, then the Judge:
Shall he therefore take upon him to condemn men? A man would not willingly
have such Divinity in his own Family: It may be thy servant has as good or
better Gifts to manage thy household affairs, might be a better husband, does
not spend as thou will, Shall he take upon him to be thy Master? There is many
a poor man has a better gift to husband thy estate then thou do, Shall he
therefore seize upon thy revenues? There must be a Call, besides these Gifts.

3. By this means every private man, yea woman and child may administer the
Sacraments; Cannot a woman sprinkle water on the child, and baptize it? There
are none so simple scarce, but have Gifts for this. In the Old Testament others
could have killed a beast for the Sacrifice, as well as the Priest, Might they
therefore lawfully do it? So that Gifts must have a Call?

Use. How blessed and happy a thing it is, when the public Ministry, and
private Christians abilities, are orderly improved for the Glory of God; when
one does not contradict, or encroach upon another, but the upper orbs and
lower orbs do all turn about for the public good, when Christians edify
one another, and yet have those in high esteem, that labor over them in the
Lord. Certainly, while this Harmony and Union is kept up, the Devil cannot
disturb the Church. We have a notable Prophecy by Zechary, what shall be done
in the times of the Gospel, Zech. 13.5. where men that had no call to preach,
being convinced of their error, and that by their dearest friends, he shall
disclaim that way, saying, I am no Prophet, I am an Husbandman, for man taught
me to keep cattle from my youth.

SERMON XCVIII. Of Christ's Sanctifying himself to be a Mediator; Showing what
is implied in it; How pure, willing, and fit he was for that great Undertaking.
JOH. 17.19. And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be
Sanctified through the Truth.
OUR Savior had prayed for the Sanctification of his Disciples, and one Reason
is from the office they were placed in, which has been dispatched. The other
is in this Verse, From Christ's Mediation manifested in his Death for them He
had merited and purchased this at Gods hand by making himself an atonement for
them; Christ you heard was the High Priest of his Church, and two things did
belong to them.

1. To pray for the people,

2. To make a Sacrifice for them: Now our Savior in this Chapter does both, he
prays, and offers up himself a Sacrifice for his people.

So that in the words we are to consider, The Person, The Action, The object
matter, The Finis cui, and the Finis cujus:

The Person, I sanctify my self, I, By this we see partly the Deity of Christ,
for none but God can say, he sanctifies himself that others may be sanctified;
and then this denotes his willingness and readiness, Christ did readily
offer up himself to all that misery and shame for our sakes.

Secondly, There is the Action, (...), Sanctify, This among many other
significations has these three especially.

1. To set apart, and solemnly to fit for any duty.

2. To dedicate and consecrate in a peculiar manner to the Lord, Thus the
Priests were sanctified and the Sacrifices were sanctified.

3. To make holy by inherent purity, and in all these respects Christ did
sanctify himself;

For 1. He as God did fill the humane Nature with all habitual and actual
Righteousness.

2. He did set and sanctify himself to be an oblation, and therefore it is
that the Apostle does so often call him the High Priest in his Epistle to the
Hebrews.

Thirdly, There is the object matter, and that is (...) my self; The Priests of
the Old Testament did consecrate the Beasts that were slain, but here Christ
sanctifies himself, So that he is both the Priest and the Sacrifice also, It
is himself, and that is the greater love.

Further, There is the End for whom, for them, and this does evidently prove
Christ to be a Sacrifice of Atonement, For whereas the Apostle Ephesians. 5.2.
there says Christ gave himself an offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet
smelling savor. The Socinian would thereby understand no more then the
acceptablenesse of it, not that is was propitiatory for us, and they compare it
with the liberality of the Philippians* Phil. 4.18. where the Apostle calls
their Gift an Odor of a sweet smell acceptable to Ged, yet this is only part
of the meaning, and the phrase is not wholly alike, for in that place of Phil.
it is (...) for us, as in Ephesians. 5.2. So that Christ gave himself for a Sacrifice
not metaphorically, as Prayer, and Alms are sometimes called Sacrifices, but by
way of Atonement to satisfy God, So that by this means we also are an Odor of
sweet smell unto him.

The Finis cujus is that they might be sanctified, of which more hereafter;
From Christ thus Sanctifying himself to be a Sacrifice for us Observe,

Doct. That Christ set himself apart to be a Sacrifice for us.
That Christ set himself apart to be a Sacrifice for us, or he sanctified
himself to become a Sacrifice for us; This is the Sum of all Divinity, All
the Types in the Old Testament did look to this; The Apostle desired to know
nothing but this; This is the Foundation of the Efficacy both of Christ's
Prayers and of ours, Had Christ only prayed for us, and not thus sanctified
himself to be a Sacrifice for us, it would not have been effectual for our
Salvation.

In my Treatise of justification.

What Christ's sanctifying himself implies.


Let us Open this Point, though I shall not insist long on it, because I have
otherwhere showed, That Christ suffered by way of an atoning Sacrifice; I shall
now speak the more briefly of it:

And first, This Sanctification of himself to be a Sacrifice for us does imply
the exceeding Purity and Holiness that was in him, and therefore Peter calls
him the undefiled and spotless Lamb, 1 Peter 1.9. In the Old Testament The
Lamb that was to be offered was to be without blemish, I. His purity and
holiness.
not to be defective in any parts, and to be without spot; There was to be no
various color upon it; This was to signify the absolute Purity of Christ in
respect of outward and inward sin; And therefore the Apostle presses the
preheminency of Christ our High Priest above those of the Law, because they had
sins of their own, and they were compassed about with their own Infirmities,
and so offered for themselves first, Hebr. 7.26. He is there called holy,
harmless, undefiled, and separate from Sinners; And this Purity and Holiness
was not only to qualify his Person to be our Mediator, but it was part of
that Righteousness which is communicated to us, Therefore he says, I
sanctify my self for them; And as he was made man for Believers, So also holy
and undefiled for them; It Is true some Divines distinguish in Christ his
Justitia personae, and his Justitia meriti, but the Righteousness of Christ
was part of his merit, and so they cannot be opposed to one another; This is
the Wedding Garment; This is our Elder Brothers Clothes; This is the fine
Linen of the Saints; Therefore thou that complainest of thy want of Holiness,
Thou art not sanctified in such a degree and measure as thou desire, remember
Christ has sanctified himself for thee.

II: His ready offering himself for us.
Secondly, This does imply the ready and willing offering up of himself to this
work; And certainly this is the great Mystery at which Heaven and Earth may be
astonished: This the Angels wonder at, and still desire to search into it more
and more; That Christ should come from the bosom of the Father, and lay aside
the manifestation of all Heavenly Majesty and Glory, to be debased in so low a
way, making himself of no reputation; This can never be considered of enough,
no, not by all the Angels and Saints to all Eternity, Philip. 2.6. The Apostle
does there enlarge himself in this Meditation, and in another place, how he
became poor that we might make us rich.

Two things are admirable in this willing Oblation of himself.

1. That he should put himself in such a suffering condition, as to be for a
while without the sense and enjoyment of his Fathers love to him; He that was
in the Bosom of the Father, an Expression to show the intimate, close, and
secret delight and love he had from the Father; How unspeakable is it that he
should deprive himself of the sense of it? To put himself as it were out of
Heaven into an Hell, this is deeper love then ever we can imagine or conceive:
No wonder the Apostle calls it (...) and (...), the unsearc^^ble Riches of
Grace, We are never able to go to the bottom of it, but still there is more
love and grace behind: Did the Queen of Sheba faint to see the temporal
Stateliness and magnificence of Solomon? How should the Believer at the sight
of this Heavenly Glory be even ravished with Admiration: No wonder if the
Church cry out, She is sick of Love, for this may do it: It was more for Christ
to be one moment without the feeling of his Fathers Love, then to endure all
those bodily Torments he did endure, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me?
In the Original it is, My strong One, He gives unto God that peculiar and
proper Title, because he was then so weak and infirm, and dejected in himself.

2. That he should not thus only put himself out of comfort, but also from the
enjoyment of that manifested glory and honor he might have retained to
himself, This also was very wonderful. In this Chapter he prays for that
Glory which yet he had with the Father from the beginning of the world, he had
it in right but not in possession; He voluntarily divested himself of that,
that so he might accomplish our Redemption; Job bewailed once the bitter change
that was upon him, He that sat among Princes, to sit upon the Dunghill
scraping his soars, this was a great Change, but this Change that Christ took
upon himself was infinitely far transcending it.

Thirdly, In that Christ is said to sanctify himself, III. His fitness for
the office of a Mediator.
herein is implied the universal fitness that was in him for that work; To
sanctify, and to be prepared, or made fit is the same thing in the Scripture,
and this is also a Treasure of exceeding great Comfort, for if Christ had not
been every ways a full and fit Redeemer, we had certainly miscarried.

His fitness is seen in regard 1. Of his Person. 2. His Offices. And 3. The
Benefits thereof, with the accomplishment of them.


The fitness in his Person is that he was both God and man, 1. The fitness of
his Person.
whatsoever some Schoolmen have thought or imagined, yet no mere man though
qualified to the highest with all manner of grace, could have satisfied for
man's sins; It was necessary he should be God, for by this means there was an
infinite value, worth, and excellency put upon his Doings and Sufferings; So
that the worth and merit of Christ's Actions did as far exceed our demerits as
his Person did ours, as God does man: It was necessary also he should be man,
for in that Nature only could he suffer, in that only could he die; Thus there
is one Mediator of God and man, the man Christ Jesus; He then that must
reconcile God and man, must necessarily be both God and man, He must be medius
that he may be a Mediator, 2. His fitness in regard of his Offices.
and therefore we may truly say he was sanctified thereunto, that is, he was
appointed and prepared for it.

2. He is fitted in respect of his Offices, which are to be a Prophet, Priest,
1. Prophetical.
and King; He is the Trismegist, if you do regard the threefold Cord that did
bind us Sinners, which we could never loose, then we shall see how fit a
Savior he was; There was in us horrible blindness and darkness of mind;
The world was not in a greater Chaos and Confusion at first, then we are
naturally in our Souls, Not knowing, understanding, or believing any thing of
God: Therefore the Apostle calls such Darkness it self, Ephesians 4. And darkened
in the mind; That is, the Eye, the Sun of the Soul, and if that be dark all
the body must be dark; This Spiritual blindness and Ignorance upon every
man's mind is that which makes him of himself incurable, We pity corporally
blind men; Oh but the spiritually blind are lamentable, every one is sensible
o^^osing their bodily Eye, Lord, that I might receive my Sight, says he to
Christ; But oh that there were such a tenderness and a melting affection about
thy Spiritual blindness; Now Christ has a Prophetical Office to cure this,
he does not only teach by the outward Proposition of the Object, but also by
giving a Seeing Eye, and vouchsafing Spiritual Illumination to the mind and
the Understanding.

2. Priestly.
In the second place, we were under the guilt of our sins, The Curse of the
Law did pursue us, we were no ways able to expiate the Guilt of the least
sin; Though Rivers of blood had run down our Eyes, yet they could not have
cleansed one sin or spot away; The Jews offered Thousands of Sacrifices, but
they could not obtain by the Efficacy of them any Rem^ssion of Sins; The
Heathens sacrificed their Sons and Daughters to appease the wrath and fury of
their Supposed gods, but that could not prevail: Oh when the Conscience of a
man is arraigned for Sin, when Guilt burns in the bowels as hot as fire;
Then a man will think of nothing but compensation, Oh that I could satisfy
God, Oh that I could make amends again as man may do to man, but this is
impossible! Therefore Christ becomes a Sacrifice for this end, If we cannot
redeem our natural death, much less our Eternal, Without Blood there is no
Remission of sin; Christ's Death ratified and confirmed the Promise, and
therefore the Covenant of Grace is also called a Testament, because this was
confirmed by the Death of the Testator; Look then as it was with those
Israelites when the Destroying Angel passed by, if the Posts were sprinkled
with blood, then they escaped the destroying Angel, so if we be watered and
cleansed in the blood of Christ, then we do escape the destroying vengeance of
God, and thus there is his fitness by his Priestly Office.

3. Kingly.
3. We were by sin in a miserable bondage and captivity to sin and Satan;
The Israelites bondage in Egypt, or in the Babylonian Captivity, was nothing to
this Spiritual slavery; It Is not indeed so terrible and grievous to flesh and
blood, yea, they like those Chains and cords of vanity well enough, but when
Paul is once awakened by the Spirit of Regeneration, and that the power of
Grace has prevailed upon him, then for those very Relics of Corruption that
are within, he cries out, Oh miserable man that I am! Romans 7. Now Christ is
fitted with Kingly power to conquer and destroy the power of sin and Satan;
There is no lust, no Corruption that is too big for the King of Glory to
overcome: Thus as the Jewish Priest represented Christ in his Priestly Office,
So Joshua, the Son of Nun did Christ in his Kingly Office, as the Apostle
insinuates, for Heb 4.8. Heb. 7 2. as no Ogs or Sons or Anak the greatest
Giants and warlike men in the world were able to stand before him, but he did
bring the People of God unto their Rest; Thus also will Christ who is both the
King of Righteousness and King of Peace subdue all our Spiritual Enemies, and
establish us in Everlasting Rest, He will first be a King of Righteousness,
and then a King of Peace, he will first conquer thy lusts, and then give thee a
Crown of Glory: Oh then admire this fitness of Christ to be thy Mediator! See
how admirably there is a proportionable fulness in him for every emptiness
of thine!

In the Fourth place, IV. He is prepared for this work.
Christ is Sanctified or prepared for this work of Redemption, If you do regard
the peculiar and proper benefits that accrue to us by this Sanctification; It
would be infinite to reckon all.

Remission and Forgiveness of our sins, Benefits of Christ's sanctifying
himself.
that is often attributed to his blood; Now how great a mercy this is, David
will tell us, Psalm. 32. when he says, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes no sin; Blessed, It Is the inbred appetite of all to be blessed; But
they mistake in what it lies; Therefore the Psalmist tells us, The rich man,
The great man, the prosperous man is not blessed, but he whose sins are
forgiven; And indeed though a man had Solomon's abundance, yet if sin be not
forgiven, how can he be blessed? You see Cain in the midst of his Cities he was
building, yet he had no quiet, because sin was not forgiven; yea David in the
midst of all his Kingly glory did not take any rest, but he was disquieted with
roaring in his bones all the night long, because sin was not pardoned.

Christ is sanctified to sanctify us; This is plain in the Text, Christ died
not only to take away the guilt of our sin, but to make us an holy people,
zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. Therefore the garments of the Saints were
made white in the blood of the Lamb; Revel. 7.14. Do not the Godly groan under
the power of Corruption? but Christ will sanctify them as he sanctified
himself to that end.

3. Peace of Conscience, and boldness at the Throne of Grace; Through him we
have free access; The Apostle hops because of him to go boldly unto God;
This handwriting against us, this gulf is taken away.

4. We glory in Tribulations, in Afflictions, because by Christ's Death the
sting of them is removed, yea, we are raised above the fears of Death; Christ's
Death does take away our Death, O Death, where is thy sting? 1 Cor. 15.

SERMON XCIX. Shows further, what is implied in that phrase of our Savior, I
sanctify my self. Handling chiefly the Priestly-Office of Christ, in
Opposition to the Socinians, and for the Comfort and Direction of Penitent
Sinners.
JOHN 17.19. I sanctify my self for them, etc.
WE are demonstrating, what is implied in this phrase, I sanctify my self for
them; There remain more particulars, which are as follow.

V. That he was wholly set apart for us.
First, This signifies, That Christ was wholly set apart for us, that he had no
other work or employment, but to mind our good, and procure it for us. In the
Scripture phrase to be sanctified, is often used for to set apart and dedicate
to such a work, that if it be otherwise employed, there is a kind of
profanation and pollution; so if the vessels dedicated to Gods service, and
sanctified, were employed, as Belshazzar did in any common use, this was the
polluting and defiling of those vessels. In some sense it holds here, Christ
was made man, and made under the Law, not for himself, but for us; Insomuch
that if he had done other work then this, he had, as it were, polluted himself,
he would not then have been doing the work of a Mediator. Though some learned
men think, That Christ obeyed the Law for himself, yet that cannot be, because
all glory and happiness was due unto him from the first beginning of his
Incarnation: He prayed indeed for the manifestation and external possession of
that glory, which yet (he says) he had before the world was made with the
Father: Seeing therefore that Christ had by virtue of the personal Union all
blessedness and happiness due unto him, He could not observe the Law, that by
the obedience thereof he might inherit eternal life, but the whole course of
his life, whether in doing or sufferings, was wholly for our good: That as the
Sun was made not for it self, but for the world, so this Sun of
Righteousness did arise with healing in his wings for us alone. He came as a
Physician, of whom we could not say, Physician heal thy self. This then is a
treasure of infinite consolation, That whatsoever Christ was, or did, it was
wholly for us, had it not been for man fallen, the Scripture does not intimate
he would have become man. It is true, some Schoolmen say, That the Incarnation
of Christ was in it self so glorious a demonstration of Gods wisdom and power,
and so desirable in it self, that though man had not sinned, yet Christ would
have been made man, this being a more glorious thing then the creation of the
world, or any thing therein; yet the Scripture supposes no other end why
Christ came into the world, but to be a Savior, which implies man a lost
sinner. Hence Isa. 9. To us a Son is born, To us a child is given; and Paul,
who gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. Therefore his death is compared to a price
and a ransom, and he himself to a Mediator and Surety: All which denominate
he was not for himself, but for us; yea his Names speak thus much, he was a
Jesus, because he saves his people from their sins; a Christ, because
anointed to do this work; An Head, because of his influx into his Members:
Hence the Schoolmen do well determine, That the habitual Grace of Christ, and
the Grace that he had as head, is all one really, and differs only notionally,
Of his fullness we have all received, Joh. 1.16. Grace in Christ is not to be
considered, as his personal perfection, but as our fullness. As the Fountain
has water, not for it self, but the streams; and as the Head does not sentire,
or put forth acts of sense for it self properly, but the whole compound:
Insomuch that there is nothing which Christ did as Mediator, but it was all
for us; and therefore the Scripture says, Col. 1.11. It pleased the Father,
that in him should all fullness dwell. Christ then is for us, and the Apostle
says, He sought not to please himself, Romans 15.3. and he became poor that we
might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8 9.

Hence secondly it follows, That if Christ sanctified himself thus wholly for
us, VI. That if by faith we improve him not for those ends God appointed him,
we make him a Christ in vain.
if we do not by faith improve him for those ends God appointed him, we make
him a Christ in vain, to have sanctified himself, and died in vain: Even as the
Sun would shine in vain, if all were blind and did not enjoy the light of
it; as the brazen Serpent would have been exalted in vain, if none that were
stung would have looked upon it: Oh then let the godly fear, lest by their
unbelief and distrust, they make Christ a Christ in vain, his Sanctification of
himself wholly in vain! Unbelief does practically what those false teachers of
righteousness by the Law did doctrinally, If righteousness come by the Law
(says the Apostle) then Christ died in vain. And thus it is here, If Christ
sanctified and fitted himself to enrich thee, to justify thee, to sanctify
thee, and thou by thy unbelief wilt not receive those things, then is he a
Christ in vain, as to thee: Oh remember, If God will not hold him guiltless
that takes his Name in vain, how much more that takes Christ in vain, which is
the most glorious name (as we may say) whereby God is made known!

Thirdly, This Sanctification of Christ did denote some kind of sin and
pollution upon him by way of imputation: For such things as were unclean, VII.
It denotes him a sinner by imputation.
they were sanctified by legal Rites: Now it is true, Christ of himself had no
uncleanness, being then holy, undefiled, and separate from sinners, yet because
he was our Surety, and undertook our debt, bearing our sins upon him;
therefore it is that he had imputed sins, though not inherent: Even as the
scapegoat had the sins of the people laid upon it: Hence it is that Heb. 7.
ult. his second coming is said to be without sin, implying that his first was
nor, because our sins were laid on him, and therefore did he so much strive in
prayer, with those excessive agonies in his soul, because of the sense of Gods
anger for our sins. Though then the Scripture says, He took all our
infirmities upon him, but without sin, that is to be understood of sin inherent
in him, no such viper could fasten on him; yet in respect of imputation our
sins were charged on him, and so he sanctified himself in his oblation, by
taking away the guilt of them: Oh then consider the infinite love of Christ,
and be amazed at it, that he should become sin, and a curse for us, that he
should be under the displeasure of God for us, who was in our persons to have
conflicted with it!

Fourthly, In that Christ is here said to sanctify himself for us, VIII. That
he was a Priest to make atonement for us.
there is hereby implied, That Christ was a Priest to make an atonement for us:
and hereupon we might enlarge our selves, concerning Christ's Priestly-office,
which is of great concernment, as appears by the Apostle at large in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, who does so industriously assert and explicate this
Office, as being that which is the foundation of all our grace and consolation.
I shall only mention these particulars:

Concerning Christ's priestly-office, Consider these things.
This Priestly-office did consist in offering up himself a Sacrifice: Every
Priest was to expiate sin by Sacrifices: Now because God would not have
burnt-offerings any longer, neither could the blood of Rams and Goats purge
away sin, therefore Christ came to make an atonement: So that now we have
reconciliation with God upon a twofold ground, his Mercy and his Justice. It Is
his mercy to send Christ into the world, yet in that Christ must satisfy by
his death it is justice: And this must needs administer much boldness at the
throne of grace, for justice can not now implead us: The only attribute that a
sinner would fear, is Gods justice; though he be gracious, yet he is just also;
he demonstrated his justice in destroying all the apostate Angels, and not
saving one of them. The Scripture represents him every where to be a just God,
that will not acquit the guilty, that will render to every one according to his
works. Oh (says the poor sinner) at this I tremble, under this I bow down, but
now by Christ's Priestly-office, justice is made on our side, not only grace is
for us, but justice also; now our very enemy once does speak for us, Justice, I
am satisfied, I can require no more: then justice would be unjust, if it should
require the payment of the same debt twice: This is ingraffed in man's heart to
make a satisfaction and compensation to God, but that was altogether vain,
which man did attempt to do, therefore Christ came to satisfy for all.

Herein Christ's Priestly-office did exceed those Priests in the Law, That they
were only typical and did outwardly cleanse, but they did not reach to the
soul, neither would they effect any immediate advantages upon it. The Apostle
diligently presses this in his Epistle to the Hebrews, and in his Epistle to
the Galatians is severe against those, who rested upon those external
Sacrifices, or any works of the Law neglecting Christ, and this truth belongs
to Christians also, for the blood of Christ is not esteemed; we think Baptism
will clear us, our tears for sin, or duties will compensate. Thus Christ is
not in our thoughts and in our hearts: Therefore whosoever does not in every
prayer, in every duty, look to the blood of Christ to cleanse him, he forgets
this truth, that Christ sanctified himself for us, we walk as if our duties, or
Sacraments, or Ordinances were sanctified to be our Mediators. It Is the blood
of Christ only that cleanses away our sins, and that purifieth our persons and
consciences.

This Priestly-office of Christ is not only in the oblation of his body, but
also in his prayers for us. Thus the Priest did in the Law, so that his prayers
had more in them, then any private man, it being a prayer by one authorized and
appointed thereunto. Christ in this also is our High priest; his prayers were
of two sorts, 1. Those that he prayed for, while here on the earth, whereof
this described in the Chapter is a chief one; and the other is that
Intercession, which he still makes in heaven for us; Wherein this prayer, and
his intercession in heaven differ.
they differ in the manner of petitioning, for those on earth were with great
cries and groans debasing himself; but this in heaven is nothing but the
presentation of his will, that what he had prayed for, and obtained for his
people, should be applied to them. Now Christ's prayer is infinitely above the
High priests prayers, for this is the prayer of him who is God as well as man,
it is of him who is the beloved Son of the Father: so that nothing can be in
justice denied to Christ's prayer, because it is a meriting and an obliging
prayer.

2. It transcends in love, because Christ is so dear unto the Father: What
shall we say to these things that are so unspeakably happy for the members of
Christ?

Consider the adjuncts of this Priestly-office, He is a Priest after the order
of Melchisedech. The ad^unct; of his Priestly Office.
In Genesis 14. we read of Abraham's tything unto Melchisedech the tithes of his
spoil, who is there called, The Priest of the most high God. It would be
endless to tell you, what the learned think about this Melchisedech, as also to
discuss all the difficulties about him. It Is enough for us that the Psalmist,
Ps. 110. prophesied of this long ago, and the Apostle applies it to Christ,
Heb. 7. Now to be a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, does imply,

1. The conjoyning of a Kingly power to the Priesthood. In the Old Testament
God had separated the Kingly and Priestly Office, none might undertake both;
and therefore when Vzziah, though a King, took upon him to offer Incense, which
was the Priests Office, God struck him with a leprosy, and the Priests
withstood him; but in this Melchisedech they were both joined together. Christ's
being then a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, does imply, that by virtue
of his Priestly office he did attain to a Kingly; and therefore the Scripture
speaks of that glorious condition he was exalted unto after his sufferings,
even to be above all Kings and Potentates, and therefore it was providential
that this Melchisedech, though a Priest, should have such a name as to be a
King of righteousness, and a King of peace. and truly had Christ only
sanctified himself to be a Priest for us without this Kingly office, we should
still be under the power of our lusts, and dominion of our sins, and should
have wanted a spiritual Prince of Glory against that prince of darkness* It Is a
Kingly Priesthood; so that there is not only religion, but power accompanying
him.

2. This implies the spirituality of his Priesthood, for Melchisedech though a
Priest, yet brought only bread and wine by way of refreshment to Abraham. It Is
a wonder to see how men of great learning and parts would find out a real
Sacrifice in that fact of Melchisedechs, but it is easily proved, that Christ
after that bodily oblation of himself, has now appointed no other Sacrifices
but spiritual. There is now nothing bodily or carnal in the Sacraments: It Is
sursum corda, and we are to prepare faith, not our teeth for the Sacrament. The
Priestly-office of old was in a carnal bodily way suitable to all the other
religious exercises; But now the external way of Christ is spiritual; we are to
offer spiritual Sacrifices, and our prayers are spiritual Sacrifices.

3. There is implied the perpetuity of it, Melchisedech was a Priest for ever.
There is no abolition or translation of this Office, no Successor to it,
therefore Christ does abide for ever, That once oblation of himself perfected
for ever those that were his: So that if he had offered up himself an hundred
times more, it could not have been more effectual, then this once oblation.

4. This Priestly-office was confirmed by an Oath, God swore to the perpetuity
of it. The Apostle does greatly aggravate this, Heb. 7.21. That God did not
only promise, but confirm it with an Oath: Every word of God is as sure as an
oath can be, but this was done to establish our faith; for it is the hardest
thing in the world to a troubled soul for sin, to believe that Christ has
made such an atonement, or to believe such a reconciliation; therefore God did
not only promise it, but swore to it.

Use. To fill the heart of those that do truly believe with unspeakable joy;
Christ sanctified himself to bring about thy peace: Here is oil enough, if thou
bring cruises to receive it: Is it not sin in the power of it, and the guilt
of it, that troubles thee? Does not that raise a great gulf between God and
thee? Behold Christ has sanctified himself, that sin should be as if it
never had been. This is the Paschal Lamb that you are not to eat boiled or raw,
but roasted with fire, not with waterish empty speculations, but fervent
affections of faith. Are you to meditate on this Sacrifice? This blood speaks
all good things for thee.

SERMON C. Of Jesus Christ as Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar; The Properties of
that Sacrifice; The way how men come to partake of the Benefit of it; Its
Efficacy as to Sanctification as well as Justification.
JOH. 17.19. I Sanctify my self for them, etc.
FRom the Person Sanctifying, we proceed to the Object-matter, which is said to
be sanctified, and that is (...), My self; The Priests in the Old Testament
consecrated and offered their brute Beasts, which though commanded by God to
have perfect Qualifications in them, yet because Beasts still, therefore our
Saviors Priesthood does far transcend that, because it is his own precious
body that he thus offers to be an Oblation for himself,

Observe. That Christ was not only the Priest, but the Sacrifice it self.
From whence Observe,

That Christ was not only the Priest but the Sacrifice it self; He offered up
himself in that bloody and ignominious death for our sakes; This is the great
mystery of our Christian Religion, whether you do regard the Doctrinal part of
it as a Truth to be believed, or as it is Declarative of the love of God and
Christ to his Church; The Prophet Isaiah cap. 53. is of old, long before it was
accomplished, greatly affected with it, and Paul upon every occasion is largely
amplifying this substantial Point.

Propositions concerning Christ's Priesthood.
To clear it Consider these Introductions,

First, That Christ was both Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar, Every thing in
Christ is wonderful; There is nothing in him after the ordinary manner of
nature, and therefore he may justly by the Prophet be called Wonderful, and as
in other particulars, I. That Christ was both Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar.
so in this it is true, That he should be Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar; Priest,
he was in both his Natures as God and man: Sacrifice, he was in his humane
nature, because that only could suffer; And Altar, he was in respect of his
Divine Nature, because by that he was sanctified; Oh then the admirable wisdom
of God that has thus appointed all fullness to be in him* When Abraham was to
offer Isaac, and the Child was bound ready to be sacrificed, he asks his
Father, but where is the Sacrifice? God (says Abraham) will provide one; II.
What things are necessary to a Sacrifice.
Thus when all mankind like Isaac was ready to be Sacrificed to the Eternal
displeasure of God, even then God found a Sacrifice for us.

Secondly, Consider what is necessary to a Sacrifice, and that is, That there
be some kind of destruction or annihilation of the thing to the honor and
glory of God; And thus a Sacrifice and a Sacrament differ, a Sacrifice is by
offering up of something to God, a Sacrament is when God offers and gives
something to us, Therefore when the Papists make the Lords Supper to be a
Sacrament and a Sacrifice also, they speak repugnancies; In a Sacrament God
gives to us, In a Sacrifice we give to God: Now among the Jews there were many
kinds of Sacrifices, and most of them did typically represent Christ; The
Paschal Lamb and the Sacrificing of the Red Heifer, these are plainly applied
unto Christ, but above all kinds of Sacrifices those that we called
Holocatomata whole burnt-Offerings; These did in a most lively manner typifie
him, for there the whole was to be burnt in fire, and offered to God, which
denoted the great humiliation of Christ both in Soul and body, and also the
exquisite Torments and Sufferings which were upon him, so that he was wounded
all over for our Transgressions.

Thirdly, Take notice that he offered up his body as a Sacrifice to God; III.
He offered himself to God.
It was in reference to him, not merely in respect of men, to witness the
Truth of God, but as every Sacrifice ought to be, it was wholly in reference to
God, though tending thereby to our good: It Is unlawful to offer Sacrifices to
any but God, because hereby is represented Gods supreme dominion and Majesty,
which is signified by the annihilation or destruction of the thing offered; Now
though Christ did not cease to be God, yet by his Death there was a separation
of the soul and body, though not of the divine nature from either; It was then
unto God that he offered up himself.

Fourthly, IV. It was by way of Expiotion.
This Sacrifice it was by way of expiation and propitiation to atone and
pacify the Justice of God, which otherwise would have been a consuming fire to
all mankind, as it was to the Apostate Angels: Sacrifices do imply some kind
of Expiation, and by Heathens were used to pacify the wrath of their gods, and
thus if Christ's body offered was truly and properly a Sacrifice, then it could
be no other but by way of expiation and satisfaction; Now that it was such an
expiatory Sacrifice is plain by the Apostle at large in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, where he compares Christ dying with those Sacrifices, and shows the
insufficiency of them in respect of Christ's once Oblation of himself, which
comparison would be weak and absurd if Christ's Death was not propitiatory; No
wonder then if the devil has raised up blasphemous Heretics to overthrow
this Doctrine, because in this is contained that happy Reconciliation between
God and a sinner; In that Christ shed his blood to atone for us is the whole
hope and comfort of the Church of God.

Fifthly, The holy and just nature of God against sin was such, V. The
necessity of it.
that there was a necessity of Christ's sacrificing himself upon the Cross for
us; It Is hotly disputed whether God might have forgiven sin absolutely
without Christ's Death, or by any other way then by Satisfaction; But when all
is said, it is acknowledged it is the most convenient way, and if we do suppose
that God would save mankind no other way but by justice as well as mercy, then
it was absolutely necessary that Christ should become man, seeing no mere man
could compensate God, neither could the Obedience of any man have delighted God
as much as Adams disobedience did offend him; Therefore it is highly derogatory
from Christ which Durand says, that if it had pleased God it might have been
that as by Adams disobedience all were made sinners, so by the same Adams
Obedience repenting and believing, all might have been made Righteous. The
properties of Christ's Sacrifice.


In the second place Consider the properties of this Sacrifice.

And First, It had infinite worth in it; Insomuch that had God ordained it so,
I. It has infinite worth in it.
it would have procured Reconciliation for all the sins of all men in the
world, yea, if there had been a thousand worlds of sinners; This is that which
Divines say, That it was a sufficient price and ransom for all, though not
efficacious: Though therefore many are damned, this does not arise from any
weakness or insufficiency in Christ's Death, but from the wickedness and
rebellion of men who refuse the means to improve this Ransom for their good;
There is infinite worth in it and that upon a threefold respect.

1. The Person offering, who is God as well as man, So that what dignity and
worth the divine Nature can put upon it, that it is sure to have; Oh that
Unbelief and distrust should ever overwhelm any Godly soul! Does not the
Apostle triumph, and say, Who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?
Romans 2. It Is Christ that died; Though the divine nature could not suffer, yet
he that suffered was God as well as man, and so it is to be accounted of
infinite worth; This is more then the Obedience of Men and Angels put together.

2. It is of infinite worth in respect of the gracious readiness and
willingness of him who did utter it; Christ received grace into his humane
nature without measure, and so this being the gracious offering of him, who was
God and man, it must have necessary acceptance.

3. It had infinite worth in respect of the thing uttered, which was no less
then the precious body and blood of Christ himself, he thought not those
preparatory sufferings and agonies enough, but he consummates all by his Death;
Oh then let not the trembling sinner fear the insufficiency of the ransom,
doubt not whether every farthing be paid, Say not, though such sins may be
discharged, yet can this that I have committed, Can the blood of Christ cover
this sin as well as others?

II. Though Christ offered himself as a Sacrifiae yet the application must be
as God has appointed.
Secondly, Consider that though Christ offered up himself as a Sacrifice, yet
the application of it must be in such a way that God has appointed; It Is not
enough that there is a potion which will cure all diseases, but it must be
taken in that way which the Physician does prescribe, and thus though Christ
offered up himself to reconcile God to man, yet this is not done till by faith
it be received; As the blood of the Sacrifice was to be sprinkled with hysop;
Thus the blood of Christ ere it does wash away our sins, must by Faith be
sprinkled upon the soul, and therefore it is not altogether here as it is when a
man is indebted and lying in prison, one comes and paieth the debt for him;
This man is released without any more a do; There is no further thing required
but the setting of him at l^berty, for though Christ has thus offerrd up
himself for the pardon of sins, yet the Father has made such an appointment,
that this price should reach to none but those that believe, and therefore this
Doctrine does not give the least security to any man to sin, for though
Christ died, yet his blood may do thee no good: Thou may lie roaring in hell
to all Eternity for all this, because thou art not one who does partake of this
death; Know the godly themselves while unconverted and abiding in their sins
have not that actual benefit of Justification which comes effectually by
Christ's Death.

III. Christ's blood washes away not only the guilt of sin but the filth of it.
Thirdly, Hence Christ's blood is not only cleansing and washing away the guilt
of sin but the filth of it; The Apostle Tit. 3. said, that he died to redeem
us a peculiar people to himself, zealous of good works; So that there is none
can plead the justifying efficacy of Christ's Death, that have not also the
sanctifying efficacy of it, as it follows in the Text, That they might be
sanctified: and this will pull up by the very roots all that carnal confidence
that most have, That come to Christ's Death as unto a common Sanctuary; It Is
true I am a grievous sinner, but Christ died, Christ was made a Sacrifice; but
what is this to thee who wallowest in thy filthy lusts? Thou art full of thy
noisome sins, and if Christ's Death did belong to thee, it would wash thee, it
would purify thee; Do not think Christ's blood can be sprinkled on thee for the
pardon of sin, and not for the washing away the filth of it; This is the
ruin of thousands, they divide Christ, and separate one effect of his death
from another.

Fourthly, Though Christ did but once offer up himself, IV. The virtue of his
Sacrifice abides for ever.
yet the virtue and power of it does abide for ever; It Is not necessary that
Christ should be always dying, therefore he is said to be a Priest for ever,
yea, this Death of Christ did extend to all the Godly that lived before his
Sufferings; Abel, Abraham, and all in the Old Testament, had no other Sacrifice
to please God with, but this; It is noted by a Learned man, that therefore
Cains Sacrifice was not accepted because he did not as Abel, offer such a
propitiatory Sacrifice as was a Type of Christ, but rested in his own duties
and works; yea, it is thought God by covering Adams nakedness with skins of
Beasts, did thereby teach Christ's Righteousness; Look then upon the blood of
Christ as powerfully working, as if to day he had been crucified; It works as a
moral Cause by Covenant and agreement with the Father, and therefore it does
as strongly work as ever,

Fifthly, It Is continually useful and necessary, seeing we renew sins daily,
V. It Is continually useful.
and therefore run into new infirmities constantly, therefore it behooves us to
apply this medicine continually: If a man had been a hundred times stung by
Serpents, he was as often to look upon the exalted Serpent to be healed, if
therefore we fall into the mire daily, we need washing as often, if we get
noisomenesse upon us, this blood must daily cleanse us, and certainly we may all
say with Peter, Not my feet but my whole body also; Let that be washed; Does
not every part of us get some new pollution? Are not hearts, affections, and
minds constantly polluted? If so, we cannot be a moment without the
application of it as often as we breathe, we need the Sprinkling of Christ's
blood.

Sixthly, We are to Consider the certain success and prevalency of it; No
sooner did the Messengers say Vriah was dead, but David's anger was removed: VI.
It Is prevalent with God.
When the destroying Angel sees this blood, he will pass by, if Moses his
prayer could so much prevail with God, that he says, Let me alone; and Lot was
so accepted that the Angel cannot destroy Sodom till he be removed; Then how
powerful and prevalent must Christ's blood be.

Seventhly, This Sacrifice is that which Christ presents to his Father; VII.
It Is that Christ presents to his Father.
The Socinians would have Christ performing his Priestly Office only in Heaven,
but it is plain he did it on earth, only what he once did, he constantly
presents to his Father, and the minding of God with this is a far more
efficacious thing, then that of the Rainbow, God when he beholds this will not
again drown the world, and when he looks on Christ will not condemn the
humbled sinner. Therefore Christ is described Rev. 10. with a Rainbow upon his
head, to signify as some think the pacificatory virtue that is in Christ.

Eighthly, The purity of the Sacrifice is not to be forgotten; He is called the
pure and spotless Lamb, 1 Pet. 1.19. As it behoved us to have a Priest without
sin, VIII. The purity of it.
So a Sacrifice without any defect, otherwise that Sacrifice would have needed
another, and so there would have been no end; Therefore though all we can offer
which is ours be full of blemishes, yet when we present Christ by Faith, then
there is no fault to be found.

Lastly, The virtue of this Sacrifice is to make us like Christ himself; IX.
The virtue of it.
he thinks it not enough to be King and Priest himself, but he makes us also
Kings and Priests for ever; We offer up Prayers and Praises to him, and by him
we conquer all our spiritual Enemies, The devil and our lusts are subdued, Such
glory have all they that are partakers of this Sacrifice.

Use of Terror to all wicked and ungodly men, who by their Unbelief and
Profaneness reject this Sacrifice; The Apostle Heb. 10. calls it trampling upon
the blood of Christ, and accounting it a profane thing; Oh how many thousand
live that have no esteem, and make no account of this Sacrifice; Oh remember
that this is the last and ultimate Sacrifice, He that rejects this has no more
hope; There remains no more oblation for sin; There is not another Christ
or another Sacrifice, if thou refuse this.

Use 2. Of Encouragement to the Godly. Come to this Fountain that is set open
for Judah and Jerusalem to cleanse in: Do not say, because Christ crucified is
a stumbling block and foolishness to wicked men, that therefore thou will
disesteem him also. There is no sore* but this blood will heal and cure: Oh let
the blood of thy soul be stanched with this blood of Christ! This blood speaks
good and comfortable things, better then that of Abel.

SERMON CI. Of Sanctification, as the Effect of Christ's Death; Showing, That no
man truly believes in Christ for Justification, that does not also for
Sanctification.
JOH. 17.19. And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also may be
sanctified through the Truth.
WE are now come to the end of Christ's Sanctification, which is twofold, the
finis cui, and cujus. We shall put them both together, for so they are
conjoined in the following clause, That they might be sanctified through the
Truth.

Wherein you have, 1. The final Cause. 2. The Manner of accomplishing it.


The final Cause, That they might be sanctified: and from this the Socinian
would argue, That Sanctification in the former clause, was not meant of an
oblation by way of Sacrifice, because the same word is applied to the Apostles
in the Text, and they were not to be sacrificed for us.

To answer this: First, Some Expositours do expound it of their offering up of
themselves by Martyrdom to confirm the truth, for Paul professes his
willingness herein, using the word (...), Phil. 2.15. which was used of some
kind of their Sacrifices; but we need not run to that, it is no new thing in
Scripture to use the same word in one verse, in different significations; and
it is a Rule, Talia sunt praedicata, qualia permittuntur a subjectis. The
Apostles then, needing not such a Sanctification, as Christ applied to himself,
but that for which he prayed in the former verse. We must understand it in the
same sense as there. It Is true, by Sanctification, some also will have
Justification comprehended, and so speak of an imputed Sanctification, but we
need not stretch the word violently, but understand it, first, Of making
inwardly holy, and then consequently, A setting apart, and dedicating our
selves wholly unto God by living unto him, and thence observe,

That Christ died not only for our Justification, but Sanctification also.
Observe. Christ died not only for our justification also. Concerning this point
consider,
He made himself a Sacrifice, not only to remove the guilt of sin* but to
remove and subdue the power of it, not only to make us happy, but also holy.

Let us consider, What is implied in this, That Sanctification comes by Christ's
death. And

First, We are to know that Christ is the Cause of our Sanctification several
ways, partly efficiently, for not only the Father and the Spirit, but Christ
himself also is the cause of all the holiness we have, I. How many ways is
the Christ is the cause of our Sanctification.
and therefore he is called the life, because he gives all supernatural life
unto his, and is compared to the vine, Joh. 15. because as the branch separated
from the Vine can bring forth no fruit; so neither is a man able without Christ
to do the least holy action; he is also called the Head, and John 1. Of his
fullness we are all said to receive. Thus as God in the course of nature is the
author of every natural gift, therefore it is said, In him we live, and move,
and have our being, Act. 17.28. So in the way of grace, Christ is the author
and finisher, as of our faith, so of every holy work in us The Author, Heb.
12.2. and therefore we cannot so much as begin or meet Christ, he must prevent
us; and the finisher; for although we have begun, yet we have not the same
manutenency and powerful preservation, what we have begun to build would
immediately fall to the ground. Thus Christ is the Alpha and Omega of our
spiritual life.

2. Christ is the meritorious cause of our Sanctification, and therefore not
only remission of sin, but holiness and zeal is made the consequent of Christ's
death; And the Apostle does not only Romans 7.8. show, that we are justified by
Christ, but also that the body of sin is mortified thereby. Thus Heb. 10.
what Sanctification that Apostate had, is attributed to the blood of Christ;
Christ then has as efficaciously merited holiness, as happiness, He died to
destroy the works of the devil; now our captivity to him, was not only in
respect of guilt, but that bondage and slavery we were in to all lusts; and
therefore those two benefits are like Castor and Pollux, one cannot be without
the other.

3. Christ is in some large and improper sense, called the formal cause of the
good in us, an assistant form, not informing, that is, Christ received and
applied by faith, does in a most inward and intimate manner live in us, and
thereby strengthens us; so the Apostle, Gal. 2.20. I no longer live, but
Christ in me. Here you see Christ lives in a godly man, for by faith we are
united unto him, and thus Christ becomes our Head, from whom we have all
spiritual influx: Now an head is a conjoined and united cause, made one with
the body, and thus is Christ and his Church; and therefore is that similitude
of an Head and the Body so often used.

4* Christ is the final cause of our Sanctification, that is, we are made holy
to this end, both that we might show forth the praises and glory of Christ, as
our Redeemer, as also that we should live to him, and set all our affections
and desires upon him, desiring with Paul, To know nothing but Christ crucified,
1 Cor. 2.1.

Secondly, In that by Christ's death we are sanctified, there is implied, II.
What is implied in our being sanctified by Christ.
That we of our selves are very impure and unclean, that we are like so many
noisome dunghils. For our being unsanctified, does imply,

1. Our filthiness or uncleanness; this is the state of every man till
sanctified by Christ, he is like an unclean leper, his riches, his honors, his
greatness, his parts, his morality does not free him from this impurity, so
that he ought to abhor himself as a monster, as a toad. This is the foundation
of all our misery, that we do not look upon our selves as so many vile
carcasses, as so many dead dogs. Till this be laid as the first principle,
Christ is not prized, Sanctification is not sought after: Oh therefore stand
like the leprous person afar off, and cry out, I am unclean, unclean? Thou
would be ashamed as Adam was to come with this nakedness and filthiness
upon thee into Gods presence.

2. Being unsanctified, does imply, That even the holy things we are employed
about, do not sanctify us, but we rather pollute them. Hag. 2. He that was
unclean, though he touched the holy things, though he ran to the Temple and
the Altar, yet he was not thereby sanctified, but he rather polluted them, and
thus while a man is unsanctified, those very duties, prayers and ordinances, he
does run unto, will condemn him, as appears Isa. 1. by that severe
expostulation with them, that abounded in their Sacrifices, yet did not wash
them or make them clean.

3. There is implied an utter unfitness and indisposition to any good work; as
on the other side, a vessel sanctified was meet for his masters use; So that
till we be sanctified by Christ's blood, we have no fitness for any holy duty,
iron can as well swim and logs fly, as a natural man be prepared to do that
which is holy and supernatural.

III. What may be inferred from our being sanctified by Christ's sanctifying
himself.
Thirdly, That our Sanctification is here attributed to Christ's Sanctification
of himself, we see,

1. That the initials and beginnings of Sanctification, are wholly from him.
Some have endeavored to make the very Heathens partakers of some kind of
sanctification, making a pietas pagana, as well as Christiana, but they are to
fear lest that might be applied to them, which Bernard did to Abailardus, Dum
sudat Platonem facere Christianum, scriptum facit Ethnicum. There is no
sanctification but where Christ is, and Christ and his body cannot be
separated, as the gold only in the Temple was sanctified; and this is good to
lay us low, and to make us admiring of the grace of Christ, How is it thou art
sanctified, and others remain profane, polluted like bruit beasts, who has
made this difference? Who infused this holy nature into thee? Wast thou not as
loathsome, as wallowing in the filth of thy lusts, as others till Christ's blood
did cleanse thee?

2. Not only the initials, but progressives, and consummatives in
Sanctification, are to be attributed to his Sanctification. Therefore you heard
him called the finisher, as well as the author of our faith; and the
Disciples, though already sanctified, yet are still more and more to be
sanctified. It Is true, here is a difference between our first Sanctification,
and the increase of it at first, we were wholly passive; Christ found us dead
in our sins, and wallowing in our blood, but afterward he finds us alive,
only needing his continual exciting and quickening grace; Therefore Paul,
though converted, yet still lives a life of faith in Christ; we need Christ all
the day long: How unholy, earthly, dull and lumpish is thy heart, if Christ did
not constantly sanctify it?

IV. Wherein the truth of Sanctification lies.
Fourthly, This Sanctification purchased by Christ must be in truth and
integrity; so Christ adds, sanctified in the truth, that is, truly, in
opposition to those legal and ceremonial sanctifications which did only cleanse
the body, but not reach to the soul. Although in the New Testament we have no
such external bodily Sanctification, yet still there is an outward
Sanctification, and an inward, both coming by Christ, and one separable from
the other. Thus you heard, the apostate is said to be sanctified by the blood
of Christ, which was not indeed and truly so, for then he would not have
totally fallen off, but in respect of the external administration. Hence 1 Cor.
1.2. the whole Church of Corinth, though afterward reproved for many sinful
practices, yet are called sanctified, and that partly, because of the external
dispensation of the Ordinances which they enjoyed: So that there is a
Sanctification external, and a Sanctification internal: External, is when by
our Baptism, and Christian profession: We acknowledge our selves separated
from the world to live unto God; but internal is when we are so indeed: How
shall we call the profane, ungodly person, a sanctified one? Look to the truth
of Sanctification here mentioned in the Text. Now the truth of it lies,

In the manner of working of it. The Spirit of God by the Word does thus
sanctify; therefore some understand this in the Text, by the truth, as
formerly our Savior prayed. God himself is the only Author of
Sanctification. We cannot make our selves holy, no more then we can make our
selves men, yet God works not in the order of grace immediately, no more then
in the order of nature, where he makes use of second causes. Thus in the
working of grace, he appoints second means, as the Ministry and Ordinances;
and therefore Paul, 1 Cor. 3. says, They were Ministers by whom the
Corinthians did believe; and there is no better discovery of true
Sanctification, then to examine the manner and way how thou have received it;
for if the Spirit of God by the Word has wrought it in thee, then fear not,
this is of a more noble and supernatural being, then what morality or
principles of civility can incline unto thee; As Christ himself was in his
bodily nature conceived by the holy Ghost in an extraordinary manner. Thus is
every one sanctified in an higher and more sublime way, then all the moral and
prudential dictates of nature can carry us unto: Oh then prove thy self, what
has the Spirit of God and his Word done unto thee! That was not more
wonderful in those who had a prophetical Spirit, then in such who are
sanctified. To enable men to speak with strange Tongues, is not more admirable,
then to give a man a strange heart to what he had once, and strange in respect
of others.

It Is true Sanctification, when it has the universality and integrity of all
parts, which is the whole Image of God, as Paul prays, 1 Thessalonians. 5. I pray God
ye be sanctified throughout in spirit, soul and body. This work of
Sanctification, it is an entire, complete, harmonical compages of all holiness,
take any part of it away, and you dissolve the whole fabric. It Is true,
Sanctification though it have not perfect and complete degrees, but not true,
if it want any essential parts, and therefore called the Image of God, which
cannot be one grace, no more then a man can be a man in one part, and a beast
in another, but the Systeme of all.

It Is true Sanctification in the permanency and continuance of it. Perseverance
does not make Sanctification to be true, but the truth of Sanctification makes
it persevere: Perseverance is an effect, not a cause of true Sanctification, as
the Apostle speaks, 1 John 2.19. They went from us, because they were not of
us; As leaves fall from the Tree, when they have no more of their wonted
nourishment; and this discovers the falsehood of those who appear sanctified
only in some fits, and upon some sad afflictions on them.

Truth of Sanctification is discovered by the purity of our aims and ends. They
love God, they obey him from such holy grounds as are suitable to the
sanctified nature: As the hungry man loves his food, because of his natural
desire to it. Thus a sanctified man loves and does that which is holy for
holiness sake.

True Sanctification is growing, and proficient every day more and more. That
which has solid root does not wither, but ripens and flourishes by the
Sunne-beams. The Apostles though already sanctified, yet are still to be more
sanctified; and certainly such is the sweetness and peace which Sanctification
brings, that it is no wonder if the heart be never satisfied, but still cries
like the horsleech, Give, Give.

6. True Sanctification will make a man diligently and fruitfully improve all
the instituted means for the increase of it, because the Spirit of God works
holiness; Therefore he is fearful to grieve it: Because the Ministry is to
make more holy, therefore he prizeth it, and labors to profit by it, yea,
because afflictions are sent by God to sanctify the heart, therefore he is
humble under them, and prays more earnestly for the Sanctification of them,
then the removal of them.

7. This Sanctification, though inchoate and imperfect here, yet shall be
perfected hereafter in Heaven. Christ's prayer, Christ's Spirit, Christ's merit
will at last obtain their complete and ultimate effect, which is full
Sanctification in Heaven, when there will be no more need to pray for further
Sanctification.

Use. Has Christ thus merited, and prayed for Sanctification? Then know,
Christ has done nothing to encourage profane and ungodly men: Christ died
not, neither is he a Redeemer or Savior, but to such who are made holy. This
may amaze and astonish all such, as divide the effects of Christ's death, yea
and divide Christ himself; They look upon him, as a Savior, but not as a
Sanctifier; They would have his blood to wash away the punishment of their
sins, but not the filth and pollution of them: Oh let the ungodly know, They
set up an Idol-Christ; There is no such Christ as pardons, but sanctifies
not also! Come then more earnestly to be healed of thy soul-pollution, then
they did of bodily diseases.

SERMON CII. Shows, Why Christ who could do all things, yet put up Prayers
What difference there is between his Prayers and ours. And the great advantage
Believers have by Christ's Praiing for them.
JOH. 17.20. Neither pray I for these alone, etc.
HItherto our Savior has prayed for his Apostles as they were Apostles; But
because many things in his Petition for them did also concern all Believers,
and lest it should be thought that none but the Apostles were the Object of his
Prayer, he therefore comes to a third part in his Petition, which relates to
the Catholic Church even the whole number of those who in time by Gods Spirit
shall be enabled to believe, Christ does represent in his Prayer to God the
weakest believer as well as the most Eminent Apostle; So that here begins the
third principal part of this Chapter.

Now in this Context we may observe, 1. The Object of Christ's Prayer. 2. The
Final Cause of it. 3. The Reasons enforcing it.


The Object of the Prayer is set down, 1. By a Negative limitation, Not for
these alone. 2. By a Posi^ive explication or description, But for those who
shall believe;


Through their word.

In the Negative limitation Consider Who it is that is here said to pray;

The Person is Christ God und man.

As for the word (...) we need say no more to that, only we are to add a
further Consideration about Christ's Praying; Seeing therefore that this is the
last place wherein he mentions his praying; I shall now supply what has been
defective in the consideration of this Point, and so Observe,

That Christ though God, yet as man did pray unto the Father as other men:
Doct. That Christ though God, yet as man did pray unto the Father.
This Point about Christ's Praying is worthy of our knowledge and right
understanding, For the Arians and Socinians did from hence argue, that Christ
was not God, it being absurd they say for him to pray who could do what he
pleased, even as it is absurd to say, that God can pray, seeing he is
omnipotent, and has no Superior; Yea, some of the Ancient Fathers have not
spoken so soundly in this Point; Hilary makes it to be but a kind of holy
simulation, that Christ prayed, and generally it is made a reason why he prayed
that he might give us an example; But although this be one subordinate end, yet
there were other more principal ends.

Upon what grounds Christ who was God as well as man did pray.
1. Therefore let us Consider upon what ground Christ did pray.

2. The difference between his Prayer and ours. He prayed then for himself and
his Church.

Because as man he was not omnipotent, and so his humane will was not able to
accomplish the things he desired, for although as God he could do all things,
in which respect he wrought Miracles, and did them not by Petition, as the
Apostles, but by his own power and in his own Name, yet as man, so, what he
desired by his humane will, by that he could not simply accomplish it, so that
in this respect it was that Christ as man did pray.

As man Christ was subject to the Law of God, and so was bound to give that
worship and Religious Service to God which the Law did require, so that when
Christ prayed he did it as fulfilling a duty, he had voluntarily submitted
unto; Even as when he came to be baptized, he told John, it behoved him to
fulfill all Righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. It was part of his Righteousness to
be baptized, because as man he was made a member of the Church; Therefore
Matthew. 4. he brings that command of worshipping and serving God alone, as
reaching to him, intimating he was bound by that Command as well as other men:
So Joh 4. he tells the Woman of Samaria, We worship, we know not what: He puts
himself in the Number of Worshipers, So that Prayer being part of Gods worship,
and a chief part of it, no wonder if Christ was constant in it: Hence we read
of spending nights in Prayer, yea, in his Troubles, his Prayers were
accompanied with strong Cries and Agonies, and the more they increased, the
more earnestly he prayed.

He prayed, because though all things were due unto him, yet by the Ordination
of God he could not be partaker of them but by Prayer; So that though the
Glorification of his body was due unto him from the beginning of his
Incarnation, yet he is to come to it by way of Prayer; Hence in this Chapter he
does by many Arguments seek for it at the Fathers hands: Thus Psalm. 2. when God
there declares his will of making him King over his Church, and giving the
Nations of the world for an Inheritance to him, it is said, Ask of me, and I
will give thee, Christ is to ask and pray for such things, So that in this
respect Christ prayed, even as all the Godly do, though God has appointed and
promised to bestow such glorious things upon his penple, yet it is by way of
prayer that they must be possessed of them; God could give them otherwise;
Neither do our prayers or Christ's Prayers make God alter or change his mind,
only prayer is appointed by him as that medium whereby his purpose shall be
brought to pass.

Christ prayed upon the same ground, as he gave thanks; Now we read he praised
God several times, yea, they sang an Hymn to God; Prayer is divided into
Petition and Thanksgiving; If then Christ could give God praise by the same
reason he might make Petition to him; He praises God as the Father of such
mercies, his Soul was affected with, and so he prays to God for such things
as he had not yet the full accomplishment of.

Lastly, These main Reasons being laid down then we may add, Christ prayed for
our example also; It Is wonder any should be so transported with pride as to
think themselves above prayer, that they need not to pray, when we see Christ
himself diligent in this Duty, So that as we are to learn of him, and imitate
the Zeal, Patience, and Love that was in him, so we are the Religious
Conversation also of Christ, which was manifested in his fervent Prayers unto
God upon all occasions, yet though Christ did thus pray, there was a great
difference between Christ's Prayers and ours.

If we speak absolutely of Christ as a person, so he needed not to pray, The
difference between Christ's prayer and ours.
for being in that respect God as well as man; Therefore he could have done all
things the humane Nature desired without any humble Supplication unto the
Father; It was then in respect of his humane nature only, and his voluntary
Humiliation of himself, otherwise being God as well as man, He might have done
all things by sole power and authority; Indeed there are some who hold that
Christ still in Heaven as man, does pray to God the Father, properly and
formally in respect of his Church, and so understand those places where he is
said to be an Advocate with the Father, and where he is said still to make
intercession for us, not (say they) that he prays in such a servile humbled
manner as he did here on Earth, yet they say it is more then mere a
representation of himself, or will that the Father fulfill what he has
purchased; It Is true and formal praying, neither (say they) is this any more
indecent and unbeseeming Christ as man in Heaven, then praising of God, which
yet as man he does; Howsoever this be, yet it is sure that when he did pray on
earth, yet it was not with such an absolute necessity and indigency as any man,
or the whole Church does pray for, they cannot in any Consideration help
themselves.

Neither did Christ pray for any spiritual gracious mercies; These are the
chiefest matter of our prayer, insomuch that temporal things are prayed for
only with a submission unto Gods Will, and so far as they conduce to our
spiritual good, but Christ had already received the Spirit of God in so full
measure, that he could not pray for further Sanctification, nor for a better
heart or more communion with God then he had, much less could he pray for such
things as suppose a sinful Imperfection in the Subject, So he did not or
could not pray for the pardon of sin which yet he taught the most holy that
are, to pray continually for, neither could he pray for justifying Faith, for
although he had faith and confidence in God, yet he had not justifying Faith,
which is the relying upon Christ for Righteousness; Neither could he pray for
the conquering and subduing of corruption seeing his pure Nature remained
altogether spotless and free from the least stain or pollution.

Neither 3. Were Prayers to him as they are to us, means to quicken up and
excite the heart, to make it more Heavenly and zealous; Prayer in us does
quicken and excite a man, and takes off the rust upon his Soul; Christ was
always in contemplation and enjoyment of God, and therefore he did not need
prayer to make his soul ascend higher to God.

Hence in the fourth place, All the matter he could pray for in reference to
himself was concerning his body, and the further glorifying of that, for seeing
it pleased him to take our body upon him in all the natural defects and
infirmities thereof, sin only excepted, it was necessary that he should not
always be in such a passible mortal way, but rise again to glory, dominion,
and all honor; Now this Christ prayed for as being to be obtained by prayer as
well as his Sufferings; He prayed also for assistance and deliverance in those
agonies he conflicted with; But in respect of his prayer for the Church, So he
prayed for their Sanctification, though not for his own, he prayed Peter's Faith
might not fail; he prayed God would not impute sin to some of those who did
crucify him; Though he needed not such Petitions, yet we do, and therefore in
this respect Christ prayed, in which we cannot imitate him, for he prayed as he
was to offer up himself a Sacrifice for our sins, so it behoved him also to
put up prayer for his people; Thus you have heard how Christ was capable of
Prayer, though God. What advantage Believers have by Christ.


Let us now Consider the comfortable advantage of these Prayers of Christ's unto
us: And

See the love of Christ, that he does remember our good in his prayers, as well
as his own; It is not enough to pray for his own Glory, but he beggeth and
prays for ours also: Paul speaks of it as his great affection and Love to
some that he made mention always of them in his Prayers, he never prayed for
himself but for them also: And thus we see Christ though ready to be offered
up, and to die such a tormented, ignominious Death, So that he might justly be
taken up with Prayer for himself only, yet he does the same time think of his
Church, and all that shall believe in him; Oh what comfortable Refreshment and
Encouragement should this be to the dejected and humbled Soul! That Christ does
in his Prayer remember and consider of thee as well as his own Glorification.

This Prayer of Christ is always heard; We many times pray, and God does deny
us, because as the Apostle James says Chapt. 4. verse. 4. We ask amiss, or we
ask not in Faith; Now Christ had every thing concurrent that might make his
Prayer successful: Therefore John 11.42. Christ there professes God the
Father heard him always: In that History many things are remarkable.

For 1. In the raising of Lazarus though he could have done it by an immediate
Word, yet he wept, and was sorely troubled; yea, he groaned twice, which were
not simply groans of his Body in a natural way, but such as were accompanied
with Prayer; Therefore he adds, I know that thou hear me always; Though
we do not read of any Prayer of Christ's at that same time, yet the groans and
the desires of his Heart, they were Prayer.

2. It is Observable how thankful Christ was for having his Prayer heard; The
same Person who is obliged to give thanks, is also bound to pray: Thus John 6.
Christ gave Thanks about that Refreshment, though it was by Barley and some
small Fish; Christ himself gives God thanks for that poor and course Diet: Oh
what Thankfulness should this teach us, and stir us up to express: And so
in this History, though the good he prayed for did not immediately redound to
him, but to Lazarus and his Sisters, yet Christ gives thanks for it, so that
Christ who prays for the good of Believers as his own good, So he gives
thanks likewise to God for Mercies and Blessings bestowed on them as though
they were his own mercies: If thou can not give God Thanks large and hearty
enough for his discriminating Mercy in opening of thy Eyes, and passing by and
leaving the Eyes of more prudent and honored in the world blind and shut up:
Know that Christ has also thanked the Father for this, Luke 10.21. Christ that
prays for all thy spiritual blessings, does also praise the Father for them.

But 3. That for which I brought this place is, That Christ does not only say,
That the Father heard him, but I know, demonstrating the Assurance of this, and
that he hears him always: This supposes Christ is always praying, for he
that is always heard, is supposed to be always pouring forth his Petitions:
And further If you say that Christ prayed, That the Cup might pass away, yet
he was not heard in that prayer, it is easily answered, That was not Christ's
Absolute but his Conditional prayer: It was an Expression of his Will ut
natura, not ut ratio; Therefore he adds, Not my Will, but thy Will be done:
Hence Hebrews 5.7. it is said, He offered up Prayers with strong Cries to him
that was able to save him from Death, and was heard in what he feared; Though
he dyed, yet was heard in that Prayer because Death had not any Dominion over
him.

Now Christ must needs be heard always,

1. Because he is the Mediator and High Priest, and so powers out his prayers
in his own Name; If Christ should not be heard for himself, then he would need
another Mediator for himself, and he must also pray in another Name, which is
highly derogatory unto his honor to imagine or think of.

2. His Prayer is meritorious as well as his death, and so in justice nothing
can be denied him.

3. He is infinitely beloved of the Father, and so when he appears nothing
can be denied him.

Lastly, He does not absolutely pray for any thing but what is conformable to
his Fathers Will, and if so be we, who are the Sons of God by Adoption only,
are sure to speed and to prevail when we keep close unto that Rule, how much
more then shall the Natural Son of God!

Use 1. To reprove those who either through pride think themselves above
prayer, or else through profaneness neglect it: Christ prayed alone and with
his Disciples, and thou have neither Family-Praier or private prayer: Christ
gave thanks though for barley bread, and thou constantly eatest thy Food
without acknowledging God to be the Author of that mercy.

Use 2. of Direction To the Godly, Make up the Defects and Insufficiency of thy
own prayers, with the Fulness, Excellency, and infinite worth that is in
Christ's Prayer, Christ prayed not with such defects and failings as thou do,
they are thy prayers, for thy good, far better then if thou had offered
them up for thy self.

SERMON CIII. In what respects the Benefits of Christ's Mediation extend to all
Believers alike, and in what not: For the Comfort of weak Christians, and such
of them as are most contemptible in the eyes of the World.
JOHN 17.20. But for them also which shall believe in me through their word.
FRom the Negative Limitation, we come to the Positive Explication and
Description of such as are the Object of Christ's prayer. And in this
Description, we may take notice,

First, Of the adversative particle, But also. Not only the Apostles, such as
were eminent, and pillars, but even for all the rest, though never so mean and
inconsiderable.

Secondly, There is the Description of the persons,

1. By their inherent properties, that shall believe.

2. By the Circumstance of the future time, That shall believe, though not yet
born, and so could not think or desire good for themselves, yet Christ does
here pray for them.

3. There is the Object of this belief, Who shall believe in me.

4. The instrumental Cause, Their word.

All these particulars have their respective usefulness. And

First, Let us consider the adversative particle, not only the Apostles, but
every believer also.

Doct.
Obs. That Christ in his Mediatory-Office had respect to the meanest and weakest
believer as well as to the choicest and most eminent. Even as the High Priest
was to pray for all the people, the poorest as well as the greatest; so does
Christ regard the soul of the most contemptible believer, as well as of such
who are more conspicuous. This might be represented in that custom amongst the
Jews, when the soul of every man, whether rich or poor did pay the same
ransom, Exodus 30.12. Though among men, there be poor and rich, learned and
unlearned, yet in respect of Christ and grace, there is no such difference. To
this purpose notably the Apostle, Gal. 3.28. There is neither Jew or Greek,
b^nd or free, but all are one in Christ Jesus. Christ in his Mediatory works
looks upon all as one: Even as it is with Gods providence in this universe.
It Is fully intent upon every one creature. There is not the lest worm or fly,
but Gods providence preserves it as well as it does the most glorious Angel,
and as it is said usually, Gods providence is so intent upon all the whole Word
universis, as if he did not attend singulis to every particular, and yet on the
other side, it is so incumbent on singulis, as if it were not to the universis:
Even thus it is with Christ, his care and love is so indulged to any one
believer, that you would think there were no other believers, you would think
his thoughts were not upon the Church in general, but on this particular, and
yet at the same time Christ's inspection and watchfulness is so over the whole
Church, that one would think, that he had not time or leisure to mind the
condition of every private Christian.

To open this Doctrine, it is good to consider these things:

That Christ being God as well as man, In what respects Christ did as much for
one believer as another.
and so a Mediator in both Natures, did know all those who were given unto him
by the Father, he knew the charge and trust that was committed unto him: Even
all that have been, or shall be, and therefore as the High Priest had the names
of the twelve Tribes on his breastplate; Thus our Mediator resembles him, for
he has the name of every one, he is the good Shepherd, who as he did lay down
his life for, so also he must necessarily know every one of them. This then is
to be taken notice of, that the Father gave such a number of persons, neither
more nor less unto Christ, to purchase their salvation; and every one of these
he did exactly know, for to him as God, all things past and to come are as
present. And therefore though these in the Text are to believe in the future,
and so have no present being, yet they are here comprehended in Christ's prayer;
But of this truth more in the second Description, which is of the circumstance
of time.

As Christ in a Mediatory way did thus receive equally every one to his charge
and trust, so in the discharge of it, he had an equal respect to all. Christ
did not will the salvation of one believer more than another: he did not intend
his blood in the efficacy of it, more for Paul or Peter, then he did for Mary
Magdalen a great sinner, if then we speak quoad affectum and intentionem, not
quoad efficaciam, and fructum; So Christ was equally a Mediator to all that
are given him by the Father. Though we judge that a most unsavory and
unthankful Doctrine, that holds, Christ did intentionally and equally die for
all; for Judas as well as Peter; That Christ had no more love in his death to
one then another; yet if we speak of those who are interessed in him
spiritually; so it is true, Christ died equally for all that are his, he made no
difference in his Mediatory acts, his eye and love, with all that he did was to
one, as well as another. None can say, he is my Christ more then another, he
intended me in his death more then another. This you heard proved by the
Apostle, when he said, in Christ Jesus, there was no respect of persons,
relations, or other differences.

Even in respect of the effects and fruits of his Mediatory love, in some
particulars all are alike. There is no difference between one and the other: As
for instance, in Justification, all believers stand alike justified through the
blood of Christ, all are accepted of, and beloved in Christ alike. This we
truly maintain, when against Papists we affirm, That any poor, weak woman, yea
one that has been a grievous sinner, yet if believing in Christ, is equally
justified with the Virgin Mary; and the ground is, because the reason of our
Justification is without us in respect of Christ, not in our selves; so that as
Christ is every where the same, thus must our Justification be every where the
same. It Is true, one is more justified then another extensively, but not
intensively, that is, one has more sin forgiven then another. Mary Magdalen
had more forgiven her then the Virgin Mary, but intensively, as our
Just^fication does consist in Gods favor and acceptance, so they were both
equal. Again, if we speak of the application of Christ's righteousness, so
indeed there is a great difference; for though Christ's righteousness be the
same, yet because some receive this with a stronger faith then others, and
because the application of this righteousness is in us, not according to the
latitude and worth that it is in Christ, but according to our necessity and
indigency; Therefore we may say, Some partake of it more then another. Though
Christ's righteousness be in it self the same to all: Even as the light of the
Sun is the same to every Star, though one Star partaketh more of it, then
another. This then must needs encourage every believer, for he has the same
Christ, the same righteousness to offer unto God for satisfaction as any Paul
or Abraham, though the father of the faithful, had. If we were to come in our
graces and duties to be accepted of, then we might truly say, I am not
comparable to such worthies, I cannot speed so well, as those that have more
eminency, but though I have not the same grace with Paul, yet I have the same
Christ with Paul, the same righteousness he would be found in, the same also I
desire to be found in. Thus our righteousness is alike in Christ.

In the application of Christ's benefits, there is no regard to external
temporal differences. Christ does not communicate himself to a Christian for
any external consideration, nor are his favors dispensed with such references,
but according to their spiritual capacities: Hence it comes about, that some
poor, weak Christian, may enjoy far more of God and Christ, then the richest
man, or the learned man that is in the world, because Christ dispenses
himself in a spiritual way, because they are his members, and believe in him,
not for accidental respects: Thus Christ says, I stand at the door and knock,
Rev. 3.20. if any man open I will come in, and sup with him Christ will come to
a poor man's house, and knock there, and will sup with him: The meaning is, he
will manifest himself in a gracious comfortable way to such an one, let him be
never so contemptible: Know then, to partake of Christ, and to have intimate
fellowship with him, is not according to the manners of great Kings and
Potentates in the earth: It Is not here as with Ahashuerus, none might come into
his presence, but such as were perfumed, and gloriously prepared for his
presence a long while together: Every believer may come boldly to the throne of
grace, and call God, Father, and never be discouraged for external respects,
God may make the poor man's cottage an heaven, whereas the rich man's palace or
hall is many times an hell. Christ regards not great men, but good men, yet
this must not be wrested to an Anabaptistical error, that because in spiritual
dispensations Christ makes no such difference; therefore the public civil
order that is between rich and poor, honorable and base, is to be confounded:
No, Christ's Gospel does not abolish humane policies and civil differences, but
does with great diligence command the renewing of them; Take an instance about
a believing servant, 1 Timothy 6.2. They that have believing masters, let them not
despise them, because they are brethren; Servants might think that by Christ
all difference is taken away, why should he be a servant, he has as much of
Christ, and is equally beloved of him with his Master? Oh, says the Apostle,
take heed of such corruption, grace does not confound and abolish relations and
order, but rather confirms them, and commands to discharge them with the
greater care.

Christ's gracious promises which are for the main the substance of the Covenant
of grace are equal to all his. He makes no difference, when he invites to
pardon, to rest, to come unto him. Indeed there are peculiar promises, which
are made either to some high degrees of grace, or to some in their peculiar
relations, or sufferings for Christ, which do not belong to all: But the
Covenant of grace, which is the substance of all promises, that is offered and
fulfilled in one believer as well as another: Thus the promise of being our
Father, and we his people, of forgiving our sins, and writing his Law in our
hearts; They are made to every believer, All the Promises are in Christ Yea and
Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. and that to every one who comes to him; This is also
infinite comfort; It Is sin and thy delusion, when thou say, such glorious
promises do not belong to me, I am so poor and unworthy. Though others may
claim them, yet I may not: Oh take heed of this! you charge Christ foolishly
and sinfully in this respect, Mat. 11. Is it not his promise universal to every
one that is heavy laden, that he will ease him? Why do thou except, when
Christ does not? So what can be more clear then that, John 6.37. Him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out; Let him be never so miserable, so
wretched, so sinful, if he comes, he will in no wise cast out, and lest it
should be thought I cannot come, he begins the verse thus, All that the Father
gives me shall come to me, all shall come, not one will he forget; therefore
Christ is described by this, That he will not break the bruised reed, nor
quench the smoking flax, Mat. 12.22. Yea the promise of perseverance is to
every godly man, as well as any; That as the least Star is as firmly set in
it is orb, as the glorious Sun, and there is no more danger of the falling of
the one, then the other; Thus it is with the godly, even the meanest, weakest
and most fearful are as sure to be kept by God to salvation, as the most
strong and heroical Christians. It Is not Peter's courage or fortitude that kept
him, for you see when preserving grace had in some measure left him, he began
to fall most dangerously, and would not have stopped, till he had come to the
bottom of the hill, had not grace prevented him. This you must know, that it is
not the graces or watchfulness of a Christian, that keeps him, as none can
say, I have differenced my self in respect of conversion; so neither I have
made my self to persevere in respect of continuance of grace. This then is
clear, That he who is truly a member of Christ, shall not perish, though he be
not the eye, or the hand, though he be the meanest, yet because a member, he is
inseparable: Therefore John 10. None can pluck any out of my hand; All the
sheep of Christ are in his hand: It Is not with Christ, as with some unnatural
parents that dote on some of their children, but others, they care not for;
Christ loves all alike in respect of the substantials of grace; So that as
every one is elected, and every one shall be converted, so every one shall
persevere to salvation. This is a precious truth, and ought to be received; for
we think with our selves, my weaknesses, my corruptions, my frailties, my
carnal fears are so great, that I shall never prove faithful in the hour of
temptation: Oh remember, that in this point of perseverance Christ makes no
difference between true believers, the weak shall hold out as well as the
strong!

Christ's protection, power and care is to one as well as another, though he may
suffer some to be more afflicted. Some more afflicted, some more exercised then
others, yet this arises not from a less love of Christ. That Parable of the
loss of one sheep, and the Shepherds leaving all to find out that,
signifies, that Gods care and love is to anyone that needs him; and therefore
the temporal promises for the generality belong to every godly person; God has
promised, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. There is no
believer living, but he is to apply this promise as properly, as if he only
were mentioned, or as if he were Joshua to whom it was first personally made.
And to this Paul, Romans 8. when he argues, He that gives us Christ, shall he
not give us all things else? And we are more then conquerours: No, Do not all
those glorious triumphs proceed upon a ground common to every believer? May not
every Christian say so as well as Paul? Thus when it is said, Cast thy burden
upon the Lord, for he cares for thee, and all things shall work for your good,
and in nothing be careful. This is bread for every child; Indeed there are
dogs, and there are swine, to whom this bread does not belong, to whom this
pearl is not to be cast, but every child may undoubtedly take it.

SERMON CIV. That in some particulars the poor weak Christian has more respect
from Christ then the strong one.
JOH. 17.20. But for those also that shall believe in me through their Word.
THe Doctrine observed was, That Christ in his Mediatory Office stood equally
affected to the weakest believer as well as the most eminent; In many things we
demonstrated an equality.

Before I come to show the differentiall particulars, let me add, That in some
particulars the poor weak Christian has more love and affection from Christ
then a strong one; So that the weaker they are, the more they conclude of more
grace and power to be showed to them.

1. Christ commonly shows more pity and compassion to such as are objects of
greater want and indigency; Therefore you heard, the smoking flax he would not
quench; As the Shepherd does gently lead those Cattle that are great with
young, and as Aristotle observes, that in nature Parents are still carried
with their greatest affection to the child that is youngest, because that is
most exposed to want; Thus also does Christ respect those that are the meanest,
the lowest, that have least of comfort and least of grace; Alas such are the
greatest objects of pity; Do not therefore think that thy infirmities make God
angry with thee if humbled for them, no, they provoke pity and compassion; As
the Psalmist speaks, Psa. 103. concerning Gods afflictions, that he remembers
what man is, he does not deal with him as if he were brass and iron, but as
dust and grass, So does Christ, he knows thy weaknesses, thy temptations,
and therefore he will mercifully consider of thee; The Apostle gives this
reason, 1 Pet. 2.7. why the husband should give honor to his wife, because she
is the weaker vessel, and certainly Christ takes this way with every Soul
married to him, the weaker it is the more compassionate is his condescension to
it.

2. His protection and preservation of it is more peculiar and emphaticall; The
weaker and more infirm thou art, the greater is Gods power and grace manifested
in thee; Thus Paul said, the power of God was perfected in his infirmities, and
when he was weak, then he was strong, 2 Chro. 22.10. This is Christ's usual way
to magnify his power and strength most in those that are the weakest of
believers, and therefore it is that many times he leaves those that are strong
and eminent to their own selves, that so feeling their own infirmities they may
be the fitter objects to glorify Christ's power; Hence when Peter was in his
failing and decaying condition, then Christ prays, that his faith may not
fail; God that owneth himself to be the judge of the Widows, and the Father of
the Fatherless, because they are most exposed to necessities, will much more
show this in a spiritual way to such as have not the hopes or the
encouragements as other godly men have.

3. He does commonly vouchsafe more inward comforts and evidences of his love
to such, gives them more cheerfulness and joy; Even as you see in nature, a
Child is not exercised with those cares and troubles that do molest when they
come to years, but mind their sport and play; Thus to new Converts God many
times, reveals much comfort and joy; They may have more then than ever
afterward in their life time; Then is the time of the Souls marriage to
Christ, and no wonder if a Feast be provided for them, and their water be
turned into wine.

4. God does in a singular manner keep them from those exercises and
temptations which many times he lets fall on those that are more eminent, Joh.
26. when Peter was young he went whither he would, but when he was old then he
should be bound, Where there is spiritual strength God puts a proportionable
burden; So that Christ in the dispensing of his exercises has a respect
always to the measure of their graces, he will not lay a Giants burden upon a
Childs back, yea, such is the wisdom of Christ herein, that he does prepare
and fit his people by degrees for afflictions, as the timber lies in water to
he seasoned by degrees for service; There is a great difference in Gods
providence to his own people, some are more tempted then others inwardly in
their souls, Some again have far more outward troubles then others, and in all
these still regard is had to the strength of his people; Christ being the head
has a respect to every member, and so knows what is the fittest exercise for
it; Be not then inordinately cast down with fears, fears about thy infirmities
and weaknesses, for if thou art weaker then others, thy burden shall be
lighter, and the less thou have of thy self, the more of Christ's power will be
in thee.

5. Though they be weak in many things, yet Christ makes them remarkably strong
in some other things; This is notable to consider, that even such who have been
weak, yet in some passages have showed more strength and courageous actings of
grace then others very glorious: Did not all the Apostles though the first
fruits as it were of Gods Spirit for fear fly from Christ? When Mary followed
him to the Cross; yea, Joseph of Arimathea which came to Christ by night for
fear, did afterward publicly own Christ, and that when he was crucified, when
were the greatest discouragements; Hence the Apostle Romans 11. exhorts in honor
to prefer one another, because there is no Christian so weak but even the
strongest may be inferior to him in some respect, Comfort then thy self in this
that though weak, yet thou have sometimes been so enabled to do those things
which yet others have failed in.

6. To those that are weak God has made glorious promises for the increase of
their grace; Thus the Prophet Isaiah, He that is weak shall renew his strength
like an Eagle, and shall not be faint, Isa. 40.31. and thus they are said to be
blessed that hunger and thirst after Righteousness because they shall be
satisfied, Mat. 5. and by the Prophet Zechary, He that is feeble shall be like
David, and David like an Angel of God, Zech. 12.8. So that the meanest
Christian may lift up his head with joy, for though thou art infirm, yet a
glorious promise of strength is made unto thee.

Lastly, God sanctifies these weaknesses and infirmities unto them, So that
they get more good by their weak grace then many times others do by their
strong; It Is better to be a babe in grace, fearing to fall, then a presumptuous
man like Peter to think we shall always stand; God suffers even strong ones
sometimes to be overcome by Philistims, that so they may fly out of themselves
to the grace of God, and depend upon his power, Now the Sanctification of their
weakness of graces lies in this.

1. They are hereby more bumble and self-emptied; They remember those duties,
He that stands, let him take heed he does not fall, and be not high-minded but
fear: Humility and self-emptinesse is a comely posture for a Christian, now
none are more so, then such who are sensible of their weakness.

2. Hereby Christ is advanced and exalted in his power, as the weak Child
lays fast hold on his Fathers arm; Thus the power and might of Christ is to
none so welcome as those that find and feel themselves falling, when the
Disciples are ready to sink, then they cry our, Master help we perish

3. They walk more thankefully to God, when the Israelites were in a barren
wilderness, having no food or water but what God did wonderfully provide for
them, then if ever they would be st^rred up to thankfulnes^; Thus when a child
of God wonders that under so many temptations and infirmities he did not this
day or that day fall and break his peace with God, he will be provoked to
glorify God and admire his grace; The hungry Soul will be thankful for every
morsel of bread, and thus will the humble lowly Christian apprehensive of its
own imbecilities glorify God for every moments preservation.

There is some difference between believers in respect of Christ's Death.
In the next place Let us Consider, That there is some difference between
Believers in respect of the fruits of Christ's Death as well as there is an
equality:

their Sanctification is not, one is made more holy then another; That as one
Star differs from another in glory, so one Christian from another in grace;
Hence some are called babes, others strong men, Some are called carnal
comparatively, others spiritual, Some are said to be perfect not absolutely but
respectively; It Is true, all the people of God are truly sanctified, one is
sanctified as well as another, aeque but not aequaliter, only the measure and
degree is very different; Not that he who has more may advance his power, and
attribute glory to himself; No, What have thou that thou have not received? Not
only the essence of grace but every degree thereof is from the grace of God;
Therefore he that prayed, help my unbelief, Mar. 9.24 argued that he could not
have one degree of faith by his own power, only Christ must bestow it on him.

those common gifts which are for service, Christ gives them in much variety,
Ephesians. 4. That all these gifts are the fruit of Christ's death is plain, and
therefore the Spirit of God is given by Christ to his Church upon his
Ascension, Now 1 Cor. 12. The Apostle does there excellently show, that though
there be diversity of operations, yet there is still but one spirit, and the
Scripture much delights in the similitude of a body, where there is diversity
of members with their peculiar operations, and it is hard for believers to be
content with these various Administrations: Every member would be an Eye,
Though Christ died equally for all, yet he did not give gifts and offices alike
to all; This variety of gifts is represented by the Kings Daughter, whose
clothing was of needle work, and it should not tend to envy or division, but
to mutual profiting and helping of one another.

The means of grace are likewise differently administered, For although Christ
died alike for all believers, yet the means of bringing them home are not
alike, Some live under more powerful means then others, Some have not the
Spurs and encouragement that others have to that which is holy; Again, some
live in clearer and more evidencing times of Gods grace then others, all those
that lived before Christ's time are said to be in the dark in comparison of the
Light that did arise by Christ; Many Kings and Righteous persons desired to see
what the Apostles did, but could not; But though all have not the like means,
yet there is not any one godly man, though in never such remote and dark
corners, but the converting grace of God will find him out, and therefore that
is not a sufficient reason which some, pleading for Christ's death universal
for all, when urged by this argument, That if Christ died for all, why then
have not all the means of grace? why is not the Gospel preached to every one,
if Christ died for every one? They answer thus, That even those who hold Christ
died for all believers, yet grant that all believers have not the same means of
grace, to some the Kingdom of heaven draws nigh more manifestly and evidently
then to others; But this as I find is insufficient, because though the means
of grace to one believer may be more then another in respect of measure and
degrees of Light, yet not of efficacy; That little means they have is blessed
by God to be as effectual as the most eminent and glorious means, whereas by
their opinion Christ is supposed to die for such, who yet never were sanctified
by any means, whether more or less they did enjoy.

4. Their temptatious either inward or outward are greatly different; Every
godly man has no^ the buffetings of Satan as Paul, had neither are all
Martyrs; Obadiah could live quietly in Ahabs Court, when at the same time Eliah
was pursued to death, Rev. 10. The devil shall cast some of you into prison;
But some only, yet in these different administrations all believers may take
the same essential comfort, and look to the same substantial happiness, you
must know also that none may nourish themselves in their weaknesses, for those
that grow and are more strong, they have many privileges which the weak attain
not to.

As 1. The growing Christian shall grow more, he that has, it shall be still
added to him.

2. The strong Christian does in Gods ordinary way attain to more solid
assurance and persuasion of Gods love, Therefore 1 Pet. 1. by adding one grace
to another, they make their calling and election sure.

3. God makes peculiar promises to such that do overcome, and that do continue
steadfast, Rev. 2. They shall have the white stone, they shall be made pillars
in the Church of God.

4. They are more serviceable to God, The more grace, the more improvement for
God; Others they bless God for them, Many are reformed and comforted thereby.

Lastly, Their glory shall be greater in heaven; Though some make the condition
of all Saints alike in heaven, yet it is more consonant to Scripture to affirm
degrees of glory as there have been degrees of grace.

Use of Instruction, That the lowest Christian in Christ's School is not to be
discouraged, Though never so blind and blockish as thou art, yet remember
Christ is a Mediator for such as are given to him, and though some exceed
others in grace, yet all have the same Christ; As though some men have better
eyes then others, yet all have the same Sun, the poor as well as the rich, the
diseased as well as the sound.

SERMON CV. Of Christ's Love and Care of every one of his before they had a
being.
JOHN 17.20. But for them also who shall believe in me through their word.
WE have heard our Savior does in this verse pass from the Apostles to all
believers; and it is Transitio perfecta, as Rhetoricians call it, for he
mentions them he prayed for, and so proceeds to others.

We are in order come to the object of this enlarged prayer, and therein is
considerable the circumstance of time, who shall believe, (...), where (...) is
for (...), as before, and (...) for (...) or (...). It Is true, some Copies,
which Grotius also follows, read it (...) in the present tense, for those
that do believe, yet because it is most universally received in the future
tense, and our Bibles go that way, I do adhere unto that, only here is the
doubt, which Austin also of old made, why he prays only for them, who shall
believe, for there were many at that time, besides the Apostles, as Nathanael,
Joseph of Arimathea, the godly Mary's, and others who did believe, were they
then excluded from Christ's prayer?

Some answer, though they did believe at that time, yet because after Christ's
Resurrection, their faith was more clear and explicit, therefore they may be
comprehended in the future tense, their former faith not being worthy the name
of faith respectively to that they obtained afterward. But the more genuine
answer seems to be, that by the future tense is included the present tense
also, it being ordinary in Scripture to express a thing that has a permanent
duration, by the future tense, not excluding the present, but denoting the
constant succession, in 1 Timothy 1.16. Therefore I obtained mercy, that in me
first Jesus might show his long-suffering, for the instruction of those (...),
who should believe in time to come. That Doctrine of Christ's long-sufferance
was demonstrated to those that believed at that time in a more remarkable
manner; but because it would be a perpetual useful document, he instanceth in
those that are to come, yea all the believers for the time past, since the
beginning of the world, are not excluded from this Mediatory prayer, while they
needed it, no more then from his death; for Christ's prayer, as his death,
profuit antequum fuit, Observe. That such is Christ's care and love to his
remembered in his prayer and death, even before they had a being.
it profited before it was, because it was present to God from eternity in
which sense he is said to be a Lamb slain from the beginning of the world.

Observe. That such is Christ's care and love to his, that they are remembered in
his prayer and death, even before they had a being, when thou could not pray
for thy self, nor any else; yea from eternity Christ's Mediatory love and
purpose was set upon thee. In particular this truth is full of consolations,
even as the Sea is of waters, to those that are members of Christ.

Therefore to open this,

Consider that when Christ here prays for all believers, he does not as we
do. When we pray for the whole Church of God, or as some say, The Angels and
Saints in Heaven pray, viz. in a general indistinct manner, not descending to
every particular, individual person. No, but Christ in this prayer, being God
as well as man, and so clothed with Omnisciency, did in this prayer know and
attend to every particular believer, that should in any age of the Church be
born, as distinctly and nominally (as I may so say) as when he told Peter, I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: So that here is a great
difference between Christ's prayer for the universal Church, and ours. We
cannot name the particular believers, that shall be in every age, but Christ
did represent in this prayer every individual man, and had as distinct
knowledge of all believers, as of the Apostles whom he knew man by man.

This must necessarily be so, because though the execution and accomplishment
of those benefits we receive by Christ's prayer, and his death be in time, yet
the Decree and purpose was from all Eternity. Christ did not at this time of
prayer, or the hour of death begin to will good to them: No, that love to
them was eternal, and of old: Insomuch that we cannot say, There ever was a
time, when God did not purpose these glorious things for them, and therefore it
is, that the Scripture does often call the godly to this consideration, that
his mercy and love to them was of old, even before they ever had a being, or
the world either, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him, before the foundations
of the world; and that is remarkable, 2 Timothy 1.9. where this grace of God is
said to be given us in Jesus Christ before the world began. It Is said to be
actually given us before the world began, either because God had decreed to do
so, or else because it is as certain, as if it had been done already: Oh then,
what lively consolations should this breed in a believers breast, Gods gracious
thoughts of mercy were of old to me, when I was many thousands of years from
having any being, yet even then was I in Gods mind and love! No wonder if all
eternity be not long enough to bless and praise God for this eternal purpose of
his.

Though we are then chosen in Christ from Eternity, yet take heed of that
absurd Error, which holds, Our sins are pardoned, and our persons justified
from Eternity. To say, That while a man is unconverted, wallowing and tumbling
in his lusts, that his sins are pardoned, and that he is as well loved of God
before his conversion, as after, is to contradict the whole course of
Scripture; for though we be elected, and thus predestined from Eternity, yet
the Effects of this are not bestowed upon us, till in time, and in such a
manner as God pleases. Praedestinatio est amor Ordinativus, not collativus, as
the Schools say. It Is immanent in God, not transient in us: Therefore you see
our Savior supposes such to be believers, who shall be made partakers of his
death; He does not promiscuously pray for all men, he does not commend to Gods
love every man or woman, but the believer only: So that we are to distinguish
between the purpose of God, and the gracious effects thereof, otherwise we may
as well say, we are glorified from Eternity.

Hence, in that Christ does thus determinately pray for every individual
believer; It Is a plain Argument that he is God, as well as man: For how could
those things be as present to him, which yet were many years to come, if he was
not God, Act. 15.18. Known unto God are all his works, from the beginning of
the world. Thus Christ being God as well as man, to him was known the state and
condition of every believer, not only before he was born, but before the world
had a being: Therefore from hence it may be properly gathered, that even to the
humane nature of Christ was revealed the number of those persons, whose
salvation he was to procure: So that Christ as man, as well as God, knew who
they were that should believe in him. It Is true, Omnisciency could not be
communicated to the humane nature, as the Orthodox maintain against the
Lutherans, neither was the knowledge of all things revealed to it, but as the
Son of man, he knew not the day of Judgment when it should determinately be;
and the nescience of this was not any sin in him, yet the revelation of this to
his humane nature, viz. who they were that he should die for, seems to be
more necessary, even as Divines say, The humane nature of Christ, shall by
revelation from the Divine at the day of Judgment, know all the thoughts and
secrets of man's heart, that so he may be the great Judge of the world in both
his Natures, howsoever here is a clear argument, that Christ is God as well as
man, and that his Godhead concurreth to the work of our Redemption.

It is not to be thought impossible, that even all things that are to come
should be thus present to Christ, though it be to us. For our knowledge is
measured by time, and there is not only a successive order in the objects we
know, but also in the acts of knowing: But the measure of Gods knowledge is by
eternity, wherein all things do exist together: So that though in themselves
one object be after another, yet in respect of God, they are beheld with one
intuitive act: As a man with one cast of an eye from some high Tower does
behold many passengers going by, one after another. It Is true, we can no more
comprehend how these things are all at once open and naked to God, then a Dwarf
can reach the Pyramides, yet for all that we are to believe, what by reason we
cannot comprehend. Quid enim magis contra rationem, quam ratione supra rationem
transcendere, said Bernard. It Is enough for our comfort, that every believer,
though yet unborn was in Christ's purpose and intention, when he laid down his
life, as if they had been existent in the land of the living.

By this intention of Christ in his prayer and death, it will inevitably and
immutably be brought about, that they shall in time be converted, they shall
believe and be brought into communion and fellowship with Christ. For seeing as
we have heard, Christ could not but be heard in what he prayed for, and the
Father always granted his Petition, therefore it cannot be but that all those,
who are given to Christ, shall one time or other be wrought upon by the Word.
Thus it is said, They believed (Act. 13.48.) as many as were ordained to eternal
life; and the Apostles were to go and preach in such places, because God had
much people there, Act. 18. and Romans 9. the Apostle does fully show, That
Election is the cause of all mercies vouchsafed in time, and those who were not
elected they were hardened and given up to a spirit of slumber: Oh then the
admirable love of God to those that are his, there shall not be one of them,
but the Word of grace will find them out! They that were not his people, shall
be made his people, Joh. 10. I have other sheep (says Christ) that are not of
this fold, and those he will bring home. Hence Romans 8. we have that golden
Chain, which all the Arminian subtilties can never dissolve, Whom he has
predestined, he has called, and whom he has called, he has justified, and
those he has justified, he has glorified. To expound calling only of vocation
to afflictions and to the cross, and Justification only of the vindicating of
their persons and cause against the calumnies of the world, is too dilute and
repugnant to the scope of the Apostle in that place; we may then absolutely
conclude of the conversion and believing of such who belong to Christ, and that
the Word preached will sometimes or other be effectual upon them.

It Is plain from hence, That Gods Election, and so Christ's dying for us, is not
conditional, or upon the supposition of our believing, but our belief is the
true and genuine effect of Election, and Christ's death. For whereas Christ here
prays for those who shall believe; The Question may be, Whether this belief
be supposed as a Condition Antecedent to Election, and Christ's death, or as an
absolute Effect of both; so that Christ does not only pray for believers, but
also that they may be believers? There is a great Controversy between
Arminians and the Orthodox, for they say, God elected some such persons to
eternal life indeed, and gave them to Christ as a Mediator, but it was upon a
supposition and foresight, that they would believe and persevere in that faith
to the end. But the Orthodox do more consonantly to the Scripture, and to the
greater exaltation of Gods grace, and magnifying of Christ, affirm, That God by
one single act of the same time, did elect a man both to grace and glory, both
to salvation and faith: So that God did not elect us, because he foresaw we
would believe, but he did elect us to believe, as well as to salvation: So that
faith is not a condition, but the effect and fruit of our Election. This is a
necessary truth to be proved, and therefore the next day it is to be
considered; for the present I take it for granted, That those who shall
believe, are such, not who by their own power shall either believe or dispose
themselves to it, but who by the grace of God shall be enabled thereunto: For
the present, consider the aggravation of this love of God in Christ to us
before we had a being. And

1. There is remarkable freeness in it of grace, if positively and absolutely
considered: For what could there be in us to move God to this mercy, when we
could not think, or cry, or pray, or do any thing for our good, even then God
set his love upon us? It was nothing in us, seeing we were in the womb of
nothing.

2. This freeness is aggravated, if comparatively considered, for it is the
grace of God that makes some to believe, and leaves others in their natural
corruption. The Apostle considered this discriminating love of God to Jacob and
Esau, Romans 9. before they had done either good or evil: Oh then sit and admire
the depth of grace, the unsearchable riches of grace! for what art thou to so
many learned and noble men in the world, to so many of thy own kindred and
family that God has past by, yet took compassion on thee? Did thou not lie
equally in the same mass of corruption and bondage to all sin?

3. There is the Eternity of this love, it was before the beginning of the
world: So that we cannot imagine any moment of time, wherein Gods thoughts were
not upon thee.

Lastly, The unchangeablenesse of this love, for the Councels of God and his
purpose are immutable, There is no change or shadow of change in him, and
therefore if once loved, always loved; he predestined thee before the world,
called thee out of the world, justifies thee in the world, and will glorify
thee after the world.

Use. What infinite cause of praise and glory the people of God have? Well
may thou call upon thy soul, and all within thee to praise God: Well may
this be the burden of every Psalm, For his mercy endures for ever; yea, if
thou had the hearts of all men and Angels, this were not enough, neither can
Eternity be long enough to glorify God in this particular.

SERMON CVI. Of both the Moving Cause and Effects of Election and of Christ's
Prayer and Death; Against Arminians and others.
JOH. 17.20. But for them also who shall believe in me through their Word.
WE come to a Second Observation from the circumstance of the future tense, Who
shall believe in me; For (as was intimated) there may be a twofold sense of
these words.

1. That this future Faith is mentioned as an effect and fruit of being given
to Christ, as also of Christ's Prayer and Death for them, So that he does not
only pray for them which shall believe, but also that they may believe, and in
this sense the Orthodox interpret it.

Or 2. It may be interpreted as if Faith were here supposed as a condition on
our part, antecedaneous both to Gods Election, and also Christ's Intercession
and death, So that the sense should be, These were given to Christ, and Christ
he prayed and died for them, because it was foreseen by God, that such would
believe upon the means of grace offered, and others not; In this sense Meisner
a Lutheran urges it, and thus all Arminians and others must take it, who hold
that we were Elected from a foresight of our Faith and perseverance therein.

But that this cannot be the meaning of our Savior is evident, because the
ground of Christ's Prayer even in respect of those who shall believe is, because
They were given to him by the Father, as appears verse. 9. I pray not for the
world but for them which thou have given me; Seeing therefore the Foundation of
Christ's Intercession is because they were given by Election to Christ as a
people to be saved through him, it is plain, that Christ prayed not because he
foresaw that they would believe, but because they were Elected: It Is true, the
Arminians do in a most violent and strange manner wrest that phrase of being
given to Christ; They understand it not of an action of the Father, but of the
disposition of the Subject; Hence it is they speak so much of a probum
ingenium, or a docilis indoles, as if it were some towardly disposition in man,
that fitted him for grace, but thus it would be rather who have given
themselves to Christ rather then that the Father had given them, and indeed
this is such a thorn in their sides, that they cannot pull out, if by such who
shall believe were to be understood, those that upon Gods foresight were known
to improve the means of Faith better then others, then all the difference from
others, and the utmost resolution of salvation, yea and Election would be unto
a man's self, when yet the Apostle does expressly stop such mouths, What have
thou that thou have not received? and who made thee to differ from another, 1
Cor. 4.7.

The Text thus vindicated and explained, I gather this Observation.

That Christ died not, and so we were not Elected because we will believe, Doct.
but our belief is the effect and fruit of Christ's death and our Election: Our
Faith is not a condition upon which our Election or Christ's Death stands
suspended and indeterminate, but these do make us infallibly and effectually to
believe in time: There are two common Opinions, The one holding, That God from
all Eternity knew who would believe in time, and persevere therein, and
thereupon they were Elected, and Christ died for us; This way go Arminians and
others; But 2. The Orthodox, they affirm that God did from all Eternity choose
some out of the corrupt mass to Eternal glory, and for this end to give them
Faith and holiness as the means thereunto; So that God did not elect us
because we did or would believe, but that we might believe, we believe because
we are Elected, not Elected because we believe: This Doctrine is very useful
because it tends to humble and debase man, and wholly to exalt the grace of
God, and therefore the more diligently to be confirmed because of late so
greatly opposed:

And before we bring Scripture-Arguments Let us Consider some few things that
will clear the state of the Question,

As 1. There is a difference of those who hold our Election, and so Christ's
Death to be upon the foresight of something in us, Some are more gross then
others, For there are some that hold a man is Elected to glory upon the
foresight of his cooperation with the grace of God, as a true merit deserving
this Election, so that with them God did behold who by his free will would
improve the offer of grace, and for this as a meritorious cause they say God
did Elect them unto Eternal Glory: But this is so highly injurious to the Grace
of God, that though some Papists have maintained it, yet Bellarmine Valentia
and other Jesuits wholly disclaim it at least in words, making no other cause
of predestination in respect of all the effects of it, but the sole and mere
good pleasure of God.

2. There are others, and they say the foresight of the good or better use of
our free will then others is not a meritorious but a moving cause with God of
our Election to Happiness: So that our Faith and Holiness though they were
not a meriting Cause, yet were a moving Cause of our predestination, but this
is also too grossly repugnant and contradictory to Scripture.

3. There are those who refine it more subtlely, and that is, That God did
foresee who would believe and persevere therein to Death, and such are
peremptorily chosen to Eternal Life, not that their Faith or Perseverance is
any merit or moving Cause, but a Conditio sine qua non, without which God would
not choose such to happiness, so that (say they) it is not for any
intrinsecall. Dignity or excellent worth in Faith, but because of the many
possible ways and means to Salvation; God appoints this way of believing
rather then another, and thus the Arminians, Only they acknowledge Holiness of
Life, and Obedience to God to be thus a Condition foreseen as well as Faith,
though they would seem utterly to deny it.

4. There are the Lutherans, and they indeed hold Faith foreseen as a
Condition in our Election; Only they say, It Is not considered as a merit, or a
Cause, no, nor as a work, but as an Instrument apprehending Christ's merits, and
therefore make Election to be by Faith, in the same sense as we are justified
by Faith; Hence they deny Holiness or Obedience to be a condition ingredient
to Election, because Christ is not laid hold upon by that as by Faith, although
herein they contradict themselves, because they acknowledge not Faith singly as
so, but Perseverance in Faith to be the Condition, and that must be necessarily
looked upon as a work, not as an Instrument receiving Christ; But the Orthodox
they affirm consonantly to Scripture, and sutably to the Glory of Gods Grace,
That God did from all Eternity choose some men out of that corrupt mass in
which all were, to Eternal Glory, and by the same Act did prepare and appoint
all those means which would effectually produce the same, So that this Election
is the Original and Fountain of all Spiritual mercies: because Elected,
Christ is appointed a Mediator: Because Elected, they are called and enabled
to believe in time, So that we deny there are two Elections, One to Glory,
another to Grace; But God by the same single Act does will both, and therefore
that there is not the same Reason of Election, and of Justification or
Salvation, for these being Acts done in time do require Faith and Holiness, as
antecedent, but Election being an Act of God from all Eternity cannot
presuppose any thing in us.

Reasons.
Now the Arguments to confirm us in this Truth they are these following.

Because the Scripture when it speaks of this great and wonderful work of
Election, it does still resolve all into the Counsel of his will, not into any
thing fore seen in a man, Ephesians. 8. Roman. 8. Roman. 9. and in many other
places it is still said, He has chosen us according to his Will, according to
his purpose; Now if so be it were for any thing foreseen in us, it would be
rather according to the Counsel of our will, and according to our purpose:
There cannot any rational Answer be given unto this Argument, for according to
the Adversaries, God does not Elect or choose any, until he foresee what every
man will do, and if he do well and persevere in this, then he is predestined,
but this does at once dash out all the Prepositions Prae, and turn them into
Post, it is not prae-destination but post-destination, not (...) but (...); And
this administers a second Argument.

If so be that God did Elect and choose to Eternal Life because he did
foresee our Faith, then the whole difference of one Believer from another
would be attributed solely to man's Power; For to say, That this is Gods Decree,
and his Appointment, that whosoever shall believe shall be saved, does not in
the least work upon any person, no more then that Decree of God, Whosoever
shall do this shall live, does suppose any that will exactly keep the Law, so
that no man in the world may believe for all this Decree; And thus when Christ
prayed for those who shall believe, he might have prayed for a Non ens, a thing
which might never have been; Therefore all the Question is, How come some to
believe and not others? How is it that of many who live under the same means of
Grace, some are called effectually, and others grow more wicked and sinful?
Certainly the Scripture does not give this unto man's Will, but to Gods
free grace and Love, as Matthew 13. To you it is given to know the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of God, and unto others not: Thus Christ also Matthew 11. solemnly
blessed and thanked God, That he had hid these things of Heaven from the wise
and prudent ones of the world, and that he had revealed them unto Babes: And
the Apostle expressly, Who has made thee to differ from another? 1 Corinthians.
4.7. Therefore it is horribly injurious unto the Grace and goodness of God to
say, That under the same Means of Grace I made my Self to believe, to repent
rather than another: Certainly such an Opinion as this is so gross and absurd,
that well may Arminianism be said not only to be repugnant to many places of
Scripture, but even to the common sense and experience of all believers; They
have a witness within their own breasts, That they were as unwilling, as
froward, as opposite to the work of Grace as any; That it was God that made
them of unwilling, willing: Even as there were many others that heard Paul, yet
God is said to open the heart of Lydia rather then others.

Faith and all holiness is the Effect and Fruit of our Election, and also of
the Death of Christ, and therefore it cannot be an antecedent Condition; That
is plain, that the same thing cannot be an Effect and Consequent of Election,
and yet an antecedent Condition, at least in the same Respects, for then it
should be considered as before and after at the same time, which is a plain
Contradiction: Now that Faith is a Consequent and an Effect of Election, and
that we are Elected to Faith and Holiness, not because we have Faith and
Holiness, is clear by several Texts of Scripture, as Act. 13.48. They
believed as many as were ordained to Eternal Life: Here is plainly set down
the Effect and the Cause; They believed, and why? Because ordained to Eternal
Life; As for that Cavil to understand (...) intransitively, as if it were no
more than dispositi, and so did imply some inherent probity that is not worth
the answering; For how were the Gentiles disposed to believe, who were said to
be dead in sins, and plunged into all manner of impiety until Grace had
converted them: Besides this disposednesse to believe, whence does it arise?
Either from our selves, and so all Glory is due to us, or from the Grace of
God; And if so, How comes it to pass that some have it and not others but
because of Election? And it is further to be added, That it is not said in the
Text, They believed that were ordained; Or (as they say) disposed to believe,
but to Eternal Life, which does necessarily suppose an Action of God, in whose
power alone it is to dispose of Eternal Life: Thus also Ephesians. 1. There are
very emphaticall Expressions to show that we are Elected to be holy and
unblameable in the sight and presence of God; And whereas they would refer
this to our glorious Estate in Heaven that cannot be, because unblameable does
properly relate to our being here upon the Earth: It is true, we will readily
grant, That both Faith and Holiness they do enter into the Decree of Election
taken terminatively, as it ends in Everlasting Happiness: Therefore it is a
mere Calumny to say, We hold such an absolute Election to Glory and Happiness
as has no respect to Christ or to Faith: For although we deny that Christ was
the meritorious Cause of our Election, yet it is plain by Scripture we are
chosen in him as the Head, and so the Cause of all the Benefits that come by
Election; And God had respect unto Faith, He chose Believers to Salvation,
only this Faith was not looked upon as an antecedent Condition in us, but as a
qualification which God by Election does work in the hearts of those that shall
be saved: We say, God has Elected such to Salvation whom in time he will by
that Decree make Believers; For he that wills an end does thereby will the means
that tends thereunto, only we deny they were supposed Believers first, and
then God Elected them.

Because the Scripture every where makes Election to be the Origina^l and
Causall Fountain or Womb of all other Benefits; That Ninth Chapter to the
Romans is pregnant to this purpose, where Election is made to be that which
brings about all blessed Eff^cts in time, Election has obtained, and it is
not of him that wills, or runs, but of God that shows mercy; Whereas
Austin of old urged by the Adversaries Opinion replied; We might as well say
according to them, it is not of him that calls, but of him that wills; And
Romans 8. The Apostle makes predestination the cause of Vocation, Justification,
and Glorification, not Vocation the Cause of Predestination.

Fifthly, If the humane Nature of Christ was not chosen to the personal Union
for any foreseen merit, much less may any mere man be Elected to Glory,
because of any supposed worth; This was an Argument urged of old by Austin, and
is very strong; By what Grace that particular man was made Christ, by that we
are made Christians; Now the Apostle says expressly that Christ 1 Peter 1.20.
he was foreordained and appointed before the Foundation of the world, and all
will readily grant, that this was not for any foreseen worth and Excellency in
the Humane Nature of Christ.

Lastly, Not to mention all that may be brought, If we are Elected upon Faith
foreseen, and Perseverance therein, then none are Elected until they come to
die, and then all those places of Scripture which speaks of our Election so as
to praise God, to have Confidence in him, to triumph over all Afflictions,
would all be in vain, for a man that is dead cannot perform these Duties.

Use 1. of Consolation to all Believers, What holy boldness and Confidence may
they have for the time to come; Did Christ think of thee before ever thou wast
born or come into this world, and will he not now thou have a being in this
world? Did he mind thee before ever thou had any Grace, and not when thou
have it? He that did the greater, will he not do the less?

Use 2. Of Admonition, To search for the Effects and Fruits of Election in your
Lives and Conversations; For if you are of God, and do belong to him, you will
hear his Word, The Word one time or another will be effectual to you.

SERMON CVII. Of Faith, the several Kinds of it: And especially of Justifying
Faith: It Is Object and Seat, etc.
JOHN 17.20. Who shall believe in me through their word.
WE are now come to the Description of those who are here prayed for.

1. The person in it is qualification, (...). 2. The Object of this
Qualification (...).
So that in this Description two things are very observable; 1. The Action. 2.
The Object.


The Action, or rather the Quality, is in those words, Who shall believe.

2. The Object, in those, (...).

For the gracious disposition, viz. of believing, I shall (God willing) treat
more generally of the Nature of it, verse. 21. where it is again mentioned, and
so shall pass over the Act, and come to the Object, that specifieth it: And
the Greek word (...) is emphatical; for it is observed by the learned, that no
profane Authors use that phrase (...), it is peculiar to the Scripture: So that
as the thing it self, viz. recumbency and resting upon Christ for salvation, is
only known in the Church of God, so is the phrase.

I shall not at this time examine that ordinary distinction of credere Deum,
Deo, and in Deum, it will be more pertinent at verse. 21. where the whole Nature
of faith in it is latitude is to be examined. At this time, I am to consider the
restriction of it to it is principal and chief Object, and that is Christ: For
there is a two fold object of Faith, the general, and that is the whole truth
of God revealed in the Scriptures, and the special, that is, the Lord Christ
making an atonement for us, and as Faith does respect this special object, so
it justifies, a man's faith does not justify him, as it believes the
threatenings or historical part of the Scripture, but as it receives Christ,
and rests on him. It Is true, the habit of justifying faith puts it self forth
into all those general acts, as a man by his rational soul accomplisheth the
acts of sense, which are common to a beast, but that which does specifically
constitute him as a man, is rationality; so justifying faith does enable a man
to believe every truth revealed in Gods Word, but that by which he is
justified, is when he wholly depends upon Christ, and as was said, This is
emphatically expressed in Scripture, by (...), not that this does every where
signify the act of saving and justifying faith, for John 2.23. many are there
said (...), To believe on the Name of Christ, to whom yet Christ would not
commit himself, but only for the most part is so. The Scripture often
expresses it by (...), especially by the Evangelist John, sometimes with the
Dative case, Act. 18.8. Act. 27.25. sometimes it has the Dative case, with the
Preposition (...), Romans 9.33. Romans 10.11. sometimes with (...) and the
Accusative case, Romans 4.5. Romans 4.24. sometimes on the Name of Christ,
sometimes on Christ, sometimes on God; and all these expressions do come to the
same effect, only hereby is expressed more then a mere intellectual assent, or
speculative belief. There is also included the fiducial and cordial inclination
of the whole heart, to rest solely upon Christ, renouncing every thing else,
that may be thought to reconcile God to us.

Doct. That the faith which ^ustififieth and saves us, makes us wholly to
depend on Christ.
Doct. That the faith which justifies and saves us, makes us wholly to depend
and rely upon Christ. So that it is with the believer in the matter of
Justification, as it was with Peter, when sinking into the sea, he cried out to
Christ, who took him by the hand, and leaning on him was saved. Thus the
believer, he is even sinking and dropping into hell, he cries out, I am
damning, I am damning, and then Christ putting his hand forth, faith takes
strong hold of it, and so is supported: or as the Israelite stung with a
Serpent, it was not the looking upon other objects, but only upon the Serpent,
and it was looking or mere beholding, not applying any medicinal things that
did cure: So it is here: It Is not the believing of every truth, but only on
Christ that justifies, and it is only believing, not repenting, not loving,
though they be necessary graces in the persons justified, but only believing,
upon which we are justified. Seeing that this is the quintessence of all
practical Divinity, and the life of faith is that which we are to be exercised
in continually; and also there are many corrupt doctrinal opinions that oppose
it.

Let us the more diligently consider the whole nature of faith, as it
justifies. And

The several kinds of faith.
First, You must know that Protestant Writers consonantly to the Scripture make
four kinds of Faith,

1. Historical, which some call Dogmatical, whereby we do believe the truths of
Scripture revealed therein, because of Divine Authority, because God says so;
for if it be only from custom or education, or other humane ends, then it is not
so much as a Divine, Historical faith, and this faith all Christians are
supposed to have, though it is to be feared few have any more then a bare humane
faith.

2. There is a Temporary Faith, called so, because it does abide but for a
season, it being not able to endure the force of persecution, and this is a
degree higher then the former, for that was only in the understanding, and so
had no efficacy upon the heart or affections at all, but this temporary faith
is carried out with some affections, both to the person revealing, and the
matter revealed, for Mat. 13. They received the Word with joy, who believed but
for a season.

3. There is the Faith of Miracles, which was granted in the primitive times of
the Church, for the confirmation of the Gospel, and that sometimes to those who
were not justified persons, and this had for the object of it a peculiar and
special promise for the doing such or such miraculous effects, and answerable
to this, some learned Divines do acknowledge still a special faith, whereby the
godly are sometimes raised up for the effecting of a particular mercy, they
stand in need of.

The object of faith.
Lastly, There is this Justifying or saving Faith, which has for it is proper
object Christ crucified, and so by resting upon him brings reconciliation with
God, and peace in the conscience. It Is true, some distinguish between
justifying faith, and saving, as if all that faith, which did justify, did not
also save, but that is built upon that dangerous foundation, as if there might
be Apostasy from the true faith.

Now whether this distinction be exact, and in what sense it is to be made
good, I shall not here dispute, but take it for a necessary truth.

Secondly, When we say, That faith justifies as it rests on Christ, and
receives him, we do not deny or exclude assent to all other divine truth,
revealed in Gods word. Justifying faith does necessarily suppose historical or
dogmatical faith. So that although they be two distinct kinds of faith, yet in
a justified person all those acts of faith proceed from the same root and
habit, that principle of faith whereby I am enabled to rest on Christ, makes me
also firmly to assent to every truth of Gods word, yea this dogmatical faith is
the foundation of justifying, and did men exercise stronger acts of historical
faith, it would much conduce to our justifying faith and strengthen that, did
we believe more firmly that Christ came to be a Mediator, then this would
quicken up to peculiar confidence in him. Therefore the devil has temptations
against both, sometimes he assaulteth us in the matter to be believed, and
sometimes about our application of what we do believe: Therefore we are not to
oppose these special acts of faith against the general.

Thirdly, This phrase of believing in Christ, It Is an act of the will as well as
the understanding.
does plainly denote a fiducial act of the will and heart, as well as the
assent of the understanding. And this is greatly to be observed, that we are
not to look upon believing, as a disposition to assent to the things of God as
true; but we do by believing incline the whole heart to trust and rest on
Christ in whom we do believe. It Is greatly disputed, Whether this fiducial
application or confidence be of the formal nature of faith, or an effect and
consequent only of it; but I shall wave that at this time. It Is plain, that to
believe in, does denote some cordial and fiducial motion of the soul to the
object, as it is center, and on that which gives us firm rest; Hence faith is
called, receiving of Christ; it is said to be the eating of his flesh, and
drinking of his blood; It Is called the embracing of the promises; and opposite
to this believing is fear, Luke 8.50. and diffidence, and wavering: So that
it is plain, faith has a fiducial assent with it, therefore it is called
believing with the whole heart, Act 8.37. The heart believes, Romans 10.9. as
well as the understanding.

Fourthly, Hence it is also, That faith is made by some Divines, not a simple,
but an aggregate or compounded habit, that it is not in one faculty seated, but
in two, The seat of faith.
that it is both in the mind and the will. And howsoever some have argued
against this, as being contrary to all Philosophy, for one habit to be in two
faculties, yet the most learned Schoolmen do confess it no absurdity, for with
some free will is seated, partly in the understanding, and partly in the will;
as also prudence a moral virtue is partly in the mind, and partly in the will;
and all do confess, That though to believe be an immediate act of the
understanding, yet to this there is required pia affectio in voluntate; and
indeed, seeing as the Apostle says, there is a captivating of the
understanding in it is carnal reasons, when we do believe, that cannot be
without some prevalent power upon the will: So that we are to look upon Faith
as a compounded habit, which does partly work upon the mind, by enlightening
that, and partly upon the will, by enclining and strengthening that.

Fifthly, The ground why justifying faith must needs comprehend both, is,
Because that in the promises of the Scripture, there is a twofold object to
move our faith; for every promise has in it that which is true, and so it
requires assenting acts, and then it has that which is good, and so it
requires fiducial and embracing acts. Wonder not then, if faith extend it self
to two distinct powers of the soul, seeing it also reaches to two distinct
objects, truth being the object of the understanding, and good the object of
the will. The Apostle comprehends both in that speech, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance; a faithful saying, there is
the truth to be believed, and worthy of all acceptance, there is the good to
be embraced. Therefore believing is not a bare speculative assenting to the
truth, but it is also a sweet quieting and composing of the heart to receive
the good promised: Hence it is called receiving, Joh. 1. and eating and
drinking, Joh. 6. it is compared to the branches receiving moisture from the
vine, Joh. 15.

Sixthly, As the Scripture expresses faith, relating to the object believed,
not to the proposition, so at other times it does express the proposition;
Hence it has often (...) put to it, Do thou believe that I am the Son of
God, or that I am sent from the Father? This is a proposition to be believed;
but you must know, that faith as it justifies, is not properly in that we
believe such a proposition to be true, viz. That Christ is God, or that he will
give eternal life to such as believe, but the ens incomplexum, that is, Christ
himself in his Person and Offices, is the object of our justifying faith:
Therefore Christ himself is said to dwell in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. Even
as the woman is married to the person of her husband, and not to the articles
of agreement upon marriage; and this is that which makes faith to be so
powerful and noble in it is efficacy, because Christ is hereby received in the
soul, who is the author and fountain of all spiritual operations: So that as
when the Sun arises in our hemisphere, it cannot but give light and heat; so
also when the Sun of righteousness arises in our hearts, there is the Spirit
of Christ also accompanying him in Sanctification and Mortification.

These things are required to justifying faith
Seventhly, To justifying faith, there are these things required, some whereof
are antecedent and concomitant, others essential and constitutive of it. As

1. There must be some explicit knowledge of Christ, and understanding of him
in his Person and Offices. Whether knowledge be an act included in the essence
of faith, or whether it be preparative and antecedent, is disputed: Howsoever
it is certain, None can believe that does not know the thing he believes: Henc^
it is that faith is so often in Scripture called knowledge. It Is true indeed,
faith has not an evident comprehensive knowledge, for then it would be
science, strictly so called, but it has a plain knowledge of the testimony or
authority that reveals it, and also some apprehensive, though not
comprehensive knowledge of that we do believe: Hence Paul says, I know whom I
have believed, 2 Cor. 4.13. And again, How shall they believe unless they have
heard? Romans 10. And this discovers the sad condition of thousands, who say,
they believe in Christ, and yet have no true knowledge about him.

2. There is required to this justifying faith, a firm and lively assent to the
whole word of God. For unless this be laid as a foundation, there cannot be any
building upon it: Insomuch that we see the Scripture sometimes attributing
salvation to the belief, that Christ was able, and that God was powerful, not
that by that object they were justified, only that was the particular in which
the doubt and difficulty did seem to be, so that it was not exclusive of that
special act of faith, but inclusive of it; and indeed this is necessary to be
known, that justifying faith does carry a man out, even to Historical or
Dogmatical matter respectively to Justification: So that when a justified
person believes any temporal promise, or the power of God, it does not simply
and ultimately believe them as such, but as they represent God a Father in
Christ, so that he believes the power of God, as of a Father in Christ, and
all the temporal promises are looked upon as Yea and Amen in Christ; so that
this is to be observed by the believer. There is nothing true in the Scripture,
but justifying faith fetches filial arguments from it, and makes him sensible
of that peace and reconciliation with God in Christ. And indeed to believe all
the truths in Scripture, does beget fear and horror, unless this justifying
faith qualify it, The devils believe and tremble; so the mere dogmatist he
believes, but has cause to tremble, for till every thing be brought to
Christ, that as God reconciled all things in heaven and earth through him; so
if thou reduce all things in the Scripture to Christ, even the threatening part
to him, because fulfilled by him, thou will have solid comfort. Thus as it is
with man, because he is rational, all those animal acts, which are common to
him with beasts, yet are reductively and participatively rational, so in the
godly man, all those general acts of faith are reduced to justifying, as the
sum of all.

SERMON CVIII. Of Justifying Faith, Showing what things are necessary
thereunto; And how or in what method the Spirit of God enableth the humbled
soul to believe.
JOH. 17.20. But for them also who shall believe on me,
SEveral particulars have been given in to the clearing of the nature of
justifying Faith; The last we were upon, was to inform what goes to the being
of it, and two Ingredients have been dispatched, viz. Knowledge and assent;
Proceed we therefore to a third thing, and that is,

A deep sense and feeling of the burden of sin, with some sorrow and
humiliation thereupon; The Law must work in the discovery of the disease,
before the Gospel does in manifestation of the Remedy; There must be the pain
and smart of a sting felt ere there be any earnest beholding of the brazen
Serpent; Our Savior said, The sick needed the Physician; When Paul by the
light of the Law found himself out of measure sinful, then he began to seek
after the unsearchable Riches of Gods grace, Come unto me all ye that are heavy
laden, and I will ease you, says Christ, Mat. 11.28. Faith, that is the
easing and reposing of the troubled Spirit: It is disputed whether Repentance
go before Faith, and indeed there is an Evangelical Repentance whereby the
heart is melted with grief for sin, because God is so gracious a Father in
Christ, and this must necessarily follow Faith, but then there is a Legal
sorrow for sin arising from Gods just hatred against it, which breeds great
trouble and confusion in the soul before it has laid hold on Christ, and this
precedeth Faith; Of this our Savior speaks, Mat. 21.32. Ye repented not that
ye might believe; And so Peter's hearers, Act. 2. were pricked at the heart,
before they were directed into Evangelicall Repentance and Faith; There is then
a fence of our undone estate going before this justifying Faith, whereby a man
finds himself utterly lost, all his desirable things perish, sin that was
once so beloved by him, is as Tamar to Amnon, hated more then ever he loved it;
Now he would throw it out of doors, the sight and memory of it is grievous to
him, I press not such a measure or degree of sorrow, it works so much in all
that there is a displacency and abhorrency in sin, as that which is the cause
of all misery.

conviction and persuasion of mind, that there is no Creature in Heaven or
Earth, no nor nothing that he can do, is able to justify him, or bring
Reconciliation with God; The Spirit of God Joh. 14. that does convince of sin
in the first place, does afterward of a Righteousness; That there is no
Righteousness to be had but in Christ only; If so be a man be no further
convinced then of his sin and disease, thinking to make medicines and
plasters of his own, thereby to heal himself. This man will always be kept in
a wandering Wilderness, What was it that made so many run into Monasteries,
undertake strict ways of Discipline and mortification? They had but an half
Conviction, They felt woeful troubles and agonies in their Souls for sin,
They could not tell what to do, as Luther professed of himself while a Papist,
but not being convinced of true Righteousness, They ran to miserable
Comforters, and so skinned the Soar, when the putrefying humor was still
within, but that Soul which the grace of God will carry on to Justification,
does not only find sin manifested but the insufficiency of all Creature
Righteousness, he sees with Noah, that unless he get into an Ark, there is
nothing but overflowing waters every where; While then this stone is squaring
for an Heavenly building, he is instructed in his own lost and undone
Condition; Being therefore thus fully persuaded that in himself he is a dead
and a damned man.

He proceeds to an actual renouncing of every thing but Christ; He sees
there is no remedy in the world for him but by Christ; He abhor^eth all those
Doctrines and practices in Religion which he did put confidence in as if they
could save him, Phil. 3. You see this method in Paul, when once his eyes were
opened, then all the privileges that were formerly counted gain, he looked
upon them as loss, yea, as dung in comparison of the Knowledge of Christ: Now
certainly this is a great work of Gods Spirit, not only to make a man renounce
his sins but his works of Righteousness also, for this undid the Jews, Romans
10. They sought to establish their own Righteousness, and so would not submit
themselves to that of Christ: In Popery what is the reigning error but that
men are not taught to go out of the works they do, and believe in Christ only,
Do they not expressly plead for some co-partnership in the work of Mediation,
and is not also this poison sucked down every where in all men's hearts, who is
there till God has humbled him over and over again, that flies wholly to
Christ? Nay, even in a godly man what is that that keeps the soar so raw, and
the heart so unquiet? Is is not because he would not be beholding to Christ
only? Therefore when a man is thus fitted by the Spirit of God as to see every
thing is a rush, a reed to lean upon but Christ; Though I could weep a Sea of
tears, and those tears turn into blood, though I had all the grace of Men and
Angels, yet it would not reconcile me to God. Then is he upon the Confines of
Justification. Therefore

Israel seeing his Enemy of sin following behind, and a Sea before, then the
Spirit of God stirs up desires and hungrings after Christ, then are his
outcries; Oh that I could believe, Oh that I had an Arm to embrace Christ! For
we see Judas coming thus far to bewail and confess his sins, to throw away that
silver he had so unjustly got, to cry out of himself; But then there were no
desires, no groans after Christ, so that while the Soul is in this posture,
many times it is ground between hope and despair; It is in great agonies, like
the woman that is to be delivered, sometimes throbs come, and there is an hope
of deliverance, but then all goes back again, sometimes they are ready to lay
hold on Christ, then comes a violent gust and puts all back again: It Is true,
desires of faith if real and sincere are faith initiall, and Mat. 5. there is
a promise of full satisfaction to those that hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, and that is implied when our Savior says, a bruised reed he
will not break, and smoking flax he will not quench, that is, where there are
the least motions and tendencies of souls toward grace, there shall be the
greatest encouragement.

actually receives and embraces Christ; His desire is put forth into actings,
so that it is no longer, Oh that I could rest upon Christ! But he does rest his
soul on him with a lively recumbency; Therefore Joh. 6. believing is called
coming unto Christ; Those tormenting slavish fears which affrighted him* Shall
such a sinner as I, one that has more offended God then many thousands
approach near to him? May I not only touch the hem of his garment, but take him
also in my arms? These and the like Questions he can now answer, and therefore
calls upon his soul, and chideth it, Why art thou thus cast down, and why art
thou thus troubled within thee? Believe on Christ; So that now he does with
Simeon take Christ in his arms, He can now say, Lord, let whatever come I shall
bear it patiently, now I have seen thy Salvation, as it was with the poor
Criple that could not stir or move, when healed, he can take up his bed and
walk, so the poor tempted sinner that before lay trembling, afraid to pray,
afraid to come to the Ordinances, can now arise and walk performing all duties
with comfort and zeal: You must know that this resting on Christ when thus
humbled for sin, is not an effect of man's power; It Is not in man's strength to
make this Iron to swim, to walk thus upon the waters, when every thing within
and without is against man and yet for all this to depend upon the Lord Christ;
No, it must be a divine and supernatural power from above, and therefore the
work of Gods grace in Faith justifying is as great, though not as wonderful,
as in miraculous Faith; when any were enabled by believing to remove Mountains;
this was not by any greater power of God then when a poor humbled sinner, by
resting on Christ, does remove those mountains of sins, and that great gulf
which is between God and the soul, We may well call justifying faith miraculous
faith; For is not this a miracle, and a wonder of wonders? That the soul thus
in darkness, and plunged into the deeps, yet should cleave unto Christ, and
say, Though he kill me, yet I will trust in him; Oh we see if there were
nothing but man's power, and the troubled sinner were left to himself, he would
immediately despair, as we see in Cain and Judas; Even as the stone naturally
descends downwards when you take away the pillar it leaned upon, so when you
take away all the carnal props and hopes of a sinner, and his sins do every way
environ him, he presently falls into the mouth of despair; It Is therefore the
great work of Gods grace to enable to believe, To you it is given to believe,
Phil. 1.29. And some are said to believe through the grace of God, Act. 18.27.
and faith is called the work of God, not only because it is that special grace
which he does so eminently require, but because he is the immediate efficient
of it; Know then that the mighty work of God goes to make the soul rest on
Christ, it would of it self despair a thousand times over, and fall into hell
before it would come to Christ, and Experience confirms this in many sad and
tempted Christians, who though they go from Minister to Minister, and read
the good promises of the Gospel, yet cannot believe till the Sprit of God
enable them; Now God enableth the humbled Soul to believe two ways, directive
and effective, by direction and instruction, and that in these particulars.

By informing him that when the Soul is truly humbled for sin, that it is a
duty to believe in Christ; That such are threatened with damnation who shall
refuse to come unto Christ, and this is a blessed lesson to learn, when the
Soul shall be thus persuaded, that if in this case I receive not Christ, I
commit a worse sin then ever yet I was guilty of; What a madness is it in me
to damn my self for fear I should be damned? I fear my other sins may destroy
my Soul, and not fear my unbelief; This is the great crying sin of all others,
He that believes not, the anger of God abides on him, yea, he is said to be
condemned already, and to make God a liar; Oh then how happy is that soul when
the Spirit of God does thus enlighten and persuade thee! Once it was a Question
and a doubt to thee, Whether thou might lay hold on Christ? Once thy thoughts
were, That to believe though it might be matter of comfort and privilege, yet
it was not of duty; But O how graciously has God taught thee otherwise? Now
thou ar^ as much afraid not to lay hold on Christ as to commit any other sin;
Thou art as conscientious in believing every promise, as in conforming to every
command; Thou dare no longer listen to doubts and fears, to Satan's
Temptations in this matter, then thou dare to the lusts and pleasures of sin.

The Spirit of God does instruct us in this, That thus to believe and rest on
Christ is to perform or to do that to which Justification is promised; He that
believes is passed from death to life, and still Remission of sins is said to
be received by Faith, and we are justified by Faith, Romans 5. So that when the
Soul does rest on Christ he performs that to which Christ with all his
benefits are promised, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have
eternnl Life; So that the humbled sinner having his eyes thus opened, he sees
it the greatest madness and folly that can be not to receive Christ, and to
rest on him; Why thus he argues, I cannot he justified, I cannot partake of
Christ till I do believe, so that to believe is as necessary in an instrumental
way, as Christ in a meritorious way; Shall the diseased Patient question
whether he shall take that medicine which will certainly heal him? Shall the
hungry man doubt whether he may receive that alms which will preserve his Life?
Thus the humbled sinner is convinced, that as he must not murder his own body
wilfully by refusing to eat meat, so he must not his own soul by a wilful
rejecting of the promise.

The Spirit of God instructs him in this also, That by believing he does not
only bring comfort and salvation to his soul, but in a most eminent manner does
also glorify God; As Abraham by that remarkable act of Faith is said to give
Glory to God, Romans 4.20. The tempted Soul is apt to think, Why should I
believe? this is but to seek my self, This is because I would have comfort
whatever becomes of Gods Glory; Oh but says the believer when thus awakened,
if I could perform all the Commandments of God, if I could love God so as to
give my body to be burnt for his Name, yet I could not glorify God so much as
by believing, for this acknowledges God in Christ, wherein God is more to be
admired then in the creation and government of the world.

Lastly, He is enabled to see the folly and unprofitablenesse of Unbelief; If
he go not to Christ, where can Salvation be had? he is sure to be damned by
keeping from Christ; Therefore with those Lepers he is resolved not to perish,
but to go to God, though he seem an Enemy to him.

And then 2. God works faith in us effectively, as you heard, by
strengthening the heart of a man fiducially to repose on Christ, if other
graces as love and patience do not grow of themselves in man's heart, much less
does Faith which is so supernatural every way.

SERMON CIX. Of Justifying Faith.
JOHN 17.20. But for them also who shall believe in me through their word.
WE are treating upon the Doctrine of Justifying Faith; and certainly, we may
say, It Is good to be on this Mount of Transfiguration, and having declared that
method Gods Spirit leads an humbled soul into, when it is enabled to believe.

We proceed to further particulars instructive in this business. The ultimate
and last act of justifying faith, was a fiducial resting upon Christ for all
spiritual benefits.

But to understand this further, Consider that the Scripture expression of it,
I. Of faith under the notion of receiving Christ.
is very emphatical, and denotes several notions in it, as when it expresses
it by receiving (...), is a word often applied to faith in this act, it
receives Christ, Joh. 1.12. it receives the promise, it receives
forgiveness of sins, Act. 26.18. so that in this justifying act of faith, we
are to conceive a precious treasure offered by the grace of God, even Christ
himself and faith, as the hand receiving of it; The receiving of Christ
implies,
and this expression is full of excellent matter, for it teaches,

1. That we in this act of Justification, or laying hold on Christ, have
nothing of our own. All our righteousness is without us, we are to receive it
offered, 1. That we have nothing of our own.
we have nothing inherent. This Paul knew experimentally, Phil. 3. when he
would be found not in his own righteousness, but that which is by faith. His
own, mark that, Any thing we may call our own, we must not be found in, and
that is our own, which is not only so effective, by our own procuring and
labor, or merit, but subjective, which is inherent in us, though it be wrought
by the grace of God, as the Just is said to live by his faith, Hab. 2.4. It Is
his faith subjectively, though Gods effectively. This word then receiving does
carry every man humbled Evangelically, wholly out of himself; and as was said
to the woman looking into the Sepulcher, Why look you for him, he is not here,
he is risen? So it may be said, Why art thou searching and digging into thine
own heart? Thy works or graces, these are not the object of faith; It Is above
thee; It Is without thee, though by faith applied to thee: Even as the poor
cripple that desired to be healed, looked upon Christ, expecting help from him,
he knew he had nothing in himself; or as the indigent beggar looks without him,
and stretches out his hand to receive food or money: So is it with the humbled
sinner: Oh then be directed here, why does God make thy own heart, thy own
ways so bitter to thee? Is it not because thou should seek out for a Christ,
and look for a righteousness without thee?

2. This word receiving implies, That we are wholly passive in our
Justification. 2. That we are wholly passive in justification
That we are not justified by doing any thing, or offering any thing to God,
but receiving from him: Even as some Philosophers say, Intelligere and sentire
are passions: Though we express them actively, yet the soul therein is passive:
So when by believing a man is justified, we are not to consider what he brings
to God, or does for God, but what he receives from him. This is a fundamental
principle to be grounded in, it is a mercy of mercies to be directed in the
agonies of thy soul to the right way of believing, to know the way to this City
of refuge; If a manslayer pursued by the avenger, had not known the way to the
City of refuge, what danger had he been in? It Is like the child not coming the
right way in it is birth; now naturally we all think by doing to partake of
Christ, not receiving, which made the Apostle so industriously assert this,
That it is not to him that works, but to him that believes, that grace is
vouchsafed: So then be instructed in this, Is thy heart groaning under sin, all
thy desires and inclinations are to Christ? Know this is done intra recipiendo,
not extra mittendo; This is done by receiving grace from God, not doing any
work for or to him; yet how apt are we all to cry out with those, What shall we
do I till Christ inform us, that the great work God approves of, is believing
or receiving. It Is the looking upon this brazen Serpent that heals thee.

3. That faith does not justify for any intrinsecal worth in it.
3. This therefore implies, That believing on Christ does not justify for any
dignity or intrinsecal worth it has. Not because it is a more excellent and
noble grace, but merely because that alone is receiving and applicative of
Christ. We receive only by faith, as we do corporally only by the hands, yet
the hands are not more noble then the eyes or the head. Hence the Scripture
never says (...), but (...), not for faith, but through faith; and it is never
said actively, says justifies, but by faith we are justified passively; So
that as it would be absurd to say, That the beggars hand has made him rich, in
receiving large alms: so it would be as absurd to attribute it to the dignity
of faith, when by it we are justified.

4. Faith is excluded as it is a work.
Therefore fourthly, In that believing is expressed by receiving of Christ, is
employed, That faith it self is excluded as it is a work: So that not only all
other graces, but faith, if considered as it is a work, does not justify us.
The eye in looking on the brazen Serpent did not heal as it was a work, but
from the virtue of the Serpent exalted by Gods appointment; When the woman
touched Christ's hem of his garment, and healing was thereby conveyed. It was
not the touching, as it was a labor and work, but the virtue of Christ. Thus
it is in this case.

5. And why faith and no other grace does justify.
And hence lastly, we see, Why faith and no other grace does thus justify,
because this alone does receive. Other graces are active, this is receptive:
Not that faith is separated from other graces, they are existent together,
though they retain their distinct properties, He that believes on Christ is
cleansed and sanctified, he loves God, and is patient in tribulation, but yet
not by this is he justified: As the Sunbeams have heat as well as light, but
it shines by the light only, not the heat, so the earth has dryness as well
as gravity, but it falls downward, not because dry, but because heavy.

II. This receiving is not a bare receiving, but an embracing also.
Secondly, This receiving is not a bare receiving, but such as is with
imbracement: As Heb. 11.2. These embraced the promises; Even as Simeon took
Christ with joy in his arms: So that there is great delight and cordial joy in
laying hold on Christ: Even as the Church said after she had lost her Beloved,
yet finding him at last, she would lay hold on him, and not let him go, as Ruth
to Naomi, thus she cleaves to Christ: So that as a man receives with dearest
imbracements some choice and precious friend he longed to see: Thus it is with
the humbled sinner: Oh this is the beloved of many thousands, whom my soul has
long prayed for, long sought for? What have I found thee, Oh thou chiefest of
many thousands? Hence it is that Christ compares himself to a Bridegroom, and
Husband, and his Church to a wife, to show what real affections are in the
heart of an humbled sinner, for to lay hold on him: Hence it is called,
Believing with the whole heart, and with joy unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1.8. There was
great feasting and joy for the finding of a lost son: But oh the unspeakable
joy, for discovering a Christ, that we thought was for ever lost, as to us!
What meltings? what ravishments are there at the meeting of him? Oh how often,
says the humbled soul, did I think, I should never find thee? How many times
did I conclude, that I should perish in my lusts and fears? but Christ at last
appears, as he did to those women after his death, who thought there was no
hope.

Thirdly, In this act of faith, there is contained resting, relying, or
fiducial reposing of the soul upon Christ. You heard the (...), did enforce
this, III. In this act of faith there is a fiducial reposing of the soul upon
Christ.
so that the soul before it believes is to be conceived as a stone falling
downwards, which cannot stay till it meet with its center, and then it
enclineth no further. In the Old Testament it is called, trusting in the Lord,
which in other synonymous expressions is sometimes called staying and leaning,
and so is a metaphor taken from those, who have some great and heavy burden
upon their back, and thereby are crushed to the ground, unless they have
something to rest upon. Thus it is with the afflicted penitent, he cries out,
I find such a load of sins, that my back would break, and heart would break,
yea every thing would fail within me, had not I Christ to throw my self upon:
hence Christ is called the Foundation stone, because all the building is
established upon that. Now that which in the Old Testament is called trusting
in God, in the New is called believing. Illyricus thinks this is the reason
of the different expression, because the God of Israel was known to the Jews,
therefore there was required only a fiducial adhesion unto him; but in the New
Testament, Christ as Mediator was not known, therefore another word is used,
viz. to believe, which comprehends both an assenting knowledge, and also a
fiducial application: So then by this act of believing, the soul which was
ready to sink under it is burden, does lean upon Christ, and as a drowning man
does catch hold on the next branch to save him, so does a humbled sinner
finding himself even falling into hell, catch hold on Christ, and therefore
it is called laying hold on him^

Fourthly, In this act of believing, IV. An application of Christ.
there is an appropriation or application of Christ to be my Christ. That
whereas the promise runs in the general, Whosoever shall believe, to him
Christ is a Savior. This justifying faith does in particular rest on Christ,
as a Savior to him. Thus Paul, Gal. 2. Who loved me, and gave himself for me;
and Thomas, My God, my Lord, Joh 20. So that as when any threatening is
denounced against a sinner, the true convert will apply it to himself, when
guilty of such a sin, I am the sinner this threatening means: So Christ being
offered as a Savior to every humbled sinner, from this general he concludes
his particular. Thus Paul, Christ came to save sinners, of whom I am chief.
Hence it is that our Divines against Papists do well maintain, That the object
of justifying faith, is the special mercy of God. It Is not enough to believe
that Christ is a Savior, but to rest on him to be my Savior. Hence faith is
called eating and drinking, Joh. 6. which is more then the mere seeing meat
upon the Table, only when we say, special mercy is the object of justifying
faith, it is not meant antecedenter, but consequenter; Not as if we were to look
for a special or particular promise made either to Thomas or Peter, as
sometimes Christ did to those who were then alive, as when he spoke to that
woman, Be of good comfort thy sins are forgiven thee; here was a special
promise to her in particular, but it is not so now the promise is general, but
it is made special by believing; and indeed without this special applying act,
our faith brings no peace, no comfort, no more then for a Lazarus to hear there
was plentiful food in Dives his house, V. This recumbent act of faith may not
only thus receive Christ, but we may be assured that Christ is ours.
but he had not so much as the crumbs thereof. Thus you see how comprehensive,
this act of believing is.

In the next place, This recumbent act of Faith may not only thus receive
Christ, but we may also be assured and know that we do believe, and that Christ
is ours. Indeed former Divines from an opposition to Popery, which teaches
doubting in our Justification and uncertainty, did define justifying faith, to
be a full persuasion of the heart, whereby we believe our sins are pardoned,
and that Christ died for us, but to believe that Christ is mine, or that I am
justified, cannot be justifying faith, but it supposes it, for Christ must be
mine before I know he is mine, The object must be before the act: Faith has
two acts, a direct and a reflex.
Therefore faith has two acts, a Direct Act, whereby it lays hold on Christ,
and a Reflex Act, whereby I know that I do lay hold on him, or that I am such
an one to whom the promises do belong. Now this believing on Christ, which
justifies is in the former act, out of the sense of my sins and deep
unworthiness to lay hold on Christ. The latter which we call Assurance, Though
the people of God may and ought to attain unto, yet is not to be confounded
with the former; nay it may be, and is often separated from it; and this is
much to be heeded by practical Christians, you would have assurance first, and
then you would believe in Christ, you would know whether your graces are true,
whether you are so and so qualified, and then you would believe: This is, as if
a woman would be assured such a man were her husband, and then she would marry
him, whereas it is marriage makes the husband: It Is believing makes Christ
thine, and when he is thine, then thou may be assured he is thine. The
cripple, and the woman, laboring under a bloody issue, felt themselves whole
after Christ had healed them, they could not before: So when faith has made
Christ thine, that thou can say with Thomas, My God, my Lord, then you may
come to be assured, he is thine. Christ had not that sense of Gods favor, when
yet he had that fiducial confidence, crying out, My God, my God, etc. The
promise is made to him that believes, not to him that knows he does believe:
It Is not said, If you have assurance, but if you believe you shall be saved.

3. Though faith does thus repose it self fiducially upon Christ, yet you must
know this is not done without opposition of unbelief and diffidence. 1 John
3.19. The Apostle says, We assure our hearts, (...), persuade; This implies,
that the heart of a man is full of objections, and has many cavils: There is
much ado ere the heart be persuaded to rest on Christ only, many Lions and
mountains are in the way. That man spoke the sense of all believers, who
prayed, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief, Mark 9.24. Oh how often is thy heart
ready to be cast down, and to have no hope! You may see these ebbings and
flowings in David's heart, faith and diffidence were like two twins struggling in
the womb; do not therefore expect such a quiet resting upon Christ, as shall
have no opposition: No, sometimes thy heart may even rage with unbelief, like
that poor demoniack, the Evangelist speaks of, Mar. 5.4. that tore chains
asunder, and no man could tame him; Such an unruly thing may thy heart be. Now
there are two great opposites to this recumbency, viz. The terrible things of
thy heart, the guilt of sin, the temptations of Satan, the sad fears that
molest thee, and then the sweet pleasing things of thy soul, which are
self-righteousness, trusting in thy own heart, in thy own works; Oh this
self-fulnesse, this mountain must be levelled, as well as this valley be
exalted, else the way is not prepared for Christ!

SERMON CX. Of Justifying Faith, That it is a fiducial Recumbency on Christ.
JOH. 17.20. But for those also that shall believe in me.
I shall now conclude this part which contains the Qualification of the
subject of Christ's Prayer, That believe in Christ; And whereas Faith has a
twofold Object, either general, of which v. 21. or special; This last is meant
here, of which much has been said to clear the nature of it; I shall end at
this time: And 1. I shall prove, that it is the duty of an humbled sinner to
have such a fiducial recumbency on Christ, and that for the pardon of his sins
in particular; It Is not enough to believe that Christ will save sinners that
repent and convert unto him, but they are to appropriate him to their own
particular: To say with Thomas, My Lord, My God: Now that Faith is such a
particular application of Christ, (whatsoever Papists and others gainsay) may
appear from these Arguments amongst others.

1. From the names and Titles that believing in Christ has, which do evidently
denote more then a mere intellectual assent unto the promises, as true; They
imply some cordial motions of the soul; The Names are these (...), which does
signify a confidence of the heart, and that which does imbolden the soul in
the presence of God, yea, to this believing there is attributed (...), Romans
5.1. Phil 3.3. This boasting must need be more then a bare apprehension in the
mind; It Is like Aarons oil that descends from the head to other places also,
(...) Romans 4 21. This is also emphatical, some make the word to be from the
Sails of Ships when filled with the Wind, which carry the Ship away speedily;
Thus the heart of man that lay groveled, and could not move, when believing is
mightily carried on in all duties; It is called (...) often, Heb. 11.1. Heb.
3.14. that denotes the things we believe to have such a subsistence in our
souls as if we were no longer our selves, but the thing believed, as Paul said,
I no longer live but Christ within me, Gal. 2.20. So this Faith in Christ does
as it were incarnate the Promises, and transubstantiate them into the believer;
Another word is (...) Heb 4.16. Let us come with confidence; Indeed Ephesians. 3.
Confidence or boldness is made an effect of faith, but confidence could not be
an effect of faith if faith had not this in its nature; As the Soul could not
produce rational acts if it were not essentially rational, so neither could
faith put a man upon fiducial acts, if it self were not fiducial; Again this
believing is called (...) boldness or confidence, Mat. 9.2. and so Varinus
makes (...), to be bold on a man: By these Titles then which the Scripture
gives, Faith in Christ we see what a powerful operation it has upon the
heart, What a Faith of spiritual miracles (as I may say) justifying Faith is,
and therefore know that thy doubts, fears, dejections, and tormenting
distractions are opposite to believing, as darkness is to light, if God do
above all graces thus approve faith, then he does above all sins abhor this
dejecting unbelief.

2. That such a special faith is required, appears, in that the Scripture
limits this faith unto Christ as the peculiar and proper object; Hence the
Evangelist John calls it so often believing in him that brings Eternal Life, and
it is Romans 8. By Faith in his blood that we are purged and have pardon of sin,
and generally when it speaks of faith as justifying, it relates to Christ as
the Object of it; Not but that it believes other Truths, only in believing of
this we are justified, as the Israelite might look upon other Objects, but
beholding of the brazen Serpent only made him whole; yea, as we told you, when
the believing of other things is reduced to justifying Faith, all other Truths
are sweetened and qualified by that, as if a man had the Philosophers stone, it
would turn all other materials into Gold.

3. That Faith must be in a special manner fiducial and applying, appears in
the effects that commonly follow it; For to this believing is attributed peace
and unspeakable joy, yea, a triumphing over all oppositions and difficulties, a
boasting and glorying in tribulation; Now this could never be without a
particular interest in Christ, for what peace and joy does it bring to hear,
that Christ in the general came to save sinners; Do not thousands go to hell
for all that? It Is therefore necessary to true solid peace, that he become my
Christ and my Savior; Hence it is, that believing is the uniting of the soul
to Christ as an husband which is an appropriate Interest, as the Church
expressed it, I am my Well-beloveds, and my well-beloved is mine, Cant. 2.16.
And hence also are those comparisons of an head and a body, of a Vine and
branches, all which argue, that the good we have by Christ comes because of our
intimate union with him, So that if we do respect those glorious effects which
usually accompany believing, they will necessarily suppose a fiducial
appropriation of Christ in a special manner.

4. This special faith is seen by the opposites and contrarieties unto it, for
he that does not believe is said (...), Luk 12.29. to be carried up and down as
a meteor that has no fixed place; Thus while the soul is not fixed on Christ
it is like a reed tossed up and down with every wind, as one in a journey, and
at a stand, seeing two ways, and not knowing which way to go, or as a man that
is uncertain between two arguments, like the balance with equal weights, that
does not incline to one side more then another; These dispositions of the Soul
oppose faith, and it is a resting and a determining of the soul upon Christ.

And Lastly, Diffidence and fear, these are made contrary to Faith, Fear not,
but believe, Luke 8.50. said Christ to his Disciples, which supposes that
faith has boldness and confidence in it; We then may judge of the nature of
faith, by the opposite sinfulness to it, and when we see fears, wanderings,
uncertain tossings up and down of the soul, in no ways stable and fixed, then
we may conclude that faith it self is a powerful, composing, and firm fixing of
the soul upon the Lord Christ.

5. That faith is thus in a special manner applying Christ appears also,
because otherwise it would be little better then the faith of devils, and of
such who have only a bare dogmaticall assent, for the devils made a Confession
of faith, That Christ was the Son of the living God, and therefore are said to
believe, yet they tremble, and are in unspeakable horror because they know he
is not a Savior to them, and thus many believe, that Christ is the Messiah,
but because there is no fiducial adhesion and appropriation of him, therefore
he is not so to them; Even as many saw Christ, yet if they did not in
particular apply themselves to him, they were not healed of their diseases; The
hungry man may starve though he see a Table furnished with plentiful food, if
he do not put into his own mouth; It Is particular Interest that enricheth, that
saves, and therefore it is said, The Just shall live by his faith, Hab. 2.

Lastly, This truth may appear, From the absurdity of that Position, to say,
faith justifies as it believes the Word of God in general only, or any Truth
asserted in general, for then my Faith would justify me as well in believing,
Judas hanged himself, as that Christ was crucified for me; Or that Paul had a
Cloak and Parchments, as in the blood of Christ; Certainly forgiveness of
sin is attributed to Christ only, and seeing (as you heard) the object of
faith justifying is bonum as well as verum; That which is beloved must have the
chiefest good in it, as well as Truth, and this may suffice to instruct you in
this main Point, that a Christian humbled for sin is not to rest or to be
satisfied in this, that Christ in general came to save sinners, or that he is
able to save thee though an heinous offender, but to apply him for thy own
particular; that thou may say of all the glory of the Gospel, which the devil
did falsely of the glory of the world, All this is mine.

Obj. But to this it is Objected, This is to preach Security, Quest.
and to imbolden men in a carnal presumption; And therefore it is a Doctrine to
be abhorred as pleasing the Flesh; Thus it is branded as if it were one of
Epicurus his Opinions that were called the Sirens of the carnal part of a man;
But to answer this,

That there cannot any doctrine of comfort and grace be preached, but a carnal
heart will turn it into the occasion of wickedness; When Paul preached the
grace of the Gospel, did not some infer from thence, Let us sin, that grace may
abound, and did not others turn the grace of God into wantonness? It Is one
thing therefore to speak of the proper genius of the doctrine, and another
thing, of the abuse of it through man's corruption, If therefore any man living
and walking in profaneness do yet comfort and encourage himself, saying, I lay
hold on Christ, I bel^eve in Christ^ This man as he deceives himself, so he
does grossly abuse the grace of God, No, Christ does not call to men that sin,
yet laugh and make merry, but that are weary and laden, to come unto him, and
then he will ease them.

This Doctrine of special and particular Faith does not encourage to
presumption, because it calls not upon sinn^rs abiding and wickedly persevering
so, to rest on him, but mourning over and abhorring their sins, Therefore no
man is commanded to believe this first, that Christ died for him, but to
believe the word of God threatening and discovering the horrid pollution that is
upon us, as also the general contagion in every part, the insufficiency and
inability to help himself, the necessity of hungring, thirsting, and seeking
out after a Savior, So that in this order and method he must by Faith lay hold
on Christ,

because the object of it is whole Christ, a Lord and Sovereign as well as a
Savior; The presumer he divides Christ, looks upon him as a Savior, not as
a Lord and Lawgiver, and therefore takes Christ but upon his own terms, not in
the Scripture-way, and so indeed he takes not Christ but an Idol of his own
making; and by this it is discovered that he does not truly believe but
presume: It Is true, Christ as the Object of our justifying faith is to be
considered as our Surety and Mediator, as a Gift of the Father to us, yet he
cannot truly be received as a Savior, but as a Lord and King also, So that God
having inseparably joined these two together, Faith dare not, Faith will not
divide, So that this will prove Jealousie-water to the Hypocrite, he professes
a belief on Christ, but it is Christ divided, or a part of Christ, he looks
upon the Atonement he made as a Savior, but not on the Obedience he owes to
Christ as a King, Christ does not only promise but command, he does not only
offer precious Gifts, but enjoyneth strict and exact duties, and faith takes
in all these.

because it does not only receive Christ, but this particular does also cleanse
and purify the heart, Act. 15. When Peter's Faith was kept up, then all his
other graces were enlivened, therefore Heb. 11. all those notable acts of high
Righteousness and Obedience are attributed to faith, so that the same Faith
has two hands, one inward whereby it receives and embraces Christ, the other
outward, whereby it stirs up and quickens to other Graces; Justifying
faith though it only justifyeth as it embraces Christ, yet at the same time
also it works by love, by patience, by zeal, by heavenly-mindednesse. So that
the exercise of all other graces is imperately from Faith, though not
elicitely; It Is true, there is a dead Faith, and (as Luther called it) an
incarnate faith, a dead faith, The Apostle James speaks against c. 2. which
is a bare assent and profession without any lively operation, and such a kind
of believer is placed by Sebastian Franco in the Catalogue of Heretics, a
lukewarm believer, but that faith which does justify, carries a man not only
to Christ, but is a general exciter and promoter to all holy duties and
obedience.

it does not only believe in Christ as the special object, but includes an
assent to the whole Word, so that it is as general as the Word is, if therefore
the Word of God does not beget security, and carnal encouragements to sin,
neither can Faith; For presumption properly consists in this, to divide the
means from the end, to think of obtaining one without the performance of the
other, can never be admitted by faith, which in the special application of
Christ is guided by the universal direction of the Scripture.

Use of Instruction to humbled sinners, Be well informed in this, that you are
not to stand in generals which are accompanied with great fears and dejections
of spirit, but in a particular manner to lay hold on Christ; Oh let thy
necessities drive thee, that easelesse and restless condition thou art in, be
like a stone from the center, like a bone out of joint, till thou art fully
united to the Lord Christ; Know it is a duty, That thou sinnest in an high
manner, while thou do thus frowardly keep off from him.

Use 2. There is the happiness of believers, They receive Christ, and so in him
all things; He that has the Sun has all the Stars, He that has the Fountain,
has the streams, if he has given us Christ, with him he will give all things:
Now God looks on thee in Christ, The devil that seeks to devour thee must
devour Christ first; And O what a poor weak thing is it to doubt about earthly
provision, when thou have received Christ for all things!

SERMON CXI. That a Gospel Ministry is to continue to the end of the world. And
for what ends*
JOHN 17.20. That shall believe through their word.
I Shall now finish this fruitful Text. The last thing considerable in it, is
the instrumental cause of faith, and that is the Apostles Ministry. This faith
is wrought by their word. To open this, Consider

1. That the word which begets faith, is called Gods word, verse. 6. and here
the Apostles word in a different sense: It Is Gods word originally and
efficiently, because revealed by him: It Is the Apostles word ministerially,
because they are the Ambassadors to publish it. Thus Paul calls it his Gospel,
as in other places, it is the Gospel of God, because the Ministers of God are
Stewards, to whom is concredited the dispensation of the Word, therefore it is
called their word.

2. Whereas Christ prays for all that shall believe even to the end of the
world, and yet they are said to believe by the Apostles word, when yet
thousands and thousands have believed since the Apostles death and departure;
Its necessary, that by the Apostles we do not understand only their persons,
but the succeeding Ministry unto them, which is to be perpetual in the Church,
all that now or hereafter shall believe, though by the present Ministers that
lived many hundred years after the Apostles, yet may be said to obtain faith by
the Apostles word, because they sit in the Apostles chair, they deliver the
Doctrine, which they delivered, and succeed the Apostles, though not in personal
and extraordinaries, yet in ordinaries, in which sense Christ promises to be
with them to the end of the world. The words thus explained, we may observe,

That God has appointed a perpetual Ministry, Observe. God has appointed a
perpetual Ministry to the end of the world.
even to continue as long as there shall be a Church in the world. All that
shall believe are brought thereunto by the Apostles word; now they being long
since dead, it necessarily follows, either that none can now believe, or else
that there is a Ministry to be perpetually succeeding them for this spiritual
effect. That the Ministry and Word preached is the means of faith, appears
evidently, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God;
yea verse. 14. there is a chain of faith, and hearing, and preaching inviolably
put together. We may bring a second witness to confirm this, 1 Cor. 3.5. Who
is Paul, or Apollo, but Ministers by whom you believe? Where you see to be
instruments of faith is not only limited to Paul the Apostle* but is extended
to other ordinary Officers in the Church, even all that water as well as plant.
The Apostles planted, the ordinary Ministers they water.

I shall not at this time prove a distinct calling of Ministers from people,
that has been done already. I shall only show the perpetual usefulness and
necessity of a Ministry, for spiritual ends, as long as there will be a Church
upon the earth; and the rather, because Socinians and Seekers, though they
grant, There was once an extraordinary Ministry in the planting of the Church,
yet they say, it was only temporal for a season, even as miracles were, and
that where the Scripture is made common, there needs no Ministry. Therefore
to inform herein, consider these Propositions,

First, That God has appointed a Ministry in his Church, not from necessity,
but a voluntary liberty condescending herein to our capacity. God did once
govern his Church, as in the Patriarchs time, by immediate revelations and
apparitions, and thus he could still do, if he pleased: It Is not therefore from
necessity, but mere bounty, that he has appointed such a way of spiritualizing
people. God does not need the parts, or gifts, or piety of any men in the
world; and certainly, if God has appointed second causes in nature, which work
from a necessary principle within, not necessarily, but freely, much less did
he in these things which are of a supernatural constitution.

Secondly, It Is to be affirmed, That in the first plantation of Christ's Church,
there were some things extraordinary, but that does not infer every thing
thus appointed was extraordinary. The Office of the Apostles, who had a
Commission to go over the world, and had an universal Authority, being
furnished to that end with infallible assistance, was extraordinary. Christ
seedeth his Church spiritually, as he did once the bodies of men miraculously,
first, he took bread himself, then he gave bread to his Disciples, and they
gave it to the people. Thus Christ he preached the word of life, and then he
commanded the Apostles to preach, who instituted others in their room. The
Office then of Apostles and Prophets, with the gift of miracles, were
extraordinary in the first constituting of the Church; but then ordinary
Officers were afterward required; As with the people of Israel, while in the
wilderness, God made miraculous provision for them, but when once settled in
Canaan, then their Manna and other miraculous provision failed them.

Quest.
And if you say, How shall we know, what is an extraordinary Office, and what is
an ordinary Office, seeing the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. reckons them up
altogether?

Answ.
I answer, It Is true, the Apostle there mentions extraordinary and ordinary
Officers, because he is to speak of the whole fruit of Christ's Ascension to his
Church, and so because Apostles were a great and principal part of Christ's gift
to his Church, and the influence of their labors upon the Church to the end of
the world, and therefore they are called the foundation, Rev. 21.14. Hence they
are mentioned as well as the ordinary; only the difference between these two
may appear in the qualifications of either, for to an Apostle was required
gifts of miracles, an universal Commission and Authority, infallibility of
assistance, etc. but to the ordinary Elders there is no such thing required,
but what may be in an ordinary manner attained unto.

Thirdly, When we say, A Ministry is appointed for spiritual ends, it is good to
know in particular what they are. And

1. You see it is in the Text, To work Faith: And therefore faith is said to
come by hearing. The ear that is the organ of learning and knowledge, as also
of faith. It Is observed by a learned man, That though we read of godly
persons, that could not see or speak, yet of none that could not hear, because
that was the instrument of faith, yet this is not so to be urged, as if a godly
man might not be made deaf, only it is a sad affliction, because by hearing
faith is begotten and increased: What enemies then are such to their souls, who
care not for hearing, who give over hearing, come now and then it may be for
sinful ends, whereas by hearing the Word preached God has appointed to give
thee faith? Art thou not then such an atheistical or profane man, because thou
do no more regard this hearing of Gods word preached? Be swift to hear, said
the Apostle James 1.19.

2. The Ministry is appointed for the conversion and regeneration of men, who
naturally are dead in sin, and averse to God. It was a subject the Prophets
often preached upon, to return every one from his evil way to God; and John
Baptist, yea Christ himself also preached repentance as well as faith. Hence
Jam. 1. God is said, Of his own will to beget us by his Word; and so its called
the washing of regeneration through the word, Tit. 3.5. That as the Spirit of
God at first by moving on the waters, prepared and produced living creatures;
Thus God by the Ordinances calls those who are like Lazarus dead in their sins,
to come out of the grave and live. There is a resurrection of souls by the
Prophets, when they lift up their voice like a trumpet, as well as there will
be of bodies, by the trump of an Archangel; and indeed this is the proper
effect of the Ministry: No moral Philosophy has attained to the inward change
of men's hearts: As Eliah, when he threw his mantle on Elisha, he left his Oxen
and followed him: Thus when God by the Word preached does lay hold on the heart
of a man, he is a new creature, mind new, heart new, affections new, all is
made new. Thus while Peter was preaching, there were three thousand converted;
So that to take the preaching of the Word away, is worse then to take the Sun
out of the heavens, that is but an instrument of heat and life bodily, this
spiritually.

3. The Ministry is for edification, as Ephesians. 4.14. For the perfecting of the
Saints, and till we come to a full stature in Christ: So that the Ministry and
Ordinances shall not be abolished, till we come into heaven, the Sacrament is
till he come, and he will be with the Ministers till the end of the world; and
certainly the godly man finds much need of a Ministry to quicken, comfort, and
direct his soul, craveth and calls for this, as much as his body does for
food and raiment: So that those who argue against a Ministry demonstrate, they
find no experimental benefit of it upon their own souls.

4. God has appointed it to propagate and defend the truth, to confute and put
all errors and heresies to silence. Therefore it is a qualification required in
the Minister, That he be able to convince gainsayers, Tit. 1.9. You see the
Apostle in some of his Epistles is not only practical, but didactical, and
therein confuting those errors that molested the truth, even in her Infancy;
for this end they are called Guides and Salt; yea they are Shepherds to keep
off the wolves that would subtly devour the sheep; We are to watch against
profaneness, and also against errors. The Apostle uses that phrase of a
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, both in matter of corrupt manners, as
also corrupt Doctrine, Gal. 1. and therefore would have the Churches of God
purged from both.

Lastly, The Ministry is appointed for spiritual Government in the Church, to
admonish those that are disorderly, to cast out profane and obstinate sinners.
For this end they have the spiritual Keys of the kingdom of Heaven vouchsafed
to them, and in the due administration thereof, God has promised his gracious
confirmation. Hence it is, that they are called Governors, Rulers, Pastors;
all which demonstrate, that a Ministry is not only in doctrinal publication of
the word of God, but in a spiritual governing and ordering of people to
supernatural ends. Indeed the Apostle says, This power is given us for
edification, not destruction, 1 Cor. 10.8. all is for spiritual ends: It Is to
save the souls of those that are under us. This, though accounted austere, yet
is profitable and necessary, even as Government in the Commonwealth. Thus you
see the ends of a Ministry.

Therefore fourthly, when we say, God has appointed a Ministry thus for
spiritual ends, this implies, God will bless and go along with it, unless
men's sins do hinder it. We may not think God has appointed these things in
vain, or for a mere form; Does not the Apostle say, That if the Gospel be not
the word of life, it is to them that perish? 2 Cor. 2. who performed the Office
of a Gospel Minister more faithfully then Christ himself? And who might expect
greater success in his Ministry then he? Yet we hear him complaining, Who has
believed our report? Oh then, let that people, that Congregation tremble, which
has long enjoyed the Ministry, yet as ignorant and profane as ever! Oh
consider with thy self and say, O Lord, thy arm is not shortened, thou art as
able to break and humble the hearts of sinners, as ever, therefore some heavy
spiritual judgment is upon me, I may fear, I am like that cursed fig tree,
upon which (Christ said) Never fruit grow more!

Now that this Ministry is to be to the end of the world, while God has a
Church here, appears by these Arguments,

1. The ends of the Office are perpetual, therefore the office it self is
perpetual. The end is to convert, to build up, to preserve from errors, to
admonish and rebuke; Will there not be this work to be done always? Heaven is
like Paradise that needed no rain, there were waters from within refreshed it;
but the Church while militant, is like the ground that needs the former and
later rain.

2. It appears by Gods promise to them, Mat. ult. I will be with you to the
end of the world, and here all that shall believe at any time, are said to
believe by their word; he is said to hold the seven stars in his hand, Rev. 3.1.

3. The duties that are enjoined people respectively to them are perpetual, as
to hear them, highly to esteem of them for their works sake, to submit
themselves unto them. These are duties required of a Church, as long as it is a
Church, therefore it is employed they must have such teachers, and officers.

4. The similitude that the Scripture uses about them, and the Church,
inforceth their perpetuity. They are light, the world will always need the Sun
and Stars. They are the salt of the earth, every Sacrifice must have that. The
Church is a Garden, these are said to water it. They are sheep, and such must
have a shepherd. They are the house of God, then there must be stewards to
dispense the things of life.

5. God threatens it as the sorest of judgments, to remove their Pastors and
Teachers into corners. To remove the Candlestick away, Rev. 2.5.

6. There are directions for the qualifications of such who are to be ordained
Ministers, given by Paul to Timothy and Titus, which are to be kept
unblameably, till the coming of Christ.

Use of Exhortation. Is the Ministry thus appointed perpetually for spiritual
ends, then look again and again, whether it has been so to you or no? Has it
been light to remove thy blindness? Has it been salt to take away thy
corruption? If our Congregations are still so many Golgothaes, when the word of
life has been so often preached to it; What can you expect that God will make
them Aceldamaes? What has hindered the Ministry from its proper efficacy upon
thee, but thy wilful rebellion and wickedness? It is to work faith, and thou
art atheistical; it is to convert thee from thy lusts, and thou art a beast
still: Hear, o heavens, and hearken, o earth, dreadful is that sin and
judgment which is upon thee!

Use 2. Of Instruction, Why the devil and his instruments would overthrow
Christ's Ministry, Is it not because those only hinder him from his quiet
possession?

SERMON CXII. Of Unity among Gods People, The Nature of it.
JOH. 17.21. That they all may be one as thou (Father) art in me, etc.
IN this Verse is laid down the matter of Christ's Petition, what it is that he
prays for in the behalf of those who shall believe in him, and that is unity
and concord amongst themselves, so that as before for the Apostles he prayed
that they might be one, as Apostles in the work of the Ministry, so here he
prays for all believers, so great a matter is it to have all the Godly at
Union amongst themselves; Now although this Union comprehend in it grace begun
here and glory consummated hereafter, yet it is again and again to be
considered, that these glorious privileges should be comprehended in the^r
Union, as if that being preserved all was preserved, and without that there
could not be any godliness here, or blessedness hereafter.

We have then the unity and agreement of all believers made the principal part
of Christ's Petition for them, and in that take notice,

1. Of the benefit it self, (...) that they may be one, he does not say, that
they may love and agree with one another, but be one, as if the Church should
be but one person, and as the Apostle argues, None ever hated his own flesh,
Ephesians. 5.29. So there should be no divisions, envyings, and differences amongst
the godly, because they are one spirit as it were; They should no more hate one
another then a man does himself.

2. Here is the universal extent of this unity, That they all; Though there be
great variety and difference in gifts, in graces, in offices, in outward
conditionr, yet they must all be one.

3. You have the pattern of this unity, As thou Father in me, and I in thee.

4. The nature and quality of this unity, That they may be one in us.

5. The benefit and fruit of this union, That the world may believe thuu have
sent me, I shall first consider the benefit prayed for, That they may be one,
and observe

That union rmongst the godly is of so great necessity and consequence that
Christ does in their behalf principally and chiefly pray for this; Doct.
Though in this Unity be included grace and sanctification, yet that which is
expressly mentioned is their agreement: I have handled this Union as it related
to Officers in the Church, from v. 11. I shall pursue from this Text, union
amongst believers themselves, Consider, That there is a twofold Unity among
the godly.
and because our Savior does enlarge himself about it, I shall also insist
upon it.

To Open this Truth Consider,

1. That the is a twofold unity or union among the gtdly, Invisible and
Visible: Invisible Unity is that whereby they being united to Christ their head
by the Spirit on Gods part, and faith on our part, I. Invisible.
do receive spiritual life and increase in which some Believers are compared to
the several members of the body, and Christ to the head, because of that
spiritual life and motion they receive from him; This is the foundation of our
visible union, and without this though we may be outwardly of the Church, yet
we do indeed receive no saving advantage by Christ. Of this union the Text
speaks not, because it is such an Union, that the world seeing it may thereby be
induced to believe Therefore 2. there is a visible Union, whereby Believers do
outwardly and visibly express their compacted nearness to one another, and so
those particular Churches of Corinth and Ephesus are called Christ's body in
respect of their external union as well as internal, for not only by faith, but
also by the Ordinances we have fellowship with Christ, and with one another, Of
this visible Unity the Text speaks, and this is made a special means to bring
the world to believe; Whereas on the contrary differences of Opinion, and sad
rents and sects in Religion is the only way to confirm men in their impiety,
and to think there is no truth, and no religion at all

II. Visible.
In the second place, This visible Union does diffuse it self in many Branches:
As 1. There is an unity of Faith and profession, when they all believe and
speak the same thing; This must be laid as the foundation of unity, for unity
in error and idolatry, or false ways, is not peace, but a faction or
Conspiracy; This unity of faith is reckoned among the many unities, the Apostle
mentions Ephesians. 4.5. Phil. 2.2. They are exhorted to be of one mind, and the
Apostle notably presses this, 1 Cor. 1.10. that they speak the same thing,
being perfectly joined together in the same mind, and the same judgment: What
a sad breach then has the devil made upon Gods people, when there are so few
of the same mind, and do judge the same things; but (as you heard) it must be
a samenesse and unity in the true Faith, for the Jews they are one amongst
themselves, the Mahumetans are one, the Papists are so one that they boast of
it, and make it a note of the true Church; Now though this should be granted
(though they have a thousand divisions amongst themselves) yet unless it be
unity in the faith, unity in the sound doctrine it is nothing at all.

2. There is an unity of affection and love in the heart, and outwardly one to
another, Love is called the affection of union, and makes a man to be the
object he loves as much as his own, and we see the prayer of Christ abundantly
fulfilled in this respect concerning the Primitive Christians, for Act. 4 32.
it is said, they were of one heart and of one soul; Those thousands of believers
were as if they had but one heart and soul among them; and thus in Tertullians
time the heathens did admire at the love Christians had to one another, our
Savior makes it a surer sign of discipleship then if they wrought miracles,
Joh. 3.35.

3. This union is seen in the public worship and Ordinances which God has
appointed, as God said of man at first, it was not good he should be alone, So
it is true of every believer, he is not to serve God alone, to think that a
private Religion is enough; Therefore you have the examples of the primitive
Christians, Act. 2.1. Act. 5.12. how they met with one accord in one place, and
that to have the enjoyment of public Ordinances, they prayed together, the
Word was preached to them, they received the Sacraments together, and the
Apostle 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. shows how the Sacrament of the Lords Supper did
declare their union and communion one with another; Hence Heb. 10.25. The
Apostle reproves those whose manner it was, not to assemble themselves
together; This v^sible union of believers in Church-Ordinances is their highest
beauty and their chiefest advantage; Hence David professes his ravishment
herein, How beautiful are thy Tabernacles O Lord of hosts! and Psa. 110. it is
called the beauties of Holiness, and Hag. 2. this temple is said to be more
glorious then ever the former was; and that because of Christ's presence
therein, preaching and reforming all abuses and corruptions: When the Ark was
taken Phinehas his daughter cried, The glory is departed from Israel; Hence the
Ordinances even in this life are called the Kingdom of heaven because of Gods
glorious presence therein; David when banished Psa. 63.2. longed to see the
glory of God as he had seen it in the Sanctuary; And then its our greatest
profit and advantage, for Gods presence is promised to these, So that the
Christian Ordinances are the life of the Church; There is a larger dispensation
of Gods gifts and graces here then otherwise.

4. This unity is seen in that public order and government which Christ has
appointed in his Church, as God has appointed some to be Shepherds, and to
govern, so others to hear and obey, he has commanded admonition, and in some
cases sharp reproof, and where obstinacy is, to cast out; Now it is very hard to
have unity in this respect, for as 1 Cor 14. it appears private Christians do
difficultly keep within their sphere, every member would be an eye, as the
Apostle there charge, so it is hard to meet with an obedient ear, though to a
wise, and godly reproof; It Is therefore a blessed thing, as to have unity of
faith, so also of order, That is to see every member of the Church with its
relation in an harmonious way, as it is in the body, though they be heterogeneal
parts, yet they all harmoniously consociate in their operations; This unity of
order is like the nerves and ligaments to this spiritual society.

5. This unity is seen in the sympathizing that all believers have one with
another, and that in respect of mourning and rejoicing; In respect of those
that mourn, So we are to weep and mourn with them; We are to bear one another
burdens; We are to be affected with the Churches calamities as being also of
the body; As the Apostle said, the care of all Churches lay upon him, 2 Cor.
11.28. Who was afflicted and he did not burn? the same proportionably is to be
in every believer: Therefore this unity of believers should be vigorous this
way, what evils, what exercises befall others, they should be affected with
them as their own; This discovers they are lively members of the body, for if
Christ though in Heaven was sensible of the persecutions done by Paul against
the Church, saying, Why persecutest thou me? how much rather should every
particular member account the temptations of others as his own; As it is thus
for mourning, so also for rejoicing, there ought to be such an unity among
believers, that we are to rejoice in the gifts, graces, and good things that
others have, as if they were our own; But O the self-love, the envy, the
repinings that are apt to be in one godly man against another, The spirit in us
lusts to envy, says the Apostle, even in believers; Hence are those daily
exhortations against grudgings, murmurings, and envyings one against another,
and these are made the fruit of the flesh, because where the Spirit of God
works and enliveneth, there is joy, peace, and long-suffering, all graces
contrary to such unquiet distempers; Now this is very difficult to flesh and
blood, that those parts and gifts which obscure thine, and those good things in
others that seem to hinder thine, yet to rejoice and bless God for them, as if
it were to thy own self, but this spiritual and mystical unity will enable thee
thereunto* Neither is the Sun or air more requisite then this union, no wonder
if our Savior does thus affectionately pray for it.

6. This union is seen in their mutual striving together, in promoting the
Kingdom and glory of Christ; They all have the same heart, the same shoulders,
the same tongue to bless and praise God; They are like so many servants in the
same house, all promoting and furthering their masters work; That as the
Apostle 1 Cor. 3. says, all the Officers are one, He that plants, and he that
waters are one, because they agree in one end, which is to set forward the work
of God; Thus it is here, Though there be never so much variety in the gifts and
graces, and conditions of Gods people, yet they are all one in this work, The
Glory of God is the end they all look upon; Thus you see in how many
particulars this Unity diffuseth it self.

In the third place, We are to know that the invisible unity does extend it
self farther then the visible; For this is to the visible Church only, III.
but that to the invisible; So that in this respect there is an unity between
all believers that ever have been, with Enoch, Abel, Abraham, and all that of
old ever were; This is believed in that which usually is called the Apostles
Creed, I believe the Catholic Church* Sometimes there was added the one
Catholic Church, and this is believed, and not seen, but by this it is that
all the godly who have been, are, and ever shall be, make up one body; All
Christ's sheep will have one sheepfold; So that there is an invisible Union,
where there cannot be a visible one,

In the fourth place, Concerning this visible Union (for we make these all one)
you are to know, some are of this unity both visibly and invisibly, externally
and internally, and in appearance; Now such only who are both ways of this
Unity, enjoy God, are indeed members of Christ, and receive benefit by him, but
the other are only in name and title, like a withered branch in a Tree, or an
artificial eye, or leg, which though joined to the body, yet receive no life
or nourishment thereof; Think it not therefore enough to be of this unity, many
have gloried and rested on this, that they are of such and such a Church, yet
their condemnation is greater then those of Sodom and Gomorrha.

In the fifth place, This unity therefore when it is true and advantageous does
first terminate on Christ, and then descends to others; Hence it is added, That
they may be one in us; There must be first an unity with Christ the Head, and
then it extends to other members, So that this is to be looked upon as the
foundation and cause of all, there must be first an incorporating into Christ;
He that is joined to the Lord is made one spirit with him.

Lastly, This Union visible is not interrupted in some effects of it by
distance of place; For in regard of prayer, there every one is remembered, when
the Churth is prayed for, So that the poor Christian who cannot pray for
himself, yet has the prayers of the whole Church of God, what a comfortable
refreshing should this be to every godly soul.

Use of Exhortation, to lay to heart more the divisions, differences, and
breaches that are among the godly; Learn of Christ here to be affected with the
unity of the Church, and again and again he commended peace to them, We are
commanded to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, God is the God of peace, the
Gospel is the Gospel of peace, Believers are called the children of peace; Take
heed of being a Jonah in this Ship, Let not thy pride, thy conceits, thy
discontents make thee tear and rend the Church; that Jerusalem may be as a City
compact together.

SERMON CXIII. Of Unity among Christians, the Benefits and Necessity of it: And
the mischief of Division.
JOHN 17.21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee,
etc.
WE have declared the Nature of this Unity, Let us now consider the Excellency,
Benefit and Necessity of Union amongst the godly, and the mischiefs of breaches
and differences amongst them.

First, The Excellency and Necessity of it appears in the vehement and
affectionate prayer for it, made by our Savior. 1. The excellency and
necessity of unity among Christians appears by the vehement and affectionate
prayer for it.
When he puts the whole company of believers together, he pitcheth upon this as
the most eminent, That they may be one. And although our Savior had not the
Spirit in measure, and so could not vainly repeat the same thing often, yet
within a little space, he does four times mention this, verse. 21, 22, 23. Now
certainly, that thing which our Savior in whom the treasures of all wisdom
are, did much press and urge, must needs be of very great moment, here is not
pardon of their sins, Justification, Adoption, Glorification mentioned, but
Unity, as if the whole kingdom of grace and glory did consist in this, obtain
this, and you have all; and our Savior as he prayed then, so he preached Love
and Unity; so that, whereas in matter of Justification he commended Faith above
all, in matter of Sanctification he comprehends all in love, John 13.34. A new
Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another: A new Commandment, not
but that the duty was old, only envy and malice had so prevailed amongst the
Jews, that to love was a new thing, as if it had not been a duty required
before. In John's Epistles it is called both new and old, 1 John 2.8. And then
again new, because there are new motives, and a new pattern, Love one another,
as I have loved you; There was never such a Pattern and President before; so
that it is not every kind of love and unity which will give content, but that
which is in the highest degree of unity, it is added verse. 35. By this shall all
men know ye 'are my Disciples, if ye love one another; not if ye work miracles,
if ye cast out devils, but if you cast out discord and variance; and therefore
there is not a greater scandal to Religion and holiness, then when those that do
believe, are as the Levites Concubine, that was cut into many pieces. Again,
Chapter 15.12. This is my Commandment that ye love one another, as I have loved
you; This is Christ's Commandment, as if there were nothing else he required but
this; and as if this were not enough, at verse 17. These things I command you,
that ye love one another; as if he should have said, If bare information will
not do it; if instruction will not do it, I lay my command and charge upon you.

2. Its a means to bring the world to believe the truth.
Secondly, This Unity and Love is a special means to bring the world to believe
the truth, and receive Christ. So that what the preaching of the Word, and
Gifts, yea miracles use to do, that unity and agreement may do. This is twice
affirmed to be the consequent of unity, verse. 21. and verse. 23. That the world
may believe thou have sent me. It Is a special way to convince all the enemies
of the truth. Thus Chap. 13.35. Men shall know ye are my Disciples, if ye love
one another: and do we not see by experience, That Papists, Heretics, and all
profane men are confirmed in their wickedness, by nothing more then the
differences and opinions of such who are godly: Do they not by books, and
otherwise in derision say, One Sect says, that has the Spirit of God, another
says, that has, and yet both are contrary one to another: Can the Spirit of
God be contrary to it self? Can it be a Spirit of truth in one, and a Spirit of
falsehood in others? Now although this be no good argument, because the Spirit
of God is communicated, but in measure to the godly, they know but in part, and
so they love but in part, many errors and divisions we are prone unto, yet
this is a very great stumbling block, and therefore woe be to that godly man,
who by his pride, self-conceit, or erroneous Doctrine shall bring such a
scandal to Religion, what if many perish in hell, because of thy froward
spirit. It is true, there ought to be zeal against errors and corruptions,
though in the godly. You see when Peter did not walk right, Paul resisted him
to the face, and would not give place to him, or other false teachers, no not
for an hour, Gal. 2.5. Mark that, No, not for an hour; Some think, let them
alone, they will recover themselves, they will do no hurt, truth needs not be
afraid, yet Paul was afraid that an hours forbearance might do hurt; Therefore
he adds, That the truth of the Gospel might continue amongst you, as if an
hours forbearance might hinder the continuance of truth; so that we are to use
Scripture-zeal, and Scripture-means to convince even those that are godly, when
erring in Doctrine: Therefore the Scripture does not commend an unity and love,
so as to let all errors and profaneness alone, but in that which is good,
unity in that which is truth and holiness, is that which Christ means here
in his prayer, and where this is, it is very potent to win all gainsayers:
It Is admirable to mollify the hearts of the opposers: Hence it is so often
reported of the primitive Christians, That they were daily with one accord
together: Therefore the Evangelist Luke records it at least five times: so that
if nothing else should make thee tender about causing any breaches in the
Church of God, this should, thou do as much as lies in thee, to hinder any
man that knows thee, ever to believe, and to be converted.

3. Its promised as a special part of the Covenant.
Thirdly, This Unity is promised as a special part of the Covenant of Grace.
That very Covenant, which promises to write the Law of God in our hearts, and
to put his fear in our inward parts, that also promises unity at the same
time, Jer. 32.39. I will be their God* and they shall be my people, I will give
them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever: Insomuch that it is
one main branch in the Covenant of Grace: So Zech 14.9. In that day, there
shall be one Lord, and his name one: The meaning is, They shall not worship
many gods, or serve in different ways of worship, but they shall be one. To
this purpose Ezekiel prophesies, Chap. 37.16, 22. which is not to be limited
to the Jews only, but also to all the believing Gentiles: Oh then in these
times of differences, and breaches amongst the godly! What should we run
unto? What should we plead in prayer, but these promises? O Lord, to be thus
divided, to have Altar against Altar, Church against Church, Prophet against
Prophet! Is this to have one heart, and one way?

But you may say, If God has thus promised it, and Christ has prayed for it,
who was heard of the Father in every thing, How comes it about that the
contrary appears? This is to be answered in it is time.

Fourthly, Unity is necessary, because hereby a serviceable and beneficial
helping of one another in spiritual things is preserved. 4 Hereby a serviceable
helping of one another in spiritua^l things is preserved.
The people of God are compared to living stones built up together, while the
stones keep in the building; they bear one another, but if once removed, it
falls down; They are compared to members in the body, while they are joined
together; There is a mutual ministration to each other, but when divided from
the body, no part can receive any nourishment: Thus it is here, while the
people of God are in union: Oh the wonderful help they are to one another,
they provoke one another, they stir up one another graces, but take these
coals from one another, and then the fire goes out! And this may be the
reason, why our Savior does not mention the Sanctification and holiness of
believers, but their unity, because this is a special means to preserve and
increase holiness, Two are better then one, because of heat and of help, says
the Wiseman, Eccles. 4.10. and so it is in this work of Grace, two are better
then one to warm one another; How may thy zeal help against another
lukewarmnesse, thy faith against another diffidence? If it be so great a sin
to see thy brother in temporal want, and not relieve him, How much more in
spiritual, and so for help, Gal. 6.1. If any be overtaken, ye that are
spiritual restore such an one; Put this bone in joint again: Now does not
experience tell us, that where divisions and discord are, there is no love, no
compassion, no watching over one another, if this unity were established, a man
would then endeavor the growth of grace in others, as in his own self; and
therefore observe, whether the power of godliness does not much abate, when
differences do arise: There is not that heavenly communion, nor hearty
concurrence in the ways of holiness. There is not that mutual helping of one
another, as at other times.

Fifthly, Unity amongst the godly is so necessary, 5. God suffers sad
persecutions to befall them, that thereby their discords may be removed.
that therefore God many times suffers sad and heavy persecutions to befall
them, that thereby their discords and divisions may be removed, and they be
more endeared to one another. Times of prosperity in the Church made the
greatest heresies and schisms, but the times of bloody persecution made the
godly more united. Thus the Martyrs, some of them in Queen Mary's days, did
bewail their differences and contests they had formerly one with another, but
the prison and persecution made them highly prize one another. Joseph's brethren
in their plenty envied and fell out with one another, but in their distress
they were glad to cleave together. The sheep that were scattered one from
another, when a sudden storm arises, makes them all company together: It may
be though the godly are so censorious, so shie, so strange to one another. God
may in time work so, that they may be glad to enjoy one another, glad to have
the communion of each other; one godly man's company may be more then the gold
of Ophir; and therefore if love and godliness do not unite you, take heed God
does not make some outward trouble and affliction to put you together; If you
do not embrace one another willingly, he may bind you in his chains together.
That promise to Judah and Israel, of making those two sticks one, was after the
cruel enmity and opposition which had been amongst them.

Sixthly, Unity is not only a sanctifier, but a strengthner also? 6. Unity
strengthens.
It Is that which confirms and establishes the Church. The old Rule is, Vis
unita sortior, the Sun beams united together cast the greater heat. It Is
union in an Army, in a Nation, in any Society that preserves it; as a Wiseman
said, Public Societies are immortal, if they do not kill themselves by
division; Our Savior confirmed this, when he said, No Kingdom divided against
it self can stand, Matthew. 12.25. He brings this as an argument, That he did not
cast out devils by the help of devils, but by the Spirit of God. Thus if the
people of God cast out error and profaneness by Gods Spirit, then they will
not entertain the like themselves; for this would be to set a Kingdom at
variance within it self. The old Rule is, Divide and impera: It was a peculiar
providence, that Christ's bones should not be broken, to demonstrate hereby (say
some) that Christ, though he died, yet he did not lose his strength. We must
justly fear God has some heavy scourge upon the godly, when they are first
divided, if their bones are broken, their strength is weakened; their evil and
misery will not stay there: So that it is a very foolish and weak thing in the
godly to continue in their divisions; for have they not mighty and numberless
enemies? Does not the whole world hate them? Are they not as Wolves to the
godly, who are as Sheep? Now if not only the Wolf and the Fox, but also one
Sheep shall devour another, Must not this bring utter ruin? The Apostle Paul
speaks fully to this, Gal. 5.15. If ye bite and devour one another, take heed
ye be not consumed of one another: Observe the notable expression, biting and
devouring one another, How unnatural is this to sheep, dogs use to do so? And
further, by this means you will consume one another; That which the devils of
hell, and all the wicked adversaries thereof could not do, that you will do to
one another, En quo discordia cives perduxit miseros! Look not then upon your
differences, as mere sins, but heavy prognostiques of Gods wrath. The veil in
the Temple did rend in pieces, which was a presage of the destruction of the
Temple.

7. It is beautiful and comely.
Seventhly, It is a most comely and beautiful thing to see; It Is a ravishing
thing to behold such an Harmony amongst the godly, therefore the compleatnesse
of it will be in Heaven; There those many thousands will all have one heart,
and one tongue to praise God; There will be no difference, one shall not have
one way of seeing God, another, another way; There will be no censuring, as
reproachful terms one against another: Now the nearer the people of God come
to this on earth, the more like are they to glorified Saints in Heaven, and
those innumerable companies of Angels that do Gods will; They have no jarrings
and contests, one Angel is not of one opinion, and another of another; We ought
to do Gods will, as they do it, not only in respect of zeal and purity, but
unity also. David is affected with it, and one of those Songs of Degrees, is
wholly to praise it, Psalm. 133.1, 2, 3. It Is compared to that precious ointment
that was so curiously to be composed, that none might presume to make the like,
and it was to be poured on the High Priest only. He compares it also to the
fruitful and pleasant Dew upon the Mountains.

The whole Psalm is considerable,

1. There is the note of admiration or indication, Behold; as if he had said,
You have by bitter experience seen what dissentions and differences do produce.

2. It Is good and pleasant; Profit and pleasure use to win all; and hereby is
denoted our averseness to such unity, that we need those low Arguments to draw
us; He does not say, It Is just, holy and acceptable to God, but good and
pleasant.

3. For Brethren: He says, Not men, but brethren, because sinful discord is
apt to creep in amongst them.

4. Even together: He speaks not of local, but soul-conjunction. Now the
sweetness of it is represented by the oil poured on Aaron, and so descending.
It must be a peace grounded on Christ our Head and High Priest, then it is to
diffuse to others. The profitablenesse of it is described by the Dew, that as
it is from heaven, So it sanctifies the barren ground. This Concord is Gods
gift only, and if received does wonderfully bless the Church.

Who would not have rejoiced to live in those days, when all believers were of
one heart and one soul? Oh what a comfort was it to hear no grudgings, no
repinings at one another? But the Devil that envious one, he quickly sowed
tares amongst them, and there became ulcers and sores to appear upon that body,
which once was as fair as Abs^loms body: Hence the Apostles do so much press,
That all things be done in charity, that they fulfill the Royal Law by loving
that they do not so much as grudge one against another! This unity and peace
is so glorious a thing, that the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. makes it matter of
ambition, Study, or be ambitious to be quiet; There is a great deal of carnal
and worldly ambition after great things, though fading and transitory; but here
is godly ambition, here is spiritual ambition, when to be a peacemaker, and a
peace-preserver, we judge it the greatest glory God does put upon us.

Eighthly, This duty of Love and uniting is most imbred in the hearts of the
godly, it should be that which they are most persuaded of, most inclined to.
It Is strange for thee to say, God has taught thee such and such high things,
and has not taught thee love. The Apostle speaks excellently, 1 Thessalonians. 4.10.
Concerning brotherly-love, ye need not I write to you, for you are taught that
of God. It Is a shame, and a reproach to us, that we need a Sermon for this: Oh
fear thy self, thou boastest of the teachings of Gods Spirit above others, and
yet art not taught to love! And here we see, Those that think a Ministry
needless, and they will not hear it; If nothing else may convince, yet this
may, God has not taught them this duty of love enough; and therefore they had
need of the Ministers of God to do it. But by this you see, That Love and
Unity should be so planted in all the godly, that we need no more press and
preach this, then an hungry man to eat his meat, or the mother to love her
child. God teaches this duty in the chief place.

SERMON CXIV. Of Unity among the Godly, More particulars setting forth the
Excellency of it, and mischiefs of Division; Answering this Objection, viz.
Seeing God has promised one heart and way, and Christ prayed for it, How comes
it to pass that there should be so many breaches amongst the Godly.
JOH. 17.21. That they may be one as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, etc.
WE are describing the Excellency of Union, and the mischief of breaches
amongst the godly, we shall add to the fore mentioned, As

1. Divisions and differences they are the fruit of the flesh; Whereas love, 9.
Divisions are the fruit of the flesh.
peace, and kindness they are the fruits of the Spirit, so that a man cannot
more demonstrate himself to be in the flesh, and devoid of Gods Spirit in any
thing then by a contentious dividing spirit; There are some men like those old
Spaniards the historian speaks of, that cannot live without an enemy, So these
Salamanders can only be in the fire, they are unquiet restless men, and these
like Marcion with great boldness and delight will cry out, we will cast fire
into the Church and divide it, But these demonstrate of what nature they are,
and who is their Father, even that envious one, the devil, who delights to sow
tares amongst the wheat, Gal. 6.20, 21. etc. you may there see two chief
principles of men's actions in the world, whereof the one is immediately opposite
to the other, the flesh and the Spirit, now it is good to observe what the works
of the one and the other are; of the flesh, he instanceth in hatred, variance,
strife, emulations, etc. all tending to break unity, and of the spirit the
clean contrary, love, peace, gentleness, etc. all uniting, If then we would
know who is a godly man, who has the Spirit of God; Judge of the Tree by its
fruit, he is full of love, gentleness, and meekness; It Is impossible that
pride, arrogance, and envyings should be the fruit of Gods Spirit; Hence the
Apostle 1 Cor. 3. does thus argue, If there be envyings and divisions among
you, are you not carnal? Thus the Apostle James c. 3.13, 14. speaks notably to
this, Who is a wise man? let him show it by a good conversation with meekness,
he divides wisdom into that which is earthly and devilish, the mother of
envyings and strife, and the wisdom from above, which is first pure and then
peaceable, yea, verse 14. Whosoever has the Name of Religion, yet is haunted
with this devil: The Apostle bids him glory not, and lie not against the Truth,
So that though a man pretend never such singular gifts, such extraordinary
Teachings of Gods Spirit, yet if contentious, he is not to glory* yea, he lies
against the Truth; Thou say, it is for the truth thou art thus contentious,
It Is for the truth thou have made these divisions, No, the truths of Christ are
to be maintained by the Spirit of Christ, As the wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God, so neither does the perverseness of man the truths of
God, so far then as any in the Church of God are contentious and striving, so
far they demonstrate the power of the flesh reigning in them.

2. This Unity is necessary, because all other things in Religion are reduced
to one; 10. Because all things are reduced to one.
If therefore all things agree in unity, every thing in Religion tends to this;
Why should not the people of God embrace it? The several Unities are notably
made an Argument to our purpose, Ephesians. 4. For the Apostle at v. 1. having
exhorted believers to walk worthy of their calling, he instanceth in such
graces as procure Unity with all lowliness, meekness, forbearing one another;
See these graces are the comely, worthy graces of our holy calling, and you
have the end of these graces, v. 3. endeavoring, we must make it our aim, our
labor, our study and prayer to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, hereupon he enumerates v. 4. why there should be such Unity, There is
one body, Christ has not many bodies, no more then a man has; All the people
of God are one body; Now how destructive is it when one part of the body should
conspire against the welfare of another? Let grace do that in this mystical
body which nature does in this natural; Then there is one Spirit, There is but
one Spirit that enlightens and sanctifies the whole Church of God, why then
should there be so many contrary opinions and ways, yet pretended to be of the
same Spirit? Indeed the Apostle says, there are diversity of gifts and
operations, yet the same Spirit; He does not say contrarieties and the same
Spirit, for that is as impossible as darkness to come from the Sun; If then
there be but one Spirit, let not the godly give occasions to the adversaries to
blaspheme, saying, the Calvinistical Spirit is one thing, and the Lutheran
spirit another; Again, there is one hope of our calling, we are called to one
Inheritance, there is only one Heaven prepared for all the godly, Why then
should they be so different by the way, when at our journeys end we must all be
received into the same place of glory; It is true our Savior says, Joh. 14.2.
In his Fathers house are many mansion places; There is room enough for all, yet
it is but one house, if one Church cannot now contain us, how shall we think one
heaven will? It follows, there is one Lord, that is Christ, who is to be
worshipped and served by us; Indeed if there were many Lords, as the Papists set
up many Saints in heaven to have their peculiar worship, then no wonder if
there were several faiths and worships also, but the Lord Christ is one; This
the Apostle urged the Corinthians with to compose their divisions, Is Christ
divided? 1 Corin. 1.13. unless there were many Christ's, or Christ be divided
into many parts, there ought not to be many divisions in the Church; how absurd
would it be to say, I have one Christ, and another he has another, a third a
third Christ; There is one faith, one systeme of doctrine to be believed,
Though there may be many particulars, yet they make up one entire Truth, So
that although there be many Religions, and many faiths in the world, yet indeed
there is but one; Even as the Apostle says, There are (...) called gods,
nuncupative gods, but to us there is one only God, So there are many called
Religions, many called Churches, but indeed there is one only; The next
argument is, there is one Baptism, that is one profession of the doctrine of
faith; Though there is not one baptism in number, yet there is one in kind;
Christ has appointed but one way for the profession of his name* and being
called upon by us; The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is also made an argument
of unity, 1 Cor 10.17. So that the Sacraments in their signification denote
unity; They manifest one body, one spirit, how sad then is it that so many
^ents and divisions should be made in the Church about Sacraments, which yet
are the bodies and seals of unity and communion! Lastly, there is one God and
Father of all; Because there is one God only, therefore we ought to be at
unity, God being One cannot be divided in himself, he cannot command things to
be believed or done contrary to himself; Therefore let all these unities make
us serious in endeavoring after unity, yea, we might add, that in hell there
is unity, all the devils agree against the Church, There could be a Legion of
devils in one man; Shall there then be unity against us, and not we at unity
among our selves?

Quest. Seeing God has promised one heart and way, and Christ prayed for it,
how comes it to pass there are so many breaches among the godly.
These things thus urged, let us answer that Objection, Seeing God has promised
one heart, and one way, and Christ has also thus earnestly prayed for it, who
is not denied any thing by the Father, how is it there are so many breaches
amongst the godly? That we may cry out contrarily to the Psalmist, Behold how
sad and destructive a thing it is for brethren to be at discord one with
another, how comes it about that the godly do no more remember of what spirit
they are? That they consider not the Spirit of God descended in the shape of a
Dove, That Babel was to be built by confusion of tongues, but Jerusalem without
any noise of the hammer, and therefore Solomon must build the Temple, not
David, because he had been a man of war.

That this may not scandalize any, Consider these things.

Answ.
1. Though unity among the godly be thus necessary, yet that infers
necessarily divisions and oppositions to the world, and therefore we are not to
wonder if the Gospel and powerful dispensing of Christ's ways makes fractions
and troubles in the world, for the godly cannot have peace with themselves but
they must be in open opposition to the world; Therefore in this Chapter, and in
other places our Savior informs them that the world will hate them, So that we
are not to say, That the Gospel of Christ is in it self of a turbulent dividing
nature, as carnal Politicians suggest, and that therefore the best peace and
unity is where Atheism does abound, for if by the Gospel there be sad
distractions and concussions of Kingdoms and States, it is not from the genius
of the Gospel, but from the opposition and corruption of men's hearts; Therefore
when our Savior said, he came to send fire and sword in the earth, Luke 12.49.
that Father should be against Son, and mother against daughter, That a man's
Enemies should be those of his own house; This was not from the nature of
Christ's doctrine but the corrupt indisposition of the subject, as when the Sun
does offend soar eyes, or the medicine and potions taken disturb the humors
and makes a man the sicker, in these cases not the Sun or the Physician is to
be blamed, So if the Introduction of Christ's Kingdom and his Ordinances make
great divisions in a place; It Is not Christ's way but wicked men's sins that are
to be blamed; This then is to be concluded upon, that the godly and the wicked
can have no unity, The godly may not come off to the worlds principles, and the
world will not come off to the godly man's principles, and therefore there must
be a perpetual enmity, which made the Wise man say, That the Righteous was an
abomination to the wicked, and the wicked to the Righteous; Pro. 29.27.

2. Seeing there cannot be unity between Sheep and Wolves, the godly and the
wicked, hence it is that even in the Church of God there being so many still
that retain their beastly nature, and though they have the title of Christians,
yet are really of the devil, hence it is that in Christ's Church there is many
times such deadly opposition; Wonder not then if among those that yet pretend
highly to Christ there be sad divisions, for many are in the flesh still, many
savor not experimentally the things of God, There shall arise among you men
that shall speak perverse things, says the Apostle, Act. 20.30. So there shall
be false Prophets who will bring in damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2. and why?
because they are men of corrupt minds; If then all that pretend to Christ, to
his Spirit, had indeed Christ's Spirit, there would be no such divisions, but
says the Apostle 1 John 2. They went from us, because they were not of us, and
1 Co. 11. there must be heresies that the (...) such as are sound may be
esteemed; Therefore though Christ has thus prayed, and God thus promised, yet
in the Church there will be grievous rents, because these are not of the Church
though in the Church, and therefore were not included in Gods promise or
Christ's prayer; Hence it is that the Scripture is full of such predictions,
that there shall arise false Prophets, that there shall be wolves in sheeps
clothes, that Satan will transform himself into an Angel of light, by which if
it were possible the very Elect would be seduced; Therefore you are not thus to
argue when you see raging divisions amongst those that profess faith in Christ
and holiness, that therefore Christ prayed in vain, or that there is no Truth,
no Religion at all, but rather that there are many hypocrites in the Church,
many who for their pride, rebel on against the Light, and other sins, shall be
left by God, and given up to believe a lie, From such differences conclude upon
this pious meditation, That even under the known light of the Gospel men may
sadly apostatize, and become heretics, yea persecutors of the Truth, if the
spirit of God keep them not in an holy fear; Therefore in the midst of these
differences say, there is a seeming believer, a seeming Church, a seeming
professor, and such commonly for some corrupt end or other make a breach in
Christ's body.

3. There is an unity in fundamentals or essentials, and an unity in
circumstantials or less principals; Now as when God has promised, and Christ
prayed for the sanctification of his people, hereby they are seen to have so
much grace as shall certainly bring them to heaven, for though they have not
all the degrees of grace, and neither are freed from all sin, yet they have the
essence of grace that will certainly bring to eternal glory; Thus it is in
unity, although in many things they have not attained to the same mind, to the
same judgment, yet they all agree in those things, that are necessary to
salvation, and this is called all truth, The Spirit of God shall lead them
into all Truth, Joh. 26.13. and they have the unction which teaches them all
things, 1 John 2.20. Hence Mat. 25. it is not possible to deceive the Elect,
viz. in fundamental things, such as shall exclude Salvation; It Is true, the
disciples doubted a while about Christ's Resurrection, which was a fundamental
Point, but it is one thing to doubt, and another thing heretically to oppose it;
The godly then cannot live and die in a fundamental error, no more then in a
gross sin unrepented of, because these do necessarily oppose salvation, and
this may be a great comfort to the godly under the diversity of Opinions and
several subtle ways of those who would bring in damnable Heresies.

4. Even in accessories and less principals their unity shall be consummated
in Heaven, and so we must understand Christ's Prayer as in his other Petitions,
with an extent to heaven, where is the completing of all grace and holiness;
The comfort is, that one day all the godly will lay aside their bitterness and
censures of one another, They will all with one mouth, and in one way, praise
and glorify God without any difference at all.

5. Christ has not given his Spirit to the Church to its full measure in this
life, and therefore they know but in part, They love but in part, Now all
division arises from ignorance in the mind and corruption in the heart, as
long therefore as these relics shall be in us so long will these divisions
be: As long as the earth emits vapors, so long will thunder and lightnings be
in the air.

Lastly, The devil does yet put forth his power, and his work is to fill the
Church with differences, and raising up Instruments thereunto, that so his
kingdom may the more prosper: Therefore though heretical Incendiaries are taken
away, yet because the devil dies not therefore he is still setting his cloven
foot where God has raised up any Church.

SERMON CXV. Of Unity among Believers; Cautions about it. Also setting forth
some good uniting Principles; With a Censure of some bad ones.
JOHN 17.21. That they may be One, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee.
THe next thing in order to be treated on concerning this Unity, is the
Cautions that are to be attended unto about it: For the name of Unity, like
that of peace, is very specious and fair, yet as Hierom said, Cursed be that
peace which forsakes the truth: So cursed be that unity which shall prejudice
the Kingdom of Christ. Conspiracy and a sinful confederacy in ways of sin,
may be painted over, as if it were this glorious unity commended by Christ. And

1. True unity is from Christ and terminated in him. There is a wicked unity.
First, Let this be considered, That the Unity which Christ commends and prays
for, is originally from Christ, and terminated in him, and afterward in those
things that are his, his truth, his ways, his commands. So that whatsoever
unity does not begin there, and afterward diffuse it self to those things, is
a sinful and wicked unity. The Devil has unity in his Kingdom; all the
Devils, though full of malice and envy to man, yet agree in their wickedness.
Though one wicked man may fall out with another, yet one devil does not with
another. There is order amongst them. There is the prince of the devils, a
legion of them could possess one man: So that if we look into hell, we shall
find nothing but unity and agreement amongst them, yet all is in their work
against Christ and his Church. Thus there is also an Antichristian Unity, the
Papists glory in their unity, that they all acknowledge one way, yea they make
it a mark of their Church: And in the world, we see all wicked men are as one
man in opposing what is godly. Now such unity as this, is matter of shame and
mourning. For, 1. It Is not terminated on Christ; they are not first united to
the true Head, this oil is not first on Aarons head; but they are of the devil,
who does move and reign in their hearts. And, 2. It Is not an unity in the
Scripture way, not an union in the true Doctrine, but heresy, not an union in
the instituted worship of God, but idolatry and superstition, an union to
overthrow Christ's Kingdom, if it were possible. Look we then to the cause and
object of our unity, else it will afford no true comfort.

2. A directed and ordered unity.
Secondly, This unity must be a directed and ordered unity. This unity must not
be confusion. That Chaos and unformed heap God created at first, it was one
thing, but it was confused, it was without form. An house demolished makes one
heap, but it is a ruinous disordered one: So then the Scripture unity is that
which keeps the order and distinction God has appointed; and indeed this is
greatly to be pressed, lest under this pretense of unity, that all the people
of God are one, we should introduce a confusion, and make Christ's body,
Monstrum horrendum, etc. Though the Church be that one body of Christ, yet in
it there are distinct members, and all have their several operations: So that
the Apostle argues against those that would confound this order; Are all the
members of the body an eye? 1 Cor. 12.14, 15, 16. This has many times sorely
troubled the Church. Men through pride and corrupt ends would not religiously
keep that order and distinction God has made in his Church: Hence the Apostle
so often presses the people to hear, to obey, to submit themselves unto their
Governors, to have them in high esteem for their works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
And why is all this? But because while this unity of order is preserved, the
Church it self and godliness is preserved.

Thirdly, This unity is consistent with such graces, 3. It is consistent with
such graces, that yet have an outward appearance of dissolving unity.
that yet have an outward appearance, of dissolving unity, as zeal for the
glory of God, sharp and severe reproof of such as go astray, to suffer no
heresies or profaneness after admonition in such who are of the Church. And
certainly this is much to be observed, As there is a sinful and foolish pity,
when men would not have justice done against notorious offenders, which pity to
the wicked is truly called cruelty to the good; for he that is pitiful to the
wolf, is cruel to the sheep: So there is a counterfeit, disguised unity and
love, and that is, when because of this peace and agreement, no damnable
heresy, no corrupt or evil way is to be severely dealt with, and a
Scripture-way taken to stop the progress of it. If this were true, then Ahab
did upon good grounds call Elijah, a troubler of Israel, because his zeal would
not bear the Idolatries then practiced: If this were true, then all the godly
Prophets were justly discouraged, because they reproved the sinful ways of
the times they lived in: Yea then, Christ himself and his Apostles were justly
condemned, for the zeal of God did so eat them up, that they reproved not only
the gross Idolatries, but almost every petty superstitious way: What shall we
think the Apostle Paul, who does so often commend the spirit of love and
meekness, That there be no hatred or strife amongst them, yet when he says; I
would they were cut off that trouble you, Gal. 5.12. and their mouths must be
stopped, Tit. 2.11. that speak perverse things, that he forgets his own rule, and
becomes an incendiary in the Church? or shall we think the Apostle John, who
presses love in every verse, and shows, He that hates his brother, is like
Cain a murderer, and of the devil; yet when he says, If any one bring any
other Doctrine, then you have received (2 epist. John 10) receive not that man
into your house, or bid him, God speed; that now he has forgot his own spirit,
that his honey is turned into gall? Be then fully persuaded, that the unity and
love Christ prays for, does not oppose Scripture-zeal, and courage against
any profane and erroneous ways: It does not bring in a compliance and
symbolizing with all heresies and profaneness. It does not erect a Temple, as
the Romans did to all gods: Nor make the Church like the Ark, wherein all
beasts clean and unclean were received. No, such remisness breaks unity; as
the strings not well-wound up cannot make any melodious sound, and the
paralytical members of the body, for want of the due firmness, cause many
feeble operations. There is a Sect called the Family of Love, as if they only
had peace and unity amongst them, but they would have all things, even wives
common, and so their unity is a fomenter of sin, and confounds those
relations God has distinguished.

These Cautions premised, Remedies for the preventing and healing divisions in
the Church.
Let us consider what remedies are fit to heal these wounds. As in the natural
b^dy, a wound is Solutio continui; so in this spiritual body of the Church, and
as to wounds, unless there be wisdom and skill, they are made worse by
Empericks. Thus unless there be proportionable and fit remedies applied with
wisdom and compassion, the breach is made greater. False ways of unity.
And

First, There are two remedies, and they are in extremes: 1. By Papists.
The one suggested by the Popish party, the other by the Socinian.

The first is, A rigid, imperious and tyrannical commanding of an uniformity
and approbation in every punctilio, and minute particular: So that no dissent
or liberty shall be allowed to a man, though humble and peaceable, earnestly
desiring to find out the truth. This tyranny came into the Church betimes;
What a large breach did Victor Bishop of Rome make in the Church about the
determinate time of keeping of Easter, whom Irenaeus did gravely oppose?
Certainly, the Apostle Romans 14. in matters of less concernment, where men may
err salva fide, or when men build only hay and stubble, not laying other
foundations, does there command a charitable carriage between the strong
Christian, and the weak. It Is true, the least truth of Christ is precious, and
we are not to deny it; but yet it is not violently to be obtruded, unless
where there is eternal damnation inevitable, if that truth be not received. Our
Savior speaks excellently to that, Matthew. 9.17. If new wine be put into old
bottles, the bottles break; while men impose opinions or practices of less
consequence, upon a people not prepared, in stead of unity, they make many
fractions, yet this way of unity has much infested the Church, and especially
when men have been in power. They have pressed unity not so much out of love to
Christ, as thereby to keep up their interest: As Musculus observes of the
soldiers, that would not have Christ's coat divided, every one hoping thereby
to have it all. Thus when Luther reformed, nothing was more ordinarily preached
by the Papists then the inconsutilis tunica, the seamless coat of Christ, which
made Luther call them Inconsutilistae and Tunicastri. Now all this endeavor to
have such an uniformity, was not out of love to Christ's Church, but their own
power; and therefore they were afraid of divisions, lest they should overthrow
their kingdom. Certainly to such austere and severe imposers; That of Austin is
often to be re-minded, Saeviunt illi, qui nesciunt, etc. let them rage and
persecute, who know not with what prayers and tears it is given to understand,
but a little of Gods truth, yet this political way of unity has been long in
the Church, Aut subscribe, aut discede, was a speech of old in the Church.

2. By Socinians.
2. There is another false way of unity extremely opposite to this, strenuously
propugned by the Socinian, and that is, A licentious and unbounded Toleration
of damnable heresies and Idolatries, which Julian also studiously promoted,
thereby to overthrow the Christian Religion. Now as the former way of unity
has been propugned by those who had power in the Church, so this latter by
those, who have been the oppressed party, for the Scripture decides a middle
way between these two principles: Hence Rev. 2. and Chap. 3. The Angels of the
Church are commended, when they did not suffer, or could not bear such as
published unsound Doctrine, and therefore those who did suffer such, are
reproved: I say, the Angels of the Church, for we are treating of Church-peace
and liberty, not political and external, which is not comprehended in this
Petition. Certainly, the Apostles in their Epistles, do as much, if not more,
set against false Doctrines and false Teachers, as they do against corrupt
practices: Hence 1 Timothy 1.20. Hymeneus and Alexander for their blasphemies and
false doctrines are by Paul delivered up to Satan, and Tit. 3.10. we have an
universal Rule given, An heretic after the first and second admonition
reject. So that it is very clear, That Church Power and Church Censures are to
be inflicted on such as obstinately offend therein; and certainly a boundless
Toleration of all kind of heresies, seems to be so harsh and unsavory a
thing, that even the Remonstrants, who yet cried up a liberty of prophesying,
as their great Diana, did disavow this, professing their approbation of that
known Rule, It Is better living, ubi nulla licent, then where omnia; and that
with this liberty of opinions, there ought to be ways used for the extirpation
of heresies. This licentiousnes then does not beget unity, but increases
breaches, for it gives way to men's corruptions to vent themselves, and is like
the warm Summer to snakes and serpents, which makes them come abroad, when the
cold winter kept them in.

These remedies then being laid aside, Let us consider, what are truly and
properly so, what is the fit oil to be poured into the Churches wounds, seeing
it is so often like that man of Jericho; whereas then this breach of unity may
be made three ways, Of the true Doctrine by heresy, Of godly Order by schism,
The true uniting principles. As to true Doctrine.
and Of Christian love by wrath and contentions in outward matters. Let us see
what are the peculiar Remedies; for what is proper to one is not to another,
and as for the way of unity in Doctrine, these are uniting and closing
principles.

So far as there is an agreement in judgment, to close heartily, and embrace
one another in that. It Is a mercy that the difference is not in the very
fundamentals and vitals of Religion, seeing therefore there are common opinions
and doctrines, wherein the godly do agree, let that unity be nourished, this
will be a means to produce further union. This Rule the Apostle gives, Phil.
3.15, 16. Whither we have attained, let us walk by the same Rule, and if any
man be otherwise minded, God shall reveal this to them. It Is a great
frowardness in the rigid Lutherans, that they will not own the Calvinists as
brethren, though there may be a reconciliation in fundamentals, as Pareus
pleads. So far then as men do retain Christ, and fundamental truth with an
humble godly disposition, desiring to be further informed. Let not the want of
what they should have, make thee despise the good things they have.

Let private Christians highly esteem and submit to those godly and faithful
Pastors, God has set over them. For commonly there begins the breach, when
they begin to be offended at them. It was some mistake about what Christ
preached, that made so many Disciples quite forsake him, it was durus Sermo, an
hard speech, they said, and would not seek to be further informed, when men
will not own that public office God has appointed, then they wander into
bypath: Therefore Ephesians. 4.12, 13* You see a twofold end of the Ministers of
Christ; the one is, To keep them from being carried about with every wind of
Doctrine. The other, for a spiritual edification, till we all come in the unity
of faith; So that a due and fit obedience and acknowledgement of them, would in
a special manner prevent divisions.

Get a pitiful and compassionate spirit to those that go astray. We are indeed
to have zeal, and an holy impatience in the things of God, yet this is to be
accompanied with pity, Of some have compassion, making a difference, says the
Apostle Jude. Certainly, when we shall consider, how prone it is for men to
receive error for truth; How naturally blind and opposite the mind of a man
is to the revealed truths of God, and how that it is the Spirit of God that
leads thee into truth, That it is God only who keeps thee from the heresies and
errors that others are carried aside with. These things will greatly move thee
to tender bowels.

SERMON CXVI. Of Christian Unity; Setting forth some Rules for Unity in
Doctrine, Church Order, and Affection; for the preventing of Error, Schism
and Wrath.
JOH. 17.21. That they also may be one as thou Father art in me and I in thee,
etc.
TO prevent or heal any breach that may be made in doctrine by error, we have
given some Remedies, and there are more remaining:

Heartily and truly to lay down or report the opinions of others that do
dissent from us; There is nothing has made the gap wider, and more raked into
the sores of the Church then such a malevolent and ill disposition, to pervert
the opinions of others, to make them hold such monstrous things, as they do
with all their hearts detest; It was thought that the Apostle James therefore
was moved to write that Epistle for works as well as faith, because some did
misunderstand Paul's writings, as if he had taught Faith only was enough to
save, though it was not accompanied with an holy life. How often was Christ and
the Apostles traduced for preaching such things that they never taught, and all
this was done by their malicious enemies to make them more odious, and to bring
greater danger upon them; And do not the Papists to this day represent the
Protestants as if they were the most damnable and blasphemous heret^ques that
ever were? But if it be not lawful in civil matters to bear false witness
against another, much less in Religious and doctrinal matters; whether
therefore it be by writing, preaching, report, or any other way Gods Word and
Conscience requires of us, that we are to represent the Opinions of others
truly and really, not put a sense of our own upon them, and then fight with
that, this is not the way to bring the straying Sheep back again, this will
never reduce to unity, for the party dissenting will presently see, that truth
is not sought for but victory, That the end of dissenters is not to bring him
to the knowledge of truth, but to disgrace and defame him, and this will never
convert, Therefore that is necessary in all disputations to state the
controversy aright, for that is like the first concoction, which if it
miscarry is not mended afterward, men may write voluminous books, and bring
multitude of arguments to no purpose, if the true state of the controversy be
not laid down: To know therefore the true and proper distance is the only way
at last to unite, as the best way to recover out of a disease is to be truly
informed what it is.

to impose such Conclusions and inferences upon the doctrine maintained by
dissentients, that are not the proper and genuine effect thereof, To cast that
upon them as their doctrine which is but our inference that we may make through
ignorance or any other distemper, is not fair, especially when they do with
their whole soul abhor such Conclusions; There were some Spiders that would
suck poison from those sweet herbs the Apostle had planted, because he showed
that where sin had abounded grace did much more; Therefore some forced this
consequence upon the Apostles doctrine, Let us sin that grace may abound, Romans
6.1. And thus the Papists deal with us, and Lutherans also, how often do they
charge this hideous calumny and consequence upon the Protestants doctrine, as
if we made God the author of sin? whereas we use but the Scripture words and
such expressions, no, nor such harsh ones neither, as some of their own Popish
Writers do, only it is truth in them but blasphemy in us; Indeed what is the
evident and plain Consequence of a Doctrine, that is to be accounted of as the
doctrine it self; As whatsoever is a clear genuine consequence from Scripture
is Scripture, but not every consequence, We are apt to deduce, Thus it is here,
what is evidently a consequence from any Doctrine, we may charge it upon the
doctrine, but then we must be sure it is the proper and natural child, not a
bastard, that it is the true issue not suppositions.

Whatsoever truth God may have indeed made known to us, or if in our persuasion
only, we are to be very careful how we publish it; This has been constant fire
in the Church of God when men either have, or in persuasion only, some doctrine
different from the current way of the Church at that time; Now it is a very hard
thing thus to be with child as it were, and not to be full of pain till we
have delivered it to the world; Why is an obstinate broacher of damnable
doctrines called an heretitk but because he chooses his own way? He invents
and excogitates a doctrine of his own, therefore compared to thieves and
robbers, that go not in by the door but climb up some other way; Now such
qualifications as these are necessary,

1. To question and examine thy own spirit, not presently to believe thy own
heart; This is a firebrand in the Church, when men have no modest doubtings and
questionings of their own ignorance and pronesse to err even in that thing
they are so confident of; how modestly does the Apostle Paul speak 1 Cor. 7.
when he determined the case about marriage, I think also I have the Spirit of
God, and he distinguishes between that which he had as an express command
from the Lord, and what he was inwardly directed unto, wheresoever the Spirit
of God leads into all truth, there he does likewise into all humility; Thus
Luthers Tune solus sapis es is famously known, though the Papists charge him
falsely with contempt of all others.

2. Before we publish it to the world to communicate our thoughts to those that
are able, wise, and learned in the Church of God, who have the Spirit of God
and his Unction as well as we; Paul though called immediately by Christ, yet
went up to Jerusalem to confer with the chief pillars there, and though he was
thus miraculously converted, yet he must go to Ananias to be further directed,
1 Cor. 14.14. those that had extraordinary gifts yet were to submit themselves
to others, The Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, which is
interpreted two ways, and both pertinently to my matter:

1. If the meaning be, The spirit of the Prophets is subject to other Prophets,
they have power to judge the doctrine we publish, then it will much more
follow, that what we have in an ordinary way is exposed to the examen of others.

2. If by it we understand it thus, there is no Prophet having the Spirit of
God moving in them that is so extraordinarily wrought upon but he may retain
those motions, and vent them in an orderly way, not to speak while others are
speaking, which seems to be the scope of the Apostle in that place; This is
very pertinent to my matter, that no man can have such revelations and impulses
from Gods Spirit but that he is in a divine method and good order to declare
them, for the unseasonable publishing of some things is like good Physic but
not administered in its fit season.

Lastly, To keep up the unity of faith this is a special means, when we do
highly prize and delight in the known plain truths of Christ* Paul that was
snatched up in the third Heavens, yet desired to know nothing but Christ
crucified; Peter thought it not inconvenient to write the same things they knew
already; Certainly nothing has more rent and torn the Church of God then
affectation of singular high things, To bring in some unheard and unknown
Truths, Oh this is the pride of men's hearts, to have it said, Such a man was
the first that brought that nation into the world, as the Jesuit of his
scientia media, Ego primus inveni; But to be weary of the known truth is in
effect to be weary of the same God, the same Christ, Why do we not desire a new
Sun, a new Earth, a new world as well?

II. Rules to keep up unity in Church Order, and to prevent Schism.
In the second place, What will keep up unity in the Churches order, and prevent
Schism there; For although the Scripture use the word schism in a large sense,
yet Ecclesiastically it is restrained to the breach of order in the Church, and
that has often been when they have kept the unity of the Doctrine, They did
not divide from the doctrine but communion in Church-ordinances; Now to keep up
an entire body in this, Consider,

1. That if such be the corruption of the Church, that thou can not keep
fellowship with her but by partaking of her sins, Then before thou leavest that
place take the way the Scripture commands, Be sure that it be not for some
less corruption, but that which does eat up the very vitals of Religion; Do
not thou leave it till God leaves it; Do not thou unchurch it till God does.

2. Let thy endeavors be in thy place to inform and heal before thou do
depart; Plead and strive with thy mother, as Hos. 2. because she has
committed whoredoms: And then Lastly, Let thy secession be unwillingly; Thou
art compelled to make this departure because the Enemies of all godliness will
not suffer thee or endure thee under their power; These things observed, then
thou art not guilty of any schism or breach, but those that gave the occasion
to it; When those of the people of Israel would not join with Jeroboam in his
Idolatry, but separated themselves, and went to Jerusalem, where the pure
worship was; They did not make a schism, but Jeroboam 2 Chro. 11.13, 14, 15.
Thus it is with the reformed Churches; The Papist calls the Protestant a
thousand times over a Schismatic because he withdraws himself from Obedience
to the Pope as Head of the Church, but we say, ours was not a schism but a
secession; They were Schismatics in falling from the primitive order and
institutions in the Church, insomuch that the Pope is the grandest Schismatic
that ever was in the Church, and further we departed not from Rome because of
petty corruptions, no, she was a Babylon ere we left her, and then we left her
unwillingly: They drove us out persecuting with fire and faggot, so that we may
say as Musculus, there is a good Schism and a bad Schism, a good schism is when
we divide male unita things evilly joined, a bad when been unita things well
united.

2. If there be many corruptions in government and administrations, yet thou
art not to make sinful Breaches and Rents, for these do plus perturbare
infirmos bonos, quam corrigere animosos malos, as Austin well; Therefore two
things thou have to do; First, As thy calling and relation is, so to reprove
and oppose the corruptions that abound; Thus the Prophets of old, and Christ
with his Apostles they did with great Zeal rebuke the corruptions then
prevailing, and although carnal and Athiestical Politicians call this Schism
and Faction, yet this is to condemn the generation of all the godly Prophets in
their ages, and to justify Ahab as if not he but Elijah had indeed been the
troubler of Israel: 2. When you have thus done your Duty, and still corruptions
are suffered, leave your Complaints with God who has promised at last to take
all scandals out of the Church, and in the mean while patiently sigh and groan
under that burden, for we may have a sinful impatience in this kind, as
Elijah in part had, and those Disciples who would needs have fire immediately
consume the Samaritans, because they would not receive Christ.

Lastly, To prevent Schism in the Churches order, take heed of pride, ambition,
and seeking great things in the Church; It Is reported that most of those who
made the greatest Rents in the Church did it upon discontent, missing of that
preferment they looked for; The spirit of Diotrephes who loved preheminencies,
made great divisions; Even the Disciples began to quarrel with one another de
primatu, Who should be the chiefest? Therefore does our Savior so often press
humility, and enjoin every one to become like a little Child.

The last particular wherein divisions are amongst the godly is in their
particular civil deportments, III. Rules for Unity in respect of love to
prevent wrath and quarrellings.
and those are the quarrellings and wranglings the Apostle James speaks
against; Now to prevent these, first remove the cause, kill the Serpent in its
Egg, and that is, the lust of the soul: The Apostle asks, From whence comes
jars and fightings? Is it not from your Lusts? James 4.1. There is warring
within against your own souls first, and then one with another; Dry up this
Fountain of lust, and then the streams will quickly run no more; Now any
kind of lust unmortified is spark great enough to set the Church on fire, a
covetous lust, when men are immoderately given to the world, that causes great
discord; As the Philistims and Isaac strived about the Well, till at last Isaac
came to a place which he called Rehoboth, that is, Rome, Genesis 26.22. Thus here
on earth we fall out about earthly things, because the creature is too scant to
give content to all, but in heaven there will be room enough, So a proud
envious lust, that breaks all Union, insomuch that till there be a
mortification of coveting within there will never be Union without: We might
mention the excellency of this Union to prevent heat, but that has been done
already; Let the Sum of all be, as much as in us lies, to put this prayer of
Christ into practice; Peace is so great a matter, that it is called the peace of
God, and God is called the God of peace, and Christ is called our peace, seeing
Christ prays for it; We see it is not all the Sermons, all the irenicall books
can do any good till God give one heart, Be importunate therefore with God, and
strive with him for this unspeakable mercy.

SERMON CXVII. Of the Distinction of Persons, and Unity of Essence in the
Deity: against the Socinians.
JOHN 17.21. As thou Father art in me, and I in thee.
THe second thing considerable in this Text, is the Pattern and Example of
Unity. It Is not all kind of unity he prays for, but that which is the most
absolute and perfect, even such unity as is between the Father and Son: Not
as if this did denote equality, but similitude only. Because this pattern was
mentioned in the prayer for the Apostles unity, I shall not repeat what then
was delivered: Only this must be acknowledged, That there is a twofold
Interpretation of this being of the Father in the Son, and the Son in the
Father. The Ancients they understand this of the Divine Nature, as if the unity
here spoken were homeousial: But Calvin says, Huc eos abripuit contentio cum
Arianis, the heat of dispute with the Arians carried them off from the sense:
So that he gives a second interpretation, making the speech to be understood,
not of the son in respect of his Divine Nature, but of his Mediatorship, for by
that he is made one with God the Father, and one with us: For whereas before
Christ's Mediatorship there was a miserable confusion and dissipation of
mankind, God the Father against man, and man against God; Through Christ there
is an happy unity obtained: So that in Calvin's judgment, this unity is that of
a Mediator, whereby Christ as Head of his Church, being joined to us, does
thereby also join us to the Father. In this sense also he explaineth that known
place, John 10. I and my Father are one; Neither may we think (as some have
calumniated, that Calvin does Judaize or Arianize; for though he deny this to
be the sense of these places, yet otherwise he does firmly propugn the true
Doctrine about Christ's Divine Nature. But there is no solid ground to make
these interpretations distinct, for one does necessarily suppose the other.
Christ could not be our Mediator and Head, to make us one with the Father,
unless he were God, and so of the same nature with the Father; and therefore
the unity of their Nature must be understood, as the foundation.

So that we have in the words, The distinctions of their Persons, by their
peculiar proprieties, Observe. The Father and Son are two distinct Persons, yet
one in Nature and Essence Consider.
and the unity of their Nature; Their personal proprieties are Father and
Son. The oneness of their Nature is in those words, Thou in me, and I in
thee. From whence observe,

That the Father and Son are two distinct Persons, yet one in Nature and
Essence. I speak not of the holy Ghost, which in other places is made the third
person, but of these two only, because they alone are mentioned in the Text.

To open this, Consider some things in general, and then what is implied in
their peculiar relations, 1. God considered absolutely and relatively.


1. That God is absolutely known, as God.

2. Relatively, as in these three Persons. God absolutely considered may be
known by the book of nature, relatively only by the Scripture and revelation.
By the creatures we only can come to know that there is a God, maker of all
things, but that this God is distinguished by three personal proprieties, is
not matter of investigation, but faith only: Therefore howsoever some learned
men have endeavored to illustrate this mystery from humane Philosophers,
especially the Platonists, who speak of three principles, the Mind, the Word,
and the Spirit, yet they made these three distinct Essences, and cannot be
applied to this mystery, though, it may be, they had these confused notions
from some ancient tradition of the Hebrews. In the Old Testament this mystery
was believed and received; Therefore good and solid Arguments may be fetched
thence to prove this Doctrine, yet in the New Testament, Christ, who is the
(...), the Word, does more expressly reveal it; so that in those who do believe
the Scriptures, yet obstinately and blasphemously not only deny, but deride the
Doctrine of the Trinity, it is a very high sin and blasphemy.

2. Although the Scripture reveal unto us three Persons, 2. There is
notwithstanding but one God.
yet this is not to be understood, as if thereby were constituted many Gods.
There were Heretics called Tritheita, that made three Gods of these three
Persons. Now this is clear, that though the Scripture acknowledge three
Persons, yet it does as plainly declare, there is but one God; Therefore though
every Person be God, yet there are not three Gods: Therefore when the Father is
called the alone God, this is not to exclude the other Persons from being God,
but any other made god. The Heathenish Idols were not gods, nor will God give
this glory to any creature.

3. This Doctrine therefore of the Trinity is purely an object of faith, 3.
This Doctrine of the Trinity is an object of faith, and cannot be demonstrated
by reason.
and cannot be demonstrated by reason. The Schoolmen do well declare, That the
same things in Divinity may be demonstrated by reason, and believed by faith,
as that there is a God; this may be known both ways; so that though faith and
science cannot have the same formal motive, yet they may be conversant about
the same object, we know there is a God by demonstrations of reason, we believe
by authority and testimony from Scripture: But now this truth about the Persons
in the Divine Nature, is only to be believed: It cannot be demonstrated by
reason. Indeed when once this revelation is made, then it is not hard to find
out such reasons and consequences grounded on Scripture, that may serve to
answer all the objections of any adversaries; for nothing revealed to be
believed, is contrary to reason, though it may be above it. Therefore when
Scripture has laid the foundation, then reason may make a superstruction, yet
we must take this Caution; although reason be allowed to be a servant to faith,
we must look she grow not imperious, as Hagar to Sarah, for then we are to cast
her out of doors, then the Rule is, Mulier ista ratio, taceat in Ecclesia. This
Doctrine therefore is to be adored with humble believing, and not to be searched
into by curious or furious rashness; and certainly the devil is very ready to
tempt in this point, sometimes he prevails to seduce in this point, as
appears by the multitude of Arians of old, and Socinians of late, sometimes
he cannot seduce, yet he does shake and disturb the minds of the godly
exceedingly by suggestions; so that their temptations about dogmatical faith,
sometimes are as grievous, as about justifying faith. But now although we have
a two fold light, the light of reason, and the light of faith, and the latter
ought to correct and direct the former, yet such is our corruption, that we
make the light of reason to correct the light of faith, as if we should make
the Sun to borrow its light from the stars. But these two lights are as
superior and inferior; so that although nothing can be false by the light of
reason, which is true by the light of faith, yet the light of faith comprehends
many things, which the light of reason cannot, as nothing can be false to
sense, and true to reason, yet reason can comprehend many things which sense
cannot: Therefore when the light of the Moon which is reason is very dim and
staggering, let the light of faith like that of the Sun fully enlighten and
confirm thee.

The characteristical properties of the Persons in the Godhead.
In the next place, Let us proceed to the peculiar characteristical properties,
for though the Father and Son have the same common Nature and Essence, yet a
different subsistence: So that though they are one God, yet not one Person.
It Is a known Rule, In Christ there is aliud and aliud, another nature, and
another nature, but not alius and alius, another Person and another person; but
in the Trinity there is not aliud and aliud, but alius and alius; As for the
use of the word Trinity, Person, etc. though not Scripture words, yet the sense
being there, it is lawful for distinction and explication sake to use them,
though the word (...) signifying a Person, be a Scripture word, and there is
the conjugate (...), from whence we may make the abstract, as Paul from (...)
does (...). Concerning therefore the relation of the Father, there are these
things.

1. In that he is called the Father, and Christ the Son, it is implied, that
he is the first Person in the holy Trinity, and the Son the second, only when
he is called the first, you must not understand it in dignity and perfection,
for the Father has no absolute perfection, which the Son has not; for
seeing both have the nature of God, therefore one cannot have greater
perfection then another; The Father is not more wise, more powerful, more holy
then the Son; Nor is he the first Person in respect of duration, as if the
Father was God before the Son; for seeing he was from all eternity Father,
therefore he had also this Son from eternity, as the Sun was never without its
beams. Indeed the Orthodox do well deride, and justly, the Socinians, That
whereas they confess the Father from all eternity, and the Son, a made, or
constituted God in time, that they thereby introduce an old God, and a young
God, not indeed as these words denote infirmities, but as old is taken for
ancient, and young for that which is new. And certainly, if there was a time,
when Christ was not the Son of God, then he became to be so in time, but he is
called the first Person in order: for so the Scripture represents an order to
our conceptions in this glorious mystery, as appears by the form of Baptism,
whereby we are baptized first into the name of the Father, and then of the
Son; The Father then is the first Person, and the Son the second, not in
respect of dignity or duration, but order.

2. When God the Father is said to be the Father of Christ his Son, It is not
in a large sense, as he is called Father sometimes, but in a proper, peculiar
and incommunicable sense; for therefore he is called (...) and (...), the only
begotten Son of God, and indeed we see plainly the unity of the Father
separated from the unity of believers in this Text, That they may be one, as
thou in me, and I in thee, for God is called the Father of all men. To which
purpose the Apostle alleges that of the Poet, We are his offspring, Act.
17.27. Thus also he is called the Father of Believers in respect of Adoption,
for so our Savior, Joh. 20.17. I ascend to my Father and your Father, but he
is called the Father in respect of a true and proper generation of his Son; as
is more to be showed. The Socinians would have him called the Son of God,
partly, because of that extraordinary conception and birth, partly, because of
the constituting and sanctifying of him to the Office of a Priest, and partly,
but principally, because of his Resurrection and Exaltation to that great power
and dominion which now he has, but these things are only declarative and
consequential to that eternal generation, whereby indeed he is the Son of God
properly, and thus the Jews understood it, when they accused him for blasphemy,
because by saying, He was the Son of God, he thereby made himself God, which
our Savior does not deny or refuse; but proves it more firmly.

Lastly, In that he is called the Father, it is thereby employed, That he is the
fountain and original of divine being to the Son. Thus John 5.26. As the Father
has life in himself, so has he given the Son, to have life in himself. To
have life in himself is only proper to God: Now as the Father has it, so also
has the Son, but he has it by donation, or communication from the Father: In
this sense it is, that Christ says, He speaks nothing of himself, but as he
hears of the Father, still reducing all things unto him, not that the Divine
Nature is begotten, but the second Person, who has the Divine Nature.

The property of the Son is, to be begotten of the Father. And herein lies the
true proper difference of those two Persons, The Father is of himself not
begotten, the Son is of the Father and begotten: Now this does imply, that
Christ has not his being by creation, as Adam had, and Angels, who therefore
are called The sons of God, but truly and really by generation, for so the
Scripture appropriates this to him, That he is the only begotten Son of God;
only you are not to measure this spiritual and eternal generation with that of
the creatures, but to abstract it from all such humane imperfections; and
therefore though it be truly a generation, yet it is not of the same univocal
nature with that of creatures: So that as God is not in a predicament, neither
is there the same univocal being to God, and the creature: Thus it is also in
this generation. Let us not therefore judge of this mystery by examples and
instances from the creature; for as the nature of God is incomprehensible, so
also is this generation.

Use 1. To bewail the doctrinal errors and blasphemies whereby the devil has
seduced many in this point: Oh pray to God to preserve thee from such poison!
Many desperately preach and write, that Christ is not truly God, nor the
eternal God, and so make us guilty of horrible Idolatry, and withal overthrow
the pillars and foundations of Religion. By this we see, that blasphemy and
damnable heresies are in our nature, which we should be plunged into, if God
leave us unto our selves.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, To take heed not only of unbelief in respect of the
promises, but also the doctrinals: This gift is also of God; It Is he that
inableth and confirms the heart in this particular also; and indeed
dogmatical faith is the foundation of salvifical.

Use 3. To admire the love both of Father and Son in procuring our salvation
for us; The Fathers love is seen, to send his only begotten Son, the Son of his
love, in whom he delighted, more then in all creatures into the world, and to
die such an ignominious death for us enemies: And then the Sons love is seen in
leaving that glory and blessedness he had for a while, to be in a state of
wrath and anger for our sakes; No wonder if the hearts of men and Angels can
never be sufficiently enough taken up with these things.

Use 4. To endeavor after such an unity as the Father and Son have; It Is the
president in the Text: Does the Father and Son ever disagree? Does the Son will
one thing, and the Father another? Neither ought there to be any disagreement
amongst believers.

SERMON CXVIII. The Glorious Mystery of the Saints Union with Christ, and with
the Father by him, Opened.
JOH. 17.21. That they all may be one as thou (Father) art in me, etc.
IN these words we have the nature and quality of the godly man's Union
declared. 1. That it is an holy and godly Unity, they are one in Christ, not in
the devil or sin as wicked men are. 2. It Is not a bodily Union and visible, but
spiritual and invisible, because it is an Unity in the Father and the Son. 3.
It Is not absolutely and adequately equal to the Union between the Father and
Son, for our Savior does plainly separate and make a difference, he said not
before, As thou Father art in us and we in thee, but in me, and I in thee,
distinguishing himself thereby in a transcendent way from the creature, so
neither in this place does he say, That they may be one with us (though that
also is true in a mystical sense, Christ the Head and the Church his body,
being one in that respect) because that might imply Unity of nature and
essence, but one in us: Now for all believers to be one in the Father and the
Son, may admit of a twofold Exposition: 1. The Preposition (...) may be as much
as (...) per, for so it is often used, and then the sense would be, That they
may be one by us, that is, by thy grace, for it is not nature but grace that
makes this Unity; Thus Ephesians. 5.8. we are said to be light in the Lord, that is
by the Lord; But this seems not so genuine, therefore the 2d Interpretation
is more received, which makes the expression to be declarative of that terminus
in which all the godly are united, The Center in which all the lines meet, The
Head in which all the members, The Root in which all the branches, The Spring
in which all the streams are conjoined, and he says in us, for though we are
proximely and immediately united unto Christ our head, yet thereby we also are
united to the Father.

Observe. That all believers are united to Christ, and in him to the Father.
Obs. That all believers are united to Christ, and in him to the Father; This
Union of Believers with Christ is an unspeakable mystery; The Scripture
represents it under many similitudes, yet we cannot conceive of it according to
its dignity; But as the hypostatical Union of the two Natures in Christ into
one person does exceed our comprehension, so likewise does the mystical Union
of believers with Christ, and in him with the Father, yet because the
Foundation of all our Christian comfort is in this Union, I. Consider those
Scripture-expressions to represent this Unity.
and Unity is our whole spiritual Treasury;

Let us follow the Scripture Light in Explication of it: And

First, It is good to Consider what synonimous or equivolent expressions the
Scripture has to represent this Unity; And we read of an emphatical one, 1
Cor. 6.17. (...), He that is joined to the Lord; The metaphor is from glue,
that does so closely and inseparably join things together, He is made one
Spirit, Is not this a wonderful expression of that intimate Union the believer
has with God? He is made one Spirit with him not essentially as if he were
made infinite, omniscient, etc. but as it were morally, as they say, Amicus est
alter ego: Another word is (...) 1 John 1.2. Truly our fellowship is with the
Father and his Son Jesus Christ: Thus 2 Pet. 2.4. we are said to be (...),
partakers of the divine nature, and often we read of the (...) of the
Communion of the holy Ghost; This Communion indeed is a consequent of our
Union, our Union is the Foundation of our Communion, although the word does not
only signify Communion but Communication sometimes, howsoever this signifies
the unspeakable privilege the godly have by their Union, that now all things
do become theirs which Christ has, our mala and his bona are communia; We
cannot fall and perish unless Christ also be destroyed with us; A last word I
shall instance in is (...), Romans 6.5. and hereby is intimated our co-planting
into him, and this the similitude of the Olive Tree, and the Vine does
admirably represent, and certainly there is no kind of Union scarce but the
Scripture expresses our Unity with Christ by it, as that of the Head and the
body, of a Foundation and building, of a Vine and its branches, of a Husband
and wife, to show hereby the Excellency and fullness of it, every one of those
unions having something that another has not; As David does attribute several
Titles to God, of a Shield, Rock, Tower, etc. to show that God was all things
to him; Thus is Christ all Unions to the godly, as I may so say.

2. There must be an unition, as Cameron well observes, II. There must be an
unition before there can be an union.
before there can be an union, a Communication before a Communion; Unition is
to be conceived efficiently as the work of Gods Spirit, joining the believer to
Christ, and union is to be conceived formally, The joining it self of the
persons together; Now there is something on Gods part uniting, and something on
ours; On Gods part, that is, the spirit of God, Ephesians. 2.8. the Jew and Gentile
have through Christ access unto the Father through one spirit, So that as it is
the Spirit that sanctifies, the Spirit that works mightily in believers, the
Spirit that seals; Thus it is also the Spirit that unites to Christ, for of
our selves we are aliens from God, we all lie dissipated in ruin, but it is the
Spirit of God that quickens us, and engrafteth us into Christ; As the Spirit on
Gods part, so Faith on our part, Ephesians 3.15. Thus Christ dwells by Faith in our
hearts, and it is by Faith we are ingrafted into the Olive Tree, therefore that
is called eating of his Flesh, and drinking of his blood, whereby we are made
one with Christ our head; We then may easily conclude all men living in their
natural condition without the Spirit of God have nothing of this Unity, They
must needs wither and perish in their sins.

3. We may conceive of a natural union with Christ and a supernatural; III.
There is a natural union with Christ and a supernatural.
A natural union all men have, in that he took man's nature and not Angels upon
him, So that in this respect all men though never so wicked yet agree with him
in his humane nature, and thousands are damned, though Christ took man's nature
upon him; The other union is supernatural, for as Christ though man yet was
conceived in a supernatural way by the holy Ghost, So all those who are
mystically united to Christ are in a supernatural way changed by the holy
Ghost, and thereby joined to Christ, for it is the Spirit of Christ as well as
of God the Father that does thus unite us to him; We cannot then take any
comfort simply in this, that Christ was made man, unless we have a spiritual
Union with him, as well as a natural; Therefore the Apostle excellently to
this purpose urging Christ's Incarnation, Heb. 2.11, 14. does not press
absolutely his being made man but so as thereby to help not all men but such as
are his brethren, all men are not Christ's brethren but such as by faith are
made one with him; Both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified are
all of one, that is, of one Adam, of one root, as it is generally expounded,
but though other men be of that one root, as well as such as are sanctified,
yet the Apostle limits it to such only that are sanctified, and from thence
draws that comfortable inference, Christ is not ashamed to call them
brethren; and v. 14. because the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself took part of the same, so that it is plain by these Texts, No man
can simply take comfort in this, that Christ became a man, That he is of the
same humane nature with Christ, for it is only to the children, only to such as
are sanctified, that his Incarnation is advantageous.

IV. This union is wholly spiritual.
Hence 4. This union is wholly spiritual and invisible, Christ is the head and
we the body, Christ the husband and we the wife, but all this is after a
spiritual and mysterious manner; The ligaments are spiritual, insomuch that
this is better felt experimentally then palpably expressed; Therefore to carnal
and natural men it is wholly a paradox, They cannot imagine what it is, Even as
spiritual and immaterial objects cannot be discerned by the eye, No man has
seen God at any time, So neither can this spiritual union be naturally
perceived, if we should preach all our life time upon it, a natural man would
never understand one iota or tittle about it, Therefore when the Apostle
speaking of the union between man and wife, Ephesians. 5.32. thereby representing the
union of Christ and his Church, adds, This is a great mystery, but I speak
concerning Christ and his Church; Oh pray therefore that thou may
experimentally feel this union with Christ; That something within may close
with this, and thou may be able to say, O Lord, though I read it in no Book,
hear it in no Sermon, yet my own heart can discern it.

V. It Is also real.
5. Though this union be spiritual, yet for all that it is real, it is not
imaginary and a mere fancy, but as Christ is a real Christ, God a real God,
faith a real grace, so real is our union with these, and therefore the effects
of this union are altogether real, such as justification, and a vivifical
influence from Christ into us; He is not an head in vain, he is not a vine in
fancy and imagination, Therefore he says, I am the true Vine, Joh. 15.1. not
corporally but spiritually, yet the expression shows, that a natural vine
does not so truly nourish its branches as Christ does his people; Hence Joh. 6.
he says, My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; Not as the
Capernaits understood it, but in a spiritual reality, and certainly the
wonderful effects of Christ's union with the godly do demonstrate the reality of
it; There is love of God, an heavenly life, support in all Exercises, etc.
which are the blessed effects of this glorious union.

VI. The necessity of this union with Christ.
6. Consider the necessity of this union with Christ, without this we are in a
necessity of perishing; For without Christ there is no justification, no
Sanctification, no Salvation; The branch withers that is not in this Vine, The
stream dries up, that is not joined to this spring, That member must needs die
that is not joined to this head; Oh then that natural men would tremble at that
distance they are in from Christ! The Scripture says, such are afar off, and
indeed there is a great gulf between them and heaven, God is an Enemy to them,
and they to God, till they be made one in Christ; Alas, they can no more
approach to God in any duty, then stubble can endure before the fire; This made
Paul Gal. 2. say, he no longer lived but Christ in him; And again, Phil. 3. he
would not be found in his own Righteousness, but in Christ; And Col. 2. Ye are
complete in him: It pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell. 1
Cor. 1. God has made Christ wisdom, rigteousnesse, and redemption; So that
Christ has the pre-eminence in all things, he is Alpha and Omega, he is all in
all; Who art thou then poor, wretched, and miserble sinner that dare abide an
hour, a day in thy natural condition without Christ? Why do thou not fear the
curses of the Law, the devils of hell, and all the vengeance of God may
immediately devour thee?

7. The excellency of this union can never be enough meditated on, VII. The
excellecy of it.
for this is a Catholicon to all diseases, evidence of this will answer all
doubts: Do thou fear perishing if united to Christ? thou can not perish any
more then he: Do thou fear God may leave thee and forsake thee? This cannot
be no more then that Christ should be forsaken, for this union makes thee and
Christ one mystical person, so that by this union there is a communion of all
Christ's good things to thee, and of thy evil things to him, thy sins were laid
on him, he became sin for thee, and thy evils are felt by him; Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? says Christ from heaven, Act. 9.4. yea, the Church is
called Christ, because of this intimate union, 1 Cor. 12.1^. So that no Son, no
wife can take such comfort and confidence from a Father or husband as the
believer from Christ, he may truly say Christ is better then all husbands and
fathers, and all relations whatever

8. There is the inseparableness of this union; All natural unions will be
dissolved, VIII.
the wife will one day be parted from her husband, the child from his Father;
They are not everlasting relations, but this is eternal; Even as Christ took
his natural body never to be divided from it, so also he does his mystical; and
upon this union is the perseverance of Gods children immovably fixed: Christ's
members can never be broken from him and thrown into hell.

9. There is the efficaciousnesse of it where Christ is united to the soul, IX.
there he puts forth his vigor and power, as Christ while on earth,
wheresoever he went put forth his miraculous power, healing the blind, the
lame, and raising the dead, thus also Christ dwelling in us can be no more hid
then the Sun when it arises on the Earth.

10. It Is an immediate union, all believers are immediately united to Christ, X.
one is not more united then another; In the body every member is not proximely
joined to the head, but in Christ the meanest and weakest believer is
immediately joined to him.

11. It is an harmonious Union, Every believer receives proper supplies for
its own peculiar necessities, as Ephesians. 4.16. XI.


Lastly, This union is of so great concernment that the principal end of the
Sacrament is to represent and seal this, as if this were the great privilege
we were always to live upon.

Use, Are the godly united to Christ? then how holy and Christ-like should they
be in all their operations; Can there be a greater argument to holiness? What
says the Apostle 1 Cor. 6. Shall I take the members of Christ and make them
members of an harlot?

SERMON CXIX. Shows, What a special means Unity among Believers is, to
enlarge the Kingdom of Christ; And yet notwithstanding that Unity without true
Doctrine is no infallible Mark of the true Church: against the Papists.
JOHN 17.21. That the world may believe that thou have sent me.
WE are now arrived at the last part of this Text, as it stands divided, which
is the consequent and fruit of all Believers Unity. It will convert the world,
and bring them to the true Faith, when they see such agreement. It Is true,
Austin makes not this a consequent, but a distinct prayer, and therefore
repeateth the word (...), as if our Saviors sense was, I pray that the world
may believe in me; And upon this foundation he makes this Question, How Christ
that said before he prayed not for the world, does here pray for the world? And
answers, The world is here taken for the world not of reprobates, but
predestined ones, in which sense the world is taken (he says) in these two
places, I came not to judge, but to save the world, John 3.17. And God was in
Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. So that it is plain,
Austin thought that the world might sometimes be taken for the elect only,
howsoever some cannot endure that Exposition; but though there may be truth in
this, yet I think the Context is to the contrary; for it is plain, that the
particle (...) does denote here some event or consequent from the believers
unity.

Therefore others by faith do not understand saving, but an historical faith,
and by the world do understand reprobates, for even such by the preaching of
the Word, and other demonstrations are many times so far convinced, as to
believe the Christian Doctrine: Therefore (they say) Christ does not here pray
for the world of reprobates, only this is a consequent of believers amongst
themselves.

But I rather with Calvin, take the world here for mankind, in a negative and
indefinite sense; First, Negative, for such as do not believe yet, and then
Indefinitely of those who do believe. Some do truly and savingly believe;
others, but for a season only. The sum then of this speech amounts to this,
Christ therefore prays, that believers may be united amongst themselves,
because hereby a wide door is opened for the progress of the Gospel. Hereby
the world may be persuaded, that Christ was the true Messiah, because he had
brought such true peace amongst his Disciples. From whence observe,

That Unity amongst believers is a special means to enlarge the Kingdom of
Christ. There is no such obstruction to the Gospel, and scandal to the world,
Observe. That Unity among believers is a special means to enlarge the kingdom of
Christ.
keeping it off from faith in Christ, as to see those who profess Christ
divided, and subdivided into many Sects and opinions: Is it not imbred in all,
to think that truth cannot be contrary to it self; That Christ cannot be
divided; That the Spirit of God is the same Spirit, and therefore men do very
speciously conclude, certainly these men are not of Christ, have not his
Spirit, they are so contrary to one another. No wonder therefore if Christ thus
earnestly pray for believers unity, as being the most effectual means to
propagate and preserve the Gospel, which made the Apostle Romans 16.17. when he
had spent the Chapter chiefly in saluting of the Saints, an expression of dear
love, he does in a most fervent manner break out thus, I beseech you, Brethren,
mark them which cause divisions and offenses, and avoid them. We are in a
special manner to take heed of such turbulent and dividing persons. The Apostle
gives this general character of all such, They serve not Jesus Christ, but
their own lusts and ends.

But to open this, Consider, Consid. I. That notwithstanding the Doctrine, yet
unity simply as such is not an infallible note of the true Church.


First, That though our Savior press Unity of believers, as a sign of his
Disciples, and a means to win others to the Faith, yet Unity simply as so, is
not an inseparable note of the true Church. The Papists indeed they professedly
maintain this, That where we see a Church in it is members all united together,
and that under one visible Head and Pastor, there we are to conclude is the
true Church; and on the contrary, when we see divisions and multiplicities of
Sects and Opinions, as (they say) there are almost an hundred amongst the
Protestants, there cannot be any true Church; And indeed they have no fairer
way to entangle men, and to fill the hearts of people with prejudices against
the truth, then because of the many opinions that are amongst us. But to this
we answer these things,

First, Unity, as Unity without true Doctrine, cannot be any distinctive Note
of a true Church. A whole Church, as that of Israel, The Papist answered. Unity
without true Doctrine no note of a true Church. The Papist no such cause to
boast of Unity.
may be universally corrupted, so that neither the Worship or Truths of God
were in any visible way received, and yet in this universal corruption, they
were all as one man. Thus the Jews and Turks they have wonderful unity
amongst themselves; yet who will conclude the Truth is amongst them? Although
the Heathens had multiplicity of Gods and religious ways, yet the Jews are at
great consent in the main things amongst themselves. It is necessary therefore
that to Unity there must be joined true and sound Doctrine.

In the second place, We say, There is no such cause for Papists to boast of
Unity amongst themselves: For our Divines do abundantly show, That these
Philistims do not only fight against the Israelites, but even one with
another. Their Swords are often set one against another, witness the Jesuits
and Dominicans, and that in great controversal points; so also between Thomists
and Scotists. Now to this Bellarmine has these answers.

First, That their differences are not in substantial things, they are only in
secondary points. But

First, So we say, The Protestants truly so called (for we cannot tell how to
call the Socinians Christians) do agree in Fundamentals; so that although there
be great disputes in their circa fundamentalia, yet the foundation it self they
fall not upon.

Secondly, We say, They have dissented in Fundamentals; for is not that a
principle of Religion with them, Whether the Pope be above the Council? And
yet there have been hot differences amongst them in this point; And therefore
some have asserted, The Pope may be deposed by the Council, and deputed for an
Heretic: Now certainly with them, either the Pope, or a Council is the
general Head of the Church, and it is of the necessity of salvation to be in
obedience to such an Head, yet they cannot agree who that is.

In the next place, Bellarmine has this evasion, If (says he) our Church have
any divisions, they arise from the mere malice of the Devil, not for want of a
remedy to keep the unity, for we have a visible Judge to determine all
controversies, whereas (says he) among Protestants their differences do arise
from the very Genius of their Doctrine, because they hold no visible
efficacious remedy to such contentions.

But to this also its answered easily, That all the differences amongst the
people of God, come from the Devil without, and corruptions within. The Devil
is not wholly conquered, nor are our corruptions altogether vanquished, and
therefore it cannot be, but that breaches and wounds will sometimes be made.

Yet in the second place, We have a more sure and efficacious remedy to compose
all differences, then they have; for they indeed allege the Pope, or a
Council, as a visible Judge to end all controversies; but these being men are
subject to ignorance and passions, and so cannot perform the Office of an
infallible visible Church, because not sufficiently qualified thereunto. Again,
They have not de facto, silenced all those debates that are amongst them. Some
of the forementioned Disputes are as fervent as ever. Neither has the Pope
yet interposed to decide, Whether those Doctrines about scientia media, and
absolute predefinitions with the dependent controversies thereon, be true on
the Dominicans side, or their adversaries?

Therefore thirdly, We hold, The Scriptures to be the infallible and unerring
Rule, and therefore have a proper and sufficient means to end all
controversies. And although it be said, That many differences arise about the
sense of the Scripture, therefore that cannot be a Judge, but the Church. We
reply, That many controversies also may arise about the Church, the Authority
of it, and it is infallibility, and therefore they who acknowledge the Scripture
the only adequate Rule of faith, do thereby confess a powerful remedy to
remove all differences.

Further, That Unity is not, de facto, always a note of the Church, appears,
from the opposition of Satan against the peace and quietness of it: And
therefore as it is in matter of practice, peace and quietness is not always a
sign of a good conscience; for our Savior says, The Devil keeps all things
quiet, while he rules, Luke 11.21. Thus it is also in respect of Churches,
many times a false superstitious Church has more plenty and ease, then a true
one, because the Devil will not disturb his own; but where the Kingdom of
Christ is, there the Devil does also desire to erect his Throne. Thus when the
good seed was sown, the Devil superseminated his Tares. In a wilderness, or a
place of weeds, he would not have been so diligent: Therefore breaches and
divisions, because they are a kind or part of afflictions and troubles, may
sooner accompany the true Church, then outward unity and prosperity.

Lastly, We grant, That if the Church of God were fully perfected, both in
respect of knowledge and holiness, it would always have unity: As we see in
Heaven, where there is no difference at all, but because we know in part, we
are godly in part, therefore these breaches may be made upon us; Discord then
and division may be in an imperfect Church, but not a perfect: Therefore our
Saviors prayer will have it is accomplishment only in Heaven.

Let us now proceed to show, Why unity is such an attractive and a divine
loadstone to bring others unto the faith. Why Unity is an attractive loadstone
to bring others unto the faith.
And

Because it is ingraffed in a man, to cleave to such a way of Religion, as will
abide and continue. Have any Nations changed their god, says the Prophet
Jeremy 2.11? You see the Statesman argued on this ground, that they should not
oppose the Christians, for if that Religion were of God, it would stand, Act.
5.39. Now this is a clear axiom, confirmed also by our Savior, That no
Kingdom divided against it self can stand, Luke 11.17. By that Argument our
Savior proves, he could not cast out Devils by the help of the Devils, for
then the Devil would overthrow his own Kingdom. Divisions then and
differences must needs be a stumbling block; for who will go into that house,
which has it is chiefest parts falling from one another? Who would venture in
that ship, which is full of leaks? Do not all say, let them alone, they will
destroy one another, there needs no outward force to ruin them, they will
consume themselves at last?

Divisions must needs put a stop to the progress of truth, because God is
acknowledged by all to be a God of peace and of order. The Apostle uses this
consideration to restrain those confusions and disorderly customs the
Christians had in their public Assemblies, 1 Cor. 14. If then God be a God of
peace and order, how can any man think his truth and people are there, where
all disorder and confusion is? It Is Babel, and not Jerusalem, that in the
building thereof men were so confounded, that they understood not the language
of one another, Jam. 3.16. Where envying and strife is, there is confusion and
every evil work. Now every one is apt to argue, certainly if this were the way
of God, if these were the people of God, there would not be such confusion
amongst them; God that made this great world in such excellent order, would
much more make his Church, his choicest plant more beautiful.

Divisions do retard the Gospel, Because men who have any ways heard of the
holy Ghost, that he alone it is, who leads into all truth, will quickly
conclude, that this Spirit cannot be against it self. And this is the more
observable, because every party does pretend to the Spirit of God, which is the
cause of that command, 1 John 3.1. To try the Spirits, and not to believe every
spirit, that is, Doctrine pretended to be of the Spirit; if then all parties do
plead Gods Spirit, and it is teaching, they are the more confirmed in their
unbelief, when they see contrary spirits, of contrary doctrines, and that with
great zeal condemning each other. Thus we have showed you, what a world of
hurt, divisions amongst the godly do; insomuch that it is a wonderful work of
God, that any are brought off from their former vain conversation, when the
spirit of division has so sadly reigned amongst us. Wonder not if conversion
be so rare a thing, if so few come in cordially to own Christ, for sad offenses
are made by these differences; and such as cause them, do as much as in them
lies, that never any more one soul may be brought into Heavens way.

In the next place, Let us consider, what are those proper sins, What those
proper sins are that divisions amongst the godly are apt to breed in the world.
that divisions amongst the godly, are apt to breed in the world. And

The first is Atheism and irreligion, to be persuaded that there is no such
thing as a true Religion, but that such things are the fancies and imaginations
of men. No doubt but thousands are confirmed in their atheistical way; they
will believe there is no God at all, no Religion better then another, for they
see the world cannot agree about it.

2. It breeds stiffnesse and obstinacy in their former erroneous and
superstitious ways. No doubt this keeps multitudes hardened in their Popish
ways, and many silly people they will keep to their old way; and why? because
there are so many ways, and every one has a Religion for himself, therefore
they will stay where they are, they know not whither they may stumble at last;
They think to go out of their old ways, is to go out of their old wits
likewise at the same time.

Lastly, It Is apt to breed fickleness, inconstancy and skepticism. Are there
not many called Seekers, that think there is now no Church since the Apostles
times, and therefore are in their souls, what Cain in his body, vagabonds about
the earth? and whence is all this? The bitter root of this was diversity of
opinions, which they entertain one after another, which at last makes them
quite without any bottom at all.

Use of Instruction, to every Christian again and again, to take heed of
causing divisions in the Church of God; Be afraid by any opinion or practice to
make an unnecessary rent; for do thou not as much as lies in thee to hinder
all others from coming to the Kingdom of Heaven? Will not this be a sad
aggravation, when men damned in hell shall plead, Lord, I was coming, even I
was hopefully inclining to such things, but this man and that man by his
division stopped me, he made me a proselyte to some pernicious way, while I was
going to Christ? Had not such a man been in the way, I had never been seduced?
Certainly, if our Savior pronounce such a woe to those by whom offenses come,
how sore will it fall upon those who make these offenses in the highest nature?

Use 2. To take heed that these divisions prove not a snare to thee; bewail
dividing times, but look they do not divide thee and God, thee and truth; but
do thou,

1. Walk humbly, renouncing thy own strength, for it is God, not thy self, must
preserve thee.

2. Pray much for the Spirit of God to give thee that unction, and senses
exercised to discern between good and evil.

3. Take heed of fomenting differences, and making the wounds wider, but with
the good Samaritan bring oil, not salt to the wounds.

Lastly, Let this make thee long for Heaven, where the strifes of brethren will
then cease.

SERMON CXX. A Consideration of Faith in its General Nature as Dogmaticall or
Historical, carried out to Scripture-Truths, because of Divine Authority.
JOH. 17.21. That the world may believe thou have sent me.
WE are treating on the Consequent of Unity amongst the Godly, That the world
may believe, which belief has been already considered relatively, as a product
of Unity: We shall now take notice of it absolutely as it is in its own self;
It is believing that the Father has sent Christ into the world.

We formerly spoke of believing in its specificall nature, as it justifies by
laying hold on Christ.

We shall here speak of it in its general Nature, because this believing is
common both to the Hypocrite and the sound Christian; For of that world which
does believe, all do not believe in a saving manner, So that although none who
believe Christ sent into the world, ought to stay in that general, but
particularly to improve Christ, that he may be sent for their good, yet because
the expression is here general, I shall consider of it as a general.

For whereas in the former Verse the Object of Faith was made Christ himself,
Ens incomplexum, Here it is a Proposition, though that only is the Objectum
quo and not quod, upon which our Faith is ultimately terminated.

Obs. Observe. That the believing of Christ being sent unto the world is the
foundation of our conversion unto God.
That the Believing of Christ being sent unto the world is the foundation and
first principle of our Conversion unto God; Though men have never so much
understanding in other Religious Points, as that Scribe spoken of, Mark 12.
though not far off, yet they are not in the Kingdom of Heaven, until they
believe in Christ as sent by the Father to be our Mediator; That as the
Apostle Hebr. 11. makes it a Fundamental requisite in every one to believe
that God is, no less is required to believe that Christ is; Therefore 1 Cor.
3. Jesus Christ is called the Foundation, and by some made the adequate object
of Divinity, because every thing considered there, does either directly or
reductively lead unto Christ; So that I shall not speak of that peculiar Act
of Faith applying Christ, but that general act whereby we know and assent
firmly and immovably, That there was a Christ, God and man, who was sent by the
Father to redeem and save sinners; For though all be thought to believe this,
yet the right and powerful assenting to it is the foundation both of all
holiness and consolation, but ere we speak of the Nature of it some
distinctions are to be premised,

That Faith is sometimes taken for the Object, the Faith quae creditur, The
Doctrine believed, and sometimes for the Grace of Faith qua creditur, whereby
we do believe Colos. 2.5. To be established in the Faith, that is, in the
Doctrine; So some are said to err, to deny, or depart from the Faith, that is,
the Doctrine; But commonly it is used for the gracious actings of the Soul
toward those Objects, only it is good to observe this distinction, because some
places are brought to prove Apostasy from inherent faith, which speaks only of
the doctrine.

2. Faith is taken sometimes actively, and sometimes passively, Actively for
fidelity and veracity in promises, in which sense it is attributed to God, and
to men. Sometimes passively for the assenting unto Truths because of another
Testimony; And this again is twofold, Either Humane Faith, when we believe any
thing merely beeause of humane authority; or divine, when we believe, because
of divine authority; (and this is greatly to be observed) for when I believe a
divine Truth for humane Authority or witness, my Faith all that while is but
humane; as those that believed Christ, for the Samaritan Woman's Testimony, all
the while they had no higher a ground then that, it was but an humane Faith,
and then a Papist as a Papist, and by Popish principles can have no more then
an humane Faith, for the utmost motive in which their Faith is resolved is the
Authority of the Church, which is but humane, and so if the Church had
propounded Titus Livius, or Aesops Fables (as some grant) to be the Word of
God, people were bound to believe it, but there is no divine Faith unless
there be a divine Testimony, and this does sadly discover Millions of baptized
persons, yet to have no divine Faith, for all the ground of their Christian
Faith is Education and humane Authority, it is not because God has said it, or
he has revealed it; They cannot say with those Samaritans, Now we believe no
longer for Education sake, or the Churches sake, but because of the Authority
and Divine Light which is coruscant in the Scriptures themselves; Insomuch that
the Jesuit Valentia does confess there are such inward discoveries of purity
and Majesty in the Scripture, that they breed such an inward reverence and
persuasion that no other book can do.

3. There is a distinction of great antiquity received in the Church between
Credere Deum, to believe there is a God, Credere Deo, to believe God speaking,
and Credere in Deum to believe in God by inward Union with him, and loving of
him; Now although it be true, that the Scripture makes no such difference,
adding the Hebrew Preposition Beth, and the Greek (...), Even where there is
but a bare historical believing there is a God, yet for explication sake it
may be received, and those only said to believe in God, who are justified and
sanctified, Though the Scripture attribute it sometimes to others.

Lastly, Consider that the Soul has several tendencies and motions to diverse
Objects; Sometimes it assents to a thing by help of the sense, and that is a
knowledge by sense, Sometimes by demonstrative Reasons, it knows a thing, and
then it is called Science strictly, Sometimes by Testimony or Authority, and
then it is called Faith; Now if the authority be divine that says such a thing,
then the Soul cannot be deceived, because God cannot lie, and so there ought to
be greater certainty and firmer adhesion to those truths then any thing of
sense and Reason, yea, in some sense it has more evidence; For there is a
twofold Evidence of the thing it self, and of the credibility of it, of the
thing it self; And so indeed the matters of sense and reason are more evident
in their own Natures to us; Of the credibility of it, and so Faith has great
evidence, as the Testimonies for such Truths are evident and clear, though the
truths themselves are supernatural and highly transcending our humane capacity.

Of the nature of Faith as it is dogmaticall or historical.
And

1. It Is wrought in us by the Grace of God; It Is the power of God that works
even this common faith: No man could know and give assent to such divine
truths, unless enabled by the Spirit of God, and therefore it is said to
believers, That to them it is given to believe, Phil. 1.29. 1. It Is wrought by
the grace of God.
which takes in the whole nature of faith; So some are said to believe through
the grace of God, No man can say, Jesus is the Lord, but by the Spirit, Acts
18.27. Some have thought that we may by humane strength come to believe divine
truths, as we may by our industry attain to philosophical knowledge; but this
is to be ignorant of man's weakness and Gods power. It Is true, men may in an
humane way comprehend the sense and meaning of the Scripture, but to give a
divine assent to it, that is the gift of God, For every good and perfect gift,
whereof this faith is a principal one, comes from the Father of lights, James
1. Did not many learned Heathens Porphyrius Celsus, Julian, and others, know
what was asserted in the Scripture, yet they did not believe, but contemn it:
And certainly we are bound to acknowledge it a great mercy of God to have
dogmatical faith: For why are so many Heretics left to themselves? Some deny
the Natures one, or the other of Christ, some his Person, some his Offices, and
should not thou do thus, if left to thy self? Nay, Is not a godly man
sometimes sadly tempted about his dogmatical faith, that he doubts of a God,
or about the truths of the Scripture? Certainly, it is a special mercy thus to
be enabled to believe; and it is good to be observed, one reason why faith must
needs be of God, which is, because the nature of it lies more in the firmness
of the act, then in the certainty of the subject: It Is not so much the object
without, as something within, makes a man believe. Gods Spirit does more work
in corroborating the heart, then revealing the object; Hence though the
Doctrine be revealed to some, yet they do not believe, when at another time,
though they have but the same measure of light, and the same argument
propounded, they do believe; and why is all this? but because Gods work in the
believer is more ex part subjecti, then objecti. Therefore it is horrible
debasing of Gods grace in working faith, to make it no more then the revealing
of the object, for then man by his own power does believe; as when a man brings
a candle in the room, then a man sees by his own power, who could not before;
for God does not only propound the object, but enlightens the understanding,
and boweth the heart to believe.

2. God works faith in us, not absolutely, or by the creatures, the beholding
and seeing of them, but by the word. Thus Romans 10. Preaching, By means of the
Word.
hearing and believing are chained together; We are then in and by the Word to
expect this work of God, not to fly to the creatures, making them equal to
Gods word for begetting faith, or to enthusiasmes and private revelations, but
to the word of God, which gives light to the simple, but as the Word is an
instrument of begetting faith, so faith is afterward an instrument of
improving the Word, for the Word does not profit in the increase and benefit
thereof, unless there be Faith. 3. The heart of man is naturally not only
unfit but contrary and opposite to the way of believing heavenly truths.
Thus as the Spirit of God does at first work Faith, and yet by Faith we are
made further partakers of Gods Spirit; So the Word does at first produce Faith
in us, which when wrought, does again improve the Word for further edification
and growth in grace.

3. The heart of man is naturally not only unfit, but contrary and opposite
unto the way of believing of heavenly Truth; And by this it is plain, Faith is
the gift of God, because man has not only an unfitness, but a contrary
repugnancy to the things of God; Therefore 1 Cor. 4.14. the natural man is said
not to receive the things of God neither can be, both the act and the power is
denied to him; Therefore when Peter made that Confession of faith, Thou art the
Son of God, Christ tells him, Flesh and blood had not revealed that to him, Mat.
16.17. Therefore the Pharisees though they heard so much of Christ, and saw all
his Miracles, yet they derided and opposed Christ, They did not hear his Word
because they were not of God, as Christ told them, Job. 8.47. Know then as in
respect of gross sin thou would be like a Cain, a Judas, if God did not
keep thee, so also in respect of doctrine thou would be the vilest Atheist,
or the most blasphemous heretic that ever was, if God did not enlighten and
confirm thee.

4. This faith may be without sanctification of the inward man.
4. Though God work faith thus, yet it may be without a Sanctification of the
inward man; For seeing Faith as it is dogmatical carrying a man only to the
Contents of the Scripture as they are true, is seated in the understanding; no
wonder if thereby a man be enlightened only, but not regenerated; Hence we read
of some who did believe, Joh. 2. yet they loved the praise of men more then of
God; That light in their mind did not serve to produce supernatural life and
heat in the heart; It was not a faith that did purify the heart, which is
called the Faith of the Elect, Tit. 1.1. because only appropriated to them; The
whole Epistle of James is on purpose to show such a Faith that is not
accompanied with holy works, although therefore we say a true lively Faith can
never be separated from sanctification, yet men may be enlightened only in their
minds, and persuaded of the truth in their hearts, without any effectual
change upon them; It Is not enough to have such a faith as may make a man a true
Protestant or orthodox, so as to be neither Papist nor heretic, for all this
is but a cure of thy mind, and with illumination may consist grievous
pollutions. Yet

5. Where this faith is there will be some kind of pious disposition of heart.
5. Where there is but a bare dogmaticall Faith enabled thereunto by the Spirit
of God, there must needs be some kind of pious disposition and tractablenesse
of the heart; For seeing the nature of faith lies in assenting to a Testimony
and that of God, there cannot be but some flexiblenesse of the heart to submit
thereunto; If indeed the Christian Religion were like the Arts and Sciences,
then there was no submission of the understanding required, seeing it assents
upon reason, which is a suitable and connaturall argument to the mind, as food
is to the appetite of hunger; But because these things are received for
authority sake, and have a supereminency to our natural understanding,
Therefore it must be captivated; Thus the Apostle excellently expresses it, 2
Cor. 10.5. the word does bring into captivity every thought to the Obedience of
Christ, a man before he believes has many proud thoughts, many subtle
thoughts, many obstinate thoughts, but Faith brings these down, and submits,
because God says so; Now this cannot be done without some yielding and
flexiblenesse; Hence the Schoolmen do determine that in faith (and they
acknowledge none besides miraculous but dogmaticall) There is a pia affectio,
some pious and affectionate disposition to him, for whose authority we do
believe; So that this dogmatical faith even in unregenerated persons is not
like that of the devils, for though the Apostle James says, They believe and
tremble, Jam. 2.19. yet their Faith is not wrought by the Spirit of God,
neither is it upon divine motions, but experience, and manifest conviction;
They feel in part the torments of hell, and therefore it is experimentally
evident to them, that there is a God who is also just and terrible in his
vengeance; But the historical faith in an unsanctified man, as it is the gift
of God, so it works some inclining disposition to God, yea, in the temporary
believer, who goes beyond a mere dogmatist, it works, as appears, Mat. 3.
Some reformation, and some joy, so that the word makes some hopeful ingresse
into him, though at last it pass away as our lives even as a tale that is
told, having no settled continuance.

6. This historical faith, as it is wrought efficiently by the Spirit of God,
6. The motive of it is divine.
so the motive of it is Divine Authority and Revelation. That as by the light
of the Sun we see the Sun, so by God we come to know every thing of God. This
divine motive of faith is freely acknowledged to be in the Thessalonians by the
Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. They received the word, not as the word of man, but as
the word of God. Hence the Prophets begin with Thus says the Lord; and Paul
discovers himself to be called by God; So that every thing has but a weak,
ineffectual operation, till it has a maker, a divine stamp upon the soul: Oh
when we once believe a threatening, as it is Gods, when we once believe a
promise, as it is Gods, it must bear down all before thee! What if the world
come? What if Satan come? What if thy companions come, telling thee this and
this? Oh but says the believing soul, God that cannot lie says the contrary!
And truly herein is discovered, that in Religion we have but an humane faith,
yea not so much, for an humane faith will make great changes in our life, when
yet our divine faith does not. If a man tells thee of such danger, of such evil
in the way, does it not presently make thee turn out of that path? But now when
Gods word tells thee, there is death and damnation in such paths, that does not
at all move thee.

SERMON CXXI. Of Dogmaticall Faith, the Properties of, and Contraries to it.
JOHN 17.21. That the world may believe, thou have sent me.
WE are discovering the nature of faith in the General, as it is carried out to
Scripture-truth, because of Divine Authority. We are to add more particulars
to clear this. And

First, Though this Faith be not a peculiar saving grace, 7. Its grace, though
but common grace
yet it is a common grace of Gods Spirit. It Is a common grace of God, to be
enabled to believe: How many Pharisees and Jews saw the miracles of Christ, as
well as the Apostles, yet did not believe so much as a Simon Magus did? It Is
the grace of God that makes a man to have a sound mind in Religion, witness
the many heresies and blasphemies diverse are fallen into, yet it is a common
grace, not peculiar; common I call it, not in that sense as some plead for an
universal grace, which indeed is no grace, but because an unregenerate man may
have it, as well as a regenerate; so that no man may conclude this is enough
for his salvation, that he does believe such and such principles of Religion,
unless also he has that peculiar effectual purifying work of faith upon his
soul: As therefore those extraordinary gifts of Gods Spirit, to work miracles,
to cast out Devils, were common to such who yet were workers of iniquity; Thus
it is with this ordinary gift of Historical faith, many men may believe the
truth of those things, the goodness whereof they never felt upon their hearts:
And many may maintain the Doctrine of Regeneration orthodoxly, who never felt
the power of it experimentally upon their own souls. There is a faith that is
common to the elect, all the children of God have the like precious faith, Tit.
1.1. in regard of the essentials, yet there is a faith common to elect and
reprobate, so that no man may conclude his salvation, because he is no Jew, no
Pagan, no Papist.

8. Its the foundation of conversion.
Secondly, Although this dogmatical Faith be common to the regenerate and
unregenerate, yet it is the foundation of our conversion, and in the regenerate
when improued, does wonderfully provoke the increase of grace. And this is good
to be observed; for though we make it not saving faith, yet it is the
foundation of saving faith; He can never believe on Christ for his Mediator,
that does not believe Christ to be a Mediator; Therefore the Apostle
describing the general nature of faith, says, Heb. 11. He that comes to God
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those that serve him: No
spiritual building can be made without this foundation; as it is thus the
foundation, so if improved, it does wonderfully promote justifying faith. The
general acts of faith, if vigorously prosecuted do mightily strengthen the
peculiar and proper acts of it. The more strongly we believe Christ to be a
Mediator, the more will this help, that he be so to me; and therefore it is
observed, that our Savior put them so often upon the trial of their very
historical faith, Do thou believe that I am able? and do thou believe that
I am the Messiah? Partly, because that was the great Question then, Whether
that individual Person was the Messiah or no? and partly, because if it was
believed, that he was the Savior, then there was no such cause of doubt,
Whether he would be a Savior to them that truly sought to him? Insomuch that
it may be questioned, Whether it be a greater act to believe Christ to be a
Mediator, or to believe him a Mediator to me? Although indeed there are more
Objections against the latter, for there are not only Objections against the
truth, but against the application of it, because of the many sins and
infirmities which I perceive in my self, yet we would think the harder task
were then over, when the soul could believe such great things, and transcendent
to humane reason; for when a man believes that Christ is both God and man
united in one Person, whose office is to redeem the oppressed sinner, may not
then he conclude easily, that he will redeem him? For which is greater, to
believe such a Person God and man, or that this Person whose Office it is to
save, will save thee? Howsoever, if we do not make comparisons between these
acts of faith, yet certainly, the more strong and powerful thy acts of faith
are about the truths of Christ, the more will they conduce to apply him to
thee: Even as in man, the more vivid his senses are, which do accompany his
common nature with a beast, the more strong and quick are his rational acts
likewise: So that this Dogmatical faith is the root as it were, which if not
thriving, those peculiar acts of faith will wither.

The general properties of this faith are to be considered: And they are these,
The properties of it.


1. It lifts a man above his natural reason.
1. It lifts a man up above his natural reason; It adds many cubits to his
stature. As reason directs and corrects sense, as we see in Astronomy; so does
faith direct and correct reason; As Zacheus, because of a small stature, went
up into a tree to see Jesus; Thus the reason of a man being too low in it self,
must ascend up to the Scriptures, that it may behold divine things, so that
they wholly overthrow faith, and change the nature of it, who made it with
Abailadus of old, to be imagination, or with the Socinians strength of reason.
Certainly Julian and the Heathens of old confound Christian Religion upon this
ground, because it was faith, it was not a science, (...), it was Julians
upbraiding; now the Christians they gloried in this, and Austin to confirm the
Christian under many captious doubts, says thus, Nomini te esse fidelem, not
rationalem; To bring then divine truths to reasons comprehension, is to put the
Sun under a bushel, or to think to fit Goliahs shoe to Zacheus his foot.

2. Though this faith lifts up reason, yet it does not contradict it. When we
say, 2. It contradicts not reason.
faith comes by revelation, not by reason, flesh and blood cannot make such
things known to us, yet when once this revelation is discovered in the
Scripture, then reason does wonderfully help to propugn and maintain this
truth; revelation must lay the foundation, and then reason will build upon it;
so that enlightened reason, and instructed reason out of the Word, is of
excellent use to explicate and clear divine mysteries; Even as the Goldsmiths
hammer is useful to dilate and diffuse his golden metal in many forms; and
this use all our learned Divines make against all Heretics; They do by the
help of reason and arguments out of the Scripture, illustrate and confirm the
Doctrine to be believed.

3. 3. Its the substance of things hoped for etc.
This general nature of faith has two excellent properties put together in one
place, Heb. 11.1. It Is there called The substance of things hoped for, and
evidence of things not seen. It Is (...) and (...); We shall not dispute,
Whether this be a definition of faith, it is enough that two differential marks
are given of it; And

First, It Is the substance of things hoped for, concerning which word learned
men say diverse things, but it may comprehend these particulars; First, that
Faith is not an empty flying fancy, for so Aristotle uses (...), as opposite
to (...), some manifestation merely, as the colors of the Rainbow, or of birds
feathers, when the Sun shines. These have but an intentional being, there is
no real, solid being in them, but faith is the substance of things hoped for;
and certainly this is greatly to be endeavored after, that thy faith be a
real substantial thing, how many men's faith are but fickle fancies, and
uncertain notions, and therefore with their dogmatical faith, they are like the
Apostle James his man without faith, tossed up and down with every wave, Jam.
1. The Apostle Ephesians. 4.14. says, Be not carried about with every wind of
Doctrine, that denotes the levity and emptiness of a thing; Trees that are
well rooted are not blown up and down like feathers; What then is the cause of
instability and uncertainty of many men's Religion? It Is because they have not
faith, wheresoever that is, it is a solid, substantial bottoming of the soul.

2. The word substance does imply, that it makes the things hoped for, though
afar off, yet present to the soul, and even to subsist in the soul; for faith
is not hindered in its actings by distance of place, for that receives Christ,
enjoys Christ, though in Heaven, and he that believes has eternal life.
Hence we are said to be already translated from death to life, John 5.24.
because to faith these things are as sure, as if they were already done. Thus
Paul, you see him by faith speaking as confidently, as if he were in Heaven
already, Rom 8. Who shall separate us from the love of God, shall things
present, or things to come? Shall life or death, etc? Hence faith is called,
The beholding of things not seen* 2 Cor. 3. Faith makes God present, Heaven
present, Christ present, as really and truly, as bodily objects are present to
sense; and truly for want of this it is that we are so cold, languishing,
dejected; we do not by faith make these things present, if we did they would
more divinely affect us, and as it is the substance of things hoped for, So of
things feared likewise, Noah by faith moved with fear, prepared an Arc, Heb.
11.7. Thus faith makes hell and damnation present; it does not look upon hell
as a far off, but is affected, as if it did see and hear those doleful
howlings in hell, and so dare no more sin, then if it were in hell already: Oh
what a mighty change would faith, thus realizing things, work upon us!

3. The word comprehends Assurance, Confidence, and so indeed is hypostasis
used both in Scripture, and by humane Authors, now this confidence of faith
and assurance is seen, in the knowing and assenting acts of faith, as well as
applicatory; witness those resolute and confident deportments, which the
Martyrs had: Had not they strong assurance of the truth, who could endure such
exquisite torments against subtle opposers? And certainly the Martyrs in Queen
Mary's days are more to be admired then those in the primitive times, for they
suffered upon undoubted and clear points, which only the Heathens gainsaid:
But now these suffered by them that acknowledged a Christ, and pretended the
Glory of Christ as well as they: So that this heavenly confidence, and
satisfaction of the soul, that they care not for further disputing, and
doubting in the matters they do believe, is a great property in faith. And this
manifests there is little faith now in Religion, wherein men are apt to think
all Religions alike, and that one may do as well as another: In these days to
have such a substantiating, reallizing and confident assurance, is a great
wonder.

The next word describing the general nature of it, is (...), and that does
imply,

First, That the things believed bring an objective light with them. As the
object that is seen brings a visibility, though faith in respect of humane
reason be obscure, and supernatural Arguments be inevident, yet compared with
the light in the Word, it has much evidence: Hence the word of God is so often
compared to light, and that illumination which God works in the mind, is
partly faith, as well as any other grace. The things that are believed bring an
evidence with them to the soul; as the Sun brings a visibility with it to be
seen: Therefore this believing is said to be by the Word set home in the
demonstration of the Spirit; and hence it is a man in some sense is passive in
believing, as he is in understanding, because the object does so powerfully
work on the mind, that it cannot withstand it; Even the Arminians could not
but grant, That the work of Gods Spirit upon the understanding is irresistible,
though not upon the will, because they say, that is an active faculty.

Secondly, The Word does imply such an evidence, that does convince and bind
up the understanding, that it cannot doubt or dispute any longer. All evidence
may not presently convince; We see though erroneous persons read never so many
excellent books, yet they are not actually convinced, the evidence indeed is
able to convince, as the Sunne-beams are able objectively to make a blind man
see, there is light enough if he had eyes; but faith is here said, to be the
actual conviction of the soul, to silence it, that it has no more to say,
according to the saying of the Schools, Fides non est tantum apprehensiva, sed
quietativa; Faith is not only apprehensive, but quietative and resting of the
soul; that it is not learning and learning, or seeking, but never coming to the
truth.

4. It has universality in its assenting.
Fourthly, This Faith has unlimitednesse, and universality in it is assenting.
The whole Word of God is the adequate Object of it; and therefore whatsoever is
revealed in the Scripture, it believes, it does not pick or choose, believe
some things, and not others, as they make for, or against us, but so far as
the Word is propounded, it does receive it. Therefore such threatenings, that
condemn man, that makes him dead in sin, and guilty of hell, such threatenings
that do speak terribly to such or such a sin, he is involved in, though it be
a troublesome and unwelcome truth to flesh and blood, yet Faith makes a man to
believe it Whether Faith be discursive, or put forth by one simple act, is
disputed, howsoever it cannot be denied, but that there is an order in the
things believed, a connection and dependence between one proposition and another
though when believed, faith is carried out with one uniform act, because there
is the same divine Authority in all.

Lastly, The immediate opposites to Faith dogmaticall, in whole* or in part,
are these, either express Paganism and Heathenisme, this is Negative
unbelief; They never so much as received these truths: Or else, Gross and
stupid Ignorance, whereby, though they say, they do believe, yet indeed they
do not, no more then Pagans, or else Heretics, who though they may hold some
Fundamental Truths, yet oppose others; or Apostates, who having once
professed, do afterward make shipwreck of their Faith: Or lastly, In some
degree all doubts and waverings about the Truth, do oppose this divine Faith,
especially when set home by the Devil, who many times has as hot fiery darts
about Dogmaticall Faith, as justifying, troubling them with doubtful thoughts
about a God, and about the truth of Scriptures; Now in such temptations, it is
not good to hold a parlee, but as Joseph to his Mistress, to run away, to
have an holy pertinacy; and with Paul to Peter, Not to give way to any such
doubt, no not for a moment: If Christ's sheep will not hear a stranger, but
run from him, much more from the Devil, who is the Arch heretic, the
Tempter, as to all sin, so to all unbelief.

Use. Pray to God to increase and establish this Faith in thee, and that
especially in these days: These are times when thy justifying Faith shall be
assaulted by doubts and disconsolate fears, these are times also, when thy
Historical Faith may be puzzled and shaken, with such heresies and cunning
devices of men: But oh let thy eyes and heart be up to Heaven, for this
substance, this evidence! Thou will then have that within, which will establish
thee against all errors.

SERMON CXXII. Of the Glory which Christ communicates unto all his Disciples,
even in this Life; And of Union with him as the Ground of it.
JOH. 17.22. And the glory which thou gave me I have given them, that they
may be one even as we are one.
OUR Savior continues amplifying his Prayer for the Union of Believers; So
that in this Text we may take notice of another argument or reason why the
Father should make them one in him and one amongst themselves.

Here is a threefold Unity spoken of, 1. That essential one of the father and
the Son. 2. That mystical one of Christ as Head and Mediator, and believers.
3. That charitative one of believers amongst themselves.


The Argument urged by our Savior in the Text, is, he had given that glory to
them which the Father had given him, so that we may take the particle (...)
causally for, the glory thou gave me, I have given, viz. in purpose and
decree, to such as shall believe; All the difficulty is, what is that glory
which Christ receiving of the Father gives to believers, Some Learned men
expound it of the Glory of the Apostleship, and working of miracles, and they
make the sense to be thus, The glory thou gave me to give, I have given them;
As Cbrist is said out of the Psalmist to receive gifts for men; Now because he
received them to give, The Apostle Ephesians. 4. alleges it as giving gifts to men,
the Consequent being put for the Antecedent; But this cannot be received
because our Savior is now praying for all believers in all successive ages,
and not the Apostles only. Others by glory do understand immortality, and that
state of happiness hereafter; But to understand it aright we must know that
the word glory when attributed to God is of a very large signification, but
more particularly when God does by any works in a more remarkable manner
declare his goodness, wisdom, omnipotency, etc. then he is said to give his
glory, Ezekiel. 39.21. Eze. 26.20. In the New Testament when we read of Christ's
Glory we may Consider of

1. His essential glory which he has as God spoken of Heb. 1. where he is
called the brightness of his Fathers Glory.

2. Of his Mediatory Glory, which he had as Mediator, his humane nature being
filled with all grace, which glory though begun on earth, yet was consummated
when exalted to the right hand of God in glory.

3. There were the many effects which did concomitate this essential and
Mediatory glory, some particulars whereof the Scripture mentions, as all the
approbation the Father gave from heaven to Christ, with all his miracles,
doctrine, and other signs of his divine nature is called Christ's glory, Joh.
1.14. We beheld his glory (by way of wonder and admiration, as the word
signifies) as the glory of the only begotten Son of God; Thus when Christ
turned the water into wine, Joh. 2.11. It Is said, he manifested his glory, and
Joh. 11. the raising of Lazarus from the dead is called Gods glory, as working
of miracles, So the love that the Father bestows on Christ, is called Christ's
glory at 24 verse in this Chapter, which may be a good Exposition of this,
Therefore by these particulars we are by the glory of Christ to understand all
things that did any way make him glorious, especially considered as a Mediator
and an head of Believers; Now this glory he did not receive for himself only,
but for us also; As the Sun of heaven has its light not so much for it self as
for the world, So Christ the Sun of Righteousness has a complete fullness,
not so much for himself as for us, that we might be made partakers of it; Hence
all the work of grace in its progress to happiness is called glory, as 2 Cor.
3.18. a place brought by Calvin to illustrate my Text, to which we may add, 2
Cor. 4 6. of which places more in time; The words thus explained observe,

That the glory which Christ has, he communicates one way or other to his
people; Observe. That the glory which Christ has he communicates one way or
other to his people.
Christ thinks it not sufficient to have glory himself, but he does
communicate the blessed effects thereof, so that they are made glorious
likewise by him: The two similitudes that Christ takes to himself illustrate
this, as that of an Head, If the head be crowned with glory, that redounds to
all the body, because the head and the whole body are considered as one, and
thus Christ though he be exalted to all glory and honor, and so it is his own
personal privilege, yet all this is for our good, and that by being glorious
himself he might also make us glorious; Hence some expound this glory of Christ
concerning his Sonship, that he is the Son of God, and indeed it cannot be
denied but that this is an eminent part of this glory; Now he has not this
Sonship only, but Joh. 1. He gives us power also to become the Sons of God;
Only he is the Son of God by nature, we by grace and adoption; Another
similitude is that of an husband and wife so often mentioned in the Canticles,
and by the Apostle; Now if the husband be a glorious King or Potentate, though
he have a Wife of mean and despised birth, yet he communicates all his glory to
her, and though God say of his essential glory, He will not give it to another;
yet Christ gives of his glory in some sense to his people, though they are not
thereby made equal to him in glory.

To understand this Doctrine Consider,

First, That the glory which Christ has, as it is personally and subjectively
his, Consider*
so it is incommunicable; I. Christ's personal glory is incommunicable
It Is impossible that the glory which Christ has personally should be made
ours, for then we should be the only begotten Sons of God, then we should be
Mediators and Saviors, which would be blasphemy for us to assume, but as God
will not, nor indeed cannot communicate his glory unto a creature, so neither
can nor will Christ communicate this glory as it is personally his unto us, but
as it is with the Sun it communicates glorious light to the Stars, yet the
Stars have not the subjective light of the Sun, so Christ though he do
communicate of his glory to us, yet not as it is inherent in him, but in respect
of the fruits thereof.

2. II. What are those effects of that glory which Christ vouchsafes to his.
We are to conceive a difference of those effects of Glory which Christ
vouchsafes to his:

they should do greater then he; Now this glory was given only to some
Apostles, and other believers in the primitive times of the Church; This was
part of that glory which was common to Christ and others; Although indeed this
was also communicated to such of whom he was not an head in a spiritual and
saving manner, but only external in respect of outward administrations, yet
when this glory was communicated to work miracles there was a great difference
between Christ and Believers, for he did them in his own name and power, but
they through the Name of Christ.

There were some things which Christ did, and they are made legally ours, God
accounts us as if we had done them; Thus Christ's Sufferings to take away the
Curse of the Law, and his obedience to the Rule of the Law is made ours, he
being our Surety, and therefore by his Obedience we are said to be made
Righteous; His obeying the Law and suffering was not only for our good, as when
he wrought Miracles and preached, but it was in our stead; Not as if we
therefore were as righteous as Christ, or were Redeemers and Mediators, but we
are the Subjects receiving of it.

There are glorious privileges which Christ has, and he gives them to us
also: We are Sons as well as he, we are coheirs with him in glory, Romans 8. We
shall be glorified with him, we shall reign with him, we shall be raised up,
and sit on Thrones of glory with him, We shall judge the world with him, yea,
as he has a Rod of Iron to break the Nations with, So the Saints shall have,
Rev. 2.26, 27. Oh the enlarged affections we should have in this particular!
Why do the people of God always go bowed down, afflicted with their own
unworthiness and temptations! Oh give faith some breathing-place, go and
meditate on this, The glory that Christ has thou may claim it also; Is he
the Son of God? Is he heir? Is he exalted to glory? Know that thou art thus
also, and although Christ is in the possession of consummate glory, but thou
art wrestling and toiling in a miserable world, yet as the Apostle argues, if
we shall not rise, then Christ is not risen, 1 Cor. 15. So if we shall not be
glorified then Christ is not glorified; Hence our Savior joyneth himself with
the disciples, I go to my Father and your Father, Joh. 20.17. and so its
Christ's glory and thy glory, Christ's Heaven and thy Heaven.

There is the sanctification of our nature by grace, and as Christ was
sanctified so also does he sanctify us; Hence you heard he sanctified himself
for us; Now the humane nature of Christ received the Spirit of God without
measure, and therefore he was called the (...) the holy One, Luke 1. but was
this holiness for himself only? no, it was for his members also, Joh. 1.10. Of
his fullness we have received grace for grace; Some understand it by way of
similitude and imitation, as we say of a child, he receives of his Father
limb for limb, he answers his Father in every point, so we are to resemble
Christ, that as Christ is the Image of the Father, so we are to be the Image of
Christ, and therefore are laid to bear the Image of the heavenly, and thus we
are made one with Christ as the seal and the wax are made one, the Seal leaving
a stamp upon the wax like it self; Now whereas the glory of Miracles others
might have that were not united to Christ, this none can have but who are
members of that head, and therefore do the people of God want grace, do they
mourn under their imperfections, let them quicken up prayer upon this
consideration, The glory Christ had he will give to believers, Why had he such
fullness but for thy emptiness? Why had he such glory but to make thee
glorious? Shall our vile bodies be made glorious like his glorious body, and
shall not our vile and corrupted souls be also made glorious like his soul?
This is excellently illustrated, 2 Co. 3.18. where we are said, te be
transformed from glory to glory, that is from grace, grace is glory, so much
godliness so much glory thou have, and because it is not perfect, therefore we
proceed from glory to glory, and how is this done? by the Gospel, for we
beholding the glory of God in Christ, are thereby changed; Thus 2 Cor. 4.6. the
glory of God is said to be seen in the face of Jesus Christ, the meaning is,
that whereas God is in his own nature invisible, and we are not able to
conceive of him aright in Jesus Christ; We see the infinite wisdom and grace
of God, so that we become glorious in grace, by faith looking on God in Christ;
this makes heavenly, this changes and alters the heart; That as Moses by
communing with God did obtain external glory which was so dazeling that the
Israelites could not behold it, So the people of God by Faith beholding God in
Christ, are thereby enlivened and made more heavenly every day; Thus we see
what those effects of glory are which Christ gives of that treasury of glory to
us.

In the third general place Consider that none are made partakers of that Glory
of Christ but by Union with him, III. None are made partakers of that glory of
Christ, but by union with him.
Now this Union is twofold either merely external in the outward Ordinances, in
which sense our Savior Joh. 15. supposes a branch may be in him, and yet not
bring forth fruit; By virtue of this Union we may obtain many glorious gifts
and common graces from the Spirit, So that we may have much spiritual glory in
the eyes of others, or else there is an internal and invisible Union, and by
this only we are made partakers of Christ's glory; Therefore none may be
contented in any outside of Religion, let thy duties be never so ravishing and
affectionate, yet not these but faith in the Olive Tree is that which makes us
partakers of this fat^ess, so that the Union of Christ with the believer is the
foundation of all grace and glory, for as a branch separated from the vine, or
a member from the body does not partake of any vital act and nourishment, So
neither does that soul which is disjoined from Christ; if the beams of the
Sun had not immediate dependence and emanation from the Sun, they could not
have such luster and Glory, So neither were not believers joined to Christ, and
made one with him, they could not put forth such glorious acts of grace as they
do, for if power to work Miracles and transcend nature be called a glory, how
much more to perform the acts of grace, which do also surpass the course of
nature; It Is a glorious thing to believe, to be patient, to be heavenly-minded,
to be zealous for God: In these actions the spirit of Christ which is also the
spirit of glory does reside upon us.

4. As union with Christ makes us partakers of glory, So the foundation and
Original of this is, because Christ is one with the Father and one with us; He
is the Mediator between God and man, So that by this means he receives glory
from the Father, which otherwise would be incommunicable to sinners, and does
convey it to such as are his members, So that still our eyes are to he fastened
on Christ as a Mediator, for none can or may approach to God in his own
ablolute nature, but as those who cannot look upon the Sun behold it in a basin
of water, where the reflection is; Thus we who could not draw nigh to that
infinite wise and pure God, having a Mediator that both partaketh of Gods
Nature and man's, thereby is afforded an admirable passage of conveyance of
glory from the Father through Christ to us, as the light is conveyed from the
Sun through the glass into the house.

Use, To make us admire the dignity and excellent condition of a Christian
united to Christ, for all the glory of Christ redounds and diffuseth it self to
them; Whatsoever privilege or glory Christ has, it is proportionably
communicated to thee, therefore lift up thy head by faith, and live joyfully in
the meditation of this; Does not the woman though contemptible when married to
an honorable person forget her Fathers Cottage and rags, and says, Now she
shall have the riches, the glory, the honor, the state that her Husband has,
since thy Soul has been united to Christ, all thy old, poor, despicable things
are laid aside; Truly the ground of all a godly man's discouragements and
perplexities arises for want of faith herein.

SERMON CXXIII. Practical Conclusions from the foregoing Doctrine.
JOHN 17.22. And the Glory, which thou gave me, I have given them, etc.
HAving cleared the sense of this Text, and showed what that glory is, which
Christ gives us, Let us proceed to make some Corollaries, or practical
Conclusions from this Doctrine.

1. No man till he be united unto Christ, has any true and solid glory
And hence therefore in the first place, this Conclusion is to be asserted, That
no man till he be united unto Christ, has any true and solid glory. For if the
glory of a Christian be in Christ the fountain; as the Sunne-beams are in the
Sun, then till partakers of Christ, we do not receive any of his glory: And
this truth may quell the vain brags of the world, and the boasts of carnal men:
Some account riches their glory, their birth their glory, outward honors their
glory, but these are not worthy the name of glory: Christ came not into the
world to give men riches, honors, greatness, but a spiritual glory; The Hebrew
word for glory signifies a weight, and the Apostle alludes to this, when 2
Cor. 4.17. he calls the happiness in Heaven an eternal weight of glory: Let
therefore a man be never so much exalted in this world, yet if not given to
Christ, he does not partake of Christ's glory; This earthly glory is no more
true glory, then a glowworm is the Sun; The Scripture calls it (...), a mere
fancy that presently passes away. All humane glory is but like Jonahs gourd,
that is presently consumed, or like Herod, Act. 12.21. who being arrayed in
royal apparel, and blasphemous acclamations made to him, he was immediately
eaten up with worms: Be not then any longer like children, that account a toy,
a glorious thing, thou art no wiser, when riches, greatness, beauty, etc. are
accounted matter of glory, an obedient ear to Gods word, is more glorious then
an ear full of jewels; interest in Christ is greater glory, then all that of
the world, which our Savior was tempted with, yet is there any thing that is
more apt to ensnare our hearts, then this vainglory: Did not the Devil think
to overcome even Christ himself in this temptation, when he showed him all the
glory of the world? Begin then to despise and contemn all the earthly glory of
this world, what will this avail, when thou art vile in Gods eyes? Thou art a
loathsome abominable creature before God, though richly clothed, and faring
deliciously every day.

In what respects humane and earthly glory comes short of heavenly.
Now the grounds, why humane and earthly glory do not arise to this heavenly, is
from these particulars:

1. It Is not a lasting, during glory: The fear and certainty of losing of it,
takes off from all the luster of it; A flour is a glorious creature, yet
because quickly withered, none makes long account of it; and thus all the
glorious things of man are compared to no better. The Prophet Isaiah, Isa.
40.6. and John Baptist of all Sermons and truths were to proclaim this, All
flesh is grass, and the flower thereof fades away, etc. And this was to make
way for Christ, implying, that while men continued in their confidence about
these things, they were too high mountains, and so no prepared path to receive
Christ: As therefore our Savior argued in another case, If the grass be so
clothed with glory, that is to be cut down and withers: so if thou art thus
careful to cloth thy body with glory, that presently must become dust and
worms meat, rotting in the grave, how much rather should thou look to have
thy soul clothed with the glorious robes of Christ, that continue for ever;
call that glory, and that alone which is eternal, which will live with thee,
and not die with thee.

2. It Is no true glory, because it is not inward and substantial. It Is not this
glory of a man in his most substantial part, which is his soul. The soul of a
man in Scripture language is called a man's glory, Genesis 49.6. unto their
assembly, Let not my honor, or glory be united, that is, not my soul: If then
a man has the earthly glory of this world, this is not the honor of his soul,
this is not solid, it is not in the noblest part of him: If rich and glorious
apparel should be put upon a dead corpse, what glory were this to the corpse,
it would not bring life and comeliness to the dead body? So it is here, let a
wicked man have more earthly glory then a Solomon, yet he is but a dead corpse,
he has not that which should be the proper glory of a man, viz. the adorning
of his soul: Hence grace is called glory, as you heard: So that nothing makes a
man glorious but grace, this is the image of God in him. The Heathen could say,
That an horse is not chosen by his trappings, and other rich accoutrements, but
as he is naked in his own body; and certainly man much less is accounted
glorious by body or wealth, but by his soul.

3. It Is not the proper glory of a man as he is a Christian: And this is much
to be considered, Every creature has that which is a peculiar grace and glory
to it, in its kind: So Seneca, We praise a Vine, if it burden its branches
with fruit, if another had golden grapes, or golden leaves, the fruitful Vine
would be preferred before it. So that what is comely to one, is not to another;
now take man as he is a Christian, and so all his glory is spiritual and
invisible; if you look upon Christ, who gives him his glory, he had none
external, nay, none had less of that then he, for he knew not where to lay his
head, yet in regard of spiritual glory, he did abound in it, he had the glory
of a Messiah, though not of a temporal Monarch; and thus it is here, that is
only a Christians glory, which is excellency in Christianity. The Apostle
speaking of women, says, Whose glory, let not it be of embroidered apparel,
etc. (1 Pet. 3.3.) but an humble and meek spirit: Hence the Kings daughter, is
said, to be all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. That then which the world does
deride and contemn, that is indeed the greatest glory; and hence the glory of a
Christian is to be justified, to be sanctified, to have communion and
fellowship with the Father in Christ.

Lastly, There is no true glory without Christ, because in times of afflictions
and tribulations, he only gives occasion to glory. Romans 5. We glory in
tribulation; and Peter says, While we suffer for righteousness sake, the
Spirit of glory rests upon us, 1 Pet. 3.14. What then will thy outward glory
avail in the time of Gods wrath, when he shall set thy sins in order before
thee, he will make all thy desirable things to perish? When Belshazzar is
smitten with trembling for his sins, he finds little glory in his stately
Palace, in his golden cups he was carousing in: Oh then prize such a glory that
will bear up thy heart in the saddest extremities! Corollary II. That the
meanest Christian surpasses Solomon in all his glory.


A second Corollary is, That the meanest Christian united to Christ, though
never so contemptible, yet is surpassing Solomon in all his glory. Every
believer, if you look upon him spiritually, is more glorious then the greatest
Potentates in the world, for concerning that they made a blaze in their solemn
installings of the Pope, saying, Sic transit gloria mundi; but the glory of
heaven abides for ever. It Is true, this world does not see any glory in a
believer, no more then they did in Christ: Therefore in the Caniicles the women
asked the Spouse, What was her beloved more then other women? They saw no such
comeliness and beauty in him; and thus it is with wicked men, What glory can
we see in those that walk more strictly? What is admirable in them more then in
others? Therefore this glory Christ gives his people is invisible and
discovered only by the eye of faith: So that this should exceedingly bear up
the heart of a believer, while he lies under all the reproaches, contempts and
oppositions of the wicked world: Oh comfort thy self with this spiritual glory;
God gives thee glory, Christ gives thee glory, while the world does thus
despise thee; and do not be discontented, because God has not given thee so
much of the worlds glory, as he has (...) ven others; What then, if he
reveals and vouchsafes this spiritual glory to thee, he does more then if he
should give thee the glory of many worlds? Nay further, thou many times art
dejected in thy own eyes, and as thou have no external glory amonstg men, so
neither do thou perceive any spiritual glory in thy self: Oh thou criest out,
that thy soul pollution, thy ^oul defilements are worst of all; but remember
this glory comes from Christ without that it does not naturally grow up in thee.

Thirdly, Though Christ give part, and a beginning of this glory here, yet it
is not perfected and consummated till hereafter. Corollary III.
I have (says Christ) given them glory already, yet he prays afterward for
the consummation of this glory, and therefore that state of happiness is
properly called a state of glory, yet we have the first fruits of it here. In
part Christ does invest us with his glory, but this is nothing to what shall be
hereafter: Even in this life, the things are so great, That no eye has seen,
neither has it entered into the heart of a man to conceive: How much more then
will eternal glory surpass all our imaginations? Should not then the
consideration of this glorious portion we in part have, and expect more fully,
make us walk comfortably, be cheerful in our afflictions, pass through this
world with joy? Certainly we put not forth our fixed contemplations on this
glory, if we did, our hearts would scarce ever be taken off it: Eudoxus was so
affected with the glory of the Sun, that he thought he was born only to
behold it: How much rather should we think it our duty, all the day long to
behold this glory? As the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.17. professes, that all the
afflictions he went through, and he had many, yet they were but light, and but
for a moment, to that eternal weight of glory; and what made him think so?
While we look not at the things which are not seen. If then thy heart is at any
time dejected, disquieted, oh think of this glory provided for thee, it will
make thy soul silence it is crying and mutterings immediately, yea this will
conquer the fear of death, and make the thoughts of it lovely and welcome.

Fourthly, Does Christ give spiritual glory to his? Then let this consume all
love and desire of vainglory, IV. It consumes all love and desire of
vainglory.
and esteem of men. This love of glory has been, and is the worm that eats
up the best fruit, when lusts and sins have not been able to undo a man, glory
from the world has: Therefore our Savior makes such a temper inconsistent
with grace, How can ye believe and seek glory of one another, and seek not the
hon^ur which comes from God only, John 5.44? This vainglory Chrysostom
called, The mother of hell; and indeed, How many religious duties does it
corrupt? The Pharisees prayed and gave alms to be seen of men; yea there is no
external duty in Religion, but this may put a man upon it; But as love of
Christ will kill the love of the world, fear of God will overcome fear of man,
so a love to this spiritual glory will quickly out, vainglory. It Is good to
observe, That though all other things in this world be vain, man is vain,
beauty is vain, wealth is vain, yet custom of speech does appropriate it only
to glory, calling it vainglory: Oh then remember, there are more glorious
things to affect and enlarge thy heart with, then these applauses of the world!

Fifthly, Does Christ give his people glory? Then let them faithfully do
Christ's work, notwithstanding all the reproaches and scorns wicked men load
them with. V. Let them faithfully do Christ's work, notwithstanding all
reproaches wicked men load them with.
David rejoiced in that he was despised and contemned while he danced before
the Ark, I will be more vile still, says he, 2 Samuel 6.22. And thus the
Apostles rejoiced they were accounted worthy to suffer for Christ's sake It Is a
great glory to lose thy glory for Christ's work: Oh this is that which makes men
afraid boldly to venture in holy things, they shall be censured, they shall be
contemned: Remember that Scripture, Those that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel
2.30. It Is a miserable slavery to live dependently upon the breath of others,
who many times do as children put a Garland upon one of their fellows heads,
and then laugh at him behind his back; so though they applaud thee to thy
face, yet secretly backbite thee: Be therefore diligent to do Gods work, and
content thy self with the glory God bestows upon thee: Does a man running in
a race regard the bird singing upon the tree? Eye Christ more, and man less.
The Moon that has but a borrowed light, is sometimes full, sometimes at the
wane, never certain: Thus a man that lives upon the applause of others, and
not approving his conscience to God, he is sometimes lifted up, and then
dejected down, even as outward supplies come to him.

Sixthly, Does Christ give glory to his? Then admire the bounty and freeness
of his grace: Of all things we would think, he would not communicate of his
glory to us; and indeed God says, He will not give glory to another; VI.
Admire the bounty of his grace.
neither will Christ give his Mediatory glory to others; only in some passages
of glory, he is willing we should reign with him, and be coheirs with him.
This shows how much he loves us; For certainly no man is willing to have
another co-partner with him in his glory; yea how apt are we to envy the gifts
and graces in others, that may overshadow us, but Christ gives of his glory to
us.

Lastly, Does Christ give glory to us? Let us then glorify him again. Christ
indeed he gives glory to us really and inwardly, but we only to him verbally
and declaratively. Let not the Heavens that are natural creatures exceed us,
VII.
They declare the glory of God, and show his handiwork; and shall not thou
then in thy life, in thy conversation declare the glory of Christ? The title
given to Church Officers, 1 Cor. 8.23. is in some sense to be applied to all
believers, they are the glory of Christ.

SERMON CXXIV. That Jesus Christ though God Co-equall with the Father, had many
things given him by the Father; And how that can be?
JOH. 17.22. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them.
WE have treated of the nature of that glory which Christ gives to all
believers: The next considerable is the description of the manner and way how
Christ comes to have this glory, and that is said to be by way of gift, The
glory which thou gave me, Now this seems very hard to understand how Christ
being God could receive any thing, for as God can have nothing given him, so it
should seem Christ neither could have any thing given him, insomuch that this
place with many others of the like fence is brought by the Socinians as an
unanswerable Argument, that Christ was not truly and essentially God, for they
heap up many places of Scripture where all that Christ has is said to be given
him, and from hence conclude he cannot be God; But the weakness of this will
appear in further discovery of this Truth, which that it may be more clearly
understood, Observe,

Doct. Christ though God had many things given him of his Father.

There is a twofold giving


That Christ though God had many things given him of his Father; The Fathers
giving of many things to him does not take off from his divine Nature; This
Truth will be profitable both to inform your judgment in that main Article of
Religion, and also is of that practical consequence; Therefore to clear this,
Consider,

1. That we may conceive of a twofold giving, that which is natural and
necessary, 2. that which is free and voluntary, so that it might or might not
be given, for a natural and necessary giving, So Christ as God has his divine
Essence from the Father, for the Father communicates the Godhead to his Son
by necessary generation, So that it was not free to him whether he would have
this Son or no, as it was whether he would create the world or no; It Is true,
there are some Learned men that say, Pater libere genuit filium, because in all
that the Father does, he does it with understanding and will, which they make
to be the formal cause of liberty; But those that do so, take not liberty for
that which may be or may not be, but for that which is immutably so, only
there is understanding and will concurring to it; In this sense the expression
may be admitted, otherwise it would be blasphemy to say the Father did so
freely communicate the divine nature to the Son, that he might have chosen
whether he would have done it or no; Therefore indeed if we speak strictly it
is not a giving of the Son of his Godhead unless we take gift in a large sense
for that which is communicating, yet the Scripture calls it so, To this purpose
some bring that Joh. 5.26. As the Father has life in himself, so has he given
to the Son to have life in himself; Where to have life in himself is the
highest perfection that can be, and proper only to the supreme deity, yet this
is given to the Son to have, and to have it so as the Father has it, and
therefore he is called the Son because he has his being of the Father
eternally, and the Fathers giving of this, or the Sons receiving of it argues
no imperfection but perfection in both.

2. There may be a giving to another by way of intrinsecall perfection, or by
way of extrinsecall declaration and manifestation of this, when God gave Angels
and men holiness this was to give internal perfection to them, but now when
Angels and men declare the wisdom, power, and goodness of God praising and
magnifying him for it; This adds no inward perfection to him, only it
outwardly declares it, and thus it was with Christ as God, many things are
said to be given him, which yet he had with the Father before the world, only
it is said to be given him because it was then declared and manifested what he
had; Indeed if we speak of Christ's humane nature, so it had many things given
to it, which were an inward perfection to him in that respect, but in respect
of his divine nature, so he was not capable of any new perfection, which he had
not always:

These things premised, What things were given Christ of the Father.
Let us now consider what was given him of the Father, And

external Declaration: Thus when glory and honor is given unto him by the
Father, as in that exceeding glorious manifestation, when it was said, Thou art
my well-beloved Son, this was external glory, God gave the outward
manifestation of glory, that which did already belong to him.

Office of Mediatorship, and that was also given to him: Hence it is that it is
so often said that the Father sent him into the world, not as if the Son did
not willingly consent to this office also, only the Father he assigned and
appointed him who was also willing to this work; So that to be a Mediator, to
be sent into the world, etc. they are mixed Attributes, for they denote
perfection and some imperfection; To be sent, To feel the glory of the Father,
these denote he was man as well as God, but so to be sent as by his own power
and strength to work out our Salvation, and purchase our peace, argues the
highest pefection, which none but a God can do; So that this is necessary to be
observed when the Scripture speaks of his appointment to this official Kingdom
of a Mediator, this no ways takes off from Christ's Godhead, but necessarily
supposes it, because none but God can perform that work.

3. The Scripture speaks of persons that are given him of the Father, and this
expression is very often with the Apostle John in this Chapter, it is many times
repeated, Those that thou have given me, So Joh. 6.59. All that the Father has
given me will come unto me; Now these are said to be given by the Father to
Christ, not that Christ as God had them not before but in respect of his
Mediatory Office, So that they are given to him that he should by his death and
merits bring them to Eternal happiness, and this makes greatly for the comfort
and consolation of the godly, and this cannot argue any imperfection in Christ
that these were given to him as a Mediator, for he did not need them, he was
happy without them, So that believers are given to Christ not for his good but
for their own good, and therefore though Christ be the Head and believers
members, yet it does not follow, that because the Head cannot be without
members, but needs the members as well as they do the head, that therefore
Christ cannot be without believers; No, Christ took these to him, not out of
want but out of bounty, He took them not to be bettered by them but to better
them, not to perfect himself but them; As the Fountain is not helped by the
streams, but the streams by the Fountain; Neither do the Stars enlighten the
Sun, but the Sun the Stars, So that if we Consider in what sense believers are
given to Christ, we shall find it is no imperfection in him, but perfection to
be added to them.

spiritual gifts and graces given to him, So he is said to receive the Spirit
without measure, and hence he is called Christ because he is anointed with the
oil of all grace, and this is in respect of his humane nature: For the humane
nature of Christ being a creature, and of the same univocal species with ours,
it could not sanctify it self, it could not adorn it self with all habitual
and actual grace; Therefore in his conflicts an Angel was sent to comfort him,
We must therefore always distinguish though not divide those two Natures in
Christ; As God he could not be anointed, he could not receive the Spirit, or be
sanctified from a cause without, but take him as man, so all the good he had
was of free grace; The personal Union was of free grace, and all habitual
holiness was infused into him by grace, for none but God can be essentially
and naturally holy, and therefore Austin of old did urge this as an
unanswerable Argument, if the humane nature of Christ had not free will or
power to sanctify it self, to adorn it self with holiness, much less has any
mere man, but so it was with Christ, that as man he was wholly furnished with
graces and gifts from above; Indeed the end why he had these, as also why he
was made man, was in reference to us; It was of his fullness that we do receive,
so that he became man, and was thus furnished with all fitness to be a
Mediator, because we could not be without him: It behoved us (says the
Apostle Heb 7.26.) to have such a High Priest that was holy and unspotted,
separated from sinners, that needed not to offer for his own sins.

We read that not only habitual grace was given him in respect of his humane
nature, but also the spirit of God was bestowed on him, and though this be
thought by the Socinians a pregnant Argument because he that is God cannot have
the Spirit of God given him; Now to this we readily grant, that not only the
graces and gifts of Gods Spirit, but the Spirit it self also was bestowed on
him, So the Prophet Isa. 11.2. The spirit of the Lord is said to rest on him,
the spirit of wisdom and counsel; Thus Act. 1.2. he is said through the holy
Ghost to give Commandments unto the Apostles whom he had chosen, but yet this
does not take off from his God head, for first, the assistance and operation of
the holy Ghost was only in respect of his humane nature, for as by the holy
Ghost his humane body was prepared and fitted, So also his rational soul by
the same holy spirit was sanctified and made the holy One; It was not therefore
in respect of his divine nature but his humane, that he had the holy Ghost
working in him, and if you say* What necessity was there of the holy Ghost,
Seeing his divine nature was able to assist and sanctify his humane nature;
It Is answered, that the holy spirit being the third person cannot be separate
from the Father and the Son, though therefore Christ as the second person was
able to do all things, yet because where the Father and Son is, there also is
the holy Ghost, therefore that works also as the other, not that the other
persons need it, but because of the inseparability; Even as the Father did at
first create all things by the Son, not that he was insufficient or impotent
without him, but because of their intimate Union.

That which we do so eminently read of in the Scripture is the glory, power,
and honor that the Father gave him upon fullfilling the work of Redemption for
us, Act. 2.36. God has made Jesus both Lord and Christ, he was made Lord; Now
that dominion is not his essential dominion which he had as God, for so he
could not be made any more Lord then God, but his Mediatory Dominion, whereby
he is exalted above all, and rules all things for the good of his people, So
Phil. 2.9. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, giving him a Name above
all Names, etc. In these and many other places we read of wonderful Majesty
and glory bestowed upon him, and that upon his humiliation and voluntary
obedience in reference to us, but although the Scripture does evidently speak
of this glory and power given him, yet this does not take off from his
Godhead: For

1. It is one thing to speak of the giving of the right and property to a
thing, another thing to speak of the possession of it; It Is true indeed Christ
upon his Resurrection had the possession of all that glory and honor which the
Word mentions, but yet he had right to it far before, and therefore we
read of divine wotship given to him before his Resurrection, as also of a
Kingdom he had, and that he could work what Miracles he pleased, and so he
believing God had a right to all that glory which could any ways be superadded
to him.

2. This dominion and glory given to him is so far from evacuating his
Godhead, that it does rather necessarily presuppose it, for who can be made the
Judge of the whole world? who can be exalted to be the King of Saints and the
Nations but he who has infinite wisdom, power, and greatness?

Use 1. Does Christ receive all that he has, not for himself, but for his
members? then what great encouragements and hopes have all the people of God,
for though they have not enough, yet Christ has; Though the star has not
light enough to dispell the day yet the Sun has: Though the stream cannot
refresh, yet the Fountain has water enough; Oh therefore that believers would
more enlarge and quicken themselves up with hopes in Christ, That they would
live on his fullness, That they would depend on his fullness, God gives thee
grace and many gifts, but what he has given Christ that must be thy only
support.

Use 2. How woeful the condition of all wicked men is who are separated from
Christ, for if all fullness come by him, then none of this can be derived to
thee; The devil will give of the torments he has to thee, not Christ of his
glory.

SERMON CXXV. Unity among Christians is part of that Glory Christ has
purchased for them.
JOH. 17.22. That they may be one even as we are one.
THough this Unity of believers so earnestly prayed for, has been at large
treated of, yet because here again repeated, I shall consider it relatively, as
it stands with respect to the foregoing words, Christ gives his glory, he
received from the Father, to those that believe in him, That they may be one.
Now the particle (...) here, as in other places, may be taken either (...), as
the end of this glory, or (...) as specifying what is part of that glory, which
he gives to them, for so some understand this, as describing and determining
what that glory is, he would give them, viz. the glory of unity and agreement,
which as Chrysostom observes was more admirable then that of signs and
doctrines, which they abounded in: Their unity did more glorify them, then
their miracles. Others they understand it as the end and fruit of that glory
they received, by Glory understanding all the heavenly benefits and privileges
vouchsafed unto them. From these Interpretations conjoined, and the relative
capacity the words stand in. I observe,

Observe. Unity among believers is part of that glory which Christ as Mediator
has obtained for them.
That Unity among Believers is part of that Glory, which Christ as Mediator
has obtained for them. For Christ speaks here as Mediator, in whom, and by
whom only the spiritual unity of believers can be obtained.

In this Doctrinal Proposition three particulars are observable:

1. That Unity among believers is part of that spiritual glory Christ purchased
for them.

2. That Christ as Mediator purchased Unity as well as other privileges.

3. That Believers cannot have Unity but from Christ, till he command these dry
bones to come together, and be united, they lie scattered up and down. Let us
consider, Consid. I. Unity is the Churches glory.

Their glory actively and passively.




First, That Unity is part of the Churches glory. It Is their Glory both
actively and passively; Their glory actively, they may in an humble and holy
manner rejoice in it: Not indeed as the Papists, who confidently and falsely
triumph in their Unity, but in a godly and sober manner; for if schisms and
divisions in the Church, did so greatly divide and rend Paul's heart, no doubt
but their Unity and accord did as much rejoice him: Therefore how emphatically
does he speak, Phil. 2.1, 2. If any consolation, if any bowels, fulfill ye my
joy, that ye may be like minded, etc. It Is then the Ministers glory, and the
Churches glory to walk in lovely accord, when in the Church, as in Solomon's
Temple, the voice of the hammer is not heard; whenas God promised in respect of
temporal peace, The sword should be turned into plow-shares, so the
controversal and polemical part of Divinity shall be changed into the practical
and affectionate part.

Again, It Is the glory of the Church passively, in this sense, that for it we
are exceedingly to glorify and praise God; We should look upon the spiritual
peace of the Church, as a greater mercy then all external mercies; What an
heavy thing is it, when Jerusalem shall be made a Babel, when the Church shall
be like the chaos and confusion that was made at first, when God shall bring
such a spiritual judgment on the Church, as sometimes he did a temporal one
upon the enemies thereof, Every man's weapon against his neighbor, till they
had destroyed one another? When therefore we see God forming the hearts of
believers to uniting terms, this we ought to praise God for, as being a special
means to promote Christ's Kingdom.

Now it is the glory of believers to be at Unity,

1. Because this will exalt them in the very hearts and thoughts of their
greatest enemies. What is glory, but the clara notitia, the famous
acknowledging of the excellency of such a thing? Now nothing will sooner
divulge the fame, and like the heavens, make the noise thereof to go through
the Land, then unity and agreement: As Solomon's wisdom spread it self over the
world: Insomuch that many came from afar to see and admire it: Thus it will be
also for the Churches accord, therefore the Psalmist put an Ecce upon it,
Behold how good and comely it is for brethren to be of one accord, Psalm 133.1,
2. Thus you heard, The Heathens admired the love of primitive Christians, Ecce
quam se mu^uo diligenti, and fratres vocant, whereas now we may say, Behold how
they hate and oppose one another, calling one another by all uncharitable
names. It Is unity then, that makes the Churches fame to be over the world

2. Unity is the glory of the Church, because it arises from the beauty and
pulchritude of it. The beauty of a thing is the glory of it; now beauty does
arise from the sweet harmony and proportion of all the parts, and this is the
unity of the Church, when every member thereof is harmoniously joined unto
another; when there is no dissonancy or difference: Certainly, It Is a better
wish to see the Church in this glory, then that of Austins, to see Rome in all
her temporal glory: If any member be deformed, or unproportionable to the other
parts: How unlovely and uncomely does it make that body? So it is here, if any
make a rent, be proud, froward or opposite, the glory thereof is departed.

3. It Is part of their glory, because the happiness and blessedness of a
Church, is in their Communion-graces. A Church denotes some society and
company; Now the advantage of such improvements is by union, if one part of the
body be divided from the other, there is no suppeditation of mutual help,
therefore there are nerves and ligaments in the body, to unite each part to
other: You see in a civil society, if there be not union, the glory of it
presently dies: divisions, like moths, rise from within, and do immediately
consume; If then the happiness of believers lie in their communion-graces and
duties; What can be more glorious then unity, which is the only means to
procure subserviency to one another, as if several Cities were supplied by
pipes of water one to another, if those pipes be stopped or cut, it brings a
necessary destruction.

The second main particular is, That Christ purchased as Mediator this
privilege as well as others. He did not only die to justify them, to
sanctify them, II. Christ purchased as Mediator this privilege as well as
others.
but to unite them also: And this should teach us several things. As

1. It should not be accounted a slight and little sin to make any breaches
or divisions in Gods Church, to do any thing through strife and vainglory:
Why? because Christ died against this; he as Mediator intended not only to
save his people, but to bring them into one; Why then do thou by thy
contentions, by thy heretical opinions thus sin against Christ's death, his
intercession and his prayer are for the same effects? Now you see in this
Chapter, that his prayer for unity is ingeminated over and over again, and
therefore Christ had this even in his thoughts, in his very death; hence it was
that also at his death* he appointed the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which
though chiefly to seal Gods grace to us, yet it did also signify the love we
ought to have to one another, as the Apostle urges, 1 Cor. 10. that as the
several corns make up one bread, thus do the godly make up one mystical body:
Divisions then in the Church are against Christ's death, and against the
Sacrament of his death; Shall we therefore run into such sins, that have
such an heinous aggravation?

2. That the people of God, where they see these divisions, are to improve this
Argument for Unity: Even as when they groan under any corruption, and would
gladly have the mastery of it, they run to the blood of Christ, praying, O
Lord, Did not Christ die that these sins might die? Was not Christ crucified,
to crucify these lusts? So it ought to be in matter of unity, Oh Lord, make
all thy people of one heart, of one mind and spirit, because Christ died for
this also; let not his death be in vain: Thou would not suffer his bones to
be broken, nor his garment divided, why then shall his Church be torn and
divided? Do not think humane policies, and invented syncretisms will be able to
soder together? It must be this blood of Christ that obtains this.

3. Christ did not only meritoriously purchase this Unity by his death, but in
him exemplarily and formally we are made one: So that Christ is both the moral
cause of this unity, and the exemplar also; for he by being both God and man in
one Person, made God and man one, when there was such an infinite distance
before, there is made the most intimate union that can be, even an hypostatical
union between God and man: Now though we cannot attain to such an union, yet by
reason of this, all believers are made one with God, and amongst themselves:
Hence is that often expression of our being in him, of ingraffing in him, of
living in him, all which do denote our intimate union with him; so that as
Christ is not divided in himself: The Divine Nature does not will one thing,
and the humane Nature the contrary, but they have the same will; thus it ought
to be here, one believer should not judge one thing, and another the contrary,
one love one thing, and another the contrary, but as Christ and the Father were
one, so ought they to be.

The last particular is, That God in Christ is the only cause of unity amongst
believers. Christ as Mediator procures it, and God through his merits
vouchsafes it, and this comprehends these particulars:

1. That such is the corruption of every man regenerate and unregenerate, that
they would no more unite, then crumbs of sand, did not God bring it about. Take
men by nature, and they are wolves and devils one to another: Insomuch that the
preserving of Commonwealths and civil Societies, is made a demonstration of a
God; for if ye consider what every man is by nature, it is a wonder that the
whole world is not full of Cains, and a mere Aceldama, like those Cadmaan
brethren the Poet speaks of. God therefore who keeps the sea within its bounds
that it overfloweth not, does also restrain and chain up the corruptions of
men, that all be not in a confusion; and although in regenerate men corruption
is in a great measure subdued, yet that is not like Daniel's root of the Tree,
that had a chain upon it never to grow, for this would be sprouting out in
strifes and contentions, did not God put bounds to it, and therefore not only
Histories that are profane, but Ecclesiastical also do abundantly witness,
That divisions and differences have been the ruin of most Churches: So truly
may we apply that of Job to the Church, If he commands peace, Who can forbid
it? And if he bring war, Who can withstand it? Job 24.39. It Is in godly men's
natures to be so many Phaetons setting the Church on fire, if God by mercy did
not prevent.

2. God through Christ does only procure spiritual concord, because hereby God
is pleased with his Church, and reconciled. Now Gods anger for sin, is that
which turns Churches and States upside down; even as you see the tempestuous
winds do fill the Sea with waves and unquietness, Tranquillus Deus,
tranquillat omnia. When God was angry with Abimelech, he sent an evil spirit
between him and the men of Sichem, Judge. 9.23. and this, like a fire, consumed
them: So when Solomon had displeased God by his Idolatries, then he stirs up
his adversary, and that against him, and at last divides the Kingdom from him.
So that you see, it is Gods anger for sin that makes discord and implacable
contentions to break forth. And thus it is also in the Church, When God is
angry, then he suffers Heretics and Schismatics to arise, who divide it into
as many pieces, as the Levites wife was: And till Gods anger be pacified, there
can never be any settling or uniting, but as the two passengers in a ship at
deadly feud one with another, did earnestly look to see which would be drowned
first, and not at all endeavor to save the ship. Thus private emulations have
undone the public; so that the Heathens may rise up against the Church of
God, for the Romans before they entered into the Senate House to consult for the
public, did first go and worship in a Temple dedicated to Jovi depositorio,
because there they did deponere inimicitias; but we go to prayer, to
Sacraments, and offer our gift at the Altar, though we remember men have justly
many things against us.

Use. Is peace and unity amongst the godly their glory? Did Christ die for it?
Does God only give it? Then under all our breaches and differences, let us
apply our selves to him, who has this sovereign power over men's hearts: It Is
but his speaking, and the winds and the waves will presently cease; he can
quickly remove the bitter spirit of contradiction, and cause all to be of one
mind; and certainly our sins have highly displeased God, that yet he suffers
his Church to wallow in her blood, that yet her wounds are not healed.

SERMON CXXVI. Of Union with Christ: Showing how, or in what respects Christ is
in every Believer, and how he is not.
JOHN 17.23. I in them, and thou in me.
OUr Savior does still continue in prayer for Unity amongst believers, which
is not simply to terminate upon one another, but to ascend higher, and all to
be made one in Christ: Therefore in this verse he shows the original and
fountain of their Unity, as also the manner of it. The Original of their Unity
is from Christ being in them, and the Father in him; The Manner is spiritual;
for as Christ is in them after a spiritual manner, so is also their union with
him.

The original of their unity expressed in those words, I in them, deserve our
serious Meditations, for it is a choice practical point, and although a mystery,
and so without any relish to the carnal heart, yet full of comfort and
savouriness to the godly soul; Now Christ is said to be in his people two
ways, either Distributively, in respect of every person; in which sense the
soul of every believer is the Temple of the holy Ghost; and Paul professed,
That he no longer lived, but Christ in him, Gal. 2. Or Collectively, as they
are a society and a Church; over whom he is an Head. Christ said to be in
believers several ways,


Christ is said to be in believers several ways:

1. By communication of the same nature with us.
1. By communication of the same Nature with us; he is partaker of flesh and
blood with us: And thus Christ may be said to be in all men: Even as God in
respect of his Essence is every where, but by gracious presence only in the
godly, though the Scripture does not use such an expression.

2. Sacramentally.
2. Christ is in believers sacramentally; in which sense they are said to eat
his flesh, and drink his blood, and thereby they abide in him, and he in them.

3. By his Spirit
3. Christ is in them by his Spirit, for that is called the Spirit of Christ,
and being given by him to them, they are thereby spiritualized, and made
heavenly. The Spirit is a guiding Spirit, a sanctifying Spirit, a comforting
and sealing Spirit to them, so that Christ becomes joined to his by this Spirit.

4. By a gracious inhabitation and sanctifying presence.
Lastly, Christ is in his by a gracious inhabitation, and sanctifying presence.
So that as in respect of our natural life, God may be said to be in us, and we
in him, For in him we live, and move, and have our being, Act 17.18. So in
respect of supernatural life, Christ is in us, and we in him, and do live and
move spiritually in him. From this last explication, which is most genuine,
Observe,

Doct.
That Christ is in believers, and believers are in him. Christ is in believers.
This union of Christ with believers, as it is much spoken of in the Scripture,
so it is indeed the fountain of all the graces, and all the comforts the people
of God receive. Our Savior John. 15. does at large declare a Parable, wherein
we may see, how we are in Christ, and that i^ as branches are in the Vine, and
verse. 5, 6. he does not only speak of our being in Christ, but Christ's being
in us, Abide in me. and I in you; and again, He that abides in me, and I in
him; by which expressions it appears, that these are two distinct things, our
being in Christ, and Christ's being in us; and indeed one is the cause of the
other, the preserver and continuer of the other; for because Christ is in us,
giving daily influence and supply, therefore we are kept in him. To open this,
How Christ lives in a believer.
To open this, Consider,

That the Scripture does not only say, Christ is in a believer, but he lives
in him: As Paul, Gal. 2.20. And this denotes, That Christ's presence in us is
operative and active; for as life in a man quoad actum primum, does always
more or less sensibly put forth life, quoad actum secundum; Thus it is with
Christ, he is in the soul, not as he was once in the ship, asleep, and so
ceasing from any action, but he lives in us; for even as God in respect of the
creatures does still work by Conservation, as at first by Creation, so that if
he did but for a moment withdraw his influence, this whole fabric would fall
into nothing. Thus it is also in respect of Grace, As Christ did at first put
supernatural life into us, so did he not continually act and enliven us, we
should quickly become dead in our sins, but Christ lives in us: And if you
say, How then comes it about, that so many times Christ seems to be gone from
the soul, that he has left his habitation, that no life or workings of Christ
appear? That may be answered afterward; Only for the present know, That
Christ is the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. which arises with healing in
his wings; and he is the Tree of Life; yea he calls himself in the abstract, I
am the life, John 11.25. And therefore if thy heart be dead, dull, formal, the
defect is not from Christ living, but by sinful obstructions, by sin in
thee: Even as it is said of Christ's Country, He could do no miracles there,
because of their unbelief, Mark 6.6. But as Christ is said to live in
believers, so to abide in them, and that denotes more then living; for Christ
(were it not for the Covenant of Grace made sure in his blood) might have lived
in the godly, but his life in us might have passed away, as our life, and like
a shadow; As God for a long while was with the people of Israel, in a
Tabernacle, that moved up and down, before he was in a Temple fixed. Thus God
was graciously present in Adam, in the Apostate Angels; but this presence was
ambulatory, only now through Christ, he has fixed his abode with us; he
comes, and so dwells with us, that he will never go from us: When therefore
Christ has once begun to live in thee, he will always abide so; Christ is
always in thy soul, though thou may not perceive it; yea the Scripture does
not only say, Christ abides in us, but that he dwells in us, Ephesians. 3.17.
Now dwelling does denote that intimatenesse and familiarity, as also that care
and cost Christ is willing to bestow on our souls: No man that is able will
suffer his house he lives in to run to decay, and to fall into utter ruins,
and indeed the house cannot take care for it self, but the master does: Thus it
is here, Christ will not suffer his own dewlling place to fall into decays, he
will see it be repaired: It will be Christ's loss, as well as the believers.

Secondly, The false ways of Christ's being in his people.
Because there are erroneous and dangerous conceits about Christ's being in his
people: Let us first remove the false ways, and then assert the true. As

1. When Christ is said to be in his people, That is not to be understood, as
if there were a confusion of their beings, or as if they were made one real
and physical person with him; for thus some have dangerously affirmed, That we
are Christed with Christ, and made one real person with Christ. It is true,
Christ and his people make up one spiritual and mystical Person; They are not
to be considered as two, no more then the Head and the body, yet it is an
heinous error, as also high nonsense, to affirm such a being of Christ in us,
as that we are turned into Christ. There are among the Popish devout Writers,
those that are called M^sti^i Theologi, as if they only did enter into the
Holy of Holies, and all other Writers were but mere literarists, and these
speak much of such raptures, and elevation of the soul, that in these pangs it
does lose its own being, and is transessentiated into God: Many sublime and
unintelligible expressions they have, such as the Paracelsians amongst
Physicians: Now what these say about God, many have an imitating language of in
respect of Christ, but when Christ is said to live and dwell in us, you must
not conceive, as if we were turned into Christ, or Christ in us; we must not
fancy such an imagination as the Papists do about Transubstantiation, thinking
that the bread is turned into the very body of Christ.

That they do not sin at all; They work not, but God or Christ in them.
Calvin of old wrote against such Libertines, affirming, That by their horrid
doctrines, they made God worse then the Devil: And of late there have been
some, who have boldly vomited this poison of the red Dragon; let them commit
never such abominable and notorious crimes, they do not sin, Why? Because
Christ is in them: But though Christ live in the godly in a spiritual sense,
yet they do not lose their personal being or operations: It Is not Christ that
repents or believes in them, but they themselves, though he efficiently help
to these duties, much less is it Christ that sins or commits iniquity in
them.

When Christ is said to be in us, this is not to be understood, as if he were
bodily living in us, as if his body were received into our body; No, the body
of Christ is now exalted at the right hand of God in glory. And howsoever the
Lutherans do hotly dispute for the ubiquity of Christ's body, yet that is to
kick against the pricks. The Scripture is clear, That his body is so in Heaven,
that it is not corporeally any where else. It Is true, all believers do partake
of whole Christ, of his Person, and therefore of his body, as well as of his
Divine Nature; but the participation of his body is not after a bodily manner,
he does not live and dwell in us bodily. It Is true, in the Virgin Mari^s womb,
Christ was there once bodily, but not so in the wombs of other women; Neither
had she been happy merely through that, had not Christ even then lived
spiritually in her heart.

Neither is Christ in the godly, as if he did possess our souls and bodies in
the same sense, as we read of the Devils being in some persons; for the Devil
was so in them, that he wholly possessed their bodies, sometimes tormenting of
them, and in others strangely raising them up, to speak in strange tongues, and
to do many wonderful things above the ordinary course of man's ability: Christ
is not thus in believers, and no wonder if Christ be not, seeing that the
Learned observe, Though the Devil be suffered to possess men's bodies, yet we
never read of any good Angel that possessed the body of any man, whereas God
might have suffered the one as well as the other, if he had pleased. Let us
then take heed of affirming any indecent, or false ways of Christ's being in
us. These latter days give instance of sad delusions in this kind, men
persuading themselves of Christ's being in them after such a palpable and bodily
manner, that at last they are delivered up to think they are Jesus Christ
himself, and whereas there is but one Christ, now there are many that say
themselves to be the Christ.

Neither may we conceive of Christ being in us, as if he were a form inwardly
informing, or inclining us, as if our actions were Christ's actions. Though the
Apostle, Galat. 2. uses that expression, I no longer live, but Christ in me,
yet that is to be understood only metaphorically, you must not take it
strictly and philosophically, as if Christ were either the form assisting or
informing of believers; not assisting, as when Angels assumed bodies, and did
speak or act in them, and by them; or as some Philosophers tell us of an
intellectus agens, that is the common form to all mankind, nor as a form
informing, for that is made part of a man, but Christ is not so, and this is
the reason, why though it be Christ living and working in us, that makes to
repent, and to believe, yet we cannot say, it is Christ that repents or
believes, because these actions come from us vitally and formally, whereas
Christ is the efficient cause of them; and it is a Rule, Efficiens non potest
supplere vicem formae and materiae: So that as in respect of our natural
consideration, though by God we live and move, yet we cannot say, it is God that
speaks, it is God that walks, because these are vital, formal actions; so
neither can we say, it is Christ that believes, that repents, that lives in
us: So that the believers work is to be distinguished from Christ's work in him.

Lastly, It Is one thing for Christ to be with us, another thing in us. When
Christ promised to be with his Apostles to the end of the world, that is, in
respect of divine assistance, protection, and success, and thus he was with
Judas, while he preached the Gospel, and wrought miracles; for as God is
providentially with many men, in whom yet he is not graciously present, as in
Cyrus, Nebuchadnezzar, Jehu, and others. Thus Christ is also operatively with
many, in whom he does not graciously dwell: So that we are not to conclude
Christ is in us, because of many gifts and extraordinary abilities. It is true,
John 15. Even a branch not bringing forth fruit, is said to be in Christ, and
so may hypocrites and reprobates be said to be in him, but this is only
externally and by profession, not internally and really.

SERMON CXXVII. Shows something of the Nature, Manner, and Effects of Christ's
being in Believers.
JOH. 17.23. I in them and thou in me.
CHrist (you have heard) is in his people and they are in him; But how to
understand this precious but sublime doctrine rightly, that is the great
difficulty; We have discovered the false and gross Imaginations about it, We
now come to the positive and affirmative manifestation of it; Although it is to
be acknowledged, that as concerning God we may easilier conceive what he is
not, then what he is; So in respect of this inhabitation of Christ in
believers, we may more easily remove false and erroneous ways then assert the
true and proper manner of it; But the light of the Word and the experience of a
godly man subordinate thereunto, will greatly conduce to make some profitable
though not comprehensive discoveries of it. And

How or in what manner Christ is in his people.
Christ being in his people is after a spiritual, invisible, and mystical
manner; It is in an invisible manner, yea, in no ways corporally sensible; We
cannot with the eye see him, the ear hear him, or the hand feel him, but all is
invisible; And this is the reason, why natural men who are carried away only as
brute beasts by sensible Objects are not affected with Christ's being in his
Children, for they say as the disciple in another case, unless we may put our
fingers in Christ's wounds, and feel his bones, we will not believe he is in us,
but as God though he is omnipresent and fills all places, yet is not seen by
the bodily eye, No man has seen God at any time, Joh. 1.18. So though Christ
fill his whole Church, and the Apostle expresses it, Col. 3.11. he is all in
all, yet this is after an invisible and corporally indiscernable man's, so
that though the Apostle who lived with Christ in a bodily manner, and was
eyewitness of all that he did and suffered, could say, 1 John 1.1. That which
we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled, yet believers cannot now say so; As it is invisible so it is
spiritual, and therefore above a carnal apprehension; This is one of those
things of God a natural man cannot perceive because spiritually discerned; Go
to any natural man though never so cultivated and adorned with rationality, yet
can he no more understand or conceive of Christ's being in the soul, then a worm
can reach to the understanding and discourse of Angels with one another, and
the reason is because there is no habitude or suitable proportion between this
truth and their capacities, So that as the Eye cannot see a Spirit because of
the disso^ancy between that Object and the visive faculty, So neither can a
natural man though walking in the high stilts of all moral endowments ever
reach unto any satisfactory knowledge in this Point, for this Truth cannot be
found in Aristotle's or Plat^^s works, neither can flesh and blood reveal it,
but by the Scripture as a guide, and the spirit of God as an efficient, we come
to know what it is: Therefore it is often by Divine called mystical, Christ's
Marriage with the soul is mystical, Christ's living and dwelling in us is
mystical, it being a great mystery, and such as the doctrine of Christ is, and
therefore none but Christ's Friends have this secret revealed and made known to
them, Therefore when Christ is thus in the soul of a believer, there are clear
discoveries and manifestations of himself; Even as when the Sun arises in our
hemisphere, the resplendent beams thereof proclaim its presence; This is
excellently set down, Joh. 14.20, 21. At that day ye shall know that I am in my
Father, and you in me, and I in you, And ver. 21. I will love him and manifest
my self to him

truly, and really, and operatively in us, So that we are not to look upon this
as a fancy or delusion, as some nonentity or mere notions of melancholy men;
No, as Christ is a real Christ, so he does really live and dwell in us; if
nothing were real but what is corporeal, then our souls should be no real
substances; Then the soul of a man would be thought to be a mere fancy and
notion likewise: But as Christ is real and the soul is real so is Christ's
dwelling and living in it real, yea, it is so real that corporal things are
said to have no reality at all comparatively; Thus Christ Joh. 15.1. I am the
true Vine, and Joh. 6.55, 56. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed, He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me and I in
him; Now why does Christ say, his body is meat indeed, he does not mean
corporally but oppositely to corporal food; The very food we eat is not meat
comparatively to Christ, for our bodies feed on that, and yet perish, they have
not life always abiding in them, but who so has Christ in him, he can no more
perish then Christ himself; Christ is meat indeed, and life indeed; The godly
then find and know this life and dwelling of Christ to be a real, solid
thing, and therefore do though not corporally yet spiritually perceive it, and
know it to be more real then their bodily life and actions; It Is not less
real and true because spiritual and mystical; Therefore that which on Christ's
part makes him to be in us, viz. his spirit, that is real, and that which on
our part receives Christ, and whereby he dwells in us, viz. faith, that is,
also a lively grace; Therefore though we walk not by bodily sense but by faith,
yet the things of Faith have as real and lively subsistence in the soul as
bodily objects can affect the body.

how Christ is to be conceived in his people, and that the Scripture represents
several ways.

1. Christ is in us by way of Union, How Christ is in his people more
particularly.
so as to be made one mystical person with us: I shall not be large in
discovering this, because I have touched on it heretofore, only the first step
of Christ's being in us is by uniting of himself to us, for we are by nature
estranged from him, and lie as so many lumps of earth devoid and destitute of
all spiritual life and motion till Christ unite himself to us, so that as it
was Gods wonderful power to call those dry bones and unite them together; Thus
it is also his admirable power to unite himself to a Believer, Christ does not
stay till we first unite our selves to him, but he joyneth himself first to us,
and this is the first step of Christ's saving grace in us.

2. Christ is in us, so that thereby we are made partakers of his person, not
only the gifts of Christ and the graces of Christ, but Christ himself is in us,
as Gal. 2.20. Christ lives in me, and so Ephesians. 3.17. Christ dwells in our
hearts, so that this King of glory does not only bring his rich Ornaments and
Hangings to beautify the soul, but he himself also in his own person resides
there; Not indeed corporally as you heard, but spiritually, for though Christ
be in heaven yet that is no hindrance to Faith; It Is not distance of place that
takes away from Faith no more then of time, but as future things are present to
heaven, so are remote things locally present to it; Even as to the eye some
Objects though many miles distant are present, Faith therefore receives the
person of Christ, and it is not only the graces of Christ but Christ himself
that dwells in the soul, but yet by faith it is true many Divines affirm the
graces of Gods Spirit to be in us, but the Scripture does expressly relate even
to the person of Christ and the Spirit as well as the graces flowing from them.

Christ is in his people by way of gracious operation as a powerful efficient,
which enableth to all those holy and divine actions the godly perform, Joh. 15.
Without me you can do nothing; As the branch without the Vine cannot bring
forth any fruit; Did not Christ daily move and breathe upon the soul, it would
always work in a carnal and humane manner, Paul says, He no longer lives but
Christ in him, Gal. 2.20. For Paul of himself, and in his own corruption would
follow the boasts of the flesh, persevere the desires thereof, did not Christ
quicken and sanctify him.

Christ is in us sacramentally, that is in and by the right use of that
Ordinance, he is in a peculiar manner present to the believer; Therefore it is
called the Communion of the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10. and although Joh 6. the
eating and drinking of Christ's body and blood be not there meant of the
Sacrament but of Faith in the general. for it is made necessary to every man
that would have Eternal life, yet by that expression is seen the intimate
incorporation of the godly with Christ, and in the right use of the Sacrament
there is a more sensible visible assurance of such a presence, whether Christ's
presence Sacramentally be other then his presence by a promise is not here to
be disputed; Certainly if the presence differ not, yet the manner of confirming
and assuring of it does, otherwise Sacraments would be Seals of the promise in
vain, and the promise it self would be enough, and the enjoying of Christ in a
promise would be enough without making use of the Sacrament, and so that be
wholly needless.

The fruits and effects of Christ's being in us.
I shall not enlarge on this Point further, But come we to the fruits and
effects of Christ's being in us; This is the great necessary thing to find that
Christ is in us, for either the devil and sin live in us, we no longer live but
sin and Satan, or else Christ and his Spirit are in us, and it is good to
observe what are the Evidences and demonstrations of Christ's being in us.

In whomsoever Christ is, he is made a New Creature, old things are past away;
It Is high blasphemy to say Christ is in constant habitual wicked men, no 2 Cor.
5.17. If any be in Christ he is a new Creature; Now whosoever is in Christ,
Christ is also in him, for they are mutual and reciprocal, if therefore thou
live in ignorance and profaneness, conclude assuredly that Christ is not in
thee; It was the devil that entered into the Swine, and hurried them headlong
into the Sea; Thus still the devil does hurry many wicked men violently into
Eternal perdition, and therefore our Savior charge the Pharisees Joh. 6.
That they were of their Father the devil, because they did his works; Thus if
Christ be in thee thou will do the works of Christ, show forth the patience,
the meekness, the zeal of Christ, if Christ be in thee ^^ou wilt have a
Christ-like operation, and therefore the godly are said to put on Christ, Gal.
3.27. As a garment which covers the whole body, so that no nakedness
appears; Thus Christ only ought to be seen in us, not our own infirmities
and corruptions, nothing of our selves but Christ.

Where Christ is, there he is all in all, he is instead of all to that
believer, Gal. 3.28. There is neither Jew nor Gentile, etc. but Christ is all
in all, Two things are affirmed, He is in all; Every believer though never so
weak and infirm has Christ as well as the noblest, as the soul is in every
finger and toe as well as in the head, which should be a great consolation to a
weak believer, for though thou have not as good gifts and parts, as good grace
and holiness, yet thou have as good a Christ as the chiefest pillars in
Religion have, but then he adds, that as Christ is in all, so he is all: What
all is Christ? He is all privileges as appears by the Context, he is Jew and
Greek, he is male and female, that is Christ is instead of all privileges and
prerogatives, hence 1 Cor. 1. he is said to be made of God to us, wisdom,
righteousness and redemption, and we are said to be complete in him; So that
wheresoever Christ is there he is all to that soul, He is wisdom to it,
righteousness to it, all spiritual privileges, yea, and all temporal
comforts likewise, He is husband, wife, friend, riches, health; Thus he is all
things to the soul eminently and virtually again he is all things
meritoriously, there being no benefit a believer can stand in need of but he
has purchased it by his death, he is also all things efficiently because he
subdueth every sin, he quickens to every grace, so that a believer can never
say, I am in such a condition, in such a temptation, that Christ himself cannot
help me.

Where Christ is in a man, there also his Spirit is putting it self forth in
the several operations thereof, an illuminating spirit, a guiding leading
spirit, a sanctifying and sealing spirit, So that men do absurdly boast of
their Interest in Christ, who yet find none of these efficacious works of Gods
Spirit within them: The Apostle John speaks notably to this, 1 John 4.13.
Hereby know we that we d^ell in him and he in us, because he has given us of
his spirit; So that as the beams of the Sun discover the Sun, so do the
spiritual effects of the holy spirit manifest Christ to be in us.

Use of Examination, Try your selves in this main Point, as the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates;
If you take the word as signifying one of an unsound mind, it argues, that
man is very unsound and unskilful, who finds not Christ in him; As they
sought for a proof of Christ's being in Paul, So do thou of his being in thee;
If Christ be in thee why is there so much of the devil, of sin, and the world?
if Christ be in thee, how come his Enemies also to be in thee? But you will
say, May not Christ be in a Believer, and yet he not feel it or be sensible of
it! yea, think the clean contrary, that Christ has left him, I answer, it is
often so, and thus Christ may not manifest himself to be in us, sometimes for
trial sake, to give us experience of our own need without him, as Christ slept
in the ^^ip, and suffered the winds and storms to arise, that they might call
more earnestly upon him, sometimes we through our corruptions and sins do
provoke him to withdraw his powerful operations; We entertain his enemies, and
then he hides himself from us, especially our unbeleef hinders the lively
operations of Christ in us, for as Christ dwells in our hearts, so he works in
our hearts by faith.

SERMON CXXVIII. Of the Fathers being in Christ; Of both their being in
Believers: And how that can be, and yet they not quite freed from Sin and
Sorrow.
JOHN 17.23. I in them, and thou in me.
THe next thing considerable in this Text is the highest round in this ladder
of Unity, and that is, The Fathers being in Christ, As I am in them, so thou in
me.

The words need no further explication, then what will necessarily be discussed
in the Doctrine; only when Christ is said to be in believers, and the Father
in him, this is not to be understood exclusively, as if the Father were not
also in believers, for the Scripture expressly affirms that Joh. 14.23. yea
it is impossible to have the Son in us, and not the Father also, 2 ep. Joh. 29.
He that abides in the doctrine of Christ, has both the Father and the Son.
Yea we cannot know the Son, or believe in him, except we believe in the
Father also, Joh. 1.4, 7, 8, 9. When Philip desired Christ to show him the
Father, because Christ spoke so much of him, our Savior does first reprove
Philip, and then instruct him: Reprove verse. 9. Have I been so long time with
you, and yet thou have not known me? Observe that, Philip desired to see the
Father, and Christ rebukes him for not knowing of him; and then instructs him,
He that has seen me, has seen the Father also; and thereupon he proceeds to
exhortation, ver. 11. Believe me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in
me. So that by this discourse none can know or believe in Christ, but he must
also know and believe in the Father; and because the Disciples were not so
fully acquainted herein, they are checked by our Savior, saying, Have I been
so long time with you, and ye know not me? The longer time people have lived
under means of grace, and yet not acquainted with divine truths, it is the
greater condemnation. When we speak of the Fathers being in Christ, this is not
to be understood in a speculative and abstracted sense, but practically, and as
it relates to us, for to that purpose is it spoken by our Savior, that hereby
it might be showed, that the Father is in us also.

Doct. As Christ is in us, so the Father being in Christ, is also thereby in
us. How the Father is in Christ.
Obs. That as Christ is in us, so the Father being in Christ, is also thereby in
us.

In this Position there are two distinct things, 1. That the Father is in
Christ. 2. That by this means the Father is also, and abides in us.


For the first, The Father is in Christ, and that in several respects:

1. In respect of the Divine Nature, for so the Father is in the Son, as in the
express Image, and representation of him, thus the Son is called, the Image of
his Father, Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3. For as the son of a natural father does many
times represent him in lineaments, color and all deportments: Thus Christ also
as the Son of God does demonstrate the wisdom, power and holiness of his
Father; Therefore Joh. 10. for the Father and Son to be one, is made the same,
with the Father being in the Son, and the Son in the Father, for the Father is
so in the Son, that he has the same Nature, Essence and Attributes with him;
and thus if the Son be in us, the Father also must be, because they are one.

The Father is in the Son in respect of operation and working: For this end it
is, that in the whole course of his Mediatorship he refers all to the
Father, as he that sent him. The doctrine he preached, he says, was not his,
but his Fathers, Joh. 14.10. The Father that dwells in me, works; the Father
and I work hitherto; so that all that Christ did in preaching of the Word, in
working of miracles, all these do declare, that the Father is in him; and this
is of great consequence, for hereby we may see, the salvation of a believer
designed, both by the Father and the Son; one was not more willing then another
to procure this Redemption.

The Father is in Christ, in respect of his infinite love, as amans is in
amato, called therefore the Son of his love; Therefore this is mentioned in the
Text, as part of this unity, That the world may know, thou have loved me;
Though this love of the Father be not terminated on him only, but on all
believers in him, and therefore it is that Christ calls him, his Father and
their Father, and so some understand that transitively, In whom I am
well-pleased, viz. with the godly, being reconciled through his blood to them;
The Father then is in the Son, by way of love, and through him in all
believers, by way of the same love.

The Father is in Christ, by the communication of the fulness of the Godhead.
This the Scripture gives a notable description of, Col. 2.9. For in him
dwells all the Godhead bodily. This place is worthy of a full consideration;
for it does not speak of the Fathers being in the Son, as the second Person,
but of the Father, as God, in his humane Nature, and the end why the Apostle
brings this, is to take off all men from running either to Philosophy, humane
traditions, or Mosaical rites, because the Godhead is in Christ bodily: The
Apostles Argument is, Where there is a complete perfection and fullness, there
needs no additaments, but in Christ there is a complete fullness to all
Evangelical purposes, and necessary matter to eternal salvation; and this is
proved, because in Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, bodily; In
Christ, that is, in his humane Nature; all the Godhead, that is, all the whole
Nature and Attributes of God, wisdom, righteousness, holiness, etc. Dwells,
that is, abides, continues, Bodily, that is, personally, in opposition first
to the legal expressions of Gods presence; as when God spoke from between the
Cherubims, as also in opposition to that efficacious presence and assistance in
the Prophets, and such extraordinary holy men that he raised up; now God was in
Christ transcendently to these, for he was in the humane Nature, so as to be
made one Person with it, Filius Dei non assumpsit hominem personam, sed
assumpsit hominem in personam; and thus the Father is in Christ, otherwise then
in other creatures, and the mind of man is never able to comprehend
sufficiently this mystery.

The Father is in Christ, as a Mediator between God and man; for this is
chiefly intended, That Christ is the bond of that union with the Father and
believers, as also with believers amongst themselves: so that Christ is not
here barely considered as God, nor barely as man, but as God-man, as Mediator;
Thus the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; So that without Christ we are
all at a distance, yea enmity with God, he is a consuming fire, and we nothing
but stubble: Even as you see, the distance and contrariety of the devils to
God: Are they one in Christ? Can they call God Father? and all is, because they
have not a Mediator: Here then is the springhead of all consolation, That the
Father is in Christ, as a Mediator reconciling God and man together; and
certainly, if the believer did more improve this truth, that he is made one
with the Father and the Son, it would raise up his soul, he would condemn
himself, for all those low, narrow and dejected thoughts, he is assaulted with,
for how can sin hurt him that is one with Christ? How can the devil destroy him
that is one with God? Certainly these must destroy Christ and God also. Indeed
the devil overcame Adam and the Angels, but they were not one with Christ, they
were not united to him in an inviolable Covenant, and therefore they quickly
spent all, and became bankrupts. This instance indeed shows what we are in
our selves, and that it is Christ only who bears us up, but withal, it
commands the soul to glory in Christ, to rejoice in Christ, to triumph in
Christ, for in him only we have pardon and boldness at the throne of grace.

Quest. How the Father and Son can be in believers, and yet they have such
great remainders of sin in them?
These glorious things being clear Scripture-truths, all the doubt is, How shall
a Christian persuade himself that the Son and the Father abide in him, when he
is sensible of such corruption and sin also in him? For who would not think,
that when these high things are spoken, that Christ lives and dwells in a
man, that the Father and Son do make their abode in him, but that such a soul
must be perfected, and made pure without sin? Who would not think, that only a
complete and perfect man can say with Paul, I no longer, but Christ in me? Oh,
says the godly Soul, I may and must say the contrary, not Christ, but sin, but
the world lives in me! And as it is thus for grace, so also for consolation,
If Christ be in a man, and he dwells there, How can there be such black
unbelieving thoughts? Where the Father and the Son is, there must be a heaven,
not a hell: Can the Sun arise in its full glory and power, yet at the same time
there be a black night? So how can Christ and the Father be in a believer, and
yet they so subject to temptations and doubts, whether he be in them or no?

Answ.
Now for the first, How the Father and Son can be in a believer, and yet there
be such remainders of vigorous corruption in him? To this it is answered,

1. That if it be duly considered, how the Father and Christ is in us, it must
presently be conceived, that there is a presence of sin necessarily supposed in
such. For as you heard, God in us, and we in him, by Christ our Mediator; Now
if we had perfection and freedom from sin, we needed not a Mediator: So that as
Sacraments suppose imperfection in the Communicant, thus does also Christ in
the person he is in; for if sin were not there, How could he be in thee, as
reconciling thee to God, as further sanctifying thee, as healing thy
corruptions? Therefore though in heaven, as some say, the mystical union of
Christ as Head, and the Church as his body shall never cease, yet the manner of
his presence will cease, he will not then be in us by faith, nor shall we
appear in him before God, as mediating for us, and covering our imperfections,
for then shall all be done away; if then you observe, how Christ is in his
people (to what end? you will conclude) if I were such as I desire and groan to
be, then I did not need Christ to be after that manner present in me at all.

2. Though God and Christ be in us, yet they are in us, as free agents,
communicating efficacy and power according to that measure and degree they
please. If Christ were in us as a natural agent, as the fire burns, or the
Sun shines, then he being also omnipotent, would produce the greatest effects
of grace possible in every believer, because he is free and works according
to his own council, therefore he distributeth grace, as he pleases, to some
more, to some less, to none according to what shall be hereafter; Therefore
though he might sanctify thee perfectly, yet he will not.

3. Christ is not only in us thus freely working in us, but he has also
bounded and ordered the way of dispensations of his grace, so that he does not
put forth power in us after we are regenerated, as if we were so many bruit
creatures, but he requires our cooperation and stirring up of our selves.
Though in the initials of grace we are passive, yet not in the progress; and
though it be Christ that does daily quicken and preserve us, yet we so
distemper our selves, that some obstructions may be put to his operative
presence. As

1. Unbelief, Christ works in us, yet so as by faith, insomuch that we are
not only justified by faith, but we are in the progress of holiness,
sanctified by faith. Hence Ephesians. 3.17. Christ is said, To dwell in our hearts
by faith: It Is by faith we receive of the fullness and fatness of Christ,
insomuch that where faith is not, there Christ does not put forth his power; So
that as our Savior said to Mary, If thou do believe, thou shall see the
glory of God, Joh. 10. so if thou actest faith, and do put that on working,
then thou will both see and feel the glorious presence of Christ; Therefore
there is no blame in Christ, his arm is not shortened; This fountain would send
forth such living streams it uses to do, only thou dammest it up, that it
cannot run.

2. Dullness and slothfulness, this does much withstand Christ's operations. The
Church in the Canticles, when she was lazy and pretended excuses, not letting
in Christ, when he desired to come in, made her at loss, and be without his
presence to her dear loss; when Christ therefore has quickened thee by
preventing grace, he has many times knocked at the door, and there has been
no entrance, this has greatly hindered the course and flourishing of grace.

3. When thou give way to any gross sin, this makes Christ withdraw, so that
little appears of him; This is like winter to the trees, that makes all the
sap withdraw to the root, so that outwardly it appears a dead tree; Therefore
cast away that abominable thing, and then Christ will come and work as formerly
in thee.

4. Christ may live and work in thee, yet thou not be sensible and apprehensive
of it. It Is Christ, but thou mistakest him for something else; as to the
Disciples, when Christ approached on the waters to them, he appeared to be a
Spirit, at which they trembled, not thinking him to be Christ, and as Mary
Magdalen thought it had been the Gardner, when it was her Lord. Thus the godly
soul, though Christ at that very time does evidently work in it, yet through
black distempers does not indeed judge Christ to be there.

Lastly, Christ sometimes purposely withdraws his operative presence to try us,
that we might see our own infirmities, that we might the more earnestly prize
his power and grace: Even as in the ship, Christ did on purpose sleep, that the
Disciples being in extremity might the more earnestly awaken him; Thus Dormit
in te Christus, and as Joseph to his brethren discovers not who he is, that so
he may be the more welcome afterward.

And as for the second Question, How can Christ be in thee, and yet thou have
no comfort and assurance? You may see the possibility of that in Christ
himself, who though so dearly beloved of the Father, and the Father was in him,
yet for the present those heavenly consolations were suspended.

Use of Instruction, to demonstrate the happy condition of such as do believe,
They have God and Christ within them; Though contemptible vessels, yet they
have a glorious treasure within; Though the Cabinet have no excellency, yet the
Jewel has. Take heed then of grieving such a noble guest within thee; when a
noble person enters into thy house, how does it trouble thee, that any
offensive object should come before him? Be thou as much careful, left any
vain thought, any evil action should molest him.

SERMON CXXIX. Of the Unity of Believers; Of the Cause and Nature of it; And
what makes to the perfect Consummation of it.
JOHN 17.23. That they may be made perfect in one.
THose words contain the effect and fruit of that former Unity specified viz.
Christ in us, and the Father in him; for our Savior here speaks of a
threefold Unity,

1. Of the Father with Christ, as Mediator.

2. Of Christ, as Mediator and Head with his Church.

3. Of believers amongst themselves, and the Unity of Christ with believers, as
their Head, is the cause of the Members union and communion one with another.

Now this is the last time our Savior repeateth this particular of unity; for
our Savior does in this prayer for believers four times repeat it, which
demonstrateth his exceeding ardent affections for it, only every expression
seems to rise higher then the former.

The first is, That they may be one.

2. That they may be one in us.

3. That they may be one, even as we are one.

4. That they may be made perfect in one, and this is here mentioned.

Now what it is to be made perfect in one will appear afterward; only the
word (...) and (...), is used sometimes of performing and consummating a thing
with perfection, sometimes it is used of sanctification and consecration, Heb.
2.10. Heb. 5.9. Heb. 7.28. Now although it be true, that all believers are
consecrated and set apart as holy from the world to God, yet that which is here
primarily intended, is the perfection and consummation of them in unity, Doct.
The Father and Christ's being in believers is the cause of that perfect and
consumma^e unity which they ought to have of themselves.

What is implied in their being made perfect in one.


which though it will not be complete till in heaven, yet it is inchoate, and
begun in this life.

Obs. That the Father and Christ's being in believers, is the cause of that
perfect and consummate unity, which they ought to have of themselves. There
could be no union in the body, if the Head did not unite it. All believers
union does first flow from Christ as their Head and Mediator: Insomuch that
whatsoever unity they may have, which does not first arise from this spring, is
humane and carnal.

To open this, let us consider, What is implied in their being made perfect in
one. And

First, Here is implied sincerity and uprightness; That their unity be from a
pure heart and unfeigned faith. This is often the use of the word perfect, as
opposed to that which is false and counterfeit; many are said to walk with a
perfect heart, because they did not walk with an heart, and an heart by
dissimulation; so that it is a perfection of essence and parts, not of degrees;
and this indeed is greatly to be urged, that as all the other things in the
godly be sincere, so their unity, that they be joined together from spiritual
principles, and by spiritual means: It was the Heathens Position, That amicitia
could only be inter bonos, that whatsoever friendship was from bono utili, or
jacundo, and not honesto, it did not deserve the name of friendship: Now how
much more is this true in that unity amongst the godly, which has for it is
cause and original, Christ himself, and for it is pattern, such an unity, that
the Father and Son have? To be perfect then in unity, is to have sincere
hearts one toward another, as the Apostle Romans 12. Let love be without
dissimulation; Let there be no water to debase this wine, let not this fair
fruit be rotten at the core.

Secondly, To be perfect in Unity, does imply, not only sincerity, but
integrity of all those substantials and essentials, wherein this oneness does
consist. You have heard, that the Unity of believers does empty it self into
two great streams, one of Faith, in respect of Doctrine; The other of Charity,
in respect of life and affections: Therefore if any of these be wanting, the
Unity is dissolved; if love be pretended, but yet there is no divine truth,
this is conspiracy, not unity; and if faith be pretended, but not love, as yet
we have no sign of the true Disciples of Christ; Let then the Church of God,
look it has these two pillars, like Jachin and Boaz to bear it up. All Unity
without Truth is like a stately building upon sand, and Truth without love is
like a foundation without superstruction; pray that the Spirit of God would
lead into all truth, for the former; and would also work those sanctifying
fruits of it, love, peace, meekness, etc for the latter.

Thirdly, The word perfect in one, does imply, an increase and daily progress
in the way of Unity. For though the Church of Christ be his Body, yet it is a
growing body, it is not come to it is full stature, no not in this life; There
are further degrees to be attained, Ephesians. 4.13. We are to grow to a perfect
man in Christ Jesus; and thus we read of many called perfect, as 1 Cor. 2.6.
Heb. 5.14. not in an absolute sense, but comparatively, because they are
carried on to further degrees of grace then others: We are not then to think,
that any Church will have such perfect Unity in this life, but that it may be
more perfected; In the best constituted Churches there are several
imperfections, there is much weakness, many carnal affections, which are apt to
discompose the beautiful frame of the Church.

Fourthly, It does imply, That they are perfected in those means, which are
appointed by God for this Unity. For seeing the means are wholly for the end,
the end can never be better enjoined then formerly, if the means be not better
improved; so that if the Church of God be perfected more in one, it must more
faithfully improve the means of unity, and they are especially two,

1. The preaching of the Word of God; For as by that at first the Church is
called out of the world, so by that also it is kept up in it is purity, and
unity. The Word of God preached is the only means appointed to remove
ignorance and mortify corruptions, which are the rares that hinder the good
seed: As the envious man sows these, so the Spirit of Christ by the Word
works the clean contrary. Hence Ephesians. 4. the Ministry is appointed as a
means to bring us to this perfect stature: far be it therefore from them to
make divisions and rents in the Church of God, whose great office and
employment is to proclaim peace: The good shepherd will not suffer his sheep so
to fight with one another, as thereby to be destroyed.

2. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that is a special means to preserve
Unity, yea and to perfect it. The Apostle 1 Cor. 10. speaks fully to this,
For we being many are one bread, and one body, for we are all partakers of that
one bread: So Ephesians. 4. one Baptism is brought as an engagement to unity:
Therefore the more graciously and perfectly these Ordinances are received, the
more is this unity confirmed and established; and therefore those primitive
Christians, who had one soul, and one heart, were constant also in their
breaking of bread, whereby their mutual love was strongly preserved.

Bellarmine not unfitly speaks of a six-fold Unity in the Church:

The first is, Ratione principii, of God who calls, though (as he says) this
makes the Church not so much una as sub uno, one as under one.

2. Ratione ultimi finis, the salvation to which it is called, and this makes
the Church not so much one, as ad unum.

3. Ratione Mediorum, in respect of the means of Faith and Sacraments; and thus
the Church is rather by one then one.

4. In respect of the holy Ghost, as a separated Governor.

5. In respect of Christ, as an internal and conjoined Head.

6. In respect of the connection of the Members amongst themselves, and in these
two last respects it is properly one.

Lastly, This Unity will be wholly perfected in Heaven; Then will all partition
walls be destroyed; Then shall it no more be said, I am of Paul, and I am of
Apollo, but God will be all in all. Therefore as this life is a place, like
Hadadrimmon, a valley of tears, bewailing corruptions and sins amongst us; so
also the divisions and breaches that are upon us: But in Heaven, all opinions,
all different ways will cease: So that although this unity for the main of it,
be attained in this life, yet in the life to come, there it will be totally
completed; Thus it is here perfect, because the endeavors and breathings of
the godly should be after that heavenly unity, to have it with the Church here
in grace, as it shall be with the Church hereafter in glory: And certainly, if
this were not accomplished in Heaven, then there would not be all tears wiped
away, nor would the reproach of Jerusalem cease.

The causes of this unity.
Thus you have heard what it is, that makes this unity of believers consummate
and perfect.

Now let us consider, What is the cause of this, and that we shall find to be
no humane strength, or outward wisdom and policy, but the lively communication
of grace inabling thereunto by Christ himself. Though the Papist pleades, That
the acknowledgement of one visible Head in the Church, is the only means to
preserve unity, yet experience shows the falsenesse of it. The divisions and
breaches of the godly, like those of Reuben, have made sad workings of heart,
and many have come running in, with their water to quench this fire: Several
Antidotes have been prescribed against this corruption, but yet when all is
done, It Is the only power of Jesus Christ, as Head of his Church, that works
this sweet Harmony. It Is true indeed, many rules and pacificall means are
commended by wise and godly men to make an unity, but these work only morally
and swasorily; that which does (as it were) physically and really work it, is
the Lord Christ himself, as the fountain of this unity: And the reason is,
because this unity among believers, is not only external, but internal and
spiritual; Now no man can work this unity in the hearts of the godly, any
more then he can work purity, and holiness: Therefore we see in the Text,
That because Christ is in us, and the Father in Christ, therefore are the godly
perfected in one; so that it requires a Divine, Supernatural power to make
the godly at heavenly accord; even as it does to make them godly. Hence it is
that in this prayer Christ commends it to God to work it, as being beyond all
humane power to effect it: Now Christ's being in a believer, is a cause of these
things in reference to their unity.

First, He is thereby a cause of the Unity it self: For we told you, This
unity, though external, yet is chiefly spiritual and internal, viz. The
harmonious knitting and joining of all the Members of Christ together, in him
their Head: Now this being wholly spiritual, none can effect it, but God
alone; for naturally we are dis-joyned from God, and full of contrariety to
him: Therefore to be made a member of Christ, and implanted into him, cannot be
by any other, but the Spirit of God: As those dry bones in Ezekiel could not of
themselves gather together, nor can a Cyen graft it self into a stock; Thus it
is here, till the Spirit of God join us to Christ, we are enemies and
adversaries unto him. That power therefore which gives grace, that only
unites, As in the natural body, the same cause which makes a member* makes it
also a united member: Insomuch that in all the fractions and divisions we see
amongst the godly, we ought to have our eyes up more to God, to consider that
power which makes them holy, must unite them; and indeed to make them gracious
and holy is the greater work, yea unity would flow by a necessary resultancy
from our membership in Christ, but that still our corruptions are too strong
and apt to disturb all.

Secondly, Christ's being in us, is not only the cause of our Unity, but also
of the harmonious suitable proportion to each other. We have an admirable
description of this harmonious sutablenesse in the unity of Christ's body,
Colos. 2.19. Ephesians. 4.15, 16. For the first, It Is a Text full of rich and
glorious matter, and to understand it, consider, What it is that the Apostle
makes the cause why those false Teachers did advance the worship of Angels,
introduce humane traditions, and all to set up other means and ways of
Justification, then the Scripture has appointed, It is (says he) because they
hold not the Head: So that every Christian in the matter of all spiritual
concernments, is still to look up to Christ, as the Head, and not to let him
go; and this he amplifieth from a twofold precious effect of this Head; The
first respects the union of believers to Christ, and so the body is said by
joints to receive nourishment, that as the body has it is nourishment
suppeditated by those natural helps, so has every Christian from Christ: Now
the joint that suppeditates these spiritual helps, is chiefly the Spirit of
God: So Romans 8.9. If any man have net the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his: So that as that is not a member truly united to the Head, which is not
informed with the same form, the Head is; so neither is that Christian really
united to Christ, which wants the Spirit of Christ: Now the Spirit of Christ is
here said, (...), To administer nourishment. The word (...) does properly
signify to supply all those ornaments, which were necessary to such as kept
their sacred dancings and festivities, but here it signifies the supply of
those things that are necessary for our spiritual end, and the word (...)
added, amplifieth it, denoting the full, plentiful and abundant supply it
gives. So that you see, it is Christ's Spirit, not ours, which does thus enable
us.

The second benefit flowing from Christ our Head, is of the Members themselves.
They by bands are knit together; Now the band here is chiefly also the Spirit
of God, though gifts and graces do ordinarily unite: So the Apostle, 1 Cor.
12.13. For we all by one Spirit are baptized into one body: So that the Spirit
of God, which is in Christ, does also work in all believers, inflaming and
exciting to such graces, whereby they have intimate communion one with another.
Now from these two benefits conjoined, we have the admirable fruit thereof,
that the body grows with the increase of God. The spiritual growth of
Christians, as in the body, is called, The increase of God; partly, because God
only is the efficient, and cause of it; partly formally, because the nature of
this increase is divine and heavenly; partly finally, because it is to the
glory and honor of God. So that by all this we see, Every true member of
Christ is a thriving and growing member, and that harmoniously according to
it is respective nature, and all this comes wholly by the Spirit of Christ; so
that an unity in the harmonious increase of it, depends solely upon him. By
this Explication, the other forementioned Text may also be discovered.

Lastly, Christ's being in us, is the cause of the perpetuity and constancy of
that Unity the godly have. This Union in Christ's body can never be dissolved.
As the Personal Union of Christ could never be divided, so neither the
mystical. Therefore our sound Divines do well from Christ's in-dwelling in us,
propugne and assert the perseverance of the Saints.

Use of Instruction, Whence it is, that even amongst the godly there are so
many differences, heart-burnings, etc. It Is because Christ is not in them after
such a powerful and efficacious manner, as he might be. The dark night and
misty fogs can no more endure before the glorious beams of the Sun, then
corrupt passions and contentions can stand before this Sun of Righteousness,
when risen to it is vertical point. Under the torrid Zone there cannot be any
cold frosts, so neither under the efficacious presence of Christ can there be
such sinful breaches.

SERMON CXXX. Shows, That every one that Believes knows the thing that he
believes: Against the Popish Implicit Faith; And what Knowledge the Knowledge
of Faith is.
JOH. 17.23. And that the world may know, that thou have sent me.
THE words now to be insisted upon ^re, the effect or event of this spiritual
Unity believers have with Christ and one another, which is, That the world may
know the Father had sent Christ; This was treated of before, only whereas
before it was that the world may believe here it is, That the world may know,
and besides a new thing is here added to their knowledge, that the Father had
sent Christ, viz. his love also of all Believers, even as he loved Christ.

What is meant by world has been showed already; I shall only fasten on this
Consideration, that what our Savior called believing ver. 21. here is called
knowing, and therefore having handled faith in its specifical nature as it
rests on Christ, which alone justifies, and also the general nature of it as
it gives firm assent to all divine Truths:

I shall now to complete the full Truth of the nature thereof handle it in
another essential constituting ingredient of it, and that is knowledge, and
the matter is necessary both in respect of doctrinall errors about it, as also
for practical usefulness, For the Pontificians they deny both that fiduciall
recumbency and application to faith, as also knowledge, leaving it only to be a
divine assent, but as we have asserted the former, So now our task shall be to
affirm the latter, viz. That Faith is knowledge as well as assent; It Is a
fiduciall assent with knowledge* These three particulars are either ingredient
or requisite to the act of believing, whether indeed knowledge be a
pre-requisite or ingredient is disputed, but that all divine Faith has
knowledge is confessed by the Orthodox against the Papists; so that I shall
observe,

That Faith is knowledge, or he that believes knows the thing that he
believes. Doct. That faith is knowledge.
Hence it is usual in Scripture to describe faith sometimes by trusting, and
sometimes by knowing, synecdochically intending thereby the whole nature of
faith; That faith is knowledge, besides many other places, is abundantly
cleared, v. 2. What knowledge faith is not.
and v. 18* in this Chapter. I shall therefore proceed to explicate to this. And

First, When we say, That Faith is knowledge, i^ is not to be understood thus,
1. Not a knowledge by sense.
as if it were such a kind of knowledge, as we have by sense, for the
Scripture does oppose living by faith to living by sense, and our Savior
faith, John 20. Blessed is he that believes and sees not, Vbi vides, non est
fides; Indeed when Thomas did feel the wounds of Christ, here he did believe
and see, but the object of his sense was a body, the ^ct of his faith was
spiritual, that Christ was the Son of the living God; What then we know by
sense, we are not properly said to believe, although things of sense may tend
to confirm our faith, as miracles and Sacraments, which Christ has appointed
for that end.

2. Not a perfect comprehension and intuitive vision of the thing we believe.
Secondly, The knowledge of faith is not by a perfect comprehension, and
intuitive vision of the thing we believe. It Is not like the knowledge of God
and Christ, we shall have in Heaven, and therefore faith shall cease in Heaven,
as it denoteh any inevidence, or imperfection in the subject: This knowledge of
faith we have here as in a glass, and in a riddle, but then it shall be face to
face, and this should abundantly satisfy us in the many things we know by
faith; for although our knowledge be very imperfect, and is like the weak eye
to the dazeling beams of the Sun, yet hereafter this vail, this cloud will be
removed, and we shall then perfectly and fully understand all those things,
that now we have but imperfect apprehensions of about the Doctrine of Christ,
of the Trinity, of the Resurrection, of the providence of God toward his
Church, how little do we understand of them? yet the time is coming, when we
shall know these things, even as we are known. The Apostle compares this
knowledge we have, to a childs knowledge in respect of a man's, 1 Cor. 13.
Alas, when we speak of God, and heavenly things, we do but stammer like so many
little children; when we come to Heaven, how vast and comprehensive will our
thoughts be, to what we have now!

3. Nor like those imperfect acts of the soul, which are called Suspicion,
opinion or doubting.
Thirdly, The knowledge of faith is not like those imperfect acts of the soul,
which are called suspicion, and opinion, or doubting. Doubting is when the
mind remains in an equal and indifferent propension, assenting to neither
part of the proposition. Suspicion is, when the soul inclines to one part of
the proposition, but upon a very light and unsatisfying argument: And Opinion
is, when we assent to something with some fear, that the opposite may be true,
and therefore the Arguments do only probably move us: Now the knowledge of
faith does exclude these imperfections, doubting is in Scripture expressly
opposed to believing, and so when a man is divided, as a traveller at two
ways, not knowing which to go, or when he does (...), hang in suspense. These
things are inconsistent with faith; and truly this is greatly to be considered,
for in these days wherein we see men so skeptical, so wavering, so uncertain,
we may conclude there is little faith; That men are opiniotive and fancy-full
in Religion, rather then believing, for where the knowledge of faith is, there
it does (...) convince, and so persuade the heart, that it knows not how to
contradict, or oppose any longer: Oh then, pray for faith in these unstable and
wavering time! It Is a mercy to be a pillar in Gods house, and not like a reed
to be shaken with every wind of doctrine.

4. Nor is it from the evidence of any internal principles.
Fourthly, The knowledge of faith is not from the evidence of any internal
principles of the thing, such as we have by demonstration and reason in
philosophical matters. And indeed this is one main reason why the fathers
insisted in believing as opposite to knowing, Noveris te ess^ fidelem, non
rationalem. It was Julians great objection against the Christians, that they
urged (...), only believe; they did not bring reasons to demonstrate; So that
if Papists, when they deny faith to be knowledge, did mean no more then this,
that it is not a scientifical knowledge, that it is not a knowledge from the
inward reason of things, we would grant it, and think it to be only a strife
about words, for this is plain, as Austin well, Non ratio dicti, sed dicendi
autoritas suadet; It Is not reason from the thing, but the authority of the
speaker, that is the cause of faith. Now for want of right understanding
herein; the Socinians they go too far on the other hand; The Papist thinks
faith defined better by ignorance then knowledge; the Socinian will have such
knowledge as shall be fetched from the inward reason of things, and this is the
cause why the Trinity and Incarnation of Christ are denied, because reason is
made the Judge of these things, but the knowledge of faith is not like that of
the Philosophers, who searched into the causes and inward principles of things,
for then the Scriptures would not be commended to us, but the Platoes and
Aristotle's of the world.

Therefore fifthly, The knowledge faith brings, is a knowledge respecting the
testimony and revelation of a thing, and the authority of him, who does reveal
it, What knowledge the knowledge of faith is.
that he is the supreme verity, and therefore cannot lie. We see in an humane
faith, a man cannot believe that which he does not know witnessed, a thing that
he never heard spoken of; and this is that which we justly blame the Church of
Rome for, That it teaches an implicit faith, viz. That we believe what the
Church believes; but now, what is it that the Church believes, they know not,
and it may be never heard of it? Therefore that is the way to lead men
blindfold to hell; for this implicit faith is indeed nothing but a simple
gross ignorance; but faith divine knows the testimony, or that word which
reveals such truth, not that they only can believe, who can read, for Faith
comes by hearing, as well as reading, so that they may know the truth
confirmed in the Scripture, though they cannot read it: Faith therefore is not
blind, nor is the obedience of it in this sense blind, as if it did not know
what it did believe, with such blind Sacrifices God is not well-pleased; and
the woman of Samaria is reproved, because she worshipped she knew not what,
Joh. 4. and it is no less guilt when we believe we know not what,

2. There is not only a knowledge of the testimony, but some, though imperfect
knowledge of the very things themselves. Thus Paul, I know whom I have
believed, 2 Timothy 1.22. and so in many places the people of God are said to know
God, to know Christ; There is an apprehensive knowledge, though not a
comprehensive; Therefore though God does not give perfect knowledge in this
life, yet he could, if he please, turn faith into vision; He that made the
corporal blind to see, can also take away mental blindness, but he is pleased
to let us have but imperfect knowledge, and that partly because we ought to be
humbled in our selves, for we see the pride and sinful corruption of man, when
it gets any knowledge in the Scripture, how ready to be lifted up, to despise
others, to think we are wiser then Solomon, which makes the Apostle say,
Knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1. not that it does so of it self, for of it
self it would rather humble and debase, but such is our corruption and vanity,
that without the special grace of God, as we grow in knowledge, so also we grow
in pride. Again, God keeps us in imperfect knowledge here, that so we might
be in constant prayer and dependence on him, to beg for knowledge, and an
understanding heart, as also that we might study and meditate, to be always
growing in knowledge, as the Apostle exhorts; Hence it is that there are so
many difficult places in Scripture, which will exercise the thoughts of the
most learned, and those things the ablest men do know, yet they may grow in a
more firm, distinct and powerful knowledge. This Sun may arise upon them by
degrees, till at last it comes to its vertical point.

Now that our faith must either be knowing, Reasons why faith must be knowing,
or have knowledge accompanying of it.
or have knowledge accompanying of it is plain.

Because the word of God is given as a Rule, and therefore compared to a light
and a lantern, because it does direct and order our conversations; If then
faith had not knowledge, to what use should the Word enlighten? To what purpose
also are those frequent exhortations to all private persons, as well as
Officers, to attend to the reading of it, to prove all things, to try all
things? Can the Scripture be made use of? Can these duties be put in practice,
and yet there be no knowledge?

2. As the Word is light objective, so the believer himself is light
subjective. Hence they are called light in the Lord, light in the very
abstract, Ephesians. 5.8. and the Scripture speaks often, of their illumination,
having their understandings and hearts opened; insomuch, that the soul is a
mere chaos and confusion till God create this light in it; faith then is
accompanied with internal light, as well as it requires external.

3. The obedience of a Christian is to be rational; it is called the (...), the
reasonable service, Romans 12.1. and all the Pharisees worship is rejected,
because it had no word to be grounded upon; we are to answer God, when he shall
say, Who has required you to believe thus, to worship thus? And how can this
be without knowledge? Though in Popery a blind obedience is commended, yet
Christ requires a seeing and knowing obedience.

4. The just is to be saved by his faith; Now if faith has no knowledge, this
properly is another man's faith; if faith has no knowledge, but believes,
because the Church believes so, or a Council believes so, then it is not so
much his own faith, as the Churches faith that must save him.

Lastly, If faith has not knowledge, then it is impossible to discharge all
those effects of faith, that the Scripture speaks of, as to cleave and adhere
to the truth, to refuse falsehood, and all cunning deceivableness of error. Now
how can this be, if faith has no eyes of knowledge to discern? Trees and men
are all one to a blind man. Any Camel will quickly be swallowed up, if there
be not a knowing faith.

2. How can we suffer martyrdom, and lose all the dearest comforts we have, if
we have not knowledge? Can a man be banished, undone, suffer death, and all for
that which he does not know whether it be true or not?

3. He cannot be thankful unto God under the truth he enjoys, neither can
he make that practical improvement of them, as he ought to do: As Christ told
the Samaritan woman, If thou did know who it is that asks thee. etc. Joh.
4. so if thou did know what Christ is, what the Covenant of grace is, thou
would make an heavenly use of it, whereas now thou know no more what to do
with it, then a swine with a pearl.

Use of Exhortation, to get out of all gross and profane ignorance; There
cannot be any faith, all the while this darkness is upon thy mind, and if
there be no Faith, there is no Justification, no Salvation, Christ is become of
no effect unto thee, and yet how boldly will many ignorant people talk of their
good faith, they are not led aside with the giddy errors of many, they cleave
to the old faith, but do thou know what thy old faith is, if it were Turcism
and Popery it would be all one to thee.

SERMON CXXXI. Of the unspeakable Love of God to Believers; Showing wherein
Gods Love to Christ, and to Believers is alike, and wherein it differs.
JOHN 17.23. And have loved them, as thou have loved me.
A Twofold Effect or Event is propounded by our Savior, of the unity which
believers have, first, in Christ, and then amongst themselves;

The first is, That the world may know, thou have sent me; of which we have
briefly treated already, because our Savior had mentioned it, v. 21. and
indeed our Savior does in these verses with so much plainness ingeminate the
matter of his Petition, that Luther on the place says, These words do
pueriliter sonare, judicio rationis, and that he was wont to say often, That he
never read a book containing such excellent and sublime matter in such simple
and plain words.

The second Effect or Event is, That the world may know, that thou have loved
them, as thou have loved me.

So that in this latter particular, there is one truth supposed, and another
proposed: That which is supposed is, that it is of great consequence for the
world to know that God loves believers, it would stop much of their malice and
violence, if they did truly know, that such whom they oppose and persecute, are
the believed ones of God: But of that afterward. That which is expressly
affirmed is, that the Father loves believers, as he loves Christ himself. A
wonderful and amazing expression it is, that believers and Christ should be
thus coupled together, that when there is such an infinite disparity, that yet
they should both agree in the same love: So that in the words you have, the
mercy and privilege God vouchsafes to believers, he loves them. Now when we
say, God loves, it is to say all things, for that is the fountain and treasury
of all good things; his love is like himself, infinite, omnipotent and
efficacious.

2. You have the example or manner of this love, and that is said to be, as he
loves Christ The Greek word (...) Austin and Calvin do explain not of
similitude, but of causality, and so resolve it into this sense. The Father
loves believers, because he loves Christ, and indeed this is a grand truth,
that in Christ only we are accepted of, and beloved. It Is not because of our
selves, but of Christ, that we are approved of, yet there is no necessity of
leaving the grammatical interpretation, for the Father does love us, as he
loves Christ not in respect of equality, but similitude, as they are said to
be one, as the Father and Son are one. These words then do contain the very
honey and honeycomb of Christianity, in that they are loved of the Father, as
Christ is, they need nothing more, for Gods love will put him upon all those
effects that a believer stands in need of.

Observe. God the Father loves believers, even as he loves Christ.
Observe. That God the Father loves believers, even as he loves Christ himself.
A great truth, and as you would think, a bold and presumptuous affirmation.

Therefore to clear it, Let us consider, wherein the love of God to Christ and
believers is not alike, and wherein they are like one to another. And

I. Wherein the love of God to Christ and believers is not alike.
The love of the Father to Christ, is as to his only natural begotten Son,
but to believers, as to his adopted children. And therefore between these there
must be a vast difference; The love of the Father to the Son is like that of
the Father to himself, because he is of the same essence with him, so that he
loves the glory and honor of his Son, as his own glory, but now that love
which he bears to his adopted children, is of an inferior nature, they are
creatures only, and their holiness is but imperfect, and by way of quality,
or accident in them, but the Son is essentially holy; so that in this respect
there is no comparison to be made between the Son and us; That love differs
toto genere in this sense, from the love bestowed on us, even as his filiation
is not of the same univocal nature with ours.

Therefore the love which the Father shows to his Son, is necessary and
natural; he could not but love him, no more then he could not, but beget him,
whereas to believers it is voluntary, and wholly of free dispensation. It Is
disputed in the Schools, Whether the Father did beget the Son necessarily, or
freely, and so by consequence, Whether his love be necessary or free; but the
soundest Writers say, That a necessity of unitability and freedom do not oppose
one another, a necessity from natural imperfection contradicts liberty as a
perfection, but not that which arises from the chiefest and highest
perfection, and so it is in God; It Is from his infinite perfection, that he
cannot but love himself, and his Son, but now in respect of his adopted sons,
all is of mere grace, which he does to them, John 1. It Is he that gives an
(...), a right and privilege to them, to become the sons of God, God could
have taken infinite delight in his own Son, that was object satisfying
enough, there needed no other then him to take his delight in, yet he was
pleased contrary to the customs of men, though he had a natural Son of his
own, to assume adopted ones likewise.

The Father loves the Son originally for his own sake, but he loves
believers for Christ's sake. And this indeed does mainly put the difference
between the Fathers love to us and Christ, here Christ is loved for his own
sake, he needed no Mediator, or another Christ to procure his acceptance, for
so there would have been imperfection in Christ, but in us, all our hope, all
our well-pleasing is through him; So that as every Star shines by the light
of the Sun, thus does every believer appear comely in the robes of Christ's
righteousness only. Thus the Apostle Phil. 3. declares fully, When he would
not be found in his own righteousness, but that which is through faith in
Christ: So that as it was the Temple, which made every thing holy, thus it is
the Lord Christ, which makes every creature accepted of.

Christ is not capable of some effects of such love, which the Father does
vouchsafe believers. To us he gives Pardon of sin, Justification by faith, in
us he works repentance, faith, and subdueth the relics of corruption in us,
but such was the perfection of Christ, that he could not have such kind of
love demonstrated to him.

II. Wherein Gods love to Christ and believers is alike.
Having thus seen the disparity, and that still Christ has the preheminency in
Gods love, Let us consider wherein Christ and we agree in Gods love. And

First, Gods love is terminated not on Christ simply, but as the head of
believers. So that Christ and his Church are considered as one mystical
person, and this is chiefly aimed at in all those places, 1.
where Christ speaks of his being in believers, and that they are his body, In
loving Christ and them as one mystical person.
all is to draw up our hearts into an high admiration of Gods love herein, for
God does now look upon Christ and believers as one, if he loves Christ, he
must needs love them; if he hate them, or cast them off, he must hate, and cast
off Christ: Insomuch that if a Christian desires to get up into a Mount of
Transfiguration, let him ascend up hither; for what will fill the heart with
heaven, if this do not, I and Christ are loved, as one? Though the Father
loves Christ in some respects transcendently to us, yet in other respects, he
makes his love common to us both. Certainly faith in this great and precious
truth, would be a constant cordial; Thou fear thy sins and imperfections
may cast thee out of Gods love, but are they able to cast Christ out of his
Fathers love, if they cannot do the one, neither can they the other? Christ and
a believer is made one, when one is loved, the other must necessarily be loved,
and if one be hated, the other also must be hated.

Secondly, The Fathers love to Christ and us is alike in the properties of it.
2. In the properties of it.
Love to Christ is not differing in it is properties from that he loves us
with. As

1. It Is eternal love, As the Father loved Christ before the world was, so he
did also all believers in Christ before the foundation of the world was laid.
This our Savior speaks of, verse. 24. Thou lovedst me before the foundation
of the world, and that he shows the like love to all believers, is often
declared, Ephesians. 1.4. We are chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world.
The love then which the Father bears to believers is an eternal love: It Is
not shorter in time then that to Christ, for in eternity there is no prius nor
posterius; As then the Father loved Christ always, even from all eternity, so
he does likewise every believer; before thou had a being, before either thy
self, or any friend in the world could take any care of thee, God did pitch his
love upon thee: Oh then, let not the people of God, think God is like man, that
he began to day or yesterday to love thee! No, it was from all eternity, and
that love brought forth in time, all the other effects of love, that called
thee, that justified thee, and that will glorify thee; Therefore the Apostle
when he speaks of these blessed effects in time, he resolves all into this
love from eternity, as the Springhead of all.

Secondly, The Fathers love to Christ and believers are alike in the property
of unchangeablenesse and immutability. God will no more alter his love, or
cease to love his children, then he will Christ himself; This is plain, because
all the promises to the godly are Yea and Amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. he is
their Mediator, in him they are made one with the Father: So that by the same
cause of perpetuity in his Headship, by the same will they certainly persevere
to us. Thus it is said, Romans 8. Who shall separate us from the love of God? He
challenges any thing to break this love, if they can. Grant then, that the
Father may love Christ in some peculiar respects, which thou art not capable
of, yet in this thou and Christ are alike, God will never change the love of
his Son into hatred, he will never become of a Father an enemy to him, so
neither will he to any true believer. As long as his love shall continue
unchangeable to his Son, so long it will to thee; and thus Gods love to thee is
on a firmer bottom, then that of Mount Zion, or the Ordinance God has made
with heaven and earth, or the day and night, for all these shall wax old, but
the love of God like himself shall abide for ever.

Thirdly, The Fathers love has the property of freeness, both to us and
Christ. Indeed if we consider Christ as God, so the Father loved him
necessarily, but as he was man, and a Mediator, so the Fathers love to him was
free, for it was of the mere goodness of God to appoint him to be a Mediator;
The humane Nature was not assumed for any foreseen merits in it, but all was
from the mere good pleasure of God, and this holds much more true in all the
gracious effects that we partake of, therefore the great scope of the Scripture
is to declare this, that all the privileges and mercies we partake of, come
not from any worth, or desert in our selves, but wholly from the grace and mere
love of God; Insomuch that all those opinions which make the rise of any good
we enjoy, to be first our love to God, and not Gods love to us, are to be
accursed; as if the earth did first water the heavens, and then the heavens the
earth.

3. In regard of the effects of it
In the third place, The Fathers love to Christ and believers, is alike in
regard of the real and true effects of it. As to Christ it was not a love in
word, or show, but power and mighty operations, so it is also to every
believer: Though there be a difference, yet the love is as real to one, as the
other; Even as when the first commandment of loving God, is said to be the
greatest, yet at the same time the second is said to be like it, in respect of
obligation, though not of dignity, Thus it is as firmly, and as really love to
believers as to Christ, though not so principally; and although some effects of
love, we partake of, which Christ is not capable of, yet there are others that
we do communicate in. As

1 One great effect of the Fathers love to Christ, while in the days of his
suffering flesh, was the protection, defense and encouragement that he had from
the Father; for Christ in the whole course of his Ministry, by faith depended
on his Father; insomuch that though the malice of his enemies was importunate
to destroy him, yet they could never accomplish their design, till the Fathers
time was come, and then, though he prayed to the Father to be saved from that
hour, yet it was only conditional, and therefore he submitted himself
absolutely to Gods will. Now the same fatherly care Christ had experience of in
his whole course, the same may believers expect; Therefore Joh. 14. he tells
them, I go to my Father, and your Father, he is the same Father to both: Oh
then, why should a believer under any extremities or agonies be cast down, the
same fatherly love thou may look for, as Christ himself met with.

A second real effect of the Fathers love, is Glorification of Christ; The
glory that Christ was to have after his sufferings, is often mentioned in the
Scripture. In this Chapter we see our Savior earnestly praying for it, and
after his Resurrection, we read how highly he was exalted, and what glory he
was lifted up into; now the Father loves all believers with the same efficacy,
as they suffer with Christ, so they shall reign with him, here they are said
not only to be sons, but heirs and coheirs with Christ, they shall sit on
thrones of glory with Christ. Thus Gods love runs in the same effects to Christ
and us.

SERMON CXXXII. Shows of what high concernment it is to the men of the world
to know how greatly Believers (whom they hate and persecute) are beloved of God.
JOH. 17.23. That thou have loved them, as thou have loved me.
THe glorious privilege of a believer has been considered from this
privilege, viz. that they and Christ are embraced with the same love, and are
made coheirs with Christ. Now before we conclude this, an Objection does
present it self to this purpose.

It may seem, that the Father loves us more then Christ, Obj.
for he gives him to be a ransom and price for us, Christ is made a curse,
dies an ignominious and a painful death, not for himself, but for us, by
which it may appear, that the Fathers love is more to us then to him, for he
delivers him to death, that we might live, he is made a man of sorrows and full
of grief, to provide consolation for us, so that Christ seems to be but the
means, and we the end, and the end has more amability and appetibility in it
then the means. But to this, these things may be returned by way of answer,

First, That Christ when he died for us, and procured our salvation, Answ.
he did it as an efficient cause, by his own inward worth and power. So that
our spiritual mercies are not so much to be considered, the end of Christ's
death, as the effects of it: So that we may truly say, what the people did to
David, in an higher manner to Christ, Thou art worth ten thousand of us, yea
then all believers: So that Christ died not for us, in such a way, as when a
Martyr dies for the truth, or a private person for the Commonwealth, for
these die to prefer a greater good above the less; The truth of God is more
worth, then any man's life; The public good is more precious, then the
temporal advantage of any one man; and in these instances, the lesser good is
lost for the greater; but when Christ was thus afflicted by the Father for us,
this was, that a greater good might obtain a lesser; for in Christ's blood,
there was plenty and all fullness to redeem his people; so that we are not to
look on Christ dying, as a mere passive means ordained for us, but as an active
means, by the causality and virtue whereof our eternal good is accomplished.

The Father does not love us more then Christ, though for a while he was made
miserable for us, for Christ's willing offering up of himself to this Sacrifice,
did infinitely draw out the love of God to him; So that the Father loved him
the more, because he would out himself from the exercise and actual enjoyment
of his Fathers love for a season, that he was contented for a time to be in
those agonies and conflicts, grapling with the sense of his Fathers
displeasure, for this very reason, his Father did infinitely love him, so
Christ himself witnesses, Job. 10.17. Therefore does my Father love me,
because I lay down my life for my sheep; and herein was the Fathers love and
acceptance seen, that upon his sufferings the Father exalted him to such
transcendent glory, exalting him above every name that is named: So that
although many Divines say, Christ merited nothing for himself, yet others say
with great confidence, That the Covenant which was made with Christ as our
Mediator, did promise him all that mediatorial honor and glory which he
enjoyed, upon the discharge of his Suretiship, and this they make to be the
principal and great thing intended by God, viz. the exaltation of Christ, and
giving of him such transcendent glory, only they confess this glory of Christ
does redound for our good; but that which was principally aimed at in the
Fathers agreement with Christ, was the glorious rewarding of him.

Though Christ was given for us, yet this does not follow that we were loved
more then Christ, Because the Father laid no more upon him, then he was willing
and able to bear. So that Christ conquered all his enemies, neither sin nor
death were able to over-master him, and therefore he was for a season under
these sufferings, that we might be made happy to all eternity; If indeed the
Father had left him in a perpetual desertion, and suffered his body to see
corruption for ever, to procure our peace, then it would have followed that he
preferred us before his Son, but that could not be. What was ordered to
befall him, was no more then he could bear, and quickly remove, and therefore
Christ lost nothing by becoming our Savior, and yet we also are made happy
thereby.

Therefore Christ was loved more then us, though he died for us, Because the
ultimate end of his death was, that we being redeemed by his death, might
acknowledge him our Lord, and for ever live to his praise and glory. So that
the salvation of believers is but a proxim and immediate end of Christ's death,
that which is ultimate, that which was principally intended, was that we being
thus ransomed, might to all eternity set forth the praises and glory of him,
who thus loved us to death.

Use of Exhortation, To behold and admire the unspeakable love of the Father to
all believers; That he joyneth Christ and them in the same love, the same
heaven, the same glory (for kind) that Christ has, all believers likewise
shall partake of. Even as for wicked men, the same hell, the same damnation and
torments which are prepared for the devil and his Angels, are also appointed
for the ungodly: If D^vid said, Seems it a light matter to be made a
son-in-law to the King, then yet Saul's purpose was not to make him like
Jonathan, and coheir with him of that temporal Kingdom, How much more should
this affect us, which the Father does for us! Oh say, and often say, Blessed
Father, is this a little matter for such a poor, weak sinner, to be taken into
the same chariot of glory with Christ, to have love like his, glory to his, as
Abigail said to David, when he sent for her to make her his wife, she
acknowledged her unworthiness, Make me one of thy handmaids (said she) So, O
Lord, if I have a drop of water, a morsel of bread, this is enough for me, but
to be taken into fellowship with Christ, and coheir with him; This is
overflowing, superabounding grace, only remember, that here is not only
privilege, but duty also; Here lies a powerful obligation upon us, to love
him with our highest and chiefest love; let his glory, his love be next to thy
heart: Oh be ashamed that thy love can burn no hotter toward him!

In the next place, we are to consider the scope and end of our Savior in
mentioning this preheminent privilege, and it is, That the world may know this
love. It Is not enough for believers to be thus highly loved by the Father, but
the world is to know and to be persuaded of it. From whence observe,

That it is of great consequence to the world to know how greatly believers are
loved of God. It would quicken them to many duties, Doct. It Is of great
consequence to the world to know how greatly believers are loved of God.
and restrain them from many sins, if this were once fully settled in their
hearts, that those whom they oppose and deride, are the beloved ones of God:
It Is true, it is of great consequence even to the godly themselves, to be fully
informed in this, they go bowed down, and very much languish, because they are
not so persuaded of this. Hence 1 John 3 1. The Apostle calls upon the godly to
attend to it, Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that
we should be called the sons of God. So that under all the hatred and
opposition of the world, it is necessary that this love of God should bear up
thy soul, though none loves thee, yet the Father does. Thus (I say) it is
necessary even for believers themselves to know how greatly they are beloved,
but here our Savior speaks of the worlds knowledge, and the necessity of their
being informed therein.

Now the usefulness of the worlds conviction herein, will appear in these
respects: The usefulness of the worlds knowing how greatly the Saints are
beloved of God, will appear in these particulars.


Hereby they may be provoked to come out of their wicked condition, and be made
one of that number which God so loves. For will not this work naturally and
genuinely upon them, when they shall think, Lo these that pray, that walk
strictly and contrary to the principles of the world, are those whom God loves
in a special manner, they are his favorites, his delight is upon them, but as
for me, and the company I keep, God is angry with us all the day long, we are
the men cursed by him, for us he has appointed hell, and eternal torments.
When any natural man shall upon these convictions argue and reason with
himself, How can he abide any longer in that sinful way? Oh then that God
would persuade thee more of this, that those whom thou malignest, against whom
thy heart rises, are such on whom Gods gracious love is fixed, and that it is
thou thy self, and such as thou art, that the anger of God abides on
continually, this would quickly make thee another man! Therefore there is not a
more deadly principle thou can swallow down, then to be prejudiced in thy
spirit against such who truly fear God.

A persuasion that such only are loved by God, as it would make thee to be of
their number, so also it would draw out thy dearest and sincerest love to them.
Thou would presently begin to think, Why should not I love those most, whom
God loves? Certainly, they are the choicest and best objects upon whom God is
pleased to cast his gracious eye, then as David said, My delight is to be with
the Saints upon the earth, Psalm. 16.3. Thus also it would be here, when once
persuaded, that such are the endeared ones of God, then thy affections, thy
heart will be to such also.

By this persuasion upon the heart of the world, that they only are loved of
God, hereby the world will cease to hate, and persecute them, to give them such
ill entertainment as they do. When our Savior possesses his Disciples with
that universal hatred they shall have in the world, and that the world cannot
do otherwise; whence is all this? but because they do not know Christ, nor
believers neither: But as they took him for an Impostor, and one not worthy to
live, so they do judge his members to be a company of heretics, not worthy to
be suffered in the world, and all this malice arises from their blind hearts,
for did they know, who they were as they oppose, they dared not to proceed;
Even as the Scripture says, If they had known Christ, they would not have
crucified the prince of glory, 1 Cor. 2.6. So that all thy hard words, and thy
hard actions, they arise from this, thou do not know what the godly are, how
accepted with God, and how precious to him; for this consideration would
immediately make thee draw in thy arm, thou would see it was a foolish thing
to set against such whom God loves, that it is but kicking against the pricks:
It Is attempting an impossible thing, if thou could get God not to love them,
then indeed it were something, but as long as God thus loves them, all thy
endeavors against them, is as vain as Balacks was against Israel, No
enchantment or divination can prevail: As it is an impossible thing, so also
it is dangerous, for seeing they are to God as the apple of his eye, and he has
given such a command, even to Kings, that they do not touch his anointed ones;
How can it be that God will let all the injuries and offenses done against them
so dearly beloved, go free; Therefore persuade thy self more of this love of
God to them, lest thou incur Gods forest displeasure.

Again, It Is not only dangerous, but foolish also, for the more the world sets
against believers, the greater their rage is, the more is Gods love drawn out
to them. So that by thy hatred, they do become glorious, and are more esteemed
by God, and receive a greater crown of glory.

Thus if these things be duly considered, we must needs say, it is of great
consequence for the world to know, that believers are so highly loved by God.
But in the next place, It Is very difficult for the world to be thus persuaded.
For

How difficult it is for the world to be so persuaded.
1. There is naturally an enmity and antipathy of the wicked against the godly,
and where malice is, they will never believe any good of those whom they hate.
Insomuch that though God does with never such a signal love demonstrate himself
to them, yet they will never be persuaded such are loved of God; for as they
are affected, so they judge of God himself; and because they think them worthy
of all hatred and evil, they conclude, God does so also: Thus this distempered
palate judges every thing bitter it tastes.

2. The love of the Father to believers is chiefly in spiritual things, such as
Justification, Sanctification, Adoption. Now these things are no more
apprehended by the world, then curious melody by a deaf ear. The Apostle
speaks to this, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. admirably showing, That the Spirit of
God reveals these spiritual things to us, and that without the Spirit, we
cannot know the things that are freely given us of God, which he illustrateth
by a similitude from a man, As no man can know the things of a man, but a man,
so neither can a man merely of himself discern the things of God. Hence the
white stone, and the new Name, Rev. 2.17. are such things that no man knows,
but he that has them.

3. The world of it self cannot know Gods love to his children, because they
have not the experience of it in their own hearts: And therefore though they
may read and hear of such a thing, yet they cannot conceive what it is: As a
man that never tasted honey, cannot guess what the sweetness is: It Is the
want of this experimental knowledge that makes the world so despise the
privileges of believers; Balaam had but a glimpse of this, and immediately he
breaks out into those wishes, That he might die the death of the righteous,
and his latter end might be like his.

Lastly, It Is hard for the world to know the Fathers love to the godly, because
his outward administrations are so clouded, that by the external events, you
would sometimes judge they were the only people whom God hates: Even as it was
with Christ himself, though he was solemnly from heaven pronounced to be the
beloved of his Father, yet in outward consideration, he was a man of sorrows
and contempt: insomuch that the Prophet says, Isa. 53. we thought him smitten
of God for his sins, and at his death they insulted over him, as being forsaken
by God.

Use of Admonition to all wicked men; Let this bridle their hearts and tongues,
and pray God would open their eyes, to understand this blessedness and
happiness of believers: Then Saul would be amongst these Prophets, then thou will desire to live and die one of them, that your soul might be in their souls
stead; Then your cry will be, We fools and miserable wretches thought them the
vilest and most miserable men in the world, but how greatly does God honor
them?

SERMON CXXXIII. Of the Connection between Grace and Glory, and that Glory even
to the most Godly, is the free Gift of God.
JOHN 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, etc.
THis verse contains a new and distinct Object, or Matter of Christ's prayer;
for whereas before he had prayed in reference to his Disciples for their
Sanctification and Union, now he prays for the last and ultimate privilege
they are capable of, which is their eternal glory.

So that in the words we may observe, 1. The Compellation, Father. 2. The
Subject of his prayer, Those thou have given me. 3. The Object matter of it,
That they be where I am. 4. The Manner of petitioning this, expressed in that
word (...), I will.


Lastly, The ultimate End of all this, That they may behold my glory which thou
have given me.

From the general Connection of this prayer with the foregoing petitionings,
and that prayer-wise two things are observable,

1. That without grace here, there is no glory hereafter. Observe. Without grace
here, there is no glory hereafter.


2. That even to the most gracious that are, Glory is given by God as a gift
obtained in prayer. After they have done all, yet still they must pray for it.

For the former, we see that truth established from the order and method that
Christ uses, having before earnestly prayed for their Sanctification and Unity
in this life, he stays not there, neither is his love confined within the
things of this world, but it extends it self to the world to come, as the
chiefest of all. As happiness and glory is the ultimate end of man, concerning
which every natural man mistakes, so grace is the only path that leads
thereunto, and there is as great a mistake about grace, what it is, as wherein
happiness does consist. So that although it be very convenient to discover what
grace is, and when a man may be said to be godly, yet I shall wave that as to a
large discourse about it: Only to clear the Doctrine, Consider,

That by grace, we mean that new creature, or those holy, What we mean by grace.
divine and supernatural principles within a man, whereby he is carried out to
work all holiness in his life. For the Scripture describes this gracious man,
sometimes by that inward work, as the root and foundation of all, sometimes by
the outward fruits of holiness, as being the visible demonstration of it. So
that in the discovery of grace, we must always attend to these two things,

1. That our religious duties be upon a root deep enough, that they proceed
from a supernatural principle within, that no external motive be the only
principle to put it into action. And then

2. That we do not content our selves with any supposed inward work of grace
upon the heart, but do accordingly; as occasion invites, manifest the powerful
efficacy thereof in our lives, for thus the Prophet Ezekiel declares Gods
promise for both, The writing of his Law in their inward parts, and making of
them to walk in his ways, Ezekiel. 36.28.

Men are very prone generally to delude themselves in this particular, thinking
to obtain glory hereafter, though they have no grace here. Hence are such
exhortations, Be not deceived, 1 Cor. 6.9. No fornicator or idolater shall
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, etc. Who would think the Apostle needed to
set such a prohibition or signal mark upon that, for we would think no body
could deceive himself in such a thing notoriously known, as that is, yet there
is nothing more ordinary, for if all the gross visible sinners should be asked
one by one, Do you hope to obtain eternal happiness? he would answer with
great confidence and expectation of it; and yet how grossly and notoriously does
he deceive himself? Is it not as plain, as that he lives, that such pleasures
of lusts shall be rewarded with eternal torments, and yet he hops otherwise?

Grace here, is not meritorious of glory hereafter. Romans 4. To him that works
the reward is of debt; but eternal life is called the Gift of God; Our Savior
in this Chapter does pray for one as well as the other; We may justly wonder to
see how prone men are naturally to look upon grace, as meritorious of glory,
that the Roman Church should so confidently maintain it, Does not all this
arise, because men are not acquainted with those relics of corruption, that
cleave to the best things we do? Certainly, that which is meritorious of hell
can never be of heaven, that which deserves eternal vengeance, can never
procure everlasting favor; but this proud opinion creeps subtly into men's
hearts under pretense of advancing grace, even while it debaseth it, for so the
Papist would persuade us, that they give more to Christ then we, because they
make him merit, that our grace may be meritorious, insomuch (that they say) we
give little or nothing to Christ, but to hold, Christ merited, that we might
merit, is to evacuate the merit of Christ, and to make it useless, for there
needs not any more two meritorious causes of salvation, then two Suns in the
firmament, or else if Christ merited, as the remote cause, and we as the
proxime cause, then salvation is to be attributed more formally to our grace,
then Christ's sufferings; So that as if the Sun should inlighten the stars,
that they could make the day, this would take off from the immediate glory of
the Sun, though that was remotely the cause of it; Thus though Christ be the
cause of our grace, yet because our grace is in it self made the mere
meritorious cause, therefore it would obscure the glory of Christ: Oh then let
the gracious man take heed of any proud risings or stirrings of heart, of any
proud opinions or doctrins which may secretly fermentate him herein.

Neither is the connection between grace and glory causal in a physical and
natural way, as the fire burns, or as the acorn will naturally grow into a
great Oak. It Is ordinarily said, That grace is the seed of glory, or grace is
glory begun, and glory is grace consummated; but all this is not so to be
understood, as if grace by any intrinsecal natural virtue did grow up to glory,
as a child does to a man; No, God might if he had pleased, when we had done
the highest acts of grace, yet have annihilated us; Though we had fought the
good fight of faith, yet he might not have given us a crown of glory; for this
heavenly glory accompanies grace only by virtue of a promise: Had not God
promised and mercifully annexed such glorious privileges, our graces of
themselves could not have procured them.

Therefore is grace and glory connexed partly from the promise of God, He is
willing out of his free bounty to bestow heaven upon our gracious walking, so
that we cannot plead our graces, but Gods promise only; neither is he a debtor
unto us, but unto himself; and this is the righteousness mentioned by the
Scripture, when it speaks of God rewarding us, as when it is said, If we confess
and forsake our sins, he is righteous to forgive them, 1 John 1.9. and so it is
just with God to remember our sufferings, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. and Paul says, It Is
the righteous Judge, 2 Timothy 4.6. which will give him the crown of glory. Here
justice and righteousness is not mentioned for strict, commutative
righteousness, but the righteousness of Gods promise and fidelity: So that God
looks upon the promise, as on the rainbow, which is a sure evidence, that he
will never destroy the world more, and then grace is an antecedent to glory,
because Grace is an ordinable means to glory; Without holiness no man shall see
God, Heb. 12.14. Sin cannot in it is nature be appointed the way to happiness.
Therefore the ancient saying is, that it is via, not causa regni; so that by
Gods commanding and appointing the way, it is as indispensably necessary, as if
it were a cause. And then

Lastly, It makes for the honor and glory of God, to make grace a necessary
forerunner of glory; For if every profane and ungodly person might be saved,
this would redound greatly to Gods dishonor, this would invert and contradict
those places of Scripture, which speak of Gods purity and holiness, so that his
eyes cannot behold the wicked that he will in no wise acquit the ungodly, Exodus
34.7. That he is angry with the wicked all the day long, Psalm. 7.11. Thus you
see, that there is an inviolable chain between sanctification and happiness,
and that it is gross and foul presumption, for a man to separate these two, to
think he shall ever partak of one, without exercising the other, and therefore
this

does thunder out unspeakable woe unto all wretched and ungodly men; What
hopes, what expectations have ye of happiness? Deceive not your selves any
longer with such false surmises; look over all the Bible, and you shall see
nothing but hell fire and eternal torments to such who are workers of iniquity;
What do you think God will alter the course of grace, when he will not the
course of nature? Will God turn the day into night, or the night into day? Will
he make the Sun stand still, or the waters of the Sea part asunder to please
the creature? Yea these miracles he may, and has done, but to save a wicked
man, living and dying in his wickedness, would be the greatest miracle that
could be; yea we may say, such is the holiness and justice of God, that he
cannot do it; What is it then that does thus befot and bewitch wicked men? What
keeps you from gnashing the teeth, tearing the hair, and crying out, Oh this
life, those sins will as surely damn me, as if I were in hell already, without
repentance? And

It speaks infinite comfort to those who have true grace, though in the least
degree: For seeing that grace does not as a natural cause produce glory, but by
the Covenant and Promise of God, then the weakest grace may plead this as well
as the strongest: The lowest believer may say, I have as good, and as faithful
a promise, as the stronger, even a cup of cold water given to a Prophet upon
right grounds, shall have an everlasting Kingdom, and therefore that cannot be
for any worth or dignity in the good duty performed; What is less then a cup
of water, and that cold, yet for this there is promised an everlasting Kingdom?
And certainly, if Paul thought, 2 Cor. 4.17. these afflictions, though in
themselves never so great, yet nothing comparable to that eternal weight of
glory, much less then are those less afflictions comparable to it.

And so I proceed to the second Doctrine, Christ prays, That believers,
though thus sanctified and perfected in one, may be made glorious. Now this
plainly supposes,

That Glory is a gift, Doct. 2. Glory is a gift.
That it does not follow upon our highest degree of Sanctification; and
therefore when the Apostle had said, The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. he
does not also say the wages of grace is eternal life, but he calls it The gift
of God; So that here is a difference between hell and heaven; The wicked man's
life deserves hell, it is the proper reward of every ungodly action, yea some
say, that hell is less then the sin, God does not punish according to the
desert of it, but it is otherwise with glory and happiness, for after we have
done to the utmost, yet it is wholly in Gods good pleasure, whether he will give
a Kingdom or no. Now the Reasons, Why eternal glory must be a gift even to the
most godly men, is

1. Because that all our best actions have some sinfulness cleaving to them,
insomuch that if God should deal strictly according to those adhering defects,
we might be damned, notwithstanding the graces we have. Therefore the Psalmist
prays, Psalm. 143.2. That God would not enter into judgment with his servant,
because in his sight no flesh should be justified. Though David was Gods
servant, and that after his own heart, yet he could not be justified, and so
not saved, unless God did graciously forgive what was imperfect: Oh then how
greatly should this humble us, when we shall consider we never did any thing in
our lives, though in the most holy manner, but it needed a pardon, as Nehemiah,
when he mentioned the many particulars he had done for God, and desired to be
remembered for them, yet added also, that he might be spared, and have mercy
showed unto him, Nehem. 13.22.

2. It Is the gift of God, because any gracious action is so far from making a
man to merit at Gods hand, that he is thereby the more obliged and bound to
God. So that the more holy he is, the less he can deserve, because in that he
is the more indebted unto God: So that it is absurd to think, that because God
has heaped more mercies upon us, that therefore still we deserve more, but
rather to acknowledge, that both grace here, and glory hereafter, is wholly
from the gift of God.

3. Glory cannot be the proper and natural reward of our grace, Because of the
vast disproportion and distance, which is between one and the other. Alas, what
is an act of faith, or love, or patience, or all of them put together, which
have been in the short time of this life unto all eternity? If thy body has
endured the pains of Martyrdom for an hour, what is that to have honor, glory
and freedom from all pain with unspeakable joy and delight to all eternity?

Use. To humble the best of Gods servants under the highest exercises of grace,
How often does the devil and thy own corrupt heart upon any holy duty puff thee
up, and make thee secure and confident, seeking for Justification by something
in thy own self? How apt to think thy self better then others, and to trust in
thy own heart? Is not this to say, thou come to heaven and happiness by thy
own power? How often does God speak to the people of Israel, that they should
not say, they entered into the Land of Canaan, for their righteousness? If for
a temporal mercy they were to take heed, their hearts were not lifted up, much
more for heaven it self: If Jacob said, Genesis 32.10. He was less then the least
of Gods mercies, much more then the greatest.

SERMON CXXXIV. Of immediate Enjoyment of, and Communion with Christ in Heaven,
as the Complement of man's happiness.
JOH. 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me be with me
where I am.
THE next thing considerable is the object matter of this Petition, which is
twofold.

1. To be where Christ is. 2. To behold the glory which the Father had given
him.

Let us Consider the first particular, To be with Christ where Christ is, and
Austin does well observe, that he does not pray, They may be where he is, for
though a man be wretched and miserable he is where Christ is, but not with
Christ, as (says he) a blind man may be where the light is but not with the
light: It Is therefore added, to be with him where Christ is, and that denotes
the gracious and happy enjoyment of him: Some understand it of Christ's gracious
presence here vouchsafed to believers, but the context does more genuinely
comprehend the former; For our Suviour was now to be no longer in this world,
and besides the expression of being with God and Christ in the Scripture-sence
is proper to that eternal felicity and glory, which they are made partakers of,
only the doubt may be if it be understood of glorious presence with Christ, why
Christ speaks in the present tense, where I am: Some answer, that this is to be
understood in respect of his divine nature, by which he was always glorious;
Others understand it spoken in the present, because he was very immediately to
be glorified every way, and then it may well be received; There are some who
make this Argument, that this must be understood of a glorious presence, not a
gracious, because (say they) of a gracious presence the phrase always is, God
is with us, but of a glorious presence We are with God, Observe. The greatest
part of our happiness that we shall have in heaven lies in this, that then we
shall be with Christ, and have immediate communion with the Lord.
but though this may be admitted as the most common expression, yet some few
instances may be showed to the contrary; Therefore the former Reasons
especially if we add the words following, That they may behold my glory, which
seem to be exegeticall of what went before, will evidence that we must
understand the sense of that happy eternal presence with Christ in heaven.

Obs. That the greatest part of our glory and happiness, which we shall have
in heaven, lies in this, that then we shall be with Christ, and have immediate
Communion with the Lord; Though we are apt to look upon the happiness of
heaven as it freeth from all pains and torments, as it delivers us from the
curse and vengeance of God, yet that which is indeed the sublime and chief part
of our happiness, is that we shall there have an immediate enjoyment of God
and Christ; It Is asserted as a Truth, that the greatest misery in hell is in
the poena damni, not in the poena sensus, and Chrysostom considering that
dreadful Sentence pronounced, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, makes
these words depart to be far more terrible then eternal fire; The doctrine
of heaven and hell was not so fully and evidently preached in the Old Testament
as in the New, yet even then we have David thus breaking forth into an holy
passion, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and whom in earth in comparison of
thee? Psalm. 73.25. Whom in heaven but thee, implying, that heaven would not be
heaven if God were not there, and that in heaven he looks not to Angels or
Saints there but God himself; Now though the happiness of heaven be described
from other particulars, yet that this is the sum of all may appear from these
two places, Phil. 1.23. where you find Paul in a divine perplexity and
heavenly straight whether he should desire to live or die, and although for the
Churches good he is contented to live, yet absolutely and simply his desire was
to depatt, and why? because this was to be with Christ, which is far better;
So then this was that which so moved Paul to be no longer in this world, viz to
be with Christ; No doubt Paul had many godly Friends, in seeing whose faces and
enjoying their company he took great delight, and this he often expresses, but
all these are nothing to Christ's Company; Thus to godly hearts, though it be a
great comfort to enjoy their Wives and Children, yet when raised by grace they
can prefer the company of Christ above all. The second place is 1 Thessalonians. 47.
when the Apostle in a divine and ravishing manner had treated on the
Resurrection, then he mentions this as the sum and Complement of all our
felicity, that we shall be with the Lord for ever; To be with the Lord, and to
be with him for ever comprehends so much that the heart can never suck out all
the honey of it.

Of immediate communion with Christ in heaven Consider these things.
But let us not with Moses stand afar off and behold the glory and sweetness of
this Land, but let us enter into it, and these things are considerable.

That we deny not but the happiness of Heaven may be amplified from several
other particulars besides our presence with Christ, such as the enjoying of
Angels and Saints, for a state of happiness is the aggregation of all good
thing desirable, but yet that which is the Sun among the Stars, That which is
the principal and great happiness is that we shall then more perfectly know
and enjoy God and Christ; It Is true indeed most Divines do yield that we shall
there know our godly Friends, and shall greatly rejoice in their salvation and
happiness, yet so that all these lines will meet in God as the center, that
all these streams will be emptied into the Ocean, so that though Heaven has
unspeakable privileges, and every thing therein is glorious, yet that which is
the Heaven of this heaven, the glory of this glory is the enjoyment of Christ
himself; It Is Gods presence that makes heaven to be heaven.

beatitudo objectiva, and formalis, an objective happiness, and this is
acknowledged to be only God himself; There is no other object that can make the
soul happy but God only; As the stars cannot dispell darkness, and make light
but the Sun only; The other is called beatitudo formalis or subjectiva, and
that is the internal perfecting of all the faculties of the soul with such
perfect grace that they are able to carry us to God in a most perfect manner,
and the glorifying of the body with all those admirable qualities that the
Scripture speaks of, so that when we say Christ in heaven is our happiness, we
speak of the objective happiness not the formal, That object in the enjoyment
whereof, the glorified Saint is made eternally happy, is Christ only.

Consider that even in this life we are with Christ, and Christ is with us;
Though (as you heard) to be with Christ is most commonly the expression of
glory, yet it may sometimes denote our gracious presence here, for thus, though
Christ be in Heaven, yet he is said to dwell in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.
Therefore we must needs in this life be with him, now this is the beginning of
that glory we shall have hereafter, He that believes, has Eternal life, Joh.
3. not only de jure, but does actually possess some beginnings of it; The
Transfiguration Peter was in, and the ecstasy Paul speaks of were forerunners
of Heaven, and although the godly may not have such an extaticall ravishing
sense of it, yet the Lord does many times bestow on his people a taste of this
joy whereby they rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, whereby they
are above the world, and can despise all earthly comforts comparatively; Austin
and Bernard do sometimes speak their experience of this upon their souls, and
no doubt but the Martyrs who were to suffer so bitterly for Christ, were had up
into the Mount of Transfiguration before they were carried to Mount Calvary,
Crus nihil sentit in ligno, quando animus est in coelo.

In the next place let us Consider the Grounds why Christ or Gods presence in
heaven is that which makes the happiness of a glorified believer. The grounds
why Gods presence in heaven is that which makes the happiness of a glorified
believer.


Because in Christ or God there is all fullness to make us happy, he is
objectively all what the soul can desire; If Christ be represented in this life
all to the Church, when yet we have but the glimpses of him, how much more in
Heaven when we shall have the full enjoyment of him; Therefore wonder not if
having of God there be our happiness, for he is the universal good, he is that
bonum in quo omnia bona, as Paul said having a Revelation from God, this was
enough, and that those who were pillars could not add unto him, so much more
may it be said in this case, having full possession of the Lord Christ himself,
no comfort or content any other way can add one cubite to that stature of
happiness.

objectively full of that which may make happy, but he is also efficiently
communicative of it, For suppose God be a Fountain sufficient and inexhausted,
yet as long as it is a Fountain sealed up, as long as there is a stone upon the
mouth of it that cannot be rolled away, so long we are not able to come at any
refreshment; God is always able to make us happy to the utmost, he might
vouchsafe us an heaven in this world, but he is a free Agent, and communicates
himself as he pleases; Now it has pleased him while we are in this life to
communicate himself by degrees; This Fountain is dispensed by drops, but in
Heaven there will God communicate himself as far as the creature is able to
receive him: Then this Sun will not be under any Cloud, then there will not be
any complaints why the Lord does hide his face or withdraw himself.

Heavens happiness lies in Christ, because then the soul is made a prepared
and suitable subject for him; All pleasure and delight arises from the
convenience of the object with the faculty, for if there be contrariety or
dissonancy then instead of happiness, there is nothing but misery; Now in
Heaven the the whole soul will be so perfected with Grace that it cannot
delight in any thing but such an holy God: What is the reason that in this life
a wicked man hates God, and refuses his will and law, but because of his
contrariety to him, and on the other side a godly man though he have but
imperfect and inchoate grace, yet he prefers Christ, and loves him before
Father and Mother, and every thing that is dear, all this arises because there
is some similitude between God and him, he is born of God, and partakes of the
divine Nature, and so by this means delights and rejoices in God, but if the
green Tree be thus ready to burn in love with God, what shall the dry Tree do?

some have not been afraid to say, That Christ with a godly man though in hell
yet would make hell no hell, for when the soul comes to enjoy that which is
most beloved, then all further desires and distractions must cease, then the
stone is come to its center; Then the fire of love has ascended as high as it
can go, then it says Sufficit, I have enough; Now all the while the Church is
on Earth she conflicts with desires after Christ, hence are those vehement
Petitions, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, The Spirit and Bride say Come, Rev.
22.17, 20. If then these desires be turned into actual enjoyments, and it is no
longer Come Lord Jesus, but he is come, then there must needs be all matter of
joy and rejoicing, he that drinks of this living water in this life shall
never thirst more, Joh. 4. viz. with a total thirst, So as to be weary of
Christ and desire some other Object, how much rather will this be true in
Heaven; Then it is impossible to be weary, to be desirous of something else
besides God, for there love is joined to the Object as fully and as nearly as
possibly it can be; As Philosophers say the matter of the Heavens desires no
other form, whereas in sublunary things it constantly does, and all because of
the actuality and perfection of that form, Thus it must be with the glorified
Saints in Heaven, They can never be glutted, never complain, as they did of
Manna by the constant use of it, but God is as richly, as delightsomely enjoyed
by every Saint in Heaven to all Eternity as at the very first entrance into
Heaven.

But you will say, May not I then desire Heaven as a place of happiness? Is it
hypocrisy and insincerity to desire that state of glory? Must it be Christ
only there? The Answer is, That is in the principal and first place to be
desired, but yet secondarily Heaven as it is our happiness and our glory may
be fought after, for which many Texts might be brought.

Use of Exhortation, To moderate all thy desires to this life and the Comforts
therein; What makes Death so grievous but to part with so dear a Husband, so
dear a Friend, so sweet Children; Oh remember Christ is above all and dearer
then all, So that if Faith were lively in representing Christ to us we should
need even patience to live, as you see it was with Paul, we should find it to
be to our great loss to be enjoying Friends while we might enjoy Christ; But
on the contrary the wicked man's misery is to be trembled at, for there Christ
says, Father, I will that where the devil and his Angels are to be tormented
to all Eternity, that those also be with them.

SERMON CXXXV. Of an humbled Christians improving in his Prayers the sweet
Appellation of Father.
JOH. 17.24. Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be where I am.
ETernal glory (we heard) our Savior prayed for all those that should believe
in him, which is expressed thus indefinitely, To be with Christ, where he is;
He does not name the place, because this is it which makes heaven to be heaven,
that we do enjoy Christ there

From this we proceed to other things considerable. As

1. The Compellation, Father. This our Savior uses three times, as being a
name denoting the most intimate and sweet relation, as also causing the
greatest confidence, why Christ calls God Father, has been discussed already
against Socinian glosses; he is not a Father to Christ in the same manner, as
he is to believers, neither did Christ use this Title, to subdue and overcome
any unbelieving and doubting thoughts in him, or to quicken up his confidence,
which otherwise might fail, but hereby to demonstrate the near relation between
them, as also his dependence upon him. So that from Christ's example herein, we
may observe,

That it is a necessary duty in a Christian in his approaches to God, Doct. It
is a necessary duty in a Christian, in his approaches to God, to think on those
attributes and relations in him, which may excite and stir up holy
confindence and boldness.
to think on those attributes and relations in him, which may excite and stir
up holy confidence and boldness. When we come unto God, we are to draw nigh to
him, as our heavenly Father, whose bowels do exceed all parents affections in
the world, if they were put together: Therefore it is our Savior in that rule
of prayer, directs to that title and compellation of a Father.

To open this, Consider,

First, That no wicked or unregenerate man is in a state or condition fit to
pray, or approach unto God upon these terms. If God be thy Judge, thy enemy,
and thy adversary, then it is not for thee to call him Father: As God
expostulates in Mal. 1.7. If I be a Father, where is mine honor? It Is true,
there is a paternity by way of creation, and thus God is the Father of all; but
we speak only of that paternity, which is by Adoption, and the Covenant of
Grace: Consid. I. No wicked man is in a condition fit to pray or approach unto
God upon these terms.
Let therefore every wicked and ungodly man conclude, that while he abides so,
he cannot pray acceptably, he may not come to God as a Father. It Is blasphemy
for such profane wretches to say to God, Thou art my Father. The Scripture
tells us, That such are of their Father the Devil: See then if the Devil thy
father will bless thee, if he will make thee happy: Oh that wicked men would
but consider, what a woeful condition it is to lie in, that they cannot pray,
that they cannot call God Father! Thou do but blaspheme with thy tongue all
the while, what God, the God of wicked and profane enemies to him? No, he is a
Judge, and a consuming fire to all such.

II. Its of great consequence for the humbled Christian in his prayer to
improve this relation of a Father.
Secondly, It Is of great consequence and advantage for the humbled Christian in
his prayer, to improve this relation of a Father. To such all the sweetness out
of this honeycomb. To improve this Meditation till it be like fire in his
bowels. For

To the tender heart humbled for sin, it is the greatest temptation that he
conflicts with, to be persuaded God is his Father. Such are the discoveries and
experiences of his own sins and infirmities, that he concludes, though other
may call God Father, yet he cannot: Is not this the great dispute in the breast
of a godly man, Whether God be his Father or no? Does he not argue against it
from the several corruptions that are in his soul? Oh how can this, and this be
in me, if God be my Father! As also from the many sad afflictions and exercises
he meets with more then others; If God were my Father, would he thus break
and bruise me, more then many in the world, making me the Butt against which
all his arrows are delivered? So that you see it is necessary to compose the
spirit against this temptation, which does so naturally breed in the heart of a
tender Christian: Insomuch that to call God Father cordially, and upon sincere
grounds, is a great mercy.

It Is necessary to be persuaded of, and call God Father, because Satan's great
temptation is against this, if he overthrow this, all is gone, if once he can
tempt thee to this, that God is not thy Father. What horror, and what
confusion, yea what an hell will not presently overwhelm thee? You see the
devil working with this engine upon Christ himself, knowing this was to set the
axe to the root of the tree, If thou be the Son of God do thus, he would have
him put that to the trial, and is not the devil still suggesting this unto
thee, if thou be the Son of God, then it would be thus and thus with thee?
Gods children never do as thou do: Now this temptation has so far
prevailed by Satan's instigation upon some of Gods people, that they have wholly
given over to pray, that they dared not to presume to pray; And why? because
God is not their Father, they may no more pray, then the damned in hell; So
that the godly man is left in a woeful desolate estate, all the while this
truth does not reign in his heart, that God is his Father.

This persuasion of God being our Father, is of so great consequence, that the
Spirit of God is sent on purpose into our hearts for this very work. Gal. 4.6.
Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts
crying Father. So that as we remain blind and darkened in mind, till the Spirit
lead us into all truth, that as we remain unholy, and cleaving to our lusts,
till the Spirit sanctify us, so we do also remain in a doubting, unbelieving
and dejected disposition, till God send this Spirit into our hearts; so that
when a man is humbled for sin, and feels the load of his transgressions, it
must be more then humane power, yea or all the counsels and directions of the
ablest Ministers, that can enable such an one to call him Father: Oh how often
does such a tempted soul say, Oh that I could call him Father! Oh that I could
delight in him as a Father! But now when this Spirit of Adoption comes into
our hearts, see with what efficacy and power it comes, it makes us to cry,
that denotes earnestness, vehemence, and also confidence, undauntedness,
notwithstanding the roaring cries of the devil and conscience to the contrary;
and thus it enableth us to cry, Abba, Father, by way of ingemination, implying,
that it is not once, but twice, yea often; for indeed if the Spirit of God did
not constantly thus keep up a filial frame, every new failing would cast us
back into a mere darkness and confusion: Therefore the Spirit of God has this
office of being a Comforter, because we of our selves cannot sow that seed in
our own souls.

This is necessary, because this only raises sweet, comfortable and
delightful thoughts of God. The relation of a Father is sweet, and what a
great difference is there between a child praying to a tender father, and a
malefactor to a severe Judge? David once said, He remembered God, and was
troubled; Certainly the more we think of God and his Attributes, Omnipotent,
Wise, Holy, Righteous; if not a Father, the more terrible and dreadful is the
apprehension of him: It Is necessary to have good endeared thoughts of God;
therefore the devils and the damned, who are of the farthest distance from God,
they have hard and raging thoughts against him; It being therefore necessary to
keep up such thoughts in the soul as these; Let God afflict, smite, destroy,
yet he is just and righteous, yea and to be loved, now this cannot be, unless
this faith is strongly carried out unto him, as a Father.

Persuasion of God as a Father is necessary, because this only will produce
faith and confidence in those that pray with such an assurance. Now faith is
the very soul and life of prayer, He that prays believing, shall receive, and
James exhorts, Let him ask in faith, nothing doubting, Chap. 1. Our Savior
told the woman, It should be according to her faith; So that unbelief makes our
prayers like a messenger without hands or feet, and if so, How shall we get our
prayers animated with this grace? Nothing conduces more to this, then the
Meditation of God, as a Father, when this is assented to, then it easily
believes God will do all necessary good for it, such a Father will not give a
stone to his child, when he asks bread. Thus Mat. 5. our Savior makes this
an argument against all distracting fears and cares, Your heavenly Father
knows what you have need of: Why is it that after prayer thy heart is as much
troubled and disquieted, as if the request had never been made known to God,
but only because faith did not reign and predominate in thy heart concerning
Gods fatherly relation to thee.

Persuasion of God as a Father is necessary, because hereby the heart will be
quickened to all those holy and filial dispositi^ns which ought to be in
children. If ye call him Father, 1 Pet. 1.17, etc. Pass your sojourning here
with an holy fear. The Scripture apprehension of a Father, will not beget
security and a licentious life, but rather it will cause an holy reverence, and
a diligent attendance to avoid all those sins that may offend and provoke. The
Spirit of adoption, is also a Spirit of Sanctification, being born of God, he
does not, he cannot sin; for how abominable and uneffectual would our prayers
be, if we should join profaneness to those duties? In stead of obtaining
mercy, we may justly expect, that God would pour out greater wrath, whereas a
due and right apprehension of God, as a Father, will make a gracious and humble
disposition in the soul.

Use of Exhortation to the people of God, that they strengthen and confirm this
relation to them, as much as may be. Pray for that Spirit of Adoption, which
will enable thee to cry Abba, Father: Oh know, that all the cause of thy
disquietness, distractions and diffidence of Spirit in thee, arises from
unbelief in this point! If thou believe God is thy Father, then sin is
forgiven, then no good thing will be denied thee; This Father will treasure up
for thee, yea the properties of this Father are wonderfully quickening, he is an
omnipotent Father, and so can do all things; he is a compassionate Father, and
so will do all things; he takes upon him both the bowels of Father and Mother
also; Parents have been hardened to their children, as the Prophet observes,
but God cannot be; He is a wise Father, and so orders every thing for the
best. This if duly considered would free thee from all distrustful cares, and
thou would learn from thy own child, to walk depending upon God, casting all
thy burden upon him, because thou see it taking no care what it shall eat, or
what it shall put on, but rests it self wholly upon it is Fathers care.

The second thing observable in the Text is, The manner of Christ's expression,
his Petition, I will, Father, I will. Some think this an expression not of
prayer, but of Christ's just demand of his right to that which he had as God,
and therefore they think, that whereas before he prayed as a man, here he
interposeth himself as God; as thus Austin of old, Omnipotenti patri se velle
dixit omnipotens filius. Others they make it an expression of prayer, because
in the former part the word (...) is used, and thus Mark 10.35. when James and
John prayed to Christ, they said, Master, we will. But seeing this prayer of
Christ's is from him as a Mediator, we may well acknowledge that there is more
then a mere humble supplication, such as mere men make, but some powerful
declaration of his will, that he will have it so: For to this purpose he
speaks, Joh. 12.26. Where I am, there also shall my servant be. Christ by his
own power and authority will cause it to be. From whence I shall touch only on
this Doctrine,

Doct. 2. Christ's prayer for his people will certainly and infallibly prevail
for them.
That Christ's prayer for his people, will certainly and infallibly prevail for
them. I will, says Christ, that they be where I am. Though we may many times
doubt of the efficacy, and success of our own prayers, yet there is no cause
at all to question the success of Christ's Intercession, and the grounds are
these,

1. Because he has merited and purchased at Gods hands those benefits he
prays for. Therefore though whatsoever God does to us, be of grace in respect
of us, yet it is of justice and right to him; so that it can no more be, that
Christ's prayer for us should not speed, then that God should be unjust, and
that not in respect of promise only to Christ, for he has likewise promised to
us, but of justice: So that now Christ may well say, Father, I will their glory
and happiness, because I have purchased it at so dear a rate.

2. Christ's prayer must needs be effectual, because it lies in his power also
to do that, and accomplish for us, which he does desire. Though therefore as
man he prays, yet as God he can fulfill and bring about what we stand in need
of: If therefore Christ says, Father I will that they be sanctified, that they
be glorified, who shall withstand this?

3. Christ's prayer will always take effect, because his will, and the will of
the Father are the same. So that as Christ argued, None could take his sheep
out of his hand, because he and the Father are one; So also it follows,
Christ's will in prayer cannot be gainsaid or hindered by any, because the Father
and he are one; if indeed the Father had one will, and Christ a contrary will
to it, then we might justly doubt of the success of it, but it is not, as
Christ wills the Sanctification and glorification of his people, so does the
Father also; So that all our confidence is to be in Christ's prayer, and not
ours.

Use of Consolation and comfort to the children of God, who mourn under the
sinful imperfections of their prayers, yea are ready to cry out, that God
shuts out their prayers: Oh let them remember, what a glorious treasure is
here laid up for them! Though their own prayers are weak, yet Christ's are not.
Look therefore again and again, see the things Christ has prayed for, and then
doubt not, but they will be accomplished in thee: Oh let not thy heart sink and
be troubled within thee, when thou see such a remedy provided for thee! Urge
Christ's name, urge Christ's prayer.

Use 2. Of Terror to wicked men, who have no interest in Christ's prayer or
intercession. If it were so terrible a judgment not to have Samuel or Jeremiah
pray for some persons, it argued their incurable condition, how much more may
it strike horror and amazement into the hearts of all wicked men, as Christ
minded thee not in his death, so neither in his prayer, I pray not for the
world? But into the hardened and impenitent heart no terrible woe can enter.

SERMON CXXXVI. Of the State of Glory, Showing what it is to behold Christ's
Glory in Heaven.
JOH. 17.24. That they may behold the glory, that thou have given me.
IN these words is contained the final cause or end of our Saviors Petition in
behalf of his Disciples, He prays that they may be with him in Heaven, and
why? That they may behold the glory, which the Father has given him; In which
words take notice of the Act, the Object, and the Cause of it; The act is, that
they may behold, ut videant, says Austin, non ut credant, because Eternal
vision in Heaven is the reward of faith here on earth; Here it is believing, in
Heaven it is beholding; Although there are some that limit the sense to this
life, as if here they were by the experience of Faith to behold the glory and
majesty of Christ as Mediator, but the context does principally relate to the
enjoying of glory in Heaven; Others they observe, Non dixit ut habeant sed ut
videant, he did not say, That they might have, but that they might behold, for
Christ's glory is incommunicable, but the word is not to be limited, for it
comprehends

1. To behold and see, and that immediately, opposite to the way of faith and
knowledge which we have of God in this life, which is but darkly.

2. It denotes* fruition and enjoyment of this glory, for we shall be
glorified with Christ, and thus the word videre is often used for frui, To see
life is to live, To see death is to die, To see the Kingdom of Heaven is to
enjoy it, So that the godly shall not be mere idle Spectators of this Glory,
but they shall be taken into fellowship with it.

3. It denotes all the effects and consequents of such a beholding of this
Glory, which are infinite delight, and joy, Immortality, and Eternity, So that
there shall never be any end of it, all this is comprehended in seeing* but the
greater Question is about the glory that is mentioned; What is understood by
that, and some relate it to that infinite and incomprehensible Glory, which he
has as God, but generally it is understood of that Glory which he has as
Mediator, for so the Father after his sufferings did infinitely exalt him, and
give him a name above all names, So that Christ as Mediator is glorified in a
transcendent manner by God, So that Christ has his essential glory as God, and
his Mediatory glory as Mediator; Now these two kinds of glory do not differ
really, Doct. The great end of our being in heaven is to behold and enjoy the
glory of Christ.
but only in several ways of administration, for he that is Mediator must
needs also be God.

Obs. That the great end of our being in Heaven is to behold and enjoy the
Glory of Christ; As the Queen of Sheba took a long journey to behold the glory
of Solomon, which did so ravish her that her spirit even fainted within her,
which yet was but a temporal, fading, and earthly glory, how much more
transcendent and ravishing will that heavenly Glory be to us, when we shall
behold the Majesty and Greatness that Christ shall then be in, sitting upon
his throne at the right hand of God, To behold and to be ravished with this
glory of Christ is the great work we have to do to all Eternity, for our
Saviors will to have us where he is is not for any want or necessity that he
had of us, Christ's glory would have been admired by Angels, though we should
never be received into his presence, but it is for our good solely, and
certainly, if the Queen of Sheba pronounced Solomon's servants happy because
they were always in his presence, how unspeakable shall the happiness of all
believers be, who shall constantly behold and enjoy Christ's glory.

How much is comprehended in this expression of beholding Christ's glory.
But let us Consider more largely what was only hinted before, viz. How much is
comprehended in this expression of beholding Christ's glory.

There is the immediate seeing and looking upon all that Majesty and Glory
which God and Christ have; This is often called by Divines Beatisical vision,
The sight of God which makes immediately happy; Now because God is an infinite
and spiritual invisible Object, It Is disputed whether we shall behold God by
our bodily eyes, That with our understanding, which are the spiritual eyes of
the Soul we shall behold him, is acknowledged by all, and clear by Scripture,
for then we shall see him face to face, that is perfectly, not as in this
world; And as for the beholding of God as a Spirit with our bodily eyes, there
are Divines that affirm it, for although (say they) it be naturally impossible
for a bodily eye to see a Spirit, yet then God will in a wonderful manner lift
up the eye of the body above that which naturally it can do, even as then God
will make it a body without passion or heaviness, and (as they say) the
torments in hell, and the flames of fire there do by Gods power work upon the
devils and the souls of men, though spirits, in hell: But it may be a curiosity
to determine this, Therefore though it may be doubted whether our bodily eyes
shall directly behold the glory and majesty of God, yet consequentially we
shall, for we shall with our bodily eyes behold Christ in respect of his humane
nature and body which he has now in heaven, so that the Glory which Christ as
Mediator has in heaven is externally visible, and to be beheld by the bodily
eyes of a glorified Saint, So that although God be a Light that no man can
approach unto, yet in and through Christ we may draw nigh unto this light; Now
this happiness of the souls knowing and the bodies seeing of God and Christ in
heaven must be unspeakable, for there is an excellent consonancy and
convenience between the faculties and the objects, how far do men go to see
objects of worldly glory; It was Austins wish, that he might have seen Rome in
her temporal glory, but what is all this to see Christ sitting on the right
hand of God on the throne of glory.

All our happiness does not lie in the mere beholding and seeing of God, but
in the enjoying of him as our happiness and our good; Therefore we are said to
be Coheirs with Christ, and to be glorified with him, yea, in the Rev. 3.21.
we are said to sit on the same Throne with Christ himself, not but that Christ
has a prerogative in his glory, and his glory is incommunicable, yet in some
proportion, and according to our capacity, we are made partakers of the same
glory: Therefore it is necessary to take seeing for enjoying here, and indeed it
cannot be but that the immediate beholding of Christ should make men happy, for
he is an object filled with all sufficiency and perfection able to satiate and
replenish the appetite of the soul, even to the very utmost; Oh therefore how
easily should we mortify our hearts as to earthly and worldly glory who would
lose this heavenly glory to obtain that? Let the devil show thee all the glory
of this world, but know Christ in his word shows thee the glory of heaven,
and will thou fall down to worship the devil rather then Christ, so that we do
not only behold and see Christ's glory without some enjoyments, as Moses did see
the Land of Canaan but was not admitted into it, but we see the expression is,
Come thou faithful Servant, enter into thy Masters Joy, Mat. 25.23. Not only
behold it but enter into it; Oh that our hearts were more affected in this.

From the seeing and enjoying of Christ there does arise in the will infinite
complacency, joy, and delight; It Is disputed wherher happiness be more in the
acts of the understanding or the will, and some conclude that it is principally
in the will, because that is an active appetite and predominant in a man,
Indeed the whole of a man; Now in beholding of God the whole soul must needs be
swallowed up, for God is an object infinitely satisfying the knowledge, and
also replenishing the will, so that nothing but God can satisfy the soul, and
this happiness is the more increased, because God will then widen and enlarge
the faculties of the soul, that they shall be able to know more, to love and
delight more then they can do in this life; Therefore our joy here is but a
drop to this Ocean, as we know but in part, so we rejoice and delight but in
part: Hence it is if God should communicate himself to us in this life as he
will do in heaven, we were not able to bear no more then the eye can endure the
dazeling beams of the Sun, it would be true, that none can see God in this
sense and live, so that in heaven the souls of men will be enlarged to receive
more of God then they can do in this life.

From this joy and delight in beholding Christ's glory, their mouths will be
filled with all praise and thanksgiving; We read of Angels and Saints
continually praising of God in heaven, so that whereas many duties will cease
in heaven, this of Thanksgiving will abide for ever, there shall be no more
the duties of humiliation and mourning, the acts of patience and justifying
faith will cease in heaven, but the duty of praising and glorifying God will
continue to all Eternity; And no wonder if praise be our only work there, for
if upon some temporal Deliverance and particular eminent mercies the Church of
God has solemnly broken forth into all praises of him, how much more in heaven
when there is such an universal Deliverance from all Enemies that there will
be no more tears or fears, There will be no more matter of complaints either
from within or without; Oh then that blessed time which believers shall have in
Heaven to all Eternity, Nothing to do but with joy and gladness to sing forth
the praises of God, and that his Mercy endures for ever; Oh beloved, how
should this make the godly long for and desire that glory more! Here they are
in a Valley of Tears, here they are sighing, groaning, exercised with one care,
one fear after another; Thus we are grovelling upon the ground while they in
Heaven are full of joy and delight; This should teach us to be weaned from
these things.

To the performing of all these things there is required a perfect
Sanctification of all the parts and the faculties of the Soul, as also a full
glorification of the body; For without these Happiness would not be in
enjoying of God, Mat. 5. Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God;
As the Eye corrupted with humors is not able to behold the most refreshing
Object with any delight, So neither can a heart defiled with sin account it any
happiness to be enjoying so holy a God; Therefore there is required a through
and perfect Sanctification of the whole man, that it may take full and adequate
delight in God; Hence if it were possible for the devils and damned in hell to
behold all this glory in heaven, yet it would not make them happy; yea, through
malice and envy they would be tormented the more; And why so? What is that
glory which they shall behold shining in Christ.
only because they want pure holiness within, and being destitute of this they
cannot delight in the presence of such holy company.

In the next place let us Consider What is that glory which they shall behold
shining in Christ; We read of Christ in prayer, how that in a wonderful
Transfiguration his face did shine, Mat. 17.2. like the Sun, here was great
glory, but yet it is nothing to Christ's glory hereafter: yea, we read of Moses
his face, that it did shine with such glory that the people could not behold
it, Therefore a veil was put upon his face, But in heaven there the glory of
Christ will transcend all these, and there will be no need of a Veil, for we
shall be enabled to behold it: Now this glory of Christ in heaven is

1. That essential glory which he has as God, This he never laid aside no more
then his Godhead, but as the Sun in a dark gloomy day may not send forth its
glorious beams; Thus the Lord Christ while here upon the earth subject to many
infirmities, had that divine glory covered for a while, otherwise he could not
have been in a capacity to suffer for us, but when in heaven then all those
infirmities are laid aside, Then the body of Christ will not hinder the
breaking forth of all his divine glory, This glory then of Christ will be
manifestly set forth, for in heaven does God put forth his more immediate glory.

2. Christ's Mediatory glory will then also be manifested, for though Christ as
God had right to all the glory in heaven, yet he did upon a new and distinct
title acquire this glory to himself, whether indeed this great name given him
above all names in heaven and earth being lifted up above all principalities
and powers was as an effect or consequent only of his foregoing humiliation is
disputed, as also what this Mediatory glory is, and whether distinct from
divine is much debated by the Learned; But this is sure, the Scripture speaks
clearly of a wonderful great Majesty and power expressed by sitting at Gods
right hand vouchsafed unto Christ after his resurrection, Now all this glory we
shall be made beholders of.

3. We shall behold Christ's glory in a passive sense, that is, all the glory
which Angels and Saints shall give unto him, for so you may read, That the
Elders gave their Crowns unto the Lamb, Rev. 5.8, 9, 10. with all praise and
glory, for he was worthy; It Is unspeakable to consider all the glory and praise
which then shall be given unto the Lord Christ, by whose means they are all
made happy, and without whom there had not been one glorified Saint.

Use of Exhortation, Let the Meditation of this glorious time wean thee from
inordinate affections to all humane and earthly glory: Does a stately glorious
house allure thee? think what is this to the glory in heaven; Do glorious
garments and apparel bewitch thee? Say, what are these to those glorious robes
in heaven? Let this Sun put out the light of the Stars, and let this also make
thee patient under all losses and chastisements.

SERMON CXXXVII. How Christ (as Mediator) had his Glory given him, although as
God he could not properly have any thing given him, except by way of
Manifestation: Against the Socinians.
JOHN 17.24. To behold the Glory, which thou have given me.
THere remain two things more observable in this Petition, whereof one is, the
efficient cause of that glory, which we are constantly to behold in heaven. The
other is, the subject for whom he thus supplicateth, both which we shall
dispatch at this time. And

First of the Description of Christ's glory, from the Author of it, which is
God the Father, from whom he has it by way of gift. I shall not be long on
this, because I have already spoken much to it: Only the Doubt is, What glory
it is, that here is said to be given by the Father? and without any further
engaging into controversies, we may fully conclude, That it is of his glory as
Mediator; and if you ask, How is that said to be already given him, when he had
not yet suffered, and so had not entered into glory? The answer is, either that
the Father had given it him in respect of his decree to give; in which sense
learned men say, the word (give) is used sometimes in this Chapter, or else he
had it actually given in respect of right and title, even before his
Resurrection. Or

Lastly, It is said to be already given, because he was immediately to possess
his glory; for thus before in the Chapter, he was said to be no longer in this
world, because he was presently to leave it: So here the glory which thou have
given me, because he was presently to be made partaker of it. So that from this
we may observe,

That Christ as Mediator had his glory given him. Doct. Christ as Mediator had
his glory given him.

Propositions a^out this point.


This appears by Christ's prayer in this Chapter to the Father, that he would
glorify him, as also by other Texts, plainly affirming this to be given him,
Phil. 2.9. God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name, etc. So Mat.
28.18. All power is given me in heaven and earth, and in many other places. Now
it cannot be denied but the Doctrine of Christ's mediatory glory, and the manner
of obtaining it, is full of difficulty, insomuch that it has greatly exercised
the thoughts of the learned; but I shall not lanch into the deeps of it,
because it is here occasionally spoken of. Christ as God cannot have any thing
given him, unless by way of manifestation and external celebration.
I shall only declare some particulars that may clear the truth. And

Christ, as God, cannot have any thing given unto him in time, unless it be by
way of manifestation and external celebration by the creature. Thus God himself
is said to have honor and glory, and worship from the creature; thus his Name
is said to be glorified, not that Gods infinite perfection is capable of any
new advantage, which he had not always, only here is a declaration and
acknowledgement of this by the creatures, and this consideration should greatly
humble us in our best and choicest services, we have not made God more happy,
or blessed thereby, neither does he need our services, only it is for our good;
as when the eye sees the Sun, or the thirsty traveller drinks of the
fountain, the Sun or spring are not helped thereby, but our infirmities
refreshed.

Obj.
And if it be objected, That the humane nature was given Christ as God, and he
had not this from all eternity, neither was this by declaration only; Therefore
something may be given Christ as God, de novo, which he had not from all
eternity. Several things may be said to this, especially these two:

Answ.
1. That nothing can be given to Christ as God, which he himself does not give
himself: And therefore if any creature, men or Angels could have given him
something of themselves, this would have argued imperfection; but it was Christ
as God that did assume this humane nature to himself: Therefore Joh. 1. God is
said to become man, and to dwell amongst us; so he is said, to take not upon
him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham; Therefore what is given him
is given by himself. But yet

Secondly, and more fully, The humane Nature was indeed assumed by the Divine,
but not to any intrinsecal perfection of the Godhead, but to make perfect the
humane Nature. So that we cannot so properly say, The humane Nature was given
to Christ as God, as that the divine Nature assumed the humane Nature, not
necessarily, but voluntarily, not out of indigence, but bounty, not because it
was to be perfected thereby, but to perfect the humane Nature.

Christ as Mediator might have something bestowed and given upon him by the
Father. For although as Mediator he must necessarily be God also, yet because
(to be Mediator) does imply a compound, as it were, viz. God-man; Therefore in
that respect, he is capable by way of gift of that which otherwise absolutely
as God, he could not receive, and in this respect, as Mediator, he still
acknowledges, He received his Doctrine from the Father, that it was from the
free love and goodness of God to appoint him to be a Mediator. Now of all the
gifts, which the Scripture speaks of, as most eminently and signally bestowed
upon him, is that glory and exaltation he was lifted up into after he had been
in a state of humiliation. This the Scripture does often inculcate; but here is
some Doubt about the explication of this, For the Socinians denying Christ to
be essentially God, Doubt.
do affirm, That this glory became due unto him, only upon his obedience unto
death, and that upon such perfect obedience, then, and not before, God
appointed and constituted him God and Lord, gave him this high excellent glory,
commanding men and Angels to worship him with the same religious worship, that
God himself is to be worshipped.

Sol.
But this is fully against Scripture, which as it makes him God while on earth,
so also King and Lord of all, although after his death, he came to a fuller
possession of this glory, he was always King and Head of the Church, having a
right to all glory, but yet did not actually receive it, but in such a method
and order God had appointed.

Doubt.
The other Doubt is about the Orthodox themselves, Whether Christ did merit this
glory for himself, or no? Some eminent Divines do wholly deny it, making his
glory only the consequent of his humiliation, not the reward of it merited by
the Lord Christ. Sol.
But there seems no danger in, yea there appears some necessity of
affirming, That Christ merited his own glory as well as ours; Not but that as
God he had a right to all glory, only the same glory was due unto him upon a
twofold title, 1. By natural inheritance, as it were being the only begotten
Son of God: And secondly, by purchase and conquest: Even as Joash obtained his
Kingdom, partly by his natural right, and partly by conquest subduing Athaliah,
who unjustly detained the Kingdom from him. This Mediatory glory then was both
a gift, and a reward unto Christ, although even all this glory that Christ is
invested with, does also redound to our good and glory.

Whether Christ, as Mediator, Doubt.
be to be adored with religious worship? But

1. This is confessed by the Orthodox against the Socinians, That Christ is by
Nature the true God, which they prove from religious worship given unto him,
Sol.
for we are commanded to believe him, therefore in him also are we to worship;
insomuch that the Socinians are guilty of high Idolatry (let them mince the
matter never so much) while they give religious worship to Christ, and yet
profess him to be a mere man. But now the Socinians to overthrow this,
Socinians Argument.
argue in this manner, He that is worshipped with a divine worship, as he is
Mediator, is not worshipped as God: But Christ is worshipped as Mediator.

In answering of this Objection, The Orthodox go several ways* Answered.
Some deny the minor, viz. That Christ is not to be religiously adored, as
Mediator, though they acknowledge that even to Christ's humane Nature there is
due some veneration inferior to the divine: But we may well enough grant the
Proposition true, That Christ, as Mediator, is to be adored with divine
worship, because as he is Mediator he must necessarily be God, and so therein
is included the ratio formalis sub qua of all religious worship: So that to be
worshipped as Mediator, and as God, are not opposite, but one is necessarily
included in the other. For that such a religious invocation of Christ, as
Mediator is lawful, appears by that prayer of Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my
spirit, Act. 7.59.

The Use may be of Instruction; Does God the Father thus exalt and glorify
Christ? Was this his purpose from all eternity thus to have him magnified for
ever? Then let it be our constant work, and the daily imploiment of our soul,
to give him all honor and praise: Oh let us be ashamed more, that we have not
honored Christ as he ought to be! Whom Ahashuerus would have honored, all the
people were ready to bow unto; how much rather then ought we to glorify the
Lord Christ, whom the Father does therefore exalt, because by his sufferings we
are also glorified. Now we may glorify him three ways: How many ways we may
glorify Christ.


1. Doctrinally, by maintaining all those true opinions that advance him in his
Nature, Offices, and all operations for us; For he that denies any of his
Natures or his Offices, or his works for us, he does greatly rob Christ of his
glory, and how busy has the devil been in all ages, thus to dishonor Christ,
because by this means the Head and the foundation of the Church is endangered,
which proves mortal to the Church; Socinians destroy one of the Natures,
Papists obscure his Offices: so that in very few Churches is Christ set up in
all his glory.

2. Christ's glory is to be cordially in thy heart, and orally in thy mouth; Oh
what enlarged affections and ravishment of soul did Paul show, when he mentions
Christ, he speaks of him, as the complete perfection of a Christian, Who is
made righteousness, wisdom and all things, and therefore this is the
character of those that are spiritual, They have no confidence in the flesh,
and rejoice in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.3.

Lastly, We glorify Christ really in our lives and conversations, when we walk
as Members sutably to the Head, when we order our conversations answerably to
the rule of the Gospel. For how often do wicked men reproach and dishonor
Christ by their ungodly lives, as if Christ taught them no better, or as if
Christ died not to deliver us from all ungodly and sinful lusts? Therefore on
the other side, then we honor Christ, when we are holy as he was, zealous as
he was, humble and meek as he was, as Paul said, He carried the marks of Christ
upon his body, so do thou the graces of Christ upon thy soul.

We come in the next place to a brief description of the subject described,
Those that thou have given me: Now this is the opposite description to such who
are of the world. By giving unto Christ, some understand by a Metonymy of the
effect for the cause, Gods decree to give, as 2 Timothy 1.9. The grace given us in
Christ Jesus before the world began, that is, decreed to be given to us: So
some expound the foregoing place, The glory which thou have given me, that is,
which thou have decreed to give, even as in this Chapter he says, I come to
thee, I sanctify my self, and as John 6.33. Every one that my Father gives
shall come to me, where by giving must be understood a decree to give, for
actual giving is the very coming it self unto Christ. Though this be true, yet
we must add, that in respect of those who were to believe, so it is a decree of
giving, but in respect of the Apostles and others who did then believe, it was
an actual giving, Now whereas we see the original and fountain of all grace
formerly prayed for, and now all glory here is, because some are given to
Christ by the Father, we may observe,

Doct. 2. That its no free will or preparatory work in man, that begins either
his grace or glory, but the sole gift of God.
That it is no free will, or preparatory work in man, that begins either his
grace or glory, but the sole gift of God. I shall but touch at this, because
handled before, only as our Savior thought fit to use this description of
believers so often in one Chapter, so it should also inform us, that it is a
truth of absolute necessity, which ought constantly to reign in our hearts,
that we did not prevent God, but Gods grace did prevent us, that we did not
choose him, but he chose us. Therefore it is a violent wresting of the words by
Arminians, when they will have this giving of some to the Father to be
understood for the consequent, men's obeying and receiving of the grace offered,
and so we give our selves to Christ, and are not given by the Father. That the
initials of all good is from grace only, and not of us, is abundantly
convinced, by that wretched, sinful, and woeful pollution that we are all born
in, like that miserable infant spoken of by the Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 16. I
shall not doctrinally enlarge this, only let the Use be

1. Admonition, to take heed of all those proud and self-advancing Doctrines,
that magnify the power of nature, that think not grace absolutely necessary,
that if it be required, it is only ad facilius operandum, or that grace does
only excite and stir up the natural abilities within us: Oh take heed of
swallowing down this deadly poison!

Use 2. Of Exhortation to the people of God, with all humility and astonishment
to admire the grace of God in Christ, that mollified thee, that prepared thee,
that began first upon thee: Alas thou wast wallowing in thy blood, thou wast
hotly pursuing thy sins, thou did violently refuse the grace of God, till at
last he opened thy heart, and saved thee against thy will, making thee of
unwilling, willing.

SERMON CXXXVIII. Of Gods love to Christ as Mediator, and in him to all
believers from all Eternity.
JOHN 17.^4. For thou have loved me before the foundation of the world.
THis last clause is brought in as a Reason of that which went before, Some
make it a Reason of Christ's Petition, why the Father should hear him, viz.
because he always loved him, and so nothing could be denied to him; others
refer it to the gift of Glory mentioned immediately; The Father gave Christ
glory because he loved him from Eternity, but these do not oppose, but may
include one another: The only doubt is, In what sense the Father is said to
love Christ before the Foundation of the world; Many understand it of Christ as
the natural and only Son of God; That as he had always the same glory with the
Father, so likewise he was always loved of him, and from hence they prove the
Deity of Christ; But Calvin and others expound it of Christ as Mediator; That
the Father did love him from the beginning, in appointing of him to be a
Mediator, and preparing him thereunto, Now this seems the more genuine
Interpretation, and does not exclude but include the former also, So that by
direct consequence the eternal godhead of Christ is asserted; Indeed Piscator
refers those words ( before the foundation of the world) to the verb (...)
Thou have given; As v. 5. implies, but there is no necessity to make such a
traj^ction; The sum is that Christ as Mediator does refer all the glory and
honor he has to the Fathers love, Now you must know that when the Father
love^h him as Mediator, It Is not absolutely terminated upon the person of
Christ but the whole number of believers in him, and therefore this loving of
Christ is to be extended unto all Believers, for the Apostle says the same
thing of them because of Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. where we are said to be chosen in
him before the foundation of the world, To be holy and without blame before him
in love; where that ( love) is referred to Gods predestinating and electing of
us, by some Interpreters; So that from the words we may observe.

That God the Father loved Christ as Mediator, Observe. That God the Father
loved Christ as Mediator, and thereby all believers in him from all Eternity.
and thereby all believers in him from Eternity: This Truth deserves
explication and application. And

1. Let us consider wherein the love of the Father was showed to Christ as
Mediator, as that will appear in the designing of him to it, and approbation
or complacency in him while discharging of it; The love of God in preparing him
thereunto is seen in these things,

1. In appointing and ordaining the second person as the only begotten of the
Father, to come into the world and take our nature upon him; For herein did the
Father love the Son, because when mankind was lost, and justice could no ways
be satisfied by any mere creature, that in this exigency Christ should offer
himself, and so readily profess, Behold, I come to do thy will O Lord; Thus
when he formerly had said, I sanctify my self, that does not solely relate to
his humane nature but even his divine also, because the second person was in a
peculiar manner sent into the world, and to become man for us.

2. The Fathers love was more remarkably seen toward that particular humane
nature which the second person assumed, in the sanctifying and glorifying of
that with all sutablenesse, and thus the love of God was to the humane nature
of Christ before the Foundation of the world by way of purpose and decree in
God, even as it is to all the Elect Children of God, for Christ attributes i^
to God the Father, that he had so fitted his humane nature, Therefore he says,
a body thou have prepared me, Heb. 10.5. Now several ways did the Fathers
love appear herein, as 1. to ordain and appoint him to be a Mediator, to make
him man for this purpose; This is attributed wholly to God the Father, hence 1
Pet. 1.20. Christ is said to be foreordained before the foundation of the
world; Christ coming into the world was not of mere necessity, There was no
compulsion to this, but the Father out of his mere good pleasure did thus
ordain him; Hence it is, that our Savior does constantly make the Fathers
mission or sending of him to be the cause of being our Mediator.

2. This love of the Fathers to him was seen in taking that particular humane
nature rather then any other into an hypostaticall Union; Though Christ did not
take an individual humane personalized as men are, yet he took a particular
nature into a personal Union with the Godhead, which is the greatest
exaltation of man's nature that can possibly be imagined; It Is that great
mystery which Angels are continually searching into; but if you ask why the
second Person did take this particular nature rather then another, that the
holy Ghost might have sanctified? here Gods mere love made the difference, for
as it was an high act of grace and favor to the Virgin Mary that she rather
then any other woman should be appointed to be the mother of Christ, so it was
much more a great honor and expression of love that this humane nature rather
then another was assumed into personal Union, and for this cause it is that
Austin did so invincibly press the Pelagians with this argument from Christ as
man, for (says he) if Christ as man was chosen not for any foreseen merit or
worth which might be in him, but it was solely by the love and goodness of
God, then much more will it follow that no mere man especially corrupted and
defiled, can be elected to Eternal Life upon the supposition or prescience of
any good thing in man, So that Christ as man was so, merely from the favor and
love of the Father, This is that gratia singularis to Christ as man, de qua fas
est praedicare, sed nefas adjudicare, as Austin.

3. The love of the Father to Christ in preparing him for Mediator, is seen in
the sanctifying and endowing of him with all holiness, that so he might be a
complete Savior, for seeing it behoved us to have such an High Priest as was
holy and separate from sin, therefore it was that he was made man in such an
extraordinary manner, for he was conceived by the holy Ghost; The holy Ghost
sanctified that corpulent substance of Christ's body whereby there was not any
form of or inclination to sin abiding in him, and therefore he is called the
(...) because he wrs habitually and originally holy; Now this was wholly of the
love of God that his humane nature was thus anointed with all holiness, and
that he received the Spirit of God without measure, and therefore the humane
nature of Christ was infinitely obliged to bless and praise God who had powered
more holiness into it then in all Angels and men; Thus the Fathers love was
seen in preparing him to be Mediator, and when he was thus appointed, and in
the discharge of his Office; The love of the Father was exceeding great to him:

For 1. you have the Father in a most glorious manner from heaven, owning of
him, and giving of that solemn approbation, This is my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased, what a glorious manifestation was here of the Fathers love to
him, his love did rest on him, yet so as thereby he makes others beloved Sons
in whom also he is well-pleased, even those that do believe in him; This
glorious Testimony then given to Christ by the Father is made by some Learned
men part of that glory which is spoken of in v. 22.

in that he was willing to lay down his life for those who were appointed to
salvation; Insomuch that although the world thought him forsaken of God, and
smitten for his own sins, yea, though Christ himself in respect of his sense
and feeling expostulated with his Father, why he had forsaken him, yet even
then was the Fathers love most of all toward him, Joh. 10.17. Therefore does
my Father love me, because I lay down my life for my sheep; Here you see that
although there were many other Reasons of the Fathers love to him, yet he
instanceth in this wherein we would think Gods anger was for the present most
displaied; It Is true, this is urged by some that therefore Christ could not
suffer the anger of God in his soul, neither could the Father afflict him as
for our sins, for how could this be, (say they) that at the same time the
Father should love him and yet be angry with him, as punishing the sins of all
the Elect upon him; But as Gods love toward Christ could consist with that
leaving of him to the hands of his Enemies, So also could the love of the
Father toward the person of Christ well consist with that anger of his toward
him as our Surety, and certainly this very particular may much encourage the
people of God, for when they are sollicitous about their acceptance with the
Father whether he will receive them into grace or no, what a ready answer is
this, the Father loves Christ because he would die for us, because he would be
crucified for us.

in exalting of him to all that honor and Majesty the Scripture so often
mentions, that is, the sitting at the right hand of God the Father; It is
true, as God he had a right to all this glory before, but then there was a
manifestation of it, and not only so, but a real communication of such glory
to his humane nature which it had not before, and his person was not admitted
into a more plenary and consummate possession of that glory, of which there was
but beginnings before; Even as it was with David, first he had a right given
him to the Kingdom, but for the present he was in constant oppressions and
miseries; Thus Christ while having a right to all majesty and divine honor was
in a state of humiliation, and he was in a form of a servant, even then when he
was equal to God, and as David when he came to the actual possession of the
Kingdom, did come to it by degrees, first at Hebron in some part, and then
afterward in Jerusalem over all Israel; Thus the Lord Christ while on earth
had several discoveries of his divine glory and honor, but the full enjoyment
of it was upon his ascension, and hence it is that here he speaks he was loved
before the foundation of the world, because the Father had appointed this glory
to him from all Eternity; Thus we have handled this love as it relates to
Christ, but you must know that it does not concern him only, but it belongs
also to the whole Church of God, So that herein is involved our greatest
consolation, for there are these particulars contained in it.

1. That Christ and we are comprehended in one act as it were of Gods love and
his Election; So that although we may and must conceive a priority and
posteriority in signo rationis, as they say, yet in natura they are together,
for seeing that the Father did predestinate him to be head of his Church, and
so does love him as head of his Church, it must necessarily follow, that the
Church also which are members to Christ their head, must be included in that
Election, for the head and the body cannot be severed; Now does not this
wonderfully make for the glory and comfort of Gods people, that at the same
time Christ was appointed to be a Mediator; They also are ordained to be saved
by him; As soon as ever he was made the head, they were made the body; In this
respect it is that Christ and believers are said to make up one mystical
person, and by this means what Christ had and did is communicated unto us.

2. Here follows the Eternity of Gods love to us, For seeing that Christ was
loved before the foundation of the world, So also must we, for we are chosen in
him, Ephesians. 1.4. from all Eternity; So that although the effects of Gods love are
vouchsafed to us in time, yet the purpose to do this was from all Eternity; Oh
then the overflowing love of God to a believer, how should this melt thy heart
and be like fire in thy bowels, when thou had no thought of thy self, when no
friend could speak a word for thee, yet even then God had thoughts of mercy
toward thee.

3. Here is the perpetuity and immutability of the Fathers love to thee, for he
cannot repent in his love as men may, They sometimes love those who prove
otherwise then they expected, They never thought such would prove so
forgetful, and therefore repent of all the kindness that ever they showed
them, but it is not so with God, for he foreknew all that ever we would do, he
knew our sins, our unkindnesses, our rebellions, and yet for all this intended
love to us, so that God cannot say, these men are greater sinners, prove more
unkind to me then ever I thought they would have; No, the only wise God cannot
be subject to such error, besides men may love those where they repent
afterward, because they cannot make them good whom they love, the more they
love, it may be the persons loved do become the worse by it, but it is not so
with God, whom he loves he makes holy; This is one great effect of his love,
to put his Image into them, to make them walk in fear of him all the day long,
Thus God will immutably love because he will always keep up grace in the
hearts of those where he has begun it.

Furthermore, This love is perpetual because in Christ; We are now joined to
him by an Union that can never be dissolved; When Christ cease to be an head
then we shall cease to be his body, So that the perseverance of the Saints is
built on this rock, they are elected in Christ, and are in time united to him,
and therefore shall never be cast off, no more then the Father will cease to
love Christ as an head, but these things were in part spoken to before.

Use, Does the Father thus love Christ? Then what strong arguments have we to
believe and be confident in all those Petitions which are put up in Christ's
Name; Has Christ prayed for thy Sanctification, for thy preservation, that the
evil of the world may not infect thee; Know Christ is so loved that nothing can
be denied him; What if the Father love not thee for thy own sake, what if he
see no loveliness in thee, yet in Christ he sees enough; Certainly as the
Father does only look upon us in Christ, so should we also look upon our selves
as in him.

Use 2. Are the godly also comprehended in the same love wherein Christ is?
then what matter of joy have they under all discouragements, under all the
hatred and cruel oppositions they meet with in the world? What though the
world hate thee, though thou have no love from all thy natural friends ever
since thou began to love God; Oh possess thy soul with this love of God in
Christ, for this answers all things.

SERMON CXXXIX. Of the Righteousness of God (as a Judge) in his Administrations
to Devils and wicked men; And (as a Father) unto his own people.
JOHN 17.25. O righteous Father, the world has not known thee, etc.
SOme have thought that our Savior having finished his prayer for all sorts of
believers, he does now give thanks to God, that had revealed himself to them,
and not unto the wicked world, and therefore they compare it with that place of
Luke 10.21. But the general torrent of Interpreters upon more probable grounds,
does conceive this to be a continuation still of the former prayer, for the
eternal glory of all believers. Indeed Piscator thinks, that our Savior does
in this close, return again to the Apostles only, but the Arguments our
Savior uses, are general, and do relate to all believers, and therefore we
are not to limit this comfortable passage to some eminent believers only.

The Matter (you heard) prayed for all believers, was, their eternal happiness,
expressed in those words, to behold the glory, which the Father had given him,
with the reason of it, because the Father had loved him before the foundation
of the world. So that although Christ as God had right to glory always, yet
being in the flesh, after an infirm and passible manner, the glory thereof was
eclipsed, which the Ancients did well express by a Candle or Lamp in a lantern,
that would indeed give great light, but the lantern being compassed about with
clay, hindered the emission of that light, till it were removed, and thus till
all those humane infirmities were taken away, which Christ subjected himself
to, while in the flesh, and he risen again, those glorious beams of his
Divinity, could not send forth themselves. This (I say) being the matter of the
Petition, our Savior does further confirm it, by continuing this prayer with
several arguments more, whereof the first is from the opposition or antithesis
that is between the wicked damned world, and believers, expressed in these
words, The world has not known, that is their Character.

2. You have the Description of believers, These have known thou have sent me.

3. The fontal cause, and original of it, I have known thee.

4. The Compellation given to God, suiting the argument in hand, righteous
Father. This is the sixth time, that Christ calls him Father in this prayer, and
no wonder, because (as you heard) it is so sweet a relation, producing all love,
delight, joy and confidence in God, by him that practically improveth it, but
that I have dispatched; only I must not pass by that adjunct, or title further
qualifying this Father, viz. righteous, righteous Father, formerly when he
prayed for the sanctification of his Disciples, then he said holy Father,
making use of that attribute, which is the cause of all holiness in the
creature, but now speaking of that dreadful and wonderful dispensation of
God, whereby to some he reveals himself; and others again he suffers to
perish in their rebellion, therefore it is that he pitcheth on a suitable
attribute, Righteous Father: It Is true indeed the word (...), is sometimes used
of a man, in respect of his universal rectitude and uprightness, and so some
take it here, and then it is no more then that former compellation (...), holy
Father, but the altering of the word with the context, may incline us to
understand it differently: Now you must know righteousness may be attributed to
God generally and particularly, How righteousness may be attributed unto God.
generally, as it comprehends the whole rectitude, and universal purity of his
whole nature, or particularly, and that several ways,

1. The righteousness of his fidelity and promise, whereby he does make good
to all believers, whatsoever he has said, even to the meanest and lowest act
of grace. Thus 1 Timothy 4.8. Paul says, The righteous Judge will give him a
Crown of glory: And 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, God is faithful and
righteous to forgive them. Here is righteousness, and the godly may plead
heaven, because of Gods righteousness, but it is only a righteousness of
promise, or fidelity in God, not any strict remunerative righteousness, as if
from the good works themselves God were bound to reward them. Indeed Maldonate,
he would fasten this interpretation upon the word, as if our Savior did plead
the merits of believers; but this is so proud and presumptuous, that we will
not spend time to confute it.

2. There is a punitive and vindicative righteousness, which God exercises to
the wicked impenitent world, and that both in spiritual and temporal
punishment, of which Revel. 16.7. 19.2. (Righteous are the judgments of God.)
Now I shall comprehend both these kinds of righteousness, righteousness of God
as a Father, in respect of those who believe in him, and righteousness of God
as a Judge, in respect of the world which does not know him.

Observe. God whether considered as a Judge of the world, or a Father to
believers, is righteous in all his ways.
Observe. That God, whether considered as a Judge of the world, or a Father to
believers, is righteous in all his ways. This truth is of great use, if duly
improved; for what will silence all thy disputes, all thy murmurings? What will
rebuke those winds and waves of thy soul, but this, The Lord is righteous?

Let us take notice of Gods righteousness in this twofold consideration, for
both are aimed at in the expression by our Savior. And

First, The righteousness of God as a Judge of the world, and as his
administrations to wicked men, they are so righteous and just, that even the
devils and wicked men, I. God is just in all his administrations to devils and
wicked men.
though they may blaspheme, yet cannot say, God is unjust, or does them any
wrong: And although the Arminians, and such infected persons, who with their
whole strength endeavor to overthrow Gods absolute Election of some to eternal
life, and the preterition and passing by of others, bring specious Arguments,
as if the Orthodox by this Doctrine made him unjust, and more cruel then any
man, yet such can prevail only with those that leave Scripture, and consult
with humane affections, and indulge too much to natural reason. For

some are elected, some are given by the Father to Christ, some are vessels of
honor and mercy, and others not loved by God to eternal life, but left to
themselves, and so become by their sinfulness vessels of wrath, and when not
only Scripture, but experience also does confirm this, That the greatest part
of the world, yea and the Christian Church die in their sins, and do eternally
perish, For many are called, but few are chosen: When (I say) Scripture and
experience is clear for such a thing, it is presumption in us to argue from
thence unrighteousness in God; For can we search into the deep counsels of God?
Do we comprehend the purposes and ends of God? We should rather conclude, There
is righteousness in all these things, though we cannot pierce into it. The
Apostle in Romans 9. does beat down such presumptuous cavillings with God; and we
may observe, That though David and Jeremiah were greatly disquieted with
anxious disputes about Gods proceedings in his administrations, yet they lay
down this as a peremptory conclusion, and they fortify themselves with this
against all insurrections of spirit, The Lord is righteous. Gods will is the
law of righteousness, and none but God himself, whose understanding is
infinite, can comprehend his own ways.

some, and leaving others, Because he has an absolute sovereignty, and
dominion over all. He is not subject to any as a superior; Neither is he bound
by any Laws imposed upon him, only his own holiness is that eternal Rule and
Law, by which he does all things, and if none may say unto a King, why do
thou so? Much less to the King of Kings: Therefore learned Divines make
Election, neither an act of mercy, or of justice, but of sovereignty and
dominion only.

Because if he had not saved one man, but left all in their undone estate, he
had done no more, then he might do. For why should it be unjust in reference to
man, more then in reference to the apostate Angels, for of that whole number of
them which fell, there is not one redeemed from their eternal miseries; and are
we of more noble consideration, then those spirits, yea one of them might have
done God more service, if restored, then many men could do? So that this
consideration should bridle our unruly thoughts, and we should rather admire
and praise the goodness and grace of God, that any one is saved, rather then
charge God sinfully and foolishly, as we are apt to do, because no more.

Because all those Divines who do hold such an absolute Election or Reprobation
do so positively express themselves, that the cause of man's damnation is
wholly from his sin, and man's sin is wholly and freely from himself. That he is
not necessitated and compelled to sin by such supposed pre-definitive Decrees,
but that he sins of himself, and so his perdition is of himself, as fully as
if there were no such Decrees at all. These two things the Orthodox suppose
that the Scripture affirms, both such Decrees of God, and also man himself to
be the only cause of his damnation, and if so be that the understanding of man,
could not tell how to reconcile these two together; It Is better with Cajetan to
confess the weakness and imbecility of our apprehensions, then to deny the
things asserted in Scripture.

In the second place, God is righteous as a Judge, II.
in that he bestows his effectual grace upon some, and not upon others. For
this end it is, that our Savior does call his Father righteous, because he
lets the world alone to it self, it deserves to perish in it is unbelief and
rebellion, but to others he manifests himself. God is so righteous herein,
that Luke 10. our Savior is greatly affected with it, and blesses God
therein. Now to our corrupt judgments we are ready to think, that Gods ways
are inequal, why he gives his grace to some, that it may be are more wicked,
and more unworthy then others. And then again, Others that seem to be more
civil, and restrained from outward impiety, he denies his mollifying grace to
them; but if we could judge of things aright, even in this wonderful
dispensation of God, we should admire his righteousness. For the full answer to
all humane cavils in this respect is, That there is none denied grace, but such
who by their sins have justly deserved so: If Judas be not converted, and Peter
is, Judas has his sins, for which God may justly give him up to spiritual
judgments; If the men of Tire and Sydon have not the means of grace as well as
Capernaum, it is because their iniquities make them unworthy of it. So that
there is no man living under the means of grace, that can justly complain of
God, because he does not give him a soft and mollified heart, as well as
others: For it is his own personal impiety and voluntary wickedness, that makes
heaven as it were like brass and iron to him: It Is true, God could if he
pleased, give Judas a soft heart, as well as Peter, but there is no injustice,
if God does not dispense his acts of liberality and grace, for then justice and
liberality, a gift and reward would be all one: So that the godly indeed, who
are partakers of converting grace, they have cause to admire and bless God for
his unspeakable goodness, but the wicked who continues and perishes in his
sins, may say, My destruction and damnation is of my self, God has done like
an holy, wise and righteous God, but I have brought vengeance upon my own head:
But these divine dispensations of Gods justice, especially as to spiritual
judgments, require a larger and more exact scrutiny, which is not here to be
insisted upon.

The righteousness of God as a Father to his people in all their afflictions.
Come we therefore in the next place, To take notice of Gods righteousness, as a
Father unto his own people and children: And herein the godly are often
solicited, they begin to question and to doubt of Gods promise and his
kindness: Oh they think, If I be thus loved of God! If I be one that does
belong to the promise, why does the Lord deal thus and thus with me? Every
wicked man, he prospers and thriveth in his impiety, but I am afflicted all
the day long, though I wash my hands in innocence: Now to the godly thus
exercised, I have only two particulars to mind them of.

1. That because God is righteous, therefore it is that thou art afflicted, and
it may be more then many wicked men are. Though it be an heavy temptation, and
such an one, that we read David at one time had much ado to overcome, yet it
is so far from being unrighteousness in God to afflict thee, though his beloved
child, that he would be unrighteous, if he did not: Does not David at another
time, when the cloud was dispelled, say, That out of very faithfulness God
has afflicted him, Psalm. 119.75? So that the righteousness of God as a Father
does require this: It Is true, thy afflictions are not properly penal, to
satisfy his righteousness, for that is done already by the blood of Christ,
but they are castigatory of thy sins, and by way of prevention for the future:
so that there is no exercise befalls thee, but thou art bound to justify and
clear him, say, It Is righteous with God to do thus to me, because of my several
corruptions that are so strong in me.

2. Gods righteousness is seen as a Father in respect of his fidelity and
veracity to keep his promise to us: So that though the good things promised may
be deferred, thou have not yet any enjoyment of them, yet know, The
righteousness of God will not suffer him to forget thee, Heb. 6.10. The Apostle
does there comfort believers, That God was not unrighteous, and therefore he
would not forget their sufferings: It Is true, it is Popery to plead the
commutative, and strict righteousness from God, as if there were an inward
condignity of our holy works in respect of heaven, but a righteousness of
fidelity, we may and ought to encourage our selves with.

Use of Exhortation, to all the children of God, that the meditation of God as
a righteous Father, should stop the mouth of impatience; say as Christ
concerning every chastisement, Joh. 18.11. Shall I not drink of the cup that my
Father has given me? What would thou have God unrighteous for thy sake?
Would thou have him not deal sutably to his holy and pure nature? Thou had
rather God should be unrighteous, then thou suffer any outward evil: Oh do thou
abhor and shame thy self! Even wicked men have been forced to acknowledge
God, just and righteous, as a Judge, and shall not grace make thee acknowledge
this in him, as a Father?

SERMON CXL. That every Unregenerate man whether in, or out of the Church is
destitute of the true saving Knowledge of God.
JOH. 17.24. Righteous Father the world has not known thee.
OUr Savior (we heard) is continuing Arguments why he should be heard thus in
his Petition for all believers, and that which is first suggested in these
words is the opposition and contrariety between the world and them; Though the
world be ignorant and obstinate against Christ, yet the Disciples they did
readily believe in him: Now this is a wonderful aggravation of their
holiness, for them only to believe amongst a world of unbelievers and
opposers, To see amongst so many that are blind, To be wise amongst so many
that are mad, yea, to believe in Christ, while the world did oppose and
persecute them, this did greatly commend their ftith:

In the words you may observe the Subject and the Attribute: The Subject is the
world; This word is taken variously, yea, in this very Petition it is used
differently, for sometimes it is taken for the wicked, perishing, and damned
world; the reprobate world, Thus he said, I pray not for the world but those
thou have given me; The world is there, the immediate opposite to all Elected
persons, but sometimes it is taken indefinitely or negatively, as when he says,
That the world may know thou have sent me; Now in this verse we must take the
word world for the company of perishing and damned men, because they are
opposed to the whole kind of saving believers: In the next place you must know
that though the word world be for the most part opposed to the Church or number
of believers, yet some may be externally in the Church, yet really and indeed
of the world, such are all who though outwardly professing Christ, and
submitting to his orders are yet unregenerated, and so in the state of gall and
bitterness; These know not God in a saving manner, though they have a barren,
speculative knowledge of him; It may therefore fall out that many may be of the
world taken indefinitely (not as limited to the reprobates) who yet in respect
of Gods purpose shall in time become his in an effectual manner, And again
many may be in the Church of God who yet in the issue will be of the perishing
damned world, Some that are wolvs for the present shall become sheep, and some
that are sheep for the present in appearance, at the day of judgment will be
discovered to be goats.

2. You have the attribute (...) has not known thee; This is put for the
present tense as among the Latins, Novi, is sometimes, for it does not only
denote that this has been the custom heretofore, but that still for the
present, and for the future; The world is full of blindness and darkness,
and does not comprehend the light, There is the particle (...) added in the
Original, And the world has hot known thee; Some think that this adds some
affection and emphasis, for either they expound it intensively for as much as
etiam, or adversatively for as much as quamvis although, in both which senses
the Hebrew particle Vau is used, but it may be taken as a mere redundant
particle, which is very familiar to the Scripture Language, and so it seems
our Translators did take it, who wholly omit it in the English; The words thus
explained observe,

Observe. The world is ignorant of God in a saving manner.
That the world is ignorant in a saving manner of God; Heaven is no more in
hell, then the true knowledge of God is in the heart of a wicked man; In the
pursuing of this, I shall take the word world largely not only for that
heathenish part of it, who never heard of Christ, but for that Christian part
of it, who though in the general profess they know God, yet in works do deny
him, and so the word shall be equipollent to every unregenerate man, whether in
the Church or out of the Church, but because of this world there is two sorts,
as was hinted before; One of those who though for the present have no saving
knowledge of Christ, yea, do oppose it, and rage at it, as Paul for a while
did, and all converts once did serve diverse pleasures and lusts; And another of
those who for a while give great and ready obedience to it, but for want of a
true root fall off wholly from God, as Judas and many other Apostates: I shall
chiefly frame my discourse to the perishing wicked world, though not excluding
the other; Bt before I go further you must take notice of what kind of
knowledge it is which we speak of, and deny to the world: It Is an effectual
saving knowledge, for it is plain the Heathens had some knowledge of God, and
unconverted Christians who will die and go to hell in their sins may have
wonderful gifts and admirable knowledge with the utterance thereof in matters
of religion, yet have no saving knowledge, So that knowledge does not make
happy unless it be practical; If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do
them. Joh. 13 17.

Demonstrations of the Point.
This premised let us proceed, and 1. That the unregenerate world does not or
cannot know God may appear several ways.

From the original pollution and pravity improved by actual wickedness wdich
is upon all till sanctified by grace, Joh. 1.10. where though Christ be said to
be the light of the world, and the world was made by him, yet it knew him not,
and Joh. 3.19. This is the condemnation of the world, that light is come into
it, yet men love darkness rather then light; What a horrible and dreadful
condition is this to love darkness rather then light? Hence 1 John 5.19 The
whole world lies in wickedness, So that it is no more wonder if the world do
not know Christ, then that the night is not the day, that weeds are not
precious flowers, They are in darkness, and so cannot see, and this reason
does not only prove the act, they are not knowing of God, but the defect of all
power and ability, they do not, neither can they know God; To which purpose the
Apostle fully, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the spiritual things
of God, neither can he know them; This removes both the act and power,
Therefore at the 12. verse he calls it the spirit of the world, which is opposed
to the Spirit of God that only makes us know the things of God; Oh then the sad
condition of all unregenerate men, this darkness is not dreadful to them,
they are as men that are asleep, yea, or blind, who have a visive faculty
though actually they cannot see, but as men dead in sin, yea, this original
pollution does still carry the demonstration higher, for it does not only
negatively or privatively remove both the act and power of the knowledge of
God, but does positively incline to the hating and opposing of all knowledge
both of God and Christ, hence the world is said so often to hate the godly, and
to hate the light, and the reasons given, because its works are evil, So that
it is but a little wickedness comparatively in the world that it does not know,
for it hates all knowledge, it rebelleth against all light, and therefore the
wisdom of the flesh is said to be enmity it self against God, Romans 8 7. Is it
any wonder then to see wicked men carried out with bloody, malicious, and
irreconcilable hatred to the knowledge of God, for it cannot be otherwise;
There is a spirit of contrariety, of opposition, and madness against God, for
if Gods truth and will be received, then there corruptions and lusts can no
longer stand; The world cannot endure that the light of the word should make
naked all its idolatry, impiety, and that it is indeed wholly at the will of
the devil.

because the devil is the immediate Prince of it; He that is called the Prince
of darkness is likewise said to be the god of this world: This is fully
expressed 2 Cor. 2.4. where the god of this world is said to blind the minds
of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ
should shine into them; Therefore you have a notable description of the devils,
from the Sovereignty and power they have, Ephesians 6.12. where they are called
principalities, and powers, and rulers of the darkness of this world; how
woeful then is the condition of the world of ungodly men who are thus made
captive to the devils, and are ensnared at their will; That as they themselves
are reserved in chains of darkness, so do they keep all their vassals, they
are chains of darkness, such as those who are in a dark dungeon, and such as
they cannot break, neither have the wicked any desire to do it, and therefore
they never say to the devils chains, as the ungodly do to Christ's dominion, Let
us break his bonds asunder, and cast his yoke away, Psalm. 2. As long then as
this strong one keeps the house (for the whole world is his house:) no wonder
if he make it like hell it self, yea, he makes the world by his ruling in it
worse then hell in some sense, for in hell he is tied up in some degree of
torments, but in the world he is let loose to infect and damn others, though
not without his torments.

from the defect or absence of those causes which do alone cause saving
knowledge, So that as the world at first when it was a confused Chaos without
form and void, could not make a glorious light to appear upon it, but that was
Gods work, whom the Apostle does therefore describe, as him that works
darkness out of light, 2 Cor. 4 6. alluding to the work of grace which is now
upon the world, So neither is the world wallowing in its filth and thick
darkness able to create the least light of saving knowledge, but must for ever
perish if God vouchsafe not his grace; Now these causes are wanting which
necessarily infer ignorance in the world; Even as the absence of the Sun makes
night.

The causes of salvation.
There is not the external Revelation and propounding of the doctrine to be
believed, unless God in much mercy send it; Hence you may see, that once in
Judea only was the true knowledge of God, and the whole world besides groped in
more then Egyptian darkness, and now though God has commanded this light to
shine over the whole world, So that it is not limited to any one Nation, yet a
great part of the world still is heathenish, So that they are darkened and
become foolish in all their imaginations; The denying of the Gospel is a
greater misery then if the Sun should be denied to shine to such a people: Now
it is God only that makes this light to shine in one place, leaving the other in
its darkness; Even the Pelagians of old did acknowledge this grace of God
necessary, viz. a revelation and proposition of the object.

Joh. 16.8. to reprove the world of sin and of righteousness; Till the Spirit
of God does illuminate in both these, the world does not understand the
horrible guilt and aggravation of sin, the damnable estate and condition it is
in thereby; Neither does it know what is that righteousness which only can
justify, and where it is to be had, so that the world even the wisest and most
learned thereof are but like so many blind moles digging constantly in the
earth; Neither affected with their disease or with the remedy, till Gods Spirit
does wonderfully convince them, and this is evidently seen in the Christian
world; For does not the glorious light of the Gospel compass men about, yet
they are like owls, the blinder because of this light, Insomuch that such
blindness of mind is not amongst heathens as amongst impenitent and hardened
Christians, for besides the natural blindeness which they have common with
heathens, there is a judicial blindness that God smites them with for
unfruitfullnesse and contempt of the Gospel; Thus they are twice blind as some
are said to be twice dead; Is it not matter of astonishment, that a people
living many years under constant and powerful preaching should yet he as brute
beasts and understand nothing of their misery, and the remedy? Surely all this
is because that judgment is come upon Israel, even blindeness of mind, and a
veil upon their hearts.

Tit. 1.1. speaks of an acknowledgement of truth after godliness, now that is
only when a man's heart is mollified as well as his mind is enlightened; It Is
true the Scripture speaks of some 2 Pet. 2.20. who by the knowledge of God did
escape the pollutions of the world, but that was only in respect of external
conversation, for they were in their natures Swine still, and not sheep; It
cannot then be that the world should know God and Christ as long as there is
that corrupt enmity and spirit of rebellion and contrariety in it to what is
holy; Christ told Peter that it was not flesh and blood which had revealed Mat
16.17. that glorious Confession of faith unto him; If then the world be thus
without the spirit of God, enlightening and converting, how then can it in any
saving way acknowledge God.

Use of Instruction Concerning the terrible condition of the perishing world,
whether within or without the Church, yea, it is most terrible to those who are
the world really, but the Church nominally; You are shut out from the face of
God and Christ, You are without hope in the world; Oh your greatness, your
pleasures will not avail to keep you from destruction, This is Eternal life to
know God and Jesus Christ, This then is eternal death not to know him.

2. That no knowledge of God or Christ which is not practical and saving,
deserves the name of Christian knowledge; The world though both by nature and
supernatural revelation may know much of God, yet because lying and living in
wickedness is said not to know him, and thus generally in the Scripture the
wicked are said not to know God; Oh then let such who have strong convictions
and also strong corruptions tremble at this; Let such who live against
knowledge fall down for fear at this; Is it not the condition of all such who
live in gross and profane ways? Do ye not commit the sins you know ye ought
not? Do ye not omit the duties that the light of the Scripture enjoyneth thee?
Oh that men should in the day stumble and not know whither they go, Follow then
all thy knowledge into a gracious practical improvement of it, lest thou perish
with the world.

SERMON CXLI. Christ is the great Teacher of his Church.
JOH. 17.25. But I have known thee.
IN these words are contained the cause and fountain of all that saving
knowledge which believers have, viz. because Christ knows God: For whereas
the immediate opposition should have run thus, The world has not known thee,
but these have known thee; This is inserted, as the cause, I have known thee.
The word is in the Preterperfect tense, (...) for the Present, as John 8 55. I
know him, and keep his saying. Now Christ's knowledge may be considered two
ways, either

1. Subjectively, or immanent in him: Or,

2. Transitively, or by way of communication unto others; as the fountains
fullness may be considered either absolutely in it self, or as originally
redundant and diffusive to it is streams. Now though the first kind of
knowledge be necessarily presupposed, yet the latter is chiefly aimed at, as
appears by those words, I have declared unto them thy Name, and will declare
unto them.

In these words therefore our Savior does manifest himself to be the Mediator,
and in a more peculiar manner the Prophet of his Church, whereby he
communicates saving knowledge unto all believers, and that he is the Sun,
which enlightneth every one that comes into the Church, That as God has put
all material light into the body of the Sun, and all other things are
enlightened by it: Thus it is with Christ the Sun of righteousness, all
spiritual knowledge is given unto him, and that without measure, from whom
there are several emanations and irradiations, whereby all that know
spiritually, are enlightened by him: Thus he is the truth and the way.

Obs. Observe. Christ is the original and fontal cause of all the knowledge that
believers have.
That Christ is the original and fontal cause of all the knowledge that
believers have. There is not the least ray or beam of any spiritual
illumination, that does not descend from him.

There are pregnant Texts to confirm this, John 1.18. No man has seen God at
any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him; Where we have an opposition of Christ to Moses, who yet talked to
God, face to face, and to all other Prophets, though they had immediate
inspirations and revelations, yet none of these saw God at any time, that is,
perfectly and comprehensively; They were but servants, and had no more
manifested to them, then what was convenient; but Christ he is the only
begotten Son of God, and in the bosom of the Father, he knows the mind, the
secrets, all the whole counsel and purpose of God, and that of himself; and
this he does not keep close in himself, as Paul when caught up into the third
heavens, heard things not to be uttered, but (...) those things that otherwise
were hidden and obscure, he had made clear and known: Thus you see, that first
Christ has a full and perfect knowledge of the mind of God, and that he has
it, not in such a manner as the holy Prophets sometimes received it, but of
himself, and that this knowledge he does not keep to himself, no more then the
Sun does its light, but he has it to reveal, and declare it to his people, so
that we have the mind of God, because Christ has revealed it: Therefore some
say, he is called the word of God, because he does manifest the inward purposes
of God for our salvation, and the means to attain thereunto. This truth also is
abundantly confirmed Joh. 3.31.32. where all the Prophets, and John himself is
debased in respect of Christ, He that comes from heaven is above all; All
others come of the earth, but Christ, because coming from heaven, the bosom of
the Father, therefore he is above all, but it follows, What he has seen and
heard he testifies; so that he communicates this knowledge to the world;
Therefore the unbelief of the world is heavily taxed, No man receives his
testimony. Although Christ be to be preferred above all that were ever sent by
God, for they were only infallible directively, and by outward assistance only,
but Christ essentially and internally, yet the world does not receive his
testimony. If then it be thus, That Christ only knows God, and from him
knowledge is derived to all others; Even the Doctors and Teachers in the
Church, do strive by his light, then it is no wonder if God from heaven does
take us of all others, and bid us attend to him, Mat. 17.5. Hear ye him: So
that we are not to regard, what the wisest, the learned, or the most ancient
say, but what Christ says.

Propositions about the point.
To open this truth, Consider these things:

1. That Christ a^ God has omnisciency, knowing all things. 1 Cor. 2.11. What
is there attributed to the Spirit of God, is true also of the Son of God, The
Spirit searches the deep things of God: Thus Christ as God must needs
comprehend all the things of God, and so there is nothing hid from him; And
this Omnisciency of his, was often manifested, especially Joh. 2. when it is
said, He knew what was in man, and needed not that any should tell him.

2. The humane Nature of Christ, or Christ as man knew not all things, but
according as the Divine Nature revealed the hidden things of God, so he came to
perceive him. Therefore the Doctrine of the Lutherans seem to confound the
Natures, when they say, The properties of the Divine Nature are communicated to
the humane Nature, Omniscience and Vbiquity, etc. This cannot be, and yet
Christ abide a true man. Hence he is said to grow in knowledge; yea as Son of
man he is said, Not to know the day of Judgment, Mat. 24.36. which cannot be
explained, as some would, he knew it not, viz. to reveal it, for in that sense
the Father also might be said not to know it, yet the humane nature of Christ,
though it was capable of nesciency, yet not of ignorance, for as he was without
all sin, so without all ignorant defects in mind, he wanted no perfection that
was due to him, it was an experimental knowledge he grew in.

3. Even the humane Nature of Christ, is now lifted up to know many things
without which as the Judge of the world, he could not accomplish that work. For
seeing that Christ God-man is appointed to judge the world, it is necessary that
even as man, there should be revealed unto him, all the thoughts, actions and
circumstances thereof concerning every man in the world, that so he might
fulfill the office of a Judge.

4. Christ, as Mediator, God and man is the author and fountain of all the
light, which is communicated to the Church. Hence it is that one of his Offices
is to be the Prophet of the Church: He is called the chief shepherd of our
souls, 1 Pet. 5 4. and being our High Priest, he was to offer up himself for
us, so also instruct and teach us: Therefore you heard the whole world is
commanded to hear him, and therefore it is that he calls himself, the truth and
the way, Joh. 14.16. So that in all matters of Religion we are still to enquire
what Christ has revealed, and what he has manifested; now he does not only
reveal the truth to be believed, but the duties also that are to be performed,
and therefore the Apostle makes it so heinous a sin to refuse Christ speaking
above Moses, Heb. 12.25. Tremble then all ye wicked men, who do constantly
refuse Christ still speaking from heaven by his Word and Ministers to leave
your sins and impieties.

5. The Scripture does often (as in all actions ad extra) attribute the same
work of teaching and enlightening, both to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the holy Spirit. So that this great work of saving knowledge is attributed
indifferently to all. Thus the Father James 1. is called the Father of lights
from whom comes every good and perfect gift: So our Savior alleges that
promise, They shall be all taught of God, Joh. 6.45. So the holy Spirit is said
to guide and lead into all truth, Illumination being frequently ascribed to the
Spirit, and 1 Cor. 2.10. God is said there to reveal things unto us by his
Spirit. And lastly, Christ himself is said to be the great teacher of his
people, as Mat. 23.10. For one is your Master, even Christ. Hence the Apostle
magnifieth the Gospel, Heb. 1. that whereas formerly God had spoken by the
Prophets, in these later days he spoke by his Son: So that the geeat sin
against the Gospel, and the aggravation of all wickedness is from hence, that
though this light be come into the world, yet men love darkness rather then
light.

6. The Lord Christ does teach several ways, either immediately, when he was
upon the earth, or mediately by the Apostles and the Ministers that he has
appointed in his Church. Therefore he is said still to speak from heaven, viz.
by the Word and the Ministry: so that we are not to conceive, as if we had
nothing of Christ now, because he is ascended to heaven, for what the
Ministers, guided by the Word of God, do, that is, as if Christ himself spoke
it, and you are to receive it with the like faith and obedience. Hence our
Savior speaking to his Apostles says, Luke 10.16. He that hears you,
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me; he that despises an
Ambassador contemns him from whom he is sent: Oh that this truth may be as a
two-edged Sword in thy heart! What dare thou, who live in thy profaneness,
if Christ himself were here upon the earth, commanding thee to leave thy sins,
yet to persevere in them, if not, How is it that you refuse those who come in
his name?

7. Though Christ has appointed a Ministry to teach and instruct people, yet
the whole efficacy and power comes from Christ alone. It Is God and Christ by
the Word that can only open the understanding, and give a spiritual knowledge,
so that conversion is so called the teaching of God, John 6.45. Therefore a man
must hear and learn of the Father, before he can come to Christ, only Christ
there adds, that this hearing and knowing of the Father comes by him: So Joh.
3.26, 27. when John's Disciples said, That all men come to Christ, he answered,
A man can receive nothing, except it be given him of heaven, attributing it to
the power of God, that any come to Christ. Therefore this Sun exceeds the
bodily one, which gives indeed external light, but cannot give an eye to see,
the blind remain blind for all that.

Lastly, Though Christ only do effectually give a knowing heart, so that
although we had the best Ministry of men and Angels, yet it would do no good
without his secret power and energie, yet we must not from thence infer the
uselesness of the Ministry, as some foolishly have done, opposing the principal
and subordinate. For in our natural life, although it be not the bread we eat,
but the word of blessing from Gods mouth, that makes it to nourish us, yet none
casts away his food, resolving to depend on God immediately: Thus though Christ
alone give the seeing eye, and the understanding heart, yet it is by and in the
use of the Ministry; though it was God alone that did give the healing virtue
to the pool of Bethesda, yet the Angel must move it, and every lame man must
come into it, else he could not be healed. Hence although Jeremy prophecy of
such abundance of knowledge, that they shall not teach one another, but be all
taught of God, which may seem and is brought by some to overthrow the Ministry,
yet the same Prophet Jer. 3.15. declares it as a special blessing, that he
would give them Pastors according to his own heart, which would feed them with
knowledge and understanding: So that Gods teaching, and the Pastors teaching do
not oppose one another. It Is said also of Lydia, that God opened her heart,
Act. 16.14. but to what end? To attend to the words of Paul: So that you must
never oppose Gods work, and the Ministry together.

In the next place, Let us consider the Properties of Christ's knowledge,
whereby he makes us also to know. As

1. The Authoritative and potestative Nature of it, he taught as one having
authority, not as the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 7.29. Hence Mat. 5. when he
had related the corrupt opinions of their Doctors in the Interpretation of the
Law, he adds, But I say unto you, opposing his Authority to them all. It Is
true, he says, he speaks not of himself, but refers his Doctrine wholly to
his Father, but withal says, He and his Father are one; he does not speak of
receiving his Doctrine in the same manner, as Paul, and other Apostles did of
him by revelation.

2. There is the freeness of this, he teaches whom he pleases. There are none
so froward, and so contumacious, but he can open their hearts, and others that
are of high and eminent understandings for want of him do remain blind owls,
Mat. 11.26, 27. where our Savior giving God thanks for manifesting the things
of the Gospel to some, and not to others, resolving all into Gods good
pleasure, Even so (Father) for so it pleases thee, he adds, No man knows
the Father, but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him: So
that where the Son will reveal it, there is knowledge, and where he will not,
there remains blindness.

3. There is the effectual and powerful way of this revealing, such shall
know, such will come to God, such shall have the vail-taken off their eyes, and
the stone out of their hearts.

4. There is the continual and daily efficacy of this, I have manifested it to
them, and will do it. Though they were Apostles, yet they need the daily
guidance and illumination of Christ's Spirit, we cannot either begin, or proceed
without him.

Use of Instruction, To look above the Ministry, even up to Christ, that he
would open thy heart, constantly wait upon that, but withal say, Unless thou
Lord go along with the Ordinance, all hearing, and all preaching is in vain; He
that only can give eyes to the corporal blind, can also to the spiritual
blind: Is it not for want of this, you find the Ministry no more working upon
you, you are not instant with God in prayer, that it may be effectual to you?

Use 2. Of Exhortation, To such who have this vail and thick cloud on their
hearts removed, let them not indeed proudly compare themselves with, and insult
over others, yet by the opposition be quickened to walk humbly and praise God
the more: O Lord, the world has not known thee, such great men, such rich men,
such neighbors, but I by thy grace have known thee!

SERMON CXLII. Sets forth the singular Christian cleaving to God, though the
multitude go another way; And how his godliness in that case endears him to
God.
JOH. 17.25. And these have known, that thou have sent me.
IN these words you have described by way of commendation the Faith of
believers with the object thereof.

1. Their Faith is called knowledge, as several times in this Chapter.

2. There is the object of this Faith, That the Father sent Christ into the
world, Austin understands it thus, as if the meaning were, They have known
me, not by nature or free will, but because I was sent into the world to reveal
and cause this knowledge in them, So that he expounds it in a causal sense,
They have believed wholly of grace, because thou have sent me to be the Sun of
Righteousness enlightening of them; But it is more consonant to the customary
use of that phrase, to take in an objective sense, making (Christ sent) to be
the specifying object of their faith, and as for the persons the (...) these
who are said thus to know, though some limit it to the Apostles only, yet
because the world is made the immediate opposite to it, we are to extend it to
all believers; I have handled this description of believers Faith absolutely
already, both as it is called knowledge, and as it is terminated upon Christ as
sent by the Father, and hereby distinguished from the absolute knowledge which
men may have of God without Christ: I shall therefore only take notice of it
relatively, as it stands by way of argument in this Petition, for therefore
does Christ commend them as the fit objects of glory, because they do believe,
though the world be wicked and mad opposers of the knowledge of God.

Obs. That it is an endearing respect of believers to God that they do own him,
Doct. That it is an indearing respect of believers to God that they do own him,
and cleave to hint, when the whole world go quite contrary.
and cleave to him, when the whole world goes the contrary way; If the whole
world did lie in godliness, as it is said to be in wickedness; If every one
did believe in God, then the excellency of such who do believe would not be so
great: If all the stones of the earth were jewels, then these would not be so
much set by, and if all the weeds of the field were choice flowers, then
flowers would not be so much regarded, so that the wickedness of the world is
an excellent foil to the godliness of believers; The darker the night is, the
light of the stars is thereby the brighter, and this the Apostle alludeth unto
in that glorious commendation given to the Saints at Philippi, Phi. 2.15. where
praying that they might be without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation, he tells them, they did shine as lights in the world, So
that as the darker the night is, the more glory is in the star when it shines,
so the more perverse and wicked the world is, the more amiable and lovely is
the faith of such who believe in Christ; Hence it is that such an encouraging
promise is made to such who confess Christ before men, Mat. 18. that is an
adulterous and wicked generation, as Mar. 8, 38. The acknowledging of God
amongst so many vile opposers and wicked persecutors is especially taken notice
of by God; Thus when the Apostle Peter speaks of Lot, how merciful God was in
protecting and delivering him from the impendent judgments he gives him this
character, that he was a just and righteous man, 1 Pet. 2.7. which was
abundantly discovered in this, that he was vexed (tormented as if he had been
put upon the rack the word is applied to the very torments of hell) with the
conversation of the wicked, his eye and ears, yea the whole soul it self was
vexed with their unlawful deeds, for Lot to walk righteously and holily in the
midst of such miscreants and incarnate devils as they were, this moved God to
have a more special care over him.

Propositions clearing the Point.
To consider this Truth more thoroughly take notice,

That there is a wonderful pronesse in every man by nature to do as the most
do, not to be thought more wise, more holy, or more strict then others,
especially to be scoffed or derided, or persecuted for walking more strictly
then others do, this is much against flesh and blood; Hence it is that we have
such a peremptory prohibition, that we are not to follow a multitude to do
evil, Exo. 23.2. therefore our Savior when he foretold that his disciples
should be hated of all men for his Names sake, he spoke the most discouraging
matter that could be, for every one naturally would gladly have the good word
of all, the praise and applause of all; But because that is impossible to
please God and please men too, therefore it is that he who will be godly, who
will do his duty, he will stir up the generation of wicked men against him as
so many hornets, he shall neither have good name, estate, liberty, or life it
self, if they could complete the height of their wickedness, now then must not
this greatly indear them to God and Christ, that though they be godly at so
dear a rate, though it cost them so much, yet for all that they will not
forsake God; Oh says God, It Is for my sake, thou art thus reproached, thus
persecuted, if thou would do as the world does, walk according to the course
and fashion thereof; Then the world would love and advance thee: Let not then
the godly be troubled, but rejoice rather under all the hard words, and ungodly
deeds which they meet with, for all these sufferings indear them more to God,
He accounts what is done to them to be done as to himself, and therefore he
will not let their sin go unpunished.

because thereby is manifested our sincerity and uprightness of heart; That
there are no carnal and earthly advantages we look after, for if there were our
earthly policy would suggest us to take some other way, and for this reason it
may be thought our Savior did upon all occasion to such who proffered to be
his disciples, still inform them of the hardship, of the troubles and miseries
they must meet with, That so they might not apostatize afterward, that they
might not say, this is more then ever was told us, we would never have taken up
the profession of Christ upon such terms; And certainly this is a rock many
have splitted at, they begin to be disciples of Christ before they thoroughly
consider how much it will cost them to be so indeed, they do not take our
Saviors advice, Luke 14.31. to sit down and consider whether being now to go
to war with such lusts and sins as formerly have been sweet to them, they can
endure or no, whether their lusts will not prove too strong for them, and so
they compound at last to be their servants again, they consider not whether
being now to rear up a strong and enduring building they can be at so much cost
or no, whether they can extend so much from their former time, and cares and
worldly thoughts and businesses, so as to make this building their great work
for want of these considerations aforehand, it is that so many have dealt
foolishly in the way of Religion, They began but could not make an end; Oh but
now when the heart is sincere and upright, there it accounts no fiery trial
strange, whatsoever difficulty and trouble it meets with; It says, this I
looked for, this I expected, this I must undergo, and by this we discover our
uprightness to God, and thereby we are more indeared to God, that it is not any
outward thing but himself only that makes us profess our obedience to him, and
this indeareth us to God.

3. Those that believe in Christ in the midst of a wicked and ungodly world are
esteemed of by God, because such have the image of God restored in them, and so
become like him, now then where God sees his own likeness, there he will
tenderly respect and protect; He that has put such bowels into a Father, that
he will lay up for his children, and take more care of them then all other
children in the world, must much more have such bowels in himself toward those
that are his; Hence it is that we are so often exhorted to meditate on that
relation of a Father which he has so graciously assumed to himself, for what
Father is there that sees his good and obedient child maintaing his credit,
striving for his honor against all those that shall oppose him, will not
inwardly be moved to take part with his child, and defend him all he can, and
shall not our heavenly Father much more show his love herein to us? our Savior
would convince believers, Mat. 6.8. not to be troubled under any exercises from
the transcendent affection that is in him as an heavenly Father to all earthly
parents; Seeing therefore believers do resemble God, and he sees his own
likeness upon them, Insomuch that God says, it is not so much for their sakes
as my sake, that they are thus maligned, how can it be but that God will take
care of them?

4 Such as believe in Christ they are become the Lords in a more peculiar
propriety; They are his people, they are his jewels, they are the apple of his
eye, and this propriety is that which prevails with God to keep them, though
all the world be destroyed, Psalm. 4. all wicked opposers of the godly are
exhorted to know this that God has set apart the godly man for himself; That
as the godly man sets God apart for himself, leaves all the world to take him
for his portion, So on the other side God passes by wicked men, they are not
in his favor or special protection but the godly are, They are his, and
therefore he will love them as his, and delight in them as his; In Isa. 43.34.
we have a glorious promise, Since thou wast precious in my sight, I will give
men for thee, and people for thy life, that is, God will give up many to
destruction to save his children; As they said to David, Thou art worth ten
thousand of us, Thus God speaks concerning his choice ones, they are worth
more then many thousands of wicked men, and it is better thousands of them
perish then few of the godly, So that this propriety Gods children have in God,
is that which will be a sure protection for them to pass safe through all
calamities.

5. To be faithful to God amongst wicked men indeareth God to them, because
this demonstrateth many excellent and choice properties in the godly, which
make them lovely and precious in his sight; As first here is demonstrated Gods
grace already begun in them, and therefore where God has begun there will he
also preserve to the latter end, for when our Savior here says, the world
has not known thee, but these have known thee, he does not commend them for
their own strength and abilities, as if they had differenced themselves from
others, but he discovers how much God had loved them hitherto, he chose us, and
loved us first, and therefore we choose and love him again, So that when
believers accept of Christ they do not herein discover any worth in themselves,
but the infinite grace of God to them that made them to be discriminated from
others. Now then where Christ has begun to love, there will he consummate and
finish, one degree of Gods love calls for another, and he has so chained his
graces together that the link shall not be broken, if then you see the godly
laboring and working after God when all the world is contrary; Do not so much
admire them as the grace of God given to them; Even as the people did when they
saw the Apostles work such wonderful miracles.

2. Here is manifested their magnanimity and courage for God, that they dare
confess his Name, and promote his kingdom to such exceeding hazard of all they
have; Will not this also make God have a special regard to them? It Is most
acceptable to God to be good in evil times, and amongst evil men, as Obedmelech
in Ahabs Courts, and some of Caesar's household; This magnanimity was admirable
in the Confessors and Martyrs of old, who despised death, yea, triumphed over
it, insomuch that though the Heathens speak of a virtue called fortitude, and
another named magnanimity, yet they are never able to show the hundredth or
thousandth part of any heathens suffering for their sect, as we can do millions
of Christians for the Christian Faith; If then David did so much prize his
Worthies, and those who were valiant men, venturing their lives for him, were
so indeared, how much more will God highly esteem such as are courageous and
venturous for him, Therefore there is such encouraging promises made to such as
are willing to lose for him, Mat. 19.29. he shall receive an hundred fold, and
shall inherit eternal life; Is not this plain that God is very tender of and
remunerative of such who are courageous and ready to lose any thing for his
sake.

3. Herein the godly manifest their love to God; In this time of adversity they
discover their kind affections toward God; Now love of God is abundantly
rewarded with love from God, What a happy exchange is this for thy poor finite
creatures love, which is not able to make God more blessed and happy, to have
the infinite, effectual, and unspeakable love of God toward thee; If we love
the inanimate creatures they do not love us again; Thou love riches, riches
do not love thee again; Thou love honors, but honors cannot love thee
again, but if we place our love upon God, then God will power out his love
abundantly upon us again, love obtains love, and where God loves his love is
infinite like himself, and withal it is efficacious, his love while we are
sinners made him send his Son to die for us; much more will his love be
operative since reconciled with us.

Lastly, All such true believers who acknowledge Christ in the midst of an
ungodly world, they do betake themselves to Gods faithfulness, and rest only
upon that; They take up this resolution, all the world will prove malicious and
ungrateful, they cannot expect better measure then what Christ himself had, who
yet did so much good where he came; Now having these expectations they fortify
themselves with Gods promise and fidelity, he will not leave them nor forsake
them; You see how often David professes his trust in God, making him his
fortress and strong tower; We see among men if any one betake himself to
another man's fidelity, and say, he will trust on him, he will depend upon him,
if such an one have any ingenuity or spark of goodness in him, to be sure he
will not fail such, he will not deceive, how much rather then will God abide
sure and faithful to all those that depend on him.

Use 1. of Exhortation not to be infected or poisoned with the common iniquity
of others, though others grow wicked, yet let not thy love grow cold, for this
will be a remarkable aggravation of grace, when the world was obstinate and
would not know God, yet thou did, Do not think that multitude of sins can be
any patronage to thee at all; Though thou art but one man, or one Family for
God in the whole Parish, do not shrink at this, but think that God does the
rather take notice of thee; It Is a more difficult task to be godly in some
places then others; It will cost more, there will be more sufferings, but still
remember never did any lose by losing for God.

Use 2. of Comfort to the godly, Though they have so little from the world, for
God he takes notice of all the hard speeches, all the hard practices that
ungodly men are guilty of toward them, but let them know, the more this
Pharaoh, this Egypt does oppress them, the more graciously will God at last
hear all their groan, and they shall enter into a Canaan, that will make amends
for all. Think not of thy conflicts and fightings, but of the Crown of glory:
Oh that the godly would consider who it is that looks on them, while they run
in this race, while they are striving for an holy victory.

SERMON CXLIII. Of Christ's teaching Believers: Showing what great need the most
illuminated Christians have still to be taught.
JOH. 17.26. And I have declared unto them thy Name, and will declare it, etc.
OUr Savior having in the former verse affirmed himself to be the cause of all
that saving knowledge believers have, he does in this verse manifest, that he
is the conservant cause, as well as the efficient, that as God is both the
Author of Creation and Preservation in the order of nature: So Christ is in
the order of grace.

We have therefore in the words, 1. The gracious action of Christ toward his
people. 2. The efficient cause. 3. The Subject to whom. 4. The final Cause
hereof.


The gracious action of Christ is set down both by the Preterperfect and Future
tense, ushered in with the part cle (...), which some make causal in this
conn^xion, They have known thou have sent me, for I have declared thy Name unto
them. And thus it may very well be taken in this place, and thence we may
observe,

That the saving knowledge of Christ comes not by our own natural strength or
abilities, but by the mere revelation and will of Christ. But I shall not
insist on that.

In the next place, the Benefit ascribed to us, is (...), at the sixth verse,
he used the word (...), but here (...). The word is sometimes used of Gods
making a thing known to us, Luke. 2.15. Sometimes of our making a thing known
to God. as Phil. 4.6. Let your requests be made known to God Not that God is
ignorant of any thing, but as much as lies in us, we spread them in Gods
presence, to take notice of them: Sometimes of one man's making known a thing to
another, as 1 Cor. 15.1. Ephesians. 6.21. In this place it is attributed to Christ,
as the efficient cause, I have declared. In the next place, there is the
diversity of time, I have, and will declare it. Austin refers this to the
present life, and the life to come, but it rather denotes the constant and
daily revelation or manifestation of Christ himself, and his truth to belevers.
3. There is the Object declared, thy Name, that is God himself. 4. The Subject
to whom, that is, not the Apostles, but to all believers.

Now I have already handled the benefit mentioned, Christ's declaring the Name
of God to believers: I shall only take notice of the Necessity of continuing
this Benefit even to Believers, though Apostles, though never so eminent in
gifts and graces, yet Christ does still keep up and increase their saving
knowledge.

Doct. That Believers do not only at their first conversion, but in the whole
progress of their life, need constant illumination and teaching from God.
Observe. That believers do not only at their first conversion, but in the whole
progress of their life, need constant illumination and teaching from God. There
is none can learn so much in Gods School, that God himself can teach him no
longer. This truth will be of great use to keep the most knowing Christians
very humble and low in their own eyes, as also to make them continually depend
upon Christ in the Word and Ministry, that they may grow in knowledge. This
truth is abundantly confirmed by that notable prayer of the Apostle for the
Ephesians, who though they were made light in the Lord, and had the mystery of
Gods will so much made known unto them, that he did not cease to give thanks
for them daily in that behalf, yet still he prays, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. That God
would give them the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him,
that the eyes of their understanding may be enlightened etc. Here it is plain,
That though these had knowledge, yet they might still increase in it. Hence the
Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1.19. does encourage believers for their diligent
attending unto the Scripture, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in
their hearts, that is, till they obtain more firm and evident knowledge of the
things of God. In the Old Testament we have David, Psalm. 119. though professing
he had more knowledge then his teachers, and the Word was continually his
counselor, yet prays he, That God would open his eyes, that he may
understand the wonderful things of Gods Law. David's eyes are not opened clear
enough, the word implies, there are some scales and film upon his eyes, that
must be rolled away, and that there are excellent precious things in Gods word,
that he does not yet understand.

For the improving of this truth, Let us consider in how many particulars a
further constant teaching by Christ is requisite to the most able believers. And

I. In respect of the object.
First, They need further revelation in respect of the objects of their
knowledge, to know more then they do know. So imperfect is every godly man's
knowledge, that it may be called ignorance rather then knowledge; We are
ignorant of far more excellent truths in Religion then we do know; If the
Heathen could say, Our eyes were in respect of natural truth, but like those of
the Owl to the Sun; How much more is this true about spiritual objects? You see
how the Apostles knowledge was successive, they come to know one thing after
another, as Christ revealed it, till they had that plentiful effusion of the
holy Ghost upon them; And the Apostle Paul, who was taught, not of men, but of
Christ himself, yea he was caught up into the third heaven, yet for all that he
puts himself in the number of those who know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. So that
this is true not only of believers, but of the eminent Doctors and Teachers in
the Church, they know but in part; yea and that will be true of them, even at
their last hour though their whole life has been to obtain knowledge of God.
Therefore this should quicken all up to diligent use of the means, for who can
sit down and say, He knows enough, or he knows all things? Indeed there
have been those that were called Guostiques, because of the great knowledge
they boasted of, but yet they made themselves even like bruit beasts: O then
confess that the waters of divine truth are so deep, that though thou were an
Elephant, yet thou might swim in it, we are as the Ancients said.

II*
Secondly, As in the object we need much revelation, so in those things we do
know, we need much assistance and direction from Christ in respect of the
adjuncts of it. For,

1. Though we do know the objects, yet we may every day know them more
evidently, more distinctly, more clearly. Alas our knowledge about God and
Christ is very confused, and therefore Paul is every day desirous to know
Christ better then he did: As it is with digging in a Mine of Gold, every days
labor brings richer and fuller supplies; or as the draining from a Spring,
does not exhaust, but makes it more plentiful: Thus it is with the heart of a
man when set to know God or Christ: There are new considerations, new respects,
and new arguments arising always from them; Insomuch that God and Christ may
seem new to the soul every day; we begin to nauseate, and grow weary, when the
same things we know, are always suggested unto us, but the soul of a man can
never he weary of the knowledge of Christ, For in him are hidden all treasures
of wisdom and grace: And therefore even those principalities and powers in
heavenly places, that are so vast and comprehensive in knowledge, yet Ephesians.
3.10. The Lord Christ is in the Ministry of the Church made more known to them
continually; So that if Angels do learn in Christ's School, and obtain more
knowledge of him, and do with great delight search into these things; no wonder
then, if the most enlightened men may yet search deeper and deeper into the Lord
Jesus Christ: Paul though one of the highest Scholars in Christ's School, yet
desired to know nothing but Christ crucified, for if in heaven the knowledge of
God, when yet it is intuitive and transcendent to this, we have will not weary
us, but daily provoke the soul to know God more, no wonder then if in this life
our knowldge be not satisfied, when it is but in part.

2. As we need Christ's daily manifestation in respect of the evidence of them,
so also in respect of the firmnes and immoveableness of our knowledge. Faith,
you heard, is knowledge, and that does necessarily imply assent: Now if our
assent be not firm and settled, We are like children tossed up and down with
every wind of Doctrine: Instability and inconstancy is much condemned in
Scripture; and indeed it does directly oppose faith, which makes the soul
confidently and firmly-adhere to the truths of Christ, as divine, as those
which cannot be dispensed with, or ever prove false; for if Paul thought it so
great a disparagement, that with him should be yea and nay in his words, much
more would this be reproachful to Christ himself, who says, He is the truth it
self, Joh. 14. So that as truth cannot be a lie, so neither can the Doctrine of
Christ be false: Now the Doctrine being in it self thus true, the power of
Christ is seen in making a gracious heart thus strongly to adhere upon divine
motives to it, as that which will abide, though heaven and earth shall pass
away; Skepticism and faith are directly opposite; when we are enabled to
believe, we receive it as the truth of God, and not as the truth of man: So
although while this gift of faith was not bestowed upon us, we debated truths
of Religion, like those in Philosophy, and were prone to have, as Hilary said
of old, Menstruam and annuam fidem, a monthly or yearly faith, yet when God
shall once strengthen us to believe then we are no longer reeds shaken with
wind, but as Origin of old alluded, When many things are removed from us, then
this Arundo (for of that they made pens formerly) is made the Calamus the pen
of a ready writer: Where God strengthens us to believe, there that turning this
way and that way, that mutability is removed, and our hearts are fixed, so as
to be able to dig for that we so firmly adhere unto. Thus the Martyrs they were
confirmed by God exceedingly, in respect of the stability of their assent to
divine truths, when yet they had great temptations to assault them; and we read
sometimes of the Disciples, that upon the working of some great miracles by our
Savior, they are said then to believe, not but that they believed before, only
they did grow and increase in this more: Oh then in times of great disputes,
when learned and godly men differ in many things, it behooves the godly
Christian to fly to this manifestation of Christ! Oh say, declare it Lord, and
still declare it to me more and more! And certainly it appears by Mat. 24.
That those who are false Prophets, have so many fair pretenses and deceivable
ways, that if it were possible, they would deceive the very elect; so that
it is a very great mercy to be of a sound mind, and established in the truth;
That as Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, so also
believers are to be.

3. We need Christ's daily declaration in respect of the efficacy and practical
operation of our knowledge. So that although we know all mysteries, yet if the
power of Christ does not make us to acknowledge these things in a godly manner,
We are but as tinkling cymbals; you see Paul made knowledge a mere puff, a
nothing without charity, 1 Cor. 13. and our Savior puts happiness upon the
doing, not knowing of these things, John 14.17. A Christian may grow two ways
in the extension of knowledge, or in the efficacy of knowledge, and this is
greatly to be lamented; many desire to know more opinions, and more notions;
many are still propounding more questions after questions, but the Apostle
Ephesians 4. tells us of the knowing of the truth as it is in Jesus, which makes a
Christian put off the oldman, and put on the new, as also an acknowledgment of
the truth after godliness, Tit. 1. Oh therefore pray, that Christ would declare
his truths to thee, so as they may not only be in thy head, but sink down into
thy heart, and be there like fire inflaming thy bowels! It Is not growing in
knowledge, at it is knowledge, but growing in it, as it is saving and operative,
which makes a man fitted for everlasting glory. As it is not the knowing of
what is excellent food, that does nourish a man, but the eating of it, and this
only does the Scripture vouchsafe to call knowledge indeed: Oh then examine thy
self! Do thou so know God, as to live on him by faith, to love and fear him?
Do thou so know Christ, as to make him a Mediator to thee in an appropriated
manner? Do thou so know the promises, as to rely on them, and to make them
thy cordial in all temptations? This is to know, in the Scripture language: So
that the Christians knowledge is wholly in tendency to operation, as all motion
is for rest, if it be barren it increases our condemnation, and not further
our consolation.

In the next place, Let us consider what are the reasons, why Christ must
continually teach his people, And

1. It is because all heavenly things are revealed from God only. Even as it is
said of the Creation, John 1. All things were made by him* and without him was
nothing made that was made: Thus all knowledge in a supernatural manner comes
from him, and without him we know nothing. Now all those things which require a
supernatural power for to give the first existence to them, require such a
power to continue them therein. Hence as Christ made all things, Heb. 1. he is
still said to bear up all things by his power; and thus likewise it is in
regard of all saving knowledge, that same Spirit of Christ which did at first
teach us, must in the whole progress of our lives teach us; As a man cannot
believe of himself, so neither increase in faith, or know more firmly and
evidently of himself.

All saving knowledge is part of that work of grace, which God is the author of
in the soul. Now in all the course of grace and progress therein, it is plain we
need the auxiliary power of God continually. Thus the Apostle speaking even to
those that did believe already, yet he says, It Is God that works in us, to
will and do; and as it is God that begins, so it is he that finisheth every
good work: Hence Christ is said to be the author and finisher of our Faith,
Heb. 12.2. As it is thus in grace, if God did not keep every godly man, he
would fall into the dirt, and all noisome lusts from which he was once
converted: So if God did not keep us firmly and constantly in his truth, there
is no damnable heresy, or blasphemy that is fetched out of hell it self, which
a godly man would not fall into: So that it is the Covenant and promise of God,
which keeps a man equally from erroneous opinions and sinful practices.

3. There is a necessity of Christ's constant teaching his people, because of
the imperfection and weakness, which is in their best knowledge. That as he
prayed about his faith, I believe, help my unbelief; so I know Lord, help my
ignorance; and therefore it is, that he will have a Ministry always in the
Church, which as that is to grow constantly in knowledge, so ought the people
much more: Oh then be affected with the true and right apprehensions of the
sins of thy mind, and thou will quickly see, that unless Christ be thy
teacher, thou shall die in thy ignorance.

4. There is a necessity of Christ's further teaching, because of the great
advantage in a grown knowledge. As

1. A man is thereby more able to discern between things that differ, he can
separate the dross from the gold.

2. He will be more evangelical in the frame of his Spirit, Heb. 6. The babe is
unskilful in the word of righteousness; Ignorance causes many scruples and
fears, which do hinder those spiritual consolations that should abound in the
heart of the godly.

3 Hereby they may be guides to others. The Apostle Rom 14. shows the many
duties of a strong Christian in respect of a weak. It Is a blessed thing to be a
means of edification of others, or the reducing of such as have gone astray for
want of this growth, many parents, many husbands, though godly for the main,
cannot do their duties.

Use 1. Of humiliation to the best persons, and the best Churches, they still
need more light; It Is not enough Christ has declared to them, but he must
still declare, not indeed new substantials and essentials to salvation, but in
regard of the superstructures of holiness and truth: That Doctrine in Popery,
The Church cannot err, makes her incurable, and is also grossly arrogant. In
particular persons, this would also breed self-emptiness, an high esteem of the
Ordinances, it would prevent heresies and errors, men being commonly confident
of themselves therein, as also any severe and uncharitable censuring of others,
knowing, as it is said, Phil. 3.15. God may in time reveal even this truth unto
them also.

SERMON CXLIV. Of the powerful sense and feeling of the love of God; How it is
attained; And what a great advantage it is to him that has it, both in
reference to duty and comfort.
JOHN 17.26. That the love wherewith thou have loved me may be in them, and I
in them.
IN these words we have the necessary Consequent or Effect, of believing in
Christ and resting on him as Mediator, and that is the love of God toward
them: So that we have here the description of Gods love to Believers, and that
in the highest degree which is imaginable ( the love wherewith thou love me;)
Critics note a Graecism in the relative (...) for (...), as Mar. 4.41. 2 Timothy
4.7. which Austin also on the place takes notice of, though Maldonate call it a
light Observation; The Truth it self is of infinite comfort that God loves
believers with that love wherewith he loves Christ himself, But this has been
discoursed of already.

2. You have the subject of this love with the manner of participation of it,
That this love may be in them, that is, in true believers, and in them only;
Some by love understand the holy Ghost, but we may take it for the gracious
favor of God, and as Zanchy well observes he does not say that this love may
be toward them (though that also be true) but in them; Gods love was to his
people by way of purpose and decree from all Eternity, but it was not in them:
Now when Gods love is said to be in them, that is to be understood of the
Effects of his love, and more especially of the sense and assurance of his love.

Lastly, There is the cause of all this expressed in these words, And I in
them, where Christ's mystical Union with and indwelling in us is made the cause
of all the love of God to believers, but of this also we have already treated,
So that there remains no new thing but the manner of participation of this
love of God to them, Observe. That it is not enough for the people of God to be
loved by him, but they are to endeavor after the sense and apprehension of
this in their own hearts.
and that is said to be in them, which although (as was said) may be true of
the several gracious effects of Gods love, yet I shall pitch on that which is
the most obvious, viz. Gods love in a believer by way of sense and assurance,
for God not only loves them but they may feel this and be persuaded thereof.

Obs. That it is not enough for the people of God to be loved by him, but they
are to endeavovr after the sense and apprehension of this in their own hearts;
This is the Emphasis, the Selah (as it were) in this expression, that Gods love
may be in them, our Faith in Christ is not only to produce those direct acts,
whereby we are persuaded of Gods love in the general, but also those reflex
acts whereby we know and feel that his love is in us; As a man under the
Sunbeams feels and enjoys the comfortable influence thereof. So that
herein lies the complete happiness of a Christian, to be loved of God, and to
perceive and feel this.

To open this you must Consider, Conside,


1. That the love of God is taken in Scripture two ways, I. The love of God is
taken two ways in Scripture.
either actively for that whereby we love him, or passively for that whereby we
are loved of him, and so some Texts do receive different Interpretations
because of the different application of that love of God; Now it is true, our
love to God is inherent in us, and we may perceive and feel it, as fire
sometime working in us for his glory and honor, but the love of God whereby he
loves us we cannot feel in us, but by the Spirit of God manifesting and
evidencing this unto our souls: We have a notable Text, Romans 5.5. where the
love of God is said to be shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is
given us, which although some expound of that love inherent in us, whereby we
love God, yet it seems more consonant to the words preceding, that it is to
be understood of that love of God whereby he loves us, for this being diffused
in our hearts, and we thereby affected with it do rejoice in tribulations, and
have such hope that will never make ashamed; This then is said to be a special
mercy vouchsafed to Gods Children, that his love is plentifully powered upon
them, as Aarons Oil upon his head, and so descending to other parts, So that
by this Love of God they can triumph and be confident in all tribulations and
exercises whatsoever; This is an heaven upon the Earth to live in such
discoveries and evidences of Gods love.

2. Gods love may be greatly toward us, yea, and the effects of it in us, II.
God may love a man and he know it not.
yet for all this we discern and feel them not; As it was with the Lord Christ
our Head, though dearly beloved of his Father, yet in respect of any sense and
perceivance of Gods love at that time, he was destitute of it; David does often
bewail his condition in respect of this spiritual desertion, and indeed there
cannot be an heavier temptation upon the godly heart then the clean contrary in
the Text; That the wrath and anger of God whereby he is drawn out against the
wicked, they should apprehend to be upon them; They who esteem the light of his
countenance above all things to find the frowns and wrath of God, to apprehend
his displeasure toward them, this is a burden greater then they can bear, So
that although this be made the connex to their believing in Christ, yet it is a
separable Consequent, it is that which may be divided from it sometimes; At
that very time when the godly do believe on Christ in a dependent way, they may
walk in sad apprehensions, knowing nothing of the love of God toward them,
yea, in a very dreadful manner questioning of it.

3. Although the love of God toward believers may not be perceived by them,
yet they are to press forward, they are to pray and wrestle with God, III. The
sense of Gods love to be labored for
that they may not continue in darkness but be brought to this comfortable
light; The Apostle Peter presses it as a necessary duty, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give all
diligence to make your Calling and Election sure, and the Apostle Paul 2 Cor.
13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith, or no; So that this happy
privilege is possible, and many of the people of God without any immediate
revelation have attained unto it; Insomuch that it is for the most part our sin
that we walk not in the sense of it: It is true indeed God sometimes out of his
Sovereignty, and for wise ends of his own, does withdraw this sense and
evidence of his favor, but for the most part it is from our selves that such
black clouds arise, which keep the light of the Sun from us. IV. The sense of
Gods love may be immediate or mediate.


4. The sense and perceiving of Gods love may be either in an immediate manner
or mediate; Immediately, and thus Christ discovered his love to some while he
was here on earth, or mediately, and that is by the discovering of the work of
grace upon our souls, whereby we gather Gods love toward us, and this is the
ordinary safe way that we are to take, otherwise under the pretense of
immediate revelations we may fall into sad delusions, and this way the
Scripture suggests, viz. that by our love to the brethren, by keeping his
Commandments we may gather, that we are loved of God; Do not then expect, as
if thou should hear a voice from heaven in a glorious manner as Christ did,
Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, but begin at the work of
grace and Sanctification in thy heart, by which thou may certainly conclude
of Gods love, as by the Sunbeams we may conclude the Sun risen, yet this must
be necessarily added, that we can neither discern of the work of grace in us,
or have such full persuasions of Gods love thereby, but by the spirit of God,
as in Romans 5.5. we of our selves through the sight of the imperfections of our
graces, would run from the presence of God, only it is the spirit of adoption
given unto us, which makes us have an Evangelical boldness before him.

V. The love of God to his is incomprehensible.
Lastly, This love of God perceived and felt by the godly is of a transcendent
and incomprehensible nature, So that if we should spend our whole life in the
meditating of it, yet we are never able to go to the bottom of it; This is
admirably expressed, Ephesians. 3 19. that ye may know the love of Christ which
passes all knowledge, from whence follows that we are filled with the
fullness of God, for this love to us is the same in kind though not in degree
with that whereby he loves Christ himself, Christ and his members are
comprehended in the same act of love, what an unspeakable consideration is this
to a poor believer; Again the love of God is such that he gave his only
begotten Son to the vilest and most ignominious death for them, which the
Apostle puts also upon it; Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world, and this love was
to us while enemies, while adversaries, and it is not to bring about a temporal
mercy for us, but eternal even everlasting glory, and lastly, this love is
immutable and unchangeable, God will never alter his love, or cease to love
such, Certainly such a love is that which the heart of a man can never
sufficiently comprehend, must needs infl^me the soul, there cannot be any cold
Ice under this torrid Zone;

The advantage a believer has by having the powerful feeling of Gods love.
Therefore in the next place let us consider the great advantages that a
believer has, which has this powerful sense and feeling of Gods love within
his heart;

And 1. It does in a wonderful manner encourage and embolden the soul, and that
under the thoughts of death and the day of Judgment; If so be this were to be
the next moment, if this voice were heard, Arise, and come to judgment, yet
the experimental feeling of Gods love would keep the heart so far from being
dejected and perplexed, that it would rather rejoice a man, and make him lift
up his head, 1 John 4.17. Herein is love made perfect (that is, not our love
but Gods love to us, as the Greek intimates) that we may have boldness in the
day of judgment; That day which is so terrible to the wicked, the very name of
it is dreadful to them that brings much comfort to him who is loved of God;
Now what a desirable life is this, who would not give the whole world to enjoy
it, viz. that he may walk in such powerful apprehensions of Gods favor, that
though death come, though the day of judgment come, yet his heart is not
terrified within him; The Apostle John speaks of Gods love perfected in us, 1
Jo. 4.12. that is, in respect of manifestation and discovery, as Gods power is
said to be perfected in our infirmities, or faith to be perfected by love,
which shows, that though God does love us, yet till this be manifested and
discovered to us, his love is not perfected to us.

2. The sense and feeling of Gods love does make us patient and contented, yea,
even rejoicing under all tribulations, the more grudgings and discontents thou
art assaulted with under any exercises, it is an argument thou have the less
feeling of Gods love upon thee, for if this did diffuse it self, thou would
be more then a conqueror in all these things, and certainly if Calvin said
gravely from the former consideration out of the place mentioned in John, That
so far a man is proficient in faith as he is well composed in his heart for the
expectation of the day of judgment; We may also speak in this particular, that
so far a man has profited in Christianity as he can from the sense of Gods
favor rejoice and be above all tribulations whatsoever; This the Apostle
mentions, Romans 5.5. the cause of all those glorious graces mentioned, viz.
patience and glorying in tribulations, as also hope which will not make
ashamed, all comes from that love of God shed abroad in their souls, and Rom 8
It Is the love of God which he felt in his soul that made him triumph in so
glorious a manner that he challenges all things as not able to hinder him from
this love of God.

3. This sense of Gods love is a notable inflamer and quickner of the heart
unto all godliness, to all holy duties; How dull, how cold and lukewarm are all
such performances that flow not from this fire within? All is but formality and
a mere outside in Religion till we have some apprehension of Gods love toward
us, yea, those that are truly loved of God, but yet not assured of it, how
heavily do they move in any holy duties, how sad and divided with unbelieving
thoughts, how prone to yield to such temptations, that because God does not
love them, therefore it is a vain thing to seek his face any longer, but if once
God let this love shine in upon his heart, then it is like oil to his bones,
then it is like Ezechiels spirit in the wheels, then many waters cannot quench
this love, So that any duty performed out of the apprehension of Gods love is
in some respect worth a thousand of those done without it; Oh therefore labor
to keep this fire always upon the Altar of thy heart, 2 Cor. 5.14. the Apostle
there says that the love of Christ constrains him, the word is thought to be
used of those Prophets who being immediately wrought upon by the spirit of God,
could not keep in what they felt, but they must deliver it, and thus it is with
a man strongly possessed with the feeling of Gods love, he cannot keep it in,
he is in an holy ecstasy and ravishment, he prays, he hears, he does all
things with all his might.

4 This apprehension of Gods love will make us wonderful heavenly, It will
take us from all things here below; As a man on a high tower thinks great
towns and cities but little things, thus a godly man raised up with the
evidence of Gods love toward him, judges all the world but a drop to God; As
the eye that has looked on the Sun is so dazeled, that it cannot behold other
things; Thus it was with Paul, he was so affected with this, that Christ loved
him and gave himself for him, Gal. 2.20. that he professes he did no longer
live but Christ in him; It Is this apprehension that will carry us up unto the
mount of Transfiguration every day; It Is no wonder then if Satan be so busy to
tempt us in this Point above all, to unsettle us about the love of God in
Christ to us, for he knows herein lies the strength of Sampson as it were,
if this be taken away any green cords will tie him, he will not have strength
to overcome the least temptation; But as long as this love of God can be
preserved and kept alive in the soul, so long neither the devil or the world is
able to do us any hurt, so long we are like the bird flying on high that is not
in danger of snares.

SERMON CXLV. Directions how to obtain, and always to preserve the Knowledge
and Assurance of Gods Love in our Hearts.
JOHN 17.26. That the Love wherewith thou love me may be in them.
THe sense of Gods love in our hearts, is of such consequence, that our Savior
does conclude his prayer with it; and as you have heard, glorious and blessed
are the effects of it. I shall therefore in this last Sermon, give some
Directive Helps, How to obtain and always to preserve this Assurance and
Knowledge of Gods Love to us; but before we declare them, it is good to take
notice of some particulars, that may rightly inform our understanding in this
point. And

Propositions to inform in this point.
First, You are to know, That it is the devils great work to keep the children of
God in darkness, and in continual doubtings. He is the tempter not only in
respect of lusts, I.
but also unbelieving and distrustful thoughts of Gods grace and mercy. That
as the work of Gods Spirit, is to comfort, called therefore a Comforter, as
also to assure and witness unto us, That we are the children of God, yea to
enable us to cry, Abba, Father: So on the contrary, Satan that unclean spirit,
his whole business is, if he cannot tempt to sin, yet to walk in a discouraged,
tormenting and afflicted way, representing God as some terrible Judge, catching
at all the advantages to destroy us: Now the way that the devil takes thus to
deject and sadden the hearts of the godly is twofold, for either he does thus
by suggestions immediately to the soul, taking the occasion, when our spirits
are darkened and clouded, or when God for holy ends has withdrawn his light of
favor from us; Or by his instruments, which he raises up, he causes such
tares of Doctrine to be sown amongst the good seed, that the child of God
shall not only walk without the persuasion of Gods favor, but think it is his
duty, and that he is obliged to reject all such comfortable thoughts; for
certainly this is one Doctrine of the devils, amongst others in Popery, that
they forbid the penitent soul any assurance or certainty of Gods favor,
encouraging doubts as the mother of humility, keeping the humbled sinner, as
the devils did the demoniack person among the tombs, in sad and doleful
objects, not discovering to him the glorious and comfortable light of the
Gospel: So that in Popery it is one high point of Religion with them, that no
man without an extraordinary revelation can attain to a certainty of Gods love
to him; he may (they will grant) have some moral conjectures, but a certain
persuasion cannot be ordinarily attained. But the Orthodox do abundantly
confirm this truth against them: Therefore I only instance in their opinion, as
an engine of Satan, whereby he would by this temptation take off the
understanding, as by the former way he would unsettle the heart and affections.
But let our wisdom be, to take the greater diligence to keep that pearl, which
we see Satan would so constantly rob us of.

Secondly, Observe this, II. Its possible for the sense of Gods favor to
consist with some doubtings.
That it is possible for the sense of Gods favor and love to consist with some
doubtings, and sad shakings of heart about it at some times: Even as the light
of the Sun may make the day, yet at the same time, there be some dark and
gloomy clouds, which though not able wholly to remove the Suns light, yet do in
a great measure obscure it; We see it in David's Psalms, some whereof you would
think were not made by the same man at the same time, for happily in the
beginning he had sad dejecting and expostulating thoughts with God, and with
his soul also, and yet ere the Psalm be ended, he is able to break out in
comfortable persuasions and assurances of Gods love: Insomuch that as Paul
finds Romans 7. in respect of grace, a daily combat, so also in respect of
certainty about Gods love; we believe, and yet crave help for our unbelief, and
the word used by the Apostle, 1 John 3.19 We assure our hearts, is (...), we
persuade our hearts, implying that our hearts have many objections and cavils;
so that this assurance comes by persuasion, even as the Greek word to comfort
(...) is used also to exhort, because this consolation is hardly received into
the soul, there must be argument upon argument, exhortation upon exhortation,
ere it will be satisfied. Do not therefore expect that, (which yet some vainly
boast of) thou should always walk in such predominant assurance of Gods
love, that there should not any time arise the least cloud or fear in thy soul;
no, such a blessed estate will only be in heaven.

Thirdly, III. The sense of Gods love may consist with a feeling of a spiritual
combat within us
Consider that the sense of Gods love may consist with a feeling of a spiritual
combat within us between the flesh and the spirit. For this assurance of Gods
favor does not arise from a total absence of all sin, that there is now no
corruption in us at all, but from Gods gracious favor in Christ, pardoning
those relics of corruption within us. It Is not therefore the perfection of
grace within us, that our sense of Gods love is built upon, but the promise and
truth of God in his Word; the not attending to this, has made Gods children
labor under heavy and sad burdens of mind; Oh they feel much corruption in
themselves, they daily find stirrings of sin within them, by which means
they are tempted to many doubts about Gods love toward them! But this is their
infirmity? for did not Paul in a very grievous manner complain of the body of
sin within him, that he found evil present with him, when he would do good,
that he was a captive, even sold under sin, and yet for all this he says, I
thank God through Jesus Christ, and concludes, That there is no condemnation
to him, yea for all this apprehension of sin in himself in the next Chapter,
what a glorious Chariot of confidence is Paul's soul lifted up to heaven in?
Does he not challenge any adversary in the world to separate him from this love
of God? Do not therefore make the sense of sin, and the sense of Gods favor
immediately opposite. These Cautions being laid down, Helps to get and keep
this favor of God
let us take notice of the Helps and means, to get and keep this favor of God
in the sense of it upon our souls. And

Be much in cherishing and nourishing the holy Spirit of God, which uses to
breathe and work in thy soul. For seeing it is plain, that by Gods Spirit we are
comforted, and that it only does seal and witness unto us Gods love, that it is
Gods Spirit which raises up the soul to call God, Father: That man can never
have assurance that grieveth this Spirit, that by any sin chaseth it away. As
Spira rebelling against the light of Gods Spirit (of whom yet judicious Divines
give a charitable censure) used this expression, If I could but feel one drop
of divine clemency, and could but in the least manner perceive God to be
propitious to me (for even the very least would be enough) I would not refuse
to endure a thousand years or more in hell torments. Oh therefore fix that
Exhortation upon thy heart, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God,
whereby ye are sealed, etc. So that the most compendious way to walk in this
light of Gods favor, is to be much in prayer for the Spirit of God, for as
that only can subdue corruptions which are too strong for us. Those primitive
Christians, which did rejoice in tribulations, and were endowed with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, it was, because they were also at the same time
full of the holy Ghost: If thou be lead by the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit,
thou shall have the comforts of the Spirit. Hence those great learned men, who
oppose this assurance, they go no higher then Aristotle's school, and seem to
know no further then the efficacy of moral virtues: Thus they make not the Sun,
but the Moon to rule the day.

Then take heed of all sin, especially such as waste the conscience, and make
a great gulf between thee and Gods favor. It Is the constant Doctrine of the
Scripture, that Gods anger is because of sin, that sin only withholds all good
from us: So that it is impossible to keep the sense of Gods love, and wallow in
sin at the same time, Mat. 5. Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see
God. The eye diseased with corrupt humors cannot behold any comfortable
object; so neither is a man polluted with sin in a fit capacity for Gods love,
for those who thus taste of Gods goodness, they are his favorites, they are
admitted into his secret presence: Now as a great Monarch would not endure,
that a man in noisome and loathsome apparel, and with the plague-sores upon him,
should be admitted into near familiarity with him; so neither will God bid a
profane person draw nigh unto him, Gods favor, and a presumption in sin
cannot consist together; When David had plunged himself into those foul sins,
you see what darkness did cover him, immediately he complains for want of
joy, that God had hid his face, that his bones were broken; and what was it but
sin, that did throw his soul into this hot fiery furnace.

Meditate much on Evangelical Truths, and the Gospel-Doctrine that is delivered
in Scripture. For as it is the Law of God, as revealed in the Scripture, that
makes a man's sin to appear out of measure sinful, by that pure glass he sees
himself more monstrous and deformed a thousand times, then ever he apprehended
himself: so by diligent inspection into, and consideration of the glorious
things of the Gospel, we see a more easy and more probable way for assurance
of Gods love, then otherwise we would: It Is not therefore the duty of Gods
people to be only poring upon their sins to be always applying the Law to
themselves, but they are also to behold the glorious riches of Gods grace in
the Gospel. Though Paul was often cast down with the sense of his sin, judging
himself the chiefest of all sinners, and less then the least of all Saints, yet
this does not drive him from Christ, but rather the more to him: hence none
speaks so vigorously and cordially about Christ, as Paul does. According to
those objects we often meditate upon, we are apt to be affected and even
transformed into them: If therefore we desire to know nothing, but Jesus Christ
crucified; if we daily possess our selves with the unspeakable love of Christ
in dying for us; if we often are caught up into this Paradise, as it were, this
love like fire will cause sweet meltings and liquefactions of the soul; and if
the cold, hard iron can by the fire be even assimulated unto it, so that its
natural coldness and untractableness is removed, it does not so much appear
iron as fire; no wonder if the gracious love of God plentifully poured out upon
the soul, does make the soul full of unspeakable joy and consolations in the
sense of it. As therefore Abraham would not consider the dead womb of Sarah,
but the power and promise of God; so neither do thou only consider the guilt,
and evil of thy soul, but also the glorious promises, and unsearchable riches
of grace manifested in the Gospel. The Apostle speaks notably to this, 2 Cor.
3.17, 18. We all beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord (viz. revealed
in Christ by the Gospel) are changed from glory to glory (from grace to grace)
by the Spirit of God; that as in heaven, the beatifical vision of God, does
fill the soul with all purity and joy: Thus the beholding of him by faith, as
manifested in the Gospel, does produce lively and cordial refreshments of soul
by the sense of his love.

4. Consider that the apprehension and discovery of Gods love to thee, is far
more noble and comfortable then the discovery of thy love to God. Thou may
take far more joy in the sense of Gods love to thee, then of thy love to God;
for Gods love to thee is the fountain and womb of all the mercies thou
enjoyest; were it not for Gods love to thee, thy love to him would not
advantage thee at all. Again, when thou discoverest thy love to God, thou
find it clogged with many imperfections, it may sad and grieve thee, because
of the defects adhering thereunto, as well as encourage and comfort thee: But
the love of God apprehended is infinite and perfect, there are no imperfections
at all; Gods love cannot be bettered and made a more noble and full love to
thee. Again, thou need Gods love, but he does not need thine; he commands
thee to love him, not that he wants thy love, or because that can add any
thing to his happiness, but because thereby thou art made capable of his love,
and so he can communicate of his goodness to thee, do not then take comfort so
much from thy graces, as the evidence of Gods love to thee thereby.

5. Take notice that it is most acceptable and well-pleasing unto God, that thou
should walk in such sense and feeling of his goodness to thee. For why are
all those commands to rejoice in him, and to bless his name continually? Why
does he invite thee to call him, Father? And why are there such thunderbolts in
the Scripture against unbelief and distrust? Why is it the main scope of the
Scripture to represent God under all love and loving considerations, but that
all our thoughts of him should be hopeful and comfortable? Do not therefore
think thou go beyond thy bounds, or it is presumption in thee to draw nigh to
God upon such assured apprehensions of his grace: No, the Scripture expressly
commands the contrary, Heb. 4.16. Let us come boldly unto the throne of grace;
and Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith
of him. Hearken not then to all those doubting temptations within, nor all
those deceitful arguments of humane reason without, but consider what the
Scripture says, and certainly it is preposterous humility, as in Peter,
refusing to let Christ wash his feet, to keep off from the Throne of grace,
when we are commanded to come to it. Besides, without this sense of love, how
can our hearts be raised up to bless and glorify God? It was David's
apprehension of Gods goodness to him, that made him call upon his soul, and all
within him to bless Gods holy Name.

6. Consider that this sense of Gods love is the proper and genuine effect of
faith in Christ, as a Mediator. Thus our Savior does here make it the
consequent of it, They have known me whom thou have sent, that the love whereby
thou love me, may be in them. It Is not enough to believe in the general, That
Christ is a Mediator to such as believe in him, but with Paul, Gal. 2.20. we
are to appropriate him, who loved me, and gave himself for me; with this
Evangelist John, we are to lean our heads, as it were in Christ's bosom; with
Thomas we are to say, My God, and my Lord. Now the genuine, but not the
necessary and inseparable effect of such an appropriating faith, is the sense
and assurance of Gods love to me in particular, which love of God is so
attentive to one believer, as if there were no more in the world: As they say
of the soul, it is tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, so is the love of
God totus in universis fidelibus, and totus in singulis, God loves a
particular believer, as much as if there were no more believers in the world:
Though the objects of his love may be diversified, yet his love is not divided,
or by division diminished.

Lastly, Fix this always upon thy heart, that Christ has prayed for this
sense of the Fathers love upon thy soul: You see in this prayer, where he
mentions all the great and consequential things unto believers, this is
brought in at the last, as the adorning and sweetning of all the rest, for if
sanctified, if hereafter to be glorified, if Christ be in us, and we in Christ,
yet if the experimental knowledge and assurance of this be absent, we are as
the Disciples under storms and tempests, crying out, We perish, we perish.

Let the summary Use of the whole be by way of Exhortation to all believers to
hunger and thirst, yea to have their souls break in longing after the enjoyment
of this love of God in us: Oh bid all things stand aloof off, till thou art
made partaker of it! Say, How long Lord, how long is it, that thou absentest
thy self? When shall I have the imbracements of thy love? When will the
glorious Sun break out and dispell all the dark clouds that are upon my soul?
Give not over importuning for it: Because of this very prayer of Christ, know
to thy encouragement, that this prayer abides for ever; Though it was once
uttered by him upon the earth, and he ceased to pray any further, yet it still
lives in the efficacy and power of it, yea that continual intercession of his
in heaven, what is it but the reviving of this prayer? So that by the virtue of
this prayer through his blood we are sanctified, we are justified, and shall
hereafter be for ever glorified.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF THE Chief Heads contained in this TREATISE.
A
Afflictions. It Is a greater mercy to be kept from sin and evil in our
Afflictions and troubles, then from the afflictions themselves. 444 The Grounds
and Reasons why it is so. 446
Antichrist. That Antichrist should prosper and prevail in the shedding of the
blood of so many Martyrs, is a dangerous temptation, etc. 388 A twofold
Antichrist. ibid.
Apostasy. Apostasy and decay in grace may be in several particulars. 350,
etc. Those that plead for the Apostasy of the godly, grant there is a
distinction to be made. 354
Apostats. That men may be eminent for a while in the Church of God, and yet
afterward prove dreadful Apostats. 372
Arians. Arians confuted. 73, 149
Ascension. The benefits of Christ's Ascension. 291
Assurance. Assurance may be attained. 356
Astrology. How vain and wicked it is to go to Astrologers or Witches, or be
such, 396 Arguments against Astrology and witchcraft, 396, 397
Atonement. Christ was a Priest to make Atonement for us. 507
Attributes. It is a necessary duty in a Christian in his approaches to God to
think to those Attributes and relations in him, which may excite and stir up
holy confidence and boldness, 657

B
Beginnings. THen Beginnings are hopeful, when the Spirit in the Ministry or
other means of grace did work upon us. 382 Then will Beginnings and endings be
alike, when grace is radicated and enters deep enough into the soul. 383 Good
Beginnings will have bad endings, when men profess Christ out of sinister and
worldly respects. ib. Hot Beginnings will end coldly. 383
Behold. What is that glory which they shall Behold shining in Christ. 663
Beholding. How much is comprehended in this expression of Beholding Christ's
glory. 662
Belief. Our Belief is the fruit and effect of Christ's death, and our election.
537 Two opinions about this, ib. The state of the Question in some particulars.
ib. Arguments to confirm us in the truth. 538
Believe. Why Gods children are so hardly brought to Believe. 211 Why profane
men think it easy to Believe in Christ. 213 Why Believing in Christ is so
acceptable to God. 213, 214
Believer. In what respect Christ did as much for one Believer as another. 525
In some particulars the poor, weak Believer has more love and affection from
Christ then a stronger. 528 The particulars wherein. ib. Wherein God
sanctifies their weakness and infirmities. 529 That such is Christ's care to
Believers, that they are remembered in his prayer and death before they had a
being. 532 This truth is full of consolations. ib. The aggravation of the love
of Christ to Believers. 535 God the Father loves Believers, even as he loves
Christ. Vide Loves. 642 It is an indearing respect of Believers to God, that
they do own him and cleave to him, when the whole world goes quite contrary.
685 Propositions clearing the point. 686
Believing. The Believing of Christ being sent into the world is the foundation
of our conversion to God. 595 Distinctions premised about Believing. 596
Blessed. It Is a Blessed thing truly to say at death, I have glorified God, and
finished the work I was to do. 103 Introductory particulars about Blessedness.
103, 104 The Grounds of this Blessedness. 105
Blood. Christ's Blood washes away not only the guilt of sin, but the filth of
it. 512

C
Call. A Lawful Call in those that preach is necessary and profitable, both in
respect of Minister and people. 494
Children. Children of God are of two sorts. 226
Christ. How Christ being God could pray. 8 All the godly are under Christ's
Mediatory prayer. 8 The matter of Christ's prayer in four things. 9 The nature
of Christ's prayer by way of Mediation. 10 The dignity of Christ's person
praying. ib. His relation to God the Father. ib. Q. Whether Christ was heard in
every thing he prayed for, or no? 11 Qualifications of Christ's prayer. ib. The
condition of Christ's prayer. ib. Christ's prayer sanctifies our prayers. 12 How
Christ who is God can be glorified. 24 Christ has power over all men. 36 Six
particulars to clear the nature of Christ's prayer. ib. The dominion of Christ
appears in nine particulars. 38, etc. Christ compared to many things. 45 Six
practical inferences from Christ's power 47, 48 Three Consolations thence. 49
Christ had that glory he prayed for with the Father before the world was. 149
Christ had an eternal being, proved by three Arguments. 150, 151 Whence it is
that any deny Christ to be eternal. 152 Christ has all things the Father has.
262 This appears in seven particulars. 262, 263 How all Christ has is the
Fathers. 264 Christ's protection and preservation to eternal life, is to be
improved, 344 This Doctrine is opened in a fourfold principle. ibid The effects
of this preservation. 346 Christ though God, yet as man did pray unto the
Father. 519 Upon what grounds Christ who was God as well as man did pray 520
The difference between Christ's prayer and ours. 521 What advantages believers
have by Christ's prayers. 521 Christ is said to be in believers several ways.
620 That Christ is in believers, and believers are in him. ibid. How Christ
lives in believers. 621 How Christ is in his people more particularly. 624 The
fruits and effects of Christ's being in his people. 626 As Christ is in us, so
the Father being in Christ is also thereby in us. ib. How the Father is in
Christ. ib. How the Father and Christ can be in believers, and yet they have
such great remainders of sin in them. 630 Christ's prayer for his people will
certainly and infallibly prevail for them. 660 Christ is the original and
fontal cause of all the knowledge that believers have. 681 Propositions about
the point. 682
Church. Christ is the head of his Church. 45 Four things implied therein. 46,
etc. There is a great difference between a Church under persecution, and not
constituted, and a Church constituted. 495
Church-office. Christ has a peculiar love of those that are in Church-office
according to his rule and way. 485 In what particulars this love is showed. ib.
The Grounds of this particular love. 486
Comfort. The Comfort of being like Christ in suffering. 438
Condition. Reasons why God sometimes changes his peoples Condition from better
to worse. 332 It is a very sad thing to fall into such a Condition that draws
out our peculiar corruptions we are most prone unto. 383 This is opened in
several considerations 383, etc. Try your Conditions. 384
Conformity. There is a twofold Conformity to Christ. 437
Conscience. Often rebelling against the light of Conscience. 368
Conversion. Conversion is a greater wonder then a miracle. 41
Corporal. There is no Corporal improvement of Christ. 334 Wherein men's
proneness appears to know Christ after a Corporal manner. 335

D
Damn. THat there are some men that are wilful set to destroy and Damn
themselves, etc. 364 The inward Causes that move men to Damn themselves. 365
The outward Causes. 371
Damnation. The everlasting Damnation of men is determined. 51
Dangers. The greater the Dangers are, Christ's people are in, the greater is
Christ's care of them. 272 This is opened in four particulars, 272, 273 The
godly man's life is full of spiritual Dangers. 277 This is explained in eight
particulars, 278, etc.
Day. Day of grace is to be improved. 24
Day of Judgment. The Day of Judgment is the greatest day that ever was or
shall be. ib
Death. Christ's Death is in it self sufficient for all, yet he gave himself a
ransom for some only. 241 Four grounds for it. 242 Christ by Death went to his
Father. 289 The particulars implied in the point. 290 Whether it be lawful to
pray for Death. 442 Vide Blessed. Delusions. vid. Sins.

Depend. Depend on Gods gracious power only in the way to heaven. 313
Devils. Devils are in subjection to Christ. 3^ The Devil may foretell some
things to come. 395
Divisions. Divisions are the fruit of the flesh. 570 Remedies for preventing
and healing Divisions in the Church. 575 What those proper sins are, that
Divisions among the godly are apt to breed in the world. 393
Doctrines. Free Will and merit are dangerous Doctrines. 125
Dying. Why the expressions of Christ Dying for All is to be taken
indefinitely, and not universally. 235, 236

E
Elected. THat none of those that are Elected shall perish. 349 Introductory
Propositions to clear the same. ibid.
Election. Election is the gift of God. 250 Four Reasons of it. 251
End. What things do diminish the comforts of the gody at the End of their day.
109, etc. The End Christ propounded in his doing and suffering. 116
Errors. Men are prone to be lead aside to Errors. 318 Errors of judgment are
damnable. 318
Eternal Death. Eternal Death. 65 Wherein it consists. 65, 66 The difference
between Eternal Death and eternal life. 66 It is Eternal Death not to know God,
77
Eternal Life. Christ gives it to those that are his. 56 What it is. 57 It
consists in three things. 57, 58 It has six properties. 57, 60 Eternal Life
compared with this present life. 63 Conclusions upon this subject. 67, 68 Helps
to be affected with Eternal Life. 70
Examples. We are not to live by Examples, but by precept. 379

F
Faith. FAith in Christ as Mediator is acceptable to God. 211 Why Faith is
called the work of God. ibid. Five Grounds why Faith in a Mediator should be
pressed. 223 Directions showing how a man may prize Faith in Christ as a
Mediator. 225, etc. The properties of Faith. 600 That Faith is knowledge. 637
What knowledge Faith is not. ibid. What knowledge the knowledge of Faith is 639
Reasons why Faith must be knowing. ibid. The people of God are kept to salvaion
through Faith. 314 This is opened in two Propositions. ibid. Why Faith confirms
us rather then other graces. ibid. That the Faith that justifies and saves
us, makes us wholly to depend on Christ. 542 The several kinds of Faith. ibid.
The object of Faith. ibid. The seat of Faith. ibid. The things required to
justifying Faith. 543, 544 God inables the humble soul to believe two ways.
546 Of Faith under the notion of receiving of Christ. 549 What the receiving of
Christ by Faith implies. ibid. Faith has two acts, a direct and reflex. 552
Arguments to prove that Faith is a particular application. 553 The Doctrine of
special and particular Faith does not tend unto presumption. 555
Father. God is the Father of Christ in a transcendent way. 13 Those prayers
are successful that are put up to God as a Father. 14 We cannot call God
Father but by the Spirit. 15 What frame of heart this compellation Father
breeds in every child of God, in seven particulars. 15, etc. Reasons why the
title Father prevails so much with God. 17, etc. The Father is the original
fountain of all good. 53 All that the Father gives shall come to Christ. 54
Finish. Christ did perfectly Finish that work the Father gave him to do. 119
Some particulars about Christ's Finishing his work. 120 How he Finished it. 121,
etc. The properties of the work Christ Finished. 123
Flesh. Flesh usually put Synecdochically for man. 35
Fortune. No Fortune. 23
Free Will. Free Will a dangerous Doctrine. 125 It is no Free Will or
preparatory work in man, that begins either his grace or glory, but the sole
gift of God. 668

G
Gesture. GEsture in prayer, lifting up the eyes to Heaven. 5
Ghost. The knowledge of the holy Ghost necessary to salvation. 100
Gift. All spiritual good the godly enjoy is only the Gift of God. Rules for
private Christians exercising their Gifts. 493
Given. That none of those that are Given by God to Christ shall perish. 352
Christ though God has many things Given him of his Father. 612 There is a
twofold Giving. ibid. What things are Given Christ of the Father. 613
Glory. Christ has a two fold Glory. 24 Whether Christ did merit Glory for
himself. 25 Christ being invested with Glory redounds to the advantage of his
Members, in five particulars. 25, 26 The nature of this Glory Christ prayed
for. 25 There were three degrees to it. 27 This Glory of Christ does consist in
four things. 27, 28 Christ's Glory is, 1. Spiritual. 2. Eternal. 29 All men
should be affected with Gods Glory more then their own good, heavenly or
earthly. 31, etc. Four Reasons why we are to pray for all our own comforts in
reference to Gods Glory. 33, 34 Gods children are to pray earnestly for their
Glory with God. 143 1. What is implied in this. 144, 145 2. This Glory is
earnestly to be prayed for. 146 3. This Glory is a cordial against all
afflictions, in five particulars. 146, 147 The Glory that Christ has, he
communicates one way or another unto his people. 605 Considerations for the
understanding of it. ib. Some Corollaries from this Doctrine. 608 Glory is a
gift. 651
Glorify. To Glorify is taken two ways in Scripture. 24 It was the holy wise
will of God to Glorify Christ. 25 We Glorify Christ three ways. 29 How we
Glorify God. 102 As Gods people Glorify Christ, so it is well-pleasing to
God. 267 How many ways the people of God Glorify Christ. 267 Why it is our
duty to Glorify Christ. 269, 270 Grounds why Gods presence in Heaven is that
which makes the happiness of a Glorified believer. 655 Glorification is of
grace. 253 How many ways we may Glorify Christ 667
God. God may regard one man's prayer more than another. 10 God appoints times
and seasons for his great works, in relation to Christ. 19, 20 In relation to
other dispensations. 21 God does all things for his own glory Vide Glory. 33
God made the world for his glory. ibid. The greatness of Gods glory. 34 God is
a universal good. 57 God is an unmixed good, 57 God is the proper and peculiar
good. 56 One only true God. 90 Many fictitious Gods made by men. 90 God is
known three ways. 91 God is holy, and so able to make other holy 297 God is
holy several ways. 297, 298 If Gods people were not kept by Gods grace, they
would be undone in soul and body. 301 God keeps all his from temporal dangers.
301 Proved in four particulars. ibid. Of Gods keeping all true believers from
spiritual evils. 303 Which appears in four particulars. 304 It Is only Gods
property to fore knew things to come. 395 God has the dominion and immediate
disposing of our being and continuance in the world. 449 Propositions
explaining this truth. ibid. Arguments to prove the point. 450
God considered absolutely and relatively. Although there be three Persons, yet
there is but one God. 583 Gods people are called out of the world. 172 Vide
People.

Godly. It is the property of Godly men to have respect to all Gods word. 201
Four Propositions to clear the point. 201, etc. Four Reasons of the point. 202
Governors. Governors that have a charge over others are to watch and pray
for the good of those they are betrusted with. 295 Proved by three Arguments.
ibid Motives to move to it. 296
Grace. Gods people must grow in Grace. 188 How many ways Gods people grow in
Grace. 188, 189 Grounds and motives to it. 190 Without Grace here, there is no
glory hereafter. 649 There is infinite comfort to those that have true Grace,
though in the least degree. 651
Grounds. Unless men be careful to look to their Grounds in profession, they
will never hold out. 382

H
Happiness. THe greatest part of our Happiness lies in this, that we shall be
with Christ, and have immediate communion with the Lord. 653
Hate, Hated, Hatred. Wicked men of the world have and will always Hate those
that are godly. 425 There is a twofold Hatred. 426 The Causes of it. ib. The
Effects of it. ib. The Properties of it. 427 Whether every godly man be thus
Hated. 428 The duty of Christ's Disciples under the worlds Hatred. 430 Why the
godly should rejoice when they are Hated for Christ's sake. 431 Cautions to
wicked men who Hate Christ. 433
Head. Christ is the Head of his Church. 45 What is implied therein. Vide
Church. 46
Heaven. Of immediate communion with Christ in Heaven. 654 The great end of our
being in Heaven is to behold and enjoy the glory of Christ. 661
Heavenly-mindednesse. Heavenly-mindednesse, wherein it does consist. 454
Help. How far men may acknowledge Gods Help, and yet not give the full glory
to God. 307
Heretics. Heretics that endeavor to spoil Christ of his glory, 151
Holy. To make a man Holy is more then to make a world 41 God is Holy, and so
makes others holy. 297 The most Holy should be humble in their approaches to
the holy God. 299 To scoff at Holiness is to rise up against God. ibid.
Hour. The word Hour has several significations. 19 Christ's Hour. ibid Under a
dark Hour be patient. 23 The Hour of Gods anger is shorter then the hour of his
mercy. ib.

I
Idolatry. IDolatry a great and grievous sin. 93
Jews. Jews deny Christ to be our Mediator. 90
Ignorance. Ignorance to be lamented. 75 Where gross Ignorance is of Christ
there men are in a damnable condition. 80 The Causes of Ignorance. 81, 82
Ignorant. All men naturally Ignorant of God in a saving manner. 74
Impotency. Man's Impotency to any thing that is holy. 4
Institution. The Institution of Sacraments is grounded upon the power that is
given to Christ 27
Inferences. Inferences from the knowledge of the true God. 93, etc.
Instrumental causes. Instrumental causes are Physical, Natural, or Moral. 470
Joyful, Joy. Christ does really intend that his people shall be Joyful. 400
This is opened in four particulars, 400 401 There is a Joy in Christ that his
people are to have fulfilled in them. 407 There is a three fold Joy. ibid To
know the nature of this spiritual Joy consider the particulars following. 408
The transcendency of this Joy above all other worldly joy. 410 The effects of
Christian Joy. 412 Spiritual Joy may then most abound when soul humiliation and
godly mourning is put in practice. 415
Judas. Why Judas is called the son of perdition. 362 Why Judas is said to be
already perished. 363 What particular eminencies Judas had, 372, etc. The thing
in which Judas did debase himself. 375 Take heed of proving a Judas. 384
Justification. Justification is the gift of God. 252 The Reasons of it. 253

K
Keeps. HOw much is implied in this, that Christ Keeps them as his charge. 339
Known. God is only and properly Known by the godly. 162
Knowledge. Knowledge twofold, Speculative, Practical 73 By the Knowledge of
God and Jesus Christ we come to eternal life. 74 Inbred Knowledge may be
increased by the contemplation of the creature. ib. True Knowledge only to be
had within the Church. ib. Without true Knowledge no salvation. 75 We must have
personal and explicit Knowledge. ib. Reasons why Knowledge is so necessary to
salvation. 76 Motives to move to Knowledge, 82, 83 Effects of Knowledge. 84, 85
-- 88 Why Knowledge that is not thus accompanied is ineffectual. 88 Our
Knowledge of God is very imperfect. 91 Who are excluded from the Knowledge of
God. 96 The Knowledge of the true God is not enough to salvation without the
knowledge of Christ. 96 The Knowledge of Christ opened in five particulars. 97
The Knowledge of God may be had several ways. 162 Proved by five Arguments.
163, 165

L
Life. THis present Life. 63 The Properties of this present Life. 63, 64
Love, Beloved. That though God Love his people, yet that does not necessarily
infer, that he must keep them from all misery in this world, and place them
immediately in happiness with himself. 439 Why God does not presently take his
Beloved ones out of the world of sin and sorrow. 440 Wherein the Love of God
to Christ and believers is not alike. 646 Wherein Gods Love to Christ and
believers is alike. ibid. The Father does not Love believers more then Christ.
645
Loved. It is of great consequence to the world to know how greatly believers
are Loved of God. 647 This appears in several particulars. ib. How difficult
it is for the world to be so persuaded. 648 God the Father Loved Christ as
Mediator, and thereby all believers in him from all eternity. 669 The
particulars wherein. ib.
Loves. God the Father Loves believers even as he loves Christ. 642

M
Manichees. MAnichees confuted. 158
Manifestation. Manifestation twofold. 161 Christ as God cannot have any thing
given him, unless by way of Manifestation 665
Mediation. Wherein God was glorified by Christ's Mediation. 113 Christ's
Mediation for us is of God. 194 Gods people are to believe the fullness of
Christ's Mediation. ibid. The fullness of Christ's Mediation in eight
particulars, 194, etc. Four Reasons why. 196
Mediator. Christ as Mediator glorified God in his Humiliation and
Exaltation. 30, etc. It is our duty to know and believe in Christ as the only
Mediator sent of God. 192 The opening of this in three particulars 193 What
Christ had or was as Mediator was for us. ib. Which appears in four
particulars. 193, etc. Christ prayed on Earth as Mediator, and makes
Intercession in Heaven. 226 Christ as Mediator had his glory given him. 663
Mediatory. All the children of God are under the Mediatory prayer. 226 The
aggravations of Christ's Mediatory prayer, in seven particulars. 227, 228, 229
Christ's Mediatory prayer, and his death, is only for the Elect. 232 Several
Considerations to clear the point. 233, 234, 235
Mediatory-Office. That Christ in his Mediatory-Office has respect to the
meanest and weakest believer, as well as to the choicest, etc. 524
Meditate. It is good for the people of God often to Meditate of this, That
they are not of this world. 455 The Reasons why it is so. 454
Meditations. Meditations are to be serious upon eternal life. 71 The effect
thereof. 71, 72
Merit. Whether Christ did Merit this glory for himself. 666
Ministers. Why the best Ministers sometimes not fruitful in conversion of
others. 3 The Ministers of the Gospel are to preach Gods word. 207 The opening
of it, in four particulars. 208 It Is a special mercy for Ministers to agree in
one. 320 What are the Causes that make the Ministers of the Gospel thus differ.
323 The Ministers of God must endeavor after the most perfect Unity, even to
be One, as the Father and Son are One. 325 The Ministers duty is to deliver
only Gods truth to the hearers. 424 The manner how they are to deliver it. 424
The Grounds why it is requisite that Ministers should have truth and godliness.
483 Vide Truth.
Why Ministers must be holy. 484
Ministry. The Ministry is appointed by Christ's power. 38 Christ's power gives
success to the Ministry. ib. It is necessary, 101 The end of the Ministry
should be to bring men to the knowledge of God and Christ 166 Four Reasons why
this is the end of the Ministry. 167, etc. If Christ, though God, yet in
respect of his Ministry does attribute all to God, How much more the Ministers
of the Gospel, who are frail men. 341 Two Errors in the extreme about the
Ministry. ibid. A grievous sin to oppose the Ministry of God. 486 None may
undertake the public Office of the Ministry without a lawful Call thereto.
491 God has appointed a perpetual Ministry to the end of the world. 557
Consider some Propositions for the opening of it. 558 A Ministry is appointed
for spiritual ends 558 Arguments to prove the perpetuity of the Ministry. ibid.

N
Name. WHat is meant by Name in Phil. 2. 28 All Church-meetings, Censures and
duties should be done in the Name of Christ. 28 All things have their success
in Christ's Name. ibid. What is meant by Gods Name. 162
Nature. All by Nature are in a state of enmity against God. 14 The humane
Nature was assumed by the divine. 666 The Father and Son are two distinct
Persons, yet one in Nature and Essence. 582
Natural. Natural knowledge insufficient to guide us in the worship of the true
God. 92

O
Obedience. THat is proper Obedience that has the word of God requiring of it.
198 There are five grounds of it. 200
Oblation. Two things admirable in Christ's Oblation of himself. 503
Office. The substance of the Ministerial Office is the same with that which
every Minister has. 492 That there is a distinct Office of the Ministry. 498
That none may enter into that Office without an authoritative mission. 499 How
shall we know what is an extraordinary Office, and what is an ordinary Office.
558
Offices. Christ is fitted in respect of his Offices to be a Prophet, Priest
and King. 503, 504 Vide Priestly.


P
People. GOds People called out of the world. 172 How many ways a People may
be said to be Gods. 176 The godly are Gods People in a peculiar manner. 177 The
opening of this in five particulars. 177, 178 They are the Lords upon several
titles. 178, 179 There ought to be a practical improvement of it. 180 It is a
sure Character of Gods People to be a willing People. 204 Seven Reasons of
this. 205, etc.
Perseverance. Several particulars about Perseverance that will be as so many
answers to Objections made against that truth, 352 353, etc. Arguments to prove
those that have true grace shall persevere. 357, etc.
Power. Power as it is expressed in this word (...) 35 It is not enough to be
put into a state of grace, unless by Gods Power we are kept therein. 307 How
many ways the Power of God does keep us. 309 Why there is such a necessity of
Gods preserving Power. 312
Pray. Whether it be lawful to Pray for any one man in particular. 229 Whether
it be lawful to Pray for a reprobate as such. 229 Whether we may Pray in faith
for others, as for our selves. 230 It is our duty to Pray for ungodly men. 231
Motives to move thereunto. 231, 232
Prayer. The matter of Christ's Prayer, 1. Himself. 2. Apostles. 3. Others, who
in time should believe. 2 To all instructions, etc. Prayers is necessary. ibid.
Reasons on Gods part, on the Words part, on man's part. 4 It should come from a
spiritual and heavenly heart. 5 Four Requisites to spiritual Prayer. 6 Its a
hard thing to Pray. 6 Customary Prayer receives nothing from God. 7 Prayer is
mental, vocal. 8 Ends in Prayer. 12
Praying. It is good and comfortable Praying for them that discover the signs
of grace in them. 229
Predestination. The Doctrine of Predestination should be preached warily. 52
Diligently. ibid. So as not to discourage humble penitents. ibid.
Predictions. Three sorts of Predictions. 396
Priest. Christ was not only Priest but Sacrifice it self. 510
Priestly. Concerning Christ's Priestly Office, consider these things. 508 The
Adjuncts of his Priestly Office. ibid.
Priesthood. Propositions concerning Christ's Priesthood. 510
Principles. Principles that do constitute a gracious disposition. 32 Uniting
Principles in Doctrine. 577 Vide Uniting.

Privileges. Privileges that come by Christ's death. 245
Promised. Things Promised must be prayed for. 137 This is explained in seven
particulars, 137, 138, etc. Six Reasons, why it is so. 139 What are the
conditions of such a prayer. 141, etc.
Propriety. They only can plead a Propriety in God and Christ, who are careful
to keep his Word. 182 Gods peculiar Propriety in his people is the ground of
all good that accrueth to them. 255 Propositions concerning Gods Propriety in
his people. 255, 256 Gods Propriety excludes all other creatures. ib. How the
Propriety of God is the cause of all good. 258
Properties. The Characteristical Properties of the Persons in the Godhead.
584 Properties in the godly which makes them lovely and precious in Gods
sight. 687
Protect. The grounds why God will Protect such as are hated for his Names
sake. 423
Protection. Christ's Protection is to one believer as well as to another. 527

Q
Qualifications. THe Qualifications of such to whom Christ's death is made
savingly advantageous. 245
Question. The great Question that all ought to put, is, How may I get eternal
life. 67 We must take the right way to answer this Question. 68 Vide Eternal
Life.


R
Reading. WHether Reading be preaching. 496
Redeemed. That (not all, but) some of mankind are Redeemed by Christ. 51
Redemption. Our Redemption obtained by Christ is a glorifying of God. 113 How
the maintainers of Universal Redemption differ among themselves. 241 Vide
Universal.

Relation. It is of great consequence for the humbled Christian in his prayers
to improve this Relation of a Father. 658
Religion. We are not to condemn the way of Religion, though some amongst them
prove scandalous. 377 Some considerations to bring this home. 378 The
unreasonableness and sinfulness of condemning Religion for some hypocrites
therein. 379
Repetitions. Repetions of the same matter in prayer may be useful. 133 Vide
Tautology.
When the ground of Repetition is good, 133, etc. When Repetitions are
forbidden. 135
Reprobates. Reprobates receive much benefit by Christ's death. 239
Righteous. God whether considered as a Judge of the world, or as a Father to
believers is Righteous in all his ways. 674 Reasons why God is Righteous in
all his administrations. 674
Righteousness. It is a dangerous sin to trust to our own Righteousness, as
it appears in four particulars. 219 Means to drive them out of
self-Righteousnesse. 220, 221 How Righteousness may be attributed to God. 674
The Righteousness of God as a Father to his people in all their afflictions.
676

S
Sacrifice. THat Christ set himself apart to be a Sacrifice for us. 502 What
things are necessary to a Sacrifice. 510 The Properties of Christ's Sacrifice.
511
Salvation. Salvation is to be desired in subordination to Gods glory 32 The
everlasting Salvation of men determined. 51 Salvation is of grace. 253 The
Reasons of it. 253 The Causes of Salvation. 679
Sanctification. Growth in Sanctification illustrated by the contraries unto it
464 The Word of God is the instrument of our Sanctification. 468 The
Explication of the Point. 469 The Word is the ordinary means of our beginning
and increase in Sanctification 471 Christ died not only for our Justification,
but Sanctification also. 515 How many ways Christ is the cause of our
Sanctification. 515
Sanctified. How many ways a godly man may be more Sanctified. 459 Reasons why
it is not enough to be Sanctified, but we must be more and more holy. 466 What
is implied in our being Sanctified by Christ. 515 Wherein the truth of
Sanctification consists. 516
Sanctifying. What Christ Sanctifying himself implies. 502 The benefits of
Christ's Sanctifying himself. 505
Saved. All that are to be Saved are committed to Christ's care. 338
Schism. How to prevent Schism. 580 Vide Unity.

Scripture. The Scripture is Gods voice. 387 So many contrary things to a
believers expectation may fall out in matters of Religion, that did not the
Scriptures foretell them, we should be greatly offended. 388 Some particulars
that are hardly concocted. 388 That whatsoever the Scripture says, is sure to
be made good. 389 The Spirit and Scripture are to be reconciled. 390 The
Scripture we now have is a full and perfect Canon for our Salvation. 390 The
parts of Scripture. ibid. The Ground why Scripture must be fulfilled. 393 In
how many senses the Scripture may be said to be fulfilled. 394 The truth of
Scripture-Prophesies. 395 The Scripture is oppositely true to all the Opinions,
Doctrine, and Religions that men set up by their own fancy.
Sense. It is not enough for the people of God to be beloved by him, but they
are to endeavor after the Sense and apprehension of it in their own hearts.
694 Considerations to open this Point. 695 The advantage they have thereby. 696
Propositions to inform in this Point. 698 Helps to get and keep the favor of
God. 698
Sending. There is a two fold Sending mediate and immediate. 493
Sent. Christ was Sent of the Father, etc. 487 How Christ was commissionated
and Sent for us. 487 The Necessity of Christ's being Sent. 490
Sermon. Prayer sanctifies every Sermon. 5 Vide Prayer.

Sins. What Sins do chiefly provoke God to give men up to strong delusions. 152
What Sins do chiefly provoke God to leave his people not totally, yet
gradually. 351
Socinians. Socinians* confuted. 73 Socinians no Christians. 591 Socinians
answered. 666
Sonship. Sonship is purchased by Christ. 14
Soul. The Soul of man has an infinite appetite. 57 God is the center of the
Soul. ib.
Spirit of God. How many ways the Spirit is a comforter to believers. 404
Suffer, Suffering. When the people of God Suffer not for any fault of their
own, but because they own God and profess his truth, this is a great obliging
of God to take care of them. 421 This Doctrine is opened in several
considerations. ibid.
Supports. Though God may afford his people many comfortable Supports, yet they
must not look to enjoy them always, 330 What are those visible Supports God
may for a while vouchsafe to his people. 330 Reasons why God sometimes changes
his peoples condition from better to worse. 332

T
Talents. THe meanest persons have Talents to improve as well as the greatest.
104
Tautology. Repetition of the same matter in prayer is not always sinful
Tautology. 131 Vide Repetitions.
This is opened in three particulars. 132
Teaching. That believers do not only at their first conversion, but in the
whole progress of their life, need constant Teaching from God. 690 This
appears in several particulars. ibid. The Reasons why Christ must constantly
Teach his people. 692
Testament. They that lived under the Old Testament dispensation not excluded
from Salvation. 100
Time. A Time is set for the Reformation of the Church. 21 Wicked men have
their set Time. ib. A set Time for Judgment. 22 The Time of every man's death
is set ibid A set Time of grace. ib. A set Time of the Churches troubles. 23
Trinity. This Doctrine of the Trinity is an object of Faith, and cannot be
demonstrated by reason. 583
Trouble. Several ways whereby a godly man falls into Trouble in this world.
284, etc. Reasons why they are subject to Trouble, 287
Trusting. Trusting to our own righteousness is a dangerous sin. 219, 220
Truth. It Is a special mercy to be kept in the Truth. 316 Ten Grounds proving
it to be such a special mercy. 316, etc. There is a threefold Truth we cannot
attain unto without the Scripture. 476 The excellent properties of the Truth of
Scripture. 478 Truth and Godliness are requisite in Ministers of the Gospel.
482 The grounds why it is requisite. 483 Vide Ministers.


V.
Union. UNion among the godly is of great necessity. 561 There must be a
Unition before there can be a Union. 587 There is a natural Union with Christ,
and a supernatural. 587 The excellency of this Union. 589
Unity. The Unity that Church Officers ought to have. 321 Grounds why it is
such a mercy. 322 The Unity between the Father and the Son is a spiritual
Union. 325 Vide Ministers.
Means to be used to get and keep Unity. 327 There is a twofold Unity between
the godly. 561 The excellency of Unity among Christians in several particulars.
561 True Unity is from Christ. 574 False ways of Unity by Papists and
Socinians. 575 Rules to keep up Unity in Church Order, and how to prevent
Schism, 580 Vide Schism.
Rules for Unity in respect of love, to prevent wrath and quarrellings. 581
Unity among believers is a special means to enlarge the kingdom of Christ 591
This is opened in several considerations. 591 The Reasons why Unity brings
others to the Faith. 593 Unity among believers is part of the glory which
Christ as Mediator has obtained for them. 616 In this Doctrine three
Propositions are to be observed. ibid. The Father and Christ being in believers
is the cause of that perfect and consummate Unity which they ought to have of
themselves. 632 What is implied in their being made perfect in One. ibid. The
Causes of this Unity. 634
United. That all believers are United to Christ, and in him to the Father. 586
Scripture-expressions to represent this Unity. ib.
Uniting. True Uniting principles as to true Doctrine, 577
Universal. How the maintainers of Universal Redemption differ among
themselves. 241
Universally. Reasons why the Scripture speaks thus Universally about Christ's
death. 237
Vocation. Vocation is of grace. 252 Two Reasons of it. 252 Vocation to the
Office of the Ministry consists in these things. 497

W
Witches. It Is a great sin to seek to Witches. 95
Witchcraft. Witchcraft is pardonable upon true Repentance. 95
Word of God. Word of God, How it does not convert. 4 How it does convert. ibid
What is implied by keeping the Word. 182 -- 184 The Parts of the Word. 183 The
Word preached and received by people does greatly enrage the wicked of the
world. 427 Considerations to open this. ibid Why preaching and receiving of the
Word do enrage wicked men. 429 The Word of God is truth. 474 In how many
particulars Gods Word is true. ibid.
Work. Who have not finished the Work God gave them to do. 107, etc. None may
look for glory until they have finished their Work. 125 It is true in
reference to Christ. ibid. In reference unto our selves. 126 The Necessity of
continual Working, in four respects. 127, 128 It Is lawful for the people of
God in all their Work they do for God to encourage themselves with this, That
there is an everlasting glory laid up for them. 129 God gives them a large
opportunity of Working. ib. Put no confidence in your Works, ibid.
World. The World was not from Eternity. 155 Proved by Scripture, and four
Reasons 156 That God made the World in time, is useful seven ways. 157, 159
Gods people are in the World, but not of it. 170 The several significations of
the World in Scripture 171, 231 The people of God are called out of the World.
172 Seven Demonstrations of it, 173, etc. Three Reasons of it. 175 Worlds great
enmity against those that be godly. 283 What it is to be of the World. 434 How
Christ is said not to be of the World 435 The not being of the World is that
which makes wicked men hate the godly. 435 What it is not to be of the World.
The World is ignorant of God in a saving manner. 678 Demonstrations of the
Point. ib.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE OF THE Chiefest of such BOOKS, as are Printed FOR THOMAS UNDERHILL.
By Col. Edw. Leigh Esquire.
A Treatise of the Divine Promises, in Five Books. The Saints Encouragement in
Evil Times. Critica Sacra, or, Observations on all the Radices or Primitive
Hebrew words of the Old Testament, in order Alphabetical. Critica Sacra, or,
Philological and Theological Observations upon all Greek words of the
New Testament, in order Alphabetical.
By Samuel Got Esquire.
Novae Solymae, Librisex, Sive Institutio Christiani, 1. De Pueritia. 2. De
Creatione Mundi. 3. De Jnventute. 4. De Peccato. 5. De Virili Aetate. 6. De
Redemptione Hominis.
Essays concerning Man's true Happiness. Parabola Evangelicae Latin redditae
Carmine Paraphrastico varii generis. Morton. His Touch stone of Conversion.
Mr Hezekiah Woodward.
Of Education of Youth, or, The Child^ Patrimony. The Lives and Acts of the
good and bad Kings of Judah. A Treatise of Fear. A Thank-offering.
Mr Samuel Fisher.
A Love-Token for Mourners, being two Funeral Sermons and Meditatitions
preparatory to his own expected Death, in a time and place of great Mortality.
Mr Herbert Palmer and Mr Daniel Cawdrey.
A Treatise of the Sabbath, in four parts. Memorials of Godliness and
Christianity, in seven Treatises, 1. Of making Religion ones Business, With an
Appendix applied to the Calling of a Minister. 2. The Character of a Christian
in Paradoxes. 3. The Character of visible Godliness. 4. Considerations to
excite to Watchfulness, and to shake off spiritual Drowsiness. 5. Remedies
against Carfulness. 6. The Soul of Fasting. 7. Brief Rules for daily
Conversation, and particular Directions for the Lord's Day.
His Sermon, entitled, The Glass of Gods Providence toward his faithful ones.
His Sermon, entitled, The Duty and Honor of Church-Rest.
Mr William Barton.
His Psalms. His Catalogue of Sins and Duties, implied in each Commandment, in
Verse. Mr Vicars Chronicle in four parts.
Mr Samuel Clark.
A General Martyrology, or, A History of all the great Persecutions that have
been in the world to this time. Together with the Lives of many eminent Modern
Divines. His Sermon at the Warwickshire men's Feast, entitled, Christian
Good-fellowship. Mr Kings Marriage of the Lamb. Mr Shorts Theological Poems.
The French Alphabet. Jus Divinum Ministerii, by the Provincial-Assembly of
London.
Mr Thomas Blake.
His Answer to Blackwood, of Baptism. Birth-Priviledge. Mr Cook His Font
uncovered. Dr John Wallis His Explanation of the Assemblies Catechism. Mr
Samuel Langley's Catechism. Mr Austin's Catechism. Mr Vicars's Catechism. Mr
John Pagit's Defense of Church Government* by Presbyterial, Classical and
Synodal Assemblies. Mr Tho. Paget, A Demonstration of Family Duties.
Mr Anthony Burgess.
Vindiciae Legis, or, A Vindication of the Law and Covenants, from the Errors
of Papists, Socinians and Antinomians. A Treatise of Justification, in two
Parts. Spiritual Refining, Part 1. or, A Treatise of Grace and Assurance:
Handling the Doctrine of Assurance, the Use of Signs in Self-examination; how
true Graces may be distinguished from counterfeit, several true Signs of Grace,
and many false ones; The Nature of Grace under diverse Scripture notions, viz.
Regeneration, the New Creature, the Heart of Flesh, Vocation, Sanctification,
etc. Spiritual Refining, the Second Part, or, A Treatise of Sin, with its
Causes, Differences, Mitigations, and Aggravations, specially of the
Deceitfulness of the Heart, of Presumptuous and Reigning Sins, and of
Hypocrisy and Formality in Religion. All tending to unmask Counterfeit
Christians, Terrify the ungodly, Comfort doubting Saints, Humble man, and
Exalt the Grace of God. His CXLV. Sermons upon the whole 17th Chapter of St
John, being Christ's Prayer before his Passion. The Difficulty of, and
Encouragements to Reformation, a Sermon upon Mark 1. verse. 2, 3. before the
House of Commons. A Sermon before the Court-Marshal. Psalm. 106.30, 31. The
Magistrates Commission, upon Romans 13.4. at the Election of a Lord Mayor. Romes
Cruelty and Apostasy, upon Revel. 19.2. preached before the House of Commons
on the 5th of November. The Reformation of the Church to be endeavored more
then the Commonwealth, upon Judges 6.27, 28, 29. preached before the House of
Lords. Public Affections, pressed upon Numb. 11.12. before the House of
Commons.
Mr Richard Baxter.
Plain Scripture Proof of Infant Baptism. The Right Method for getting and
keeping Spiritual Peace and Comfort. The Unreasonableness of Infidelity, in
four Parts. 1. The Spirits Intrinsic witness to the truth of Christianity,
with a Determination of this Question, Whether the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles do oblige those to believe who never saw them? 2. The Spirits Internal
witness of the truth of Christianity. 3. A Treatise of the Sin against the holy
Ghost. 4. The Arrogance of Reason against Divine Revelation repressed.
The Christian-Concord, or, The Agreement of the Associated Ministers of
Worcestershire, with Mr Baxters Explication of it. A Defense of the
Worcestershire Petition for the Ministry and Maintenance. The Quakers
Catechism. An Apology against Mr Blake, Dr Kendal, Mr Lodovicus Molineus, Mr
Aires, and Mr Crandon. His Confession of Faith. The Saints everlasting Rest.
The TEXTS Explained and Vindicated in this TREATISE.
Genesis. Chap. Verse. Page 49 6 609 Deuteronomy. 3 8 362 25 2 363 1 Samuel. 20
31 363 2 Samuel. 2 7 362 1 Kings. 8 27 7 2 Chronicles. 33 13 85 Psalms. 10 17
139 17 89 301 19 1 159 68 20 451 69 11 176 103 14 528 119 6 201 Proverbs. 28 9
141 28 14 358 Ecclesiastes. 5 2 132 7 17 449 8 11 369 Isaiah. 4 5, 6 395 8 6
490 33 14 70 40 6 383 57 1 450 61 3 414 65 9, 20 357 Jeremiah. 32 39 358 50 27
451 Ezekiel. 37 16, 22 566 Hosea. 9 4 413 Zechariah. 14 9 56^ Malachi. 1 7 657
Matthew. 5 48 263 6 20 64 6 7 135 11 27 38 13 37 182 16 18 360 21 32 545 23 9
257 24 36 363 26 14 375 Mark. 9 50 321 9 24 530 13 22 357 Luke. 1 70 322 12 29
554 22 13 284 John. 1 16 40 1 3 150 1 10 606 6 29 211 6 39 349 7 7 435 8 55 151
10 28 349 14 6 37 14 12 291 15 2 375 15 11 400 15 16 463 Acts. 17 23 91 17 27
585 20 27 424 26 22 388 Romans. 1 21 92 1 17 174 6 19 206 9 5 99 10 2 77 12 1
456 12 10 431 1 Corinthians. 1 14 115 1 2 516 2 17 424 3 8 563 6 20 257 6 7 587
8 4, 5 90 8 2 94 11 19 389 15 22 44 15 47 435 2 Corinthians. 2 15 348 4 6 606 5
16 334 11 20 17 Galatians. 1 4 175 3 28 524 4 16 430 6 17 126 Ephesians. 2 2
189 2 3 363 4 1, 3, 4 571 5 2 502 Philippians. 2 10 28 2 2 407 2 15 514 3 1 401
3 20 454 3 9 549 4 18 502 Colossians. 1 16 150 2 20 45 2 20 171 2 5 596 2 9 629
2 19 635 3 1 454 1 Thessalonians. 2 13 478 2 Thessalonians. 1 3 189 3 2 254 1
Timothy. 1 16 532 4 16 484 5 10 424 6 20 424 6 2 526 2 Timothy. 1 9 149 1 9 533
3 16 390 3 15 479 Hebrews. 2 7 46 4 9 126 5 14 633 10 29 464 11 26 32 11 24 18
11 3 155 13 18 151 James. 2 11 201 4 3 7 4 6 153 5 16 141 1 Peter. 1 3 146 1 5
307 1 23, 24 479 2 20 554 2 7 686 4 18 355 4 12 389 4 14, 15 16. 421 2 Peter. 1
6 273 3 17 316 3 12 456 1 John. 2 20 513 2 2 278 2 19 360 3 8 344 3 19 552 5 16
230 3 John. 2 460 Jude. 3 316 Revelation. 3 4 364 21 27 364 22 12 464

FINIS.

