THE Resurrection of the Dead, AND Eternal Judgment: OR, The truth of the
Resurrection of the Bodies, both of Good and Bad at the last day: Asserted, and
proved by, Gods Word.

Also, the manner and order of their coming forth of their Graves; as also,
with what Bodies they do arise.

Together, with a Discourse of the last Judgment, and the final Conclusion of
the whole World.

By John Bunyan, a Servant of the Lord's Christ.

1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. Behold I show you a Mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, at the last
Trump; (for the Trump shall sound, and the Dead shall be raised incorruptible,
and we shall be changed.) John 5. 28, 29. Marvel not at this, for the hour is
coming, in which all that are ^n their Graves, shall hear his Voice, and shall
come forth; they that have done good, to the Resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil, to the Resurrection of damnation. London, Printed for
Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle, without Temple-Barre.

Courteous Reader,
THough this be a small Treatise, yet it does present thee with things of the
greatest, and most weighty concernment, even with a Discourse of Life and Death
to Eternity: opening, and clearing, by the Scriptures of God, that the time is
at hand, when, there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just and
unjust; even of the Bodies of both, from the Graves where they are, or shall
be, at the approach of that day.

Thou have also in these few lines, the order and manner of the rising of these
two sorts of People, wherein is showed thee with what Body they shall then
rise; as also their states and condition at this day, with great clearness.

For here thou shall see the truth, and manner of the terrible Judgment, the
opening of the Books, the examining of Witnesses, with a final conclusion upon
good and bad. Which, I hope will be profitable to thy Soul that shall read it.
For if thou art godly, then here is that which will through Gods blessing,
encourage thee to go on in the faith of the truth of the Gospel; but if thou
art ungodly, then here thou may meet with conviction: yea, and that of what
will be without fail, thy end, at the end of the World: whether thou continue
in thy sins, or repent. If thou continue in them, blackness, and darkness, and
everlasting destruction; but if thou repent and believe the Gospel, then light
and life, and joy, and comfort, and glory, and happiness, and that to Eternity.

Wherefore let me here beg these things at thy hand.

First, That thou take heed of that spirit of mockery, that says, 2 Pet. 3. 4,
5. Where is the promise of his coming?

Secondly, Take heed that thy heart be not overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come upon thee
unawares. Luke 21. 34, 35.

Thirdly, But be diligent in making thy Calling and Election sure; that thou in
the day, of which thou shall read more in this Book, be not found without that
glorious Righteousness that will then stand thee instead, and present thee
before his glorious presence, with exceeding joy; to him be glory in the Church
by Christ Jesus, World without end, Amen.

John Bunyan.

OF THE Resurrection of the Dead, and Eternal Judgment
But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call Heresy, so
worship I the God of my Father, believing all things that are written in the
Law and the Prophets, and have hope toward God, which they themselves also
allow, that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and
unjust, Acts* 24. 14, 15.
MY Discourse upon this Text, will chiefly concern the Resurrection of the
Dead: wherefore to that I shall immediately apply my self not meddling with what
else is couched in the words.

You see here, that Paul, being upon his Arraignment, accused of many things,
by some that were violent for his blood; and being licenced to speak for
himself by the then Heathen Magistrate; he does in few words tell them, that as
touching the Crimes wherewith they charged him, he was utterly faultless, only
this he confessed, that after that way which they call Heresy, so he
worshipped the God of his Fathers; believing all things that are written in the
Law and the Prophets, and that he had the same hope toward God, which they
themselves did allow, that there should be a Resurrection of the dead, both of
the just* and unjust.

Whence note by the way, That an hypocritical people, will persecute the power
of those truths in others, which themselves in words profess. I have hopes
toward God, and that such a hope which themselves do allow, and yet I am this
day, and that for this very thing persecuted by them.

But to come to my purpose, there shall be a Resurrection of the dead etc. By
these words, the Apostle shows us what was the substance of his Doctrine, to
wit, that there should be a Resurrection of the dead; and by these words also,
what was the great argument with his Soul, to carry him through these
temptations, afflictions, reproaches, and necessities he met with in this
World, even the Doctrine of a Resurrection. I have hope toward God, says he,
and there is my mind fixed, for there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both
of the just, and unjust. The reason why I cannot do what these Jews would have
me; also why I cannot live as do the Gentiles, it is, because I have in my
Soul, the faith of the Resurrection. This is the Doctrine I say, which makes
me fear to offend, and that is, as an undergirder to my Soul, whereby I am kept
from destruction and confusion, under all the storms and tempests I here go
through. In a word, this is it that has more awe upon my Conscience, then all
the Laws of men, with all the penalties they inflict. Verse. 17. And herein do I
exercise my self to have always a Conscience void of offense, both toward God
and toward men.

Now here, seeing this Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead* has that
power, both to bear up and to awe; both to encourage and to keep within
compass, the Spirit and Body of the People of God: It will be requisite, and
profitable for us, to inquire into the true me^ning and nature of this word,
the Resurrection of the dead.

And for the better compassing of this matter, I shall briefly inquire.

First, what this place is meant by the dead.

Secondly, What is meant by the Resurrection.

Thirdly, Why the Apostle does here speak of the Resurrection of the dead, as
of a thing yet to come, there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the
just, and unjust.

For the first, The dead in Scripture, go under a five-fold Consideration, as,

1. Such as die a natural death, or as when a man cease to be any more in
this World, as David, whom Peter tells us, is both dead and buried, and his
Sepulcher remains with us to this day. Acts 2. 29.

2. There is a People that are reckoned dead in trespasses and sins, as those
are, who never yet were translated from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan to God. Such I say, who yet never felt the power of the Word and
Spirit of God, to raise them from that state, to walk with him in the
Regeneration: making a life out of Christ, and his present benefits. Ephesians. 2.
1, 2. John 5. 25.

3. There is a death seizes men often after some measure of light received
from God, and some profession of the Gospel of Christ. These, for the certainty
of their damnation, are said to be dead, dead; twice dead, and plucked up by
the roots. Jude 12.

4. There is in Scripture mention made of a death to sin, and the lusts of the
flesh; this death is the beginning of true life and happiness, and is a certain
forerunner of a share in Christ, and with him in another World, Romans 6. 6, 7,
8. 2 Timothy 2. 11.

5. Lastly, there is also in the Word, a relation of eternal death. This is the
death that those are in, and swallowed up of, that go out of this World
Godless, Christless, and Graceless; dying in sin, and so under the curse of the
dreadful God, who I say, because they have missed of the Lord Jesus Christ, the
Savior in this day of Grace: are fallen into the gulf and jaws of eternal
death and misery, in the fire that never shall be quenched. Mark 9. 43, 44. Luk
16. 23, 24, 25, 26.

Now then, seeing there is death, or to be dead, taken under so many
Considerations in the Scripture; it is evident, that to be dead in Christ, the
Text is not meant of them all: I then must distinguish, and inquire which of
these deaths it is, that here the Apostle did look for a Resurrection from.

First then, it cannot be meant a Resurrection from eternal death, for from
that there is no Redemption. Psalm. 49. 38.

Secondly, Neither is it a Resurrection from that double death; for they that
are in that, are past recovery also.

Thirdly, And so for those that are dead to sin, it is nonsense, to say there
shall, or can be a Resurrection from that: for that it self is a Resurrection.
Colos. 2. 12, 13. 20. which Resurrection also, the Apostle had then passed
through. And also all the Brethren, as he says, You has he quickened, who were
dead in trespasses and sins; and again, if ye then be risen with Christ* and
again, wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of
God, who raised him from the dead. Col. 3. 1.

Lastly, The dead therefore in this Scripture, must be understood of those that
have departed this life, that have Body and Soul separated each from the other;
and so the Resurrection, a Resurrection of the Body out of the Grave; as Daniel
says, many that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall arise; and again, the
hour is coming, when all that are in their Graves shall hear his voice, and
shall come forth, etc. Dan. 12. 2. John 5. 28.

The Resurrection of the Just then, is the rising of the Bodies of the Just,
and the Resurrection of the unjust, the rising of their Bodies at the last
Judgment. This also is the meaning of that saying of Paul, to Agrippa, I
stand, says he, and am Judged, for the hope of the promise made unto our
Fathers, which promise at first began to be fulfilled in the Resurrection of
the Body of Christ, Acts 13. 32, 33. and hat its accomplishment, when the dead,
small and great, are raised out of their Graves: wherefore, though Paul says
in the 13th of the Acts, it is already fulfilled: yet here he says, he hopes
it shall come. Which promise, says he, our twelve Tribes instantly serving God
day and might, hope to come, as God told Daniel, saying, go thy Way, for thou
shall stand in thy lot at the end of the days. Dan. 12, 13.

Christ is already risen, and therefore so far the promise is fulfilled, but
his Saints are yet in their Graves, and therefore that part of the fulfilling
of it, is yet to come, as he says, Why should it be an incredible thing with
you, that God should raise the dead. Acts 26. 6, 7, 8.

Again, That it is the Resurrection of the dead Bodies of both Saints and
sinners that is here inserted, it is further evident, because the Apostle
says, it is the Resurrection, that the very Pharisees themselves allowed. I
have hope toward God, says he, which themselves also allow, then what that
hope is, he in the next words shows, namely, That there shall be a
Resurrection of the Dead, etc. Now we know, that the Pharisees did not allow of
a Resurrection from a state of Nature, to a state of Grace, which is the same
with the new birth; but did confidently allow and teach, that they were the
Children of Abraham, according to the flesh. Yea, when any of them began to
adhere, or incline to Christ's Doctrine in some things, yet the Doctrine of the
new Birth, or of being raised from a state of Nature, to a state of Grace, they
would very much stick at; though in the mean time, they utterly were against
the Doctrine of the Sadduces, which denied the Resurrection of the Body, John
31. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. John 8. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. Acts 23. 6, 7, 8.

Further, the Resurrection here spoken of, must needs be the Resurrection of
the Body, because it is called, a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just,
and unjust, that is, of both Saints and sinners, according to the saying of
Christ, The hour is coming, when all that are in their Graves shall hear his
Voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good, to the Resurrection of
life; and they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of damnation. Joh. 5.
28, 29.

Again, the Resurrection here mentioned, is a Resurrection to come, not already
enjoyed, either by Saints or sinners, there shall be a Resurrection of the
Dead, both of the just, and unjust. Now I say, the Resurrection here being yet
deferred by the just, and counted also the Resurrection of the dead, both of
the just and unjust: It must needs be the same Resurrection that is spoken of
by Jobe, who says, So man lies down, and rises not again, till the Heavens
be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep, Job. 14. 12.

Having thus in few words opened this Scripture unto you, I shall in the next
place, for the further satisfaction of those that are yet wavering, and for the
refreshment of those that are strong and steadfast: lay down before you, several
undeniable Scripture demonstrations, of the Resurrection of the Dead, both of
the just, and unjust.

I shall first begin with the Resurrection of the Just.

The Just must arise, because Christ is risen from the dead. Christ is the head
of the Just, and they are the members of his Body; and because of this union,
therefore the Just must arise. This is the Apostles own Argument, If Christ,
says he, be preached, that he rose from the dead, how say some among you, that
there is no Resurrection of the dead; but if there be no Resurrection of the
dead, then is not Christ risen. 1 Cor. 15. 12, 13. Now I say, the Reason why
the Apostle thus argues the Resurrection from the dead, by the Resurrection of
Christ. It is, because the Saints (of whose Resurrection he here chiefly
discourses, are in their Bodies, as well as in their Soul, the members of
Christ; know you not, says he, that your Bodies are the members of Christ, 1
Cor. 6. 15. A very weighty Argument; for if a good man be a member of Christ,
then he must either be raised out of his Grave, or else sin and death must have
power over a member of Christ. I say again, if if this Body be not raised, then
also Christ is not a complete Conqueror over his enemies; for as much as death
and the Grave, has still power over his members. The last Enemy that shall be
destroyed, is Death. Now though Christ in his own person, has a complete
Conquest over Death, etc. yet Death has still power over the Bodies of all
that are in their Graves: now I say, Christ being considered with relation to
his members, then he has not yet a complete Conquest over death, neither will
he, until they every one be brought forth of their Graves; for then, and not
till then, shall that saying be every way fulfilled: Death is swallowed up of
Victory, 1 Cor. 15. 26. and 53, 54.

Secondly, As there must be a Resurrection of the Just, because Christ is their
Head, and they his members: so also, because the Body of the Saints, as well as
their Soul, is the purchase of Christ's blood. Ye are bought with a price, says
Paul: wherefore glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are Gods.
1 Cor. 6. 20. Christ will not lose the purchase of his blood, O Death, says
Christ, I will have them; O Grave, I will make thee let them go, I will ransom
them from the power of the Grave, I will redeem them from death. (I have bought
them, and they shall be mine) O Death, I will be thy plague, O Grave, I will be
thy destruction, Hos. 13, 14. Job 18. 13, 14. Revel. 1. 18. I say, though the
power of the Grave be invincible, and death be the King of terrors, yet he who
has the Keys of Hell and of Death, at his Girdle, to him belongs the issues
from death. He that is our God, is the God of Salvation, and to God the Lord,
belongs the issues from death. Psalm. 68. 20. and we the price of his blood,
shall be delivered.

Thirdly, As the Body is the member of Christ, and the price of his blood: so
it is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in us. What, know you not that
your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you? and you are not your
own. The Body is no such rediculous thing in the account of Christ, as it was
in the account of the Saduces. The Body is not for fornication, but for the
Lord, and the Lord for the Body, and that no only in this World, but that
which is to come: wherefore he says, God has both raised up the Lord Jesus,
and will raise us up also by his power. 1 Cor. 6. 13, 14. 19. that is, as he
has raised up the Body of Christ: so will he raise up ours also by Christ.

Fourthly, The Bodies of the Just must arise again, because of that Similitude,
that must be betwixt the Body of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Bodies of the
Saints. When he shall appear, we shall be like him. 1 John 3. 2. Now we have it
abundantly manifest in Scripture, that the Body of the Lord Jesus, was raised
out of the Grave, caught up into Heaven, and that it ever remains in the
holiest of all, a glorified Body, Luk 24. 3, 4, 5 6, 7, 8. 35. 36, 37, 38, 39,
40, 41, 42. John 20. 24, 25, 26, 27. Acts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Acts 2. 31. Acts 17. 30, 31, 32. Mar. 16. 6, 7, 19. Heb. 7. 24, 25, 26. eb. 8.
2, 3. Heb. 10. 12.

Now I say, it would be very strange to me, if Christ should be raised,
ascended, and glorified in that Body; and yet that his People should be with
him, no otherwise then in their Spirits; especially, seeing that he in his
Resurrection, is said to be but the first begotten from the dead, and the first
fruits of them that sleep, Col. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 23. for we know, that a first
begotten, does imply more Sons, and that first fruits do foreshew an after
Crop: wherefore we conclude, that as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be
made alive, but every man in his own order: Christ the first fruits, and
afterward them that are his at ^is coming. 1 Cor. 15. 22, 23.

And hence it is, that the Scripture says, He shall change our vile body, that
it may be fashioned like to his glorious Body. And hence it is again, that the
day of Christ is said to be the day of the manifestation of the Sons of God,
and of the redemption of our body; for then shall the Saints of God not only
be, but appear as their Savior, being delivered from their Graves, as he is
from his, and glorified in their Bodies, as he is in his. Phil. 3. 20, 21. Romans
8. 21, 22, 23.

Fifthly, There must be a Resurrection of the Body of the Saints, because the
Body, as well as the mind, has been a deep sharer in the afflictions that we
meet with for the Gospel sake. Yea, the body is oft-times the greater sufferer,
in all the Calamities, that for Christ's sake we here undergo; it is the body
that feels the stocks, the whip, hunger and cold, the fire and rack, and a
thousand calamities: it is the body in which we have the dying marks of the
Lord Jesus: that the life of Jesus, also might be made manifest in our mortal
slesh. Gal. 6. 17. 2 Cor. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. God is so just a God, and
so merciful to his People, that though the bodies of his Saints should, through
the malice of the enemy, be never so dishonourably tortured, killed and sown in
the Grave: yet he will (as further will be showed anon) raise it again in
incorruption, glory and honor: as he says also in another place, that we who
have continued with Christ in his temptations; that have for his sake underwent
the reproach and malice of the World; to you, says Christ, I appoint a Kingdom
as my Father has appointed unto me. Luke 22. 28, 29. If we suffer with him, we
shall reign with him, and he that hates his life in this World, shall keep it
to life eternal, 2 Timothy 2. 12. John 12. 29. all this is to be enjoyed,
especially at the Resurrection of the Just.

But sixthly, There must be a Resurrection of the Just, otherwise, there will
be the greatest disappointment on all sides that ever was, since man had a
being on the Earth.

A disappointment I say,

First, Of the Will of God; for this is the will of the Father that sent
me,says Christ, that of all that he has given me, I should lose nothing, (not
a dust) but should raise it up again at the last day. John 6. 39.

Secondly, A disappointment of the Power of God; for he that has raised up the
Lord Jesus, does also intend to raise us up by his Power, even our Bodies, as
Paul says, the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for
the body, and God has both raised up the Lord, and will also raise us up by
his Power. 1 Cor. 6. 13, 14.

Thirdly, If there should be no Resurrection of the Just, Christ also would be
wonderfully disappointed of the fruits of all his sufferings. As I told you
before, his People are the price of his Blood, and the members of his Body, and
he is now at the right hand of God (far above all Principalities and Powers,
and every name that is named) expecting till his enemies be made his Footstool,
and brought under Heb. 1. 13. the foot of the weakest Saint, which will not be,
until the last enemy Death is destroyed. We know that he said, when he went
away, that he would come again, and fetch all his People to himself, even up
into Heaven, that where he is, there we may be also. Joh. 12. 26. Joh. 14. 1,
2, 3. Joh. 17. 24. But I say, how will he be disappointed, if when he comes,
the Grave and Death should prevent and hinder him, and with its bars, keep down
those, whom he has ransomed with his blood, from the power thereof.

Fourthly, If the Bodies of the Just arise from the dead, then they also will
be disappointed. It Is true, the Saints departed, have far more fellowship, and
Communion with God and the Lord Jesus, then we have, or are not yet capable of
having, Luke 23. 43. They being in Paradise, and we in this World; but yet, I
say for all that, they are, though there, very much longing for the day of the
Lords vengeance, which will be the day in which they will, and must arise from
the dead. This I say, is the time that they long for, when they cry under the
Altar, How long O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our
blood, on them that dwell on the Earth? When they died, they Heb. 11. 35. died,
in hope to obtain a better Resurrection, and now they are gone, they long till
that day be come, Rev. 6. 10, 11. Till the day come, I say, when the dead, even
all the enemies of Christ, shall be judged; for then will he give reward to his
Servants the Prophets, and to his Saints, and to (...) that fear his name,
small and great. Revel. 11. 1. 8.

Fifthly, If the Just arise not, great disappointment also will be to the
Saints yet alive in this World: for, notwithstanding they have already received
the first fruits of the Spirit, yet the wait, not only for more of that, but
also for the Resurrection, Redemption, and changing of this vile body, Romans 8.
20, 21, 22, 23. Phil. 3. 20, 21. For our Conversation is in Heaven, says Paul,
from whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body. But now I
say, if the body rises not, then how can it be made like to the glorious Body
of Christ Jesus: yea, what a sad disappointment, infatuation, and delusion, are
those poor Creatures under, that look, and that by Scripture warrant, for such
a thing? They look for good, but behold evil; they expect to be delivered in
their whole man from every enemy; but lo, both death and the Grave, their great
enemies, do swallow them up for ever; But Beloved, be not deceived, Psalm. 9.
10. The needy shall not always be forgotten, the expect^tion of the poor shall
not perish for ever, says Christ, he that sees the Son, and believes on him
that sent him, has everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day,
John 6. 40.

Sixthly, If the Just arise not out of their Graves, then also is every Grace
of God in our Souls defeated; for though the spirit of devotion can put forth a
feigned show of holiness, with the denial of the Resurrection, yet every Grace
of God in the Elect, does prompt them forward to live as becomes the Gospel, by
pointing at this day, as

First, It Is this that faith looks at, according as it is written, I believed,
and therefore have I spoken; we believed, and therefore speak, knowing that he
that has raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus, and shall
present us with you. 2 Cor. 4 13, 14.

Secondly, Hope looks at this, We says P^ul, which have the first fruits of
the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the
ad^ption, to wit, the redemption of our Body, that is, we expect this by hope:
but hope which is seen, is not hope, for what a man sees, or has in present
possession, why does he yet hope for it. Romans 8. 23, 24, 25.

Thirdly, The Grace of self-denial also wo^keth by this Doctrine, If after the
manner of men, I have fought with Beasts at Ephesus; what advantageth it me, if
the Dead rise not? As who should say; wherefore do I deny my self of those
mercies and privileges, that the men of this World enjoy? why do not I also,
as well as they, shun persecution for the Cross of Christ? If the dead rise
not, what shall I be the better for all my trouble that here I met with for the
Gospel of Christ? 1 Cor. 15. 32.

Fourthly, Both Zeal and patience, with all other the Graces of the Spirit of
God in our hearts, are much, yea chiefly, encouraged, animated, and supported
by this Doctrine, as James says, Be patient therefore my Brethren, unto the
coming of the Lord, (for then shall the dead be raised. 1 These. 4. 16, 17.)
Behold, the Husbandman waits for the precious fruits of the Earth, and has
long patience, till he receive both the early and latter Rayn; be ye also
patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. Jam. 5.
7, 8.

Seventhly, The Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Just, must needs be a
certain truth of God, if we consider the devilish, and satanical errors and
absurdities that must unavoidably follow the denial thereof, as

First, He that holds no Resurrection of our Body, he denies the
Resurrection of the Body of Christ: this is the Spirits own Doctrine; For if
the Dead rise not, then is not Christ risen, 1 Cor. 15, 16. He that denies the
Resurrection of the members, denies the Resurrection of the Head; for seeing
the Resurrection of the Saints is proved by the Resurrection of Christ, he that
does deny the Resurrection of the Saints, must needs deny the Resurrection of
Christ, that proves it.

Now this error, as it is in it self destructive to all Christian Religion: so
it, like an Adder, carries within its bowels, many other alike devilish and
filthy, as

1. He that denies the Resurrection of the Saints, he concludes, that to
preach deliverance from sin and death, it is vain preaching; for how can he be
freed of sin, that is swallowed up for ever of Death, and the Grave? as he most
certainly is, that is always contained therein as Paul says, if Christ be not
risen, (whose Resurrection is the ground of ours) then our preaching is vain,
and your faith is also vain; then we preach fables, and you receive them for
truth. 1 Cor. 15. 14.

2. This error, casts the Lie in the face of God, of Christ, and the
Scriptures, ye, and we also, says Paul, are found false Witnesses of God,
because we have testified of God, that he raised Christ up, if so be that the
dead rise not. 1 Cor. 15. 15. Mark, before he said, Christ in his Resurrection,
does prove our Resurrection; but now he says, that our Resurrection will prove
the truth of his, and indeed, both are true; for as by Christ's rising, ours is
affirmed: so by ours, his is demonstrated: o^

3. The denial of the Resurrection, it also damneth all those that have
departed this World in the faith of this Doctrine. If Christ be not raised (as
if he is not, we rise not) then is not only your faith vain, and ye are yet in
your sins that are alive; but then they also that are fallen asleep in Christ,
are perished. 1 Cor. 15. 17, 18.

4 He that denies the Resurrection of the Just, he concludes, that the
Christian is of all men, the most miserable. Mark the words, If in this life
only, we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most miserable. 1 Cor. 15.
19. First of all, men the most miserable, because we let go present enjoyments
of those that will never come if the dea^ rise not? of all men most miserable,
because our faith, our hope, our joy and peace, are all but a lie, if the dead
rise not. But you will say, he that gives up himself to God shall have comfort
in this life. Ah, but if the dead rise not, all our comfort that now we think
we have from God, will then be found presumption and madness, because we
believe, that God has so loved us, as to have us in his day, in Body and Soul
to Heaven: which will be nothing so, if the dead rise not. If in this (...)
only, we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. Poor
Christian, thou that look for the blessed hope of the Resurrection of the
Body, at the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ:
how will thou be deceived, if the Dead rise not? but now is Christ risen and
become he first fruits of them that sleep; for since by man came death, by man
came also the Resurrection from the dead. 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21.

5. But again, he that (...) the Resurrection of the dead, he sets open a
^^^udgate to all manner of impiety, he cutteth ^he throat of a truly holy life,
and lays the Reins upon the neck of the most outragi^us ^ust^, For if the
dead rise not, let us eat and drink* that is, do anything, though never so
diabolical and hellish, let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die; and there is
an end of us, we shall not arise again, to receive either evil or good. 1 Cor.
15. 32.

6. To deny this Resurrection, nay if a man do but say, it is past either with
him or any Christian: his so saying tends directly to the dest^uction and
overthrow of the faith of them that hear him; and is so far from being
according to the Doctrine of God, that it eats out good and wholesome
Doctrine, even as Cankers eat the face and flesh of a man: how ill favouredly
do they look, that have their nose and lips eat off with the Canker? even so
badly does the Doctrine of no Resurrection of the dead, look in the eyes of
God, Christ, Saints and Scripture. 2 Timothy 2. 18.

Lastly, I conclude then, that to deny the Resurrection of the Bodies of the
Just, it argues,

First, Great ignorance of God, ignorant of his power to raise, ignorant of his
promise to raise, ignorant of his faithfulness to raise; and that both to
himself, Son, and Saints, as I showed before: therefore says Paul to those
that were thus deluded, Awake to Righteousness, and sin not, for some have not
the knowledge of God* I speak this to your shame, 1 Cor. 18. 32, 33, 34. as if
he had said, Do you profess Christianity? and do you question the Resurrection
of the Body? Do you not know, that the Resurrection of the Body, and glory to
follow, is the very quintessence of the Gospel of Jesus Christ? Are you
ignorant of the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and do you question the power
and faithfulness of God, both to his Son and his Saints, because you say, there
shall be no Resurrection of the Dead? you are ignorant of God; of what he can
do, of what he will do, and of what he will by doing, glorify himself.

Secondly, As it argues very great ignorance of Gods power, faithfulness, etc.
so it argues gross ignorance of the Tenor and cur^ant of the Scriptures; for
as touching the Dead, that they are raised, have ye not read in the Book of
Moses (says Christ) how that God said unto him in the Bush, I am the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the
Dead, but of the Living: ye do therefore greatly err, Mark 12. 26, 27.

To be the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, it is to be understood of his being
their God, under a new Covenant-Consideration, as he says, I will be their
God, and they shall be my People. Heb. 8. 10, 11. John 8. 44. 1 John 38. 9, 10.
Hos. 6. 2. Col. 3. 4. Ephesians. 1. 4. Now thus he is not the God of the Dead, that
is, of those that perish, whether they be Angels or men.

Now, I say, they that are the Children of God, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
they are counted the Living under a threefold Consideration.

1. In their Lord and Head, and thus all the Elect may be said to live; for
they are from Eternity chosen in him, who also is their life, though possibly
many of them yet unconverted. I say, yet Christ is their life, by the eternal
purpose of God.

2. The Children of the new Covenant, do live both in their spirits in glory,
by open vision, and here by Faith Gal. 2. 20. and the continu^l Communication
of Grace from Christ into their Souls.

3. They live also with respect to their rising again; for God calls those
things that are not, as though they were, Romans 4. 17. to be born, dead, buried,
risen and ascended, are all present with God, he lives not by time, as we do,
a thousand years to him, are but as the day that is past, 2 Pet. 3. 8. Heb. 4.
13. Isa. 46. 9, 10. Romans 8. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. And again, one day is as a
thousand years. Eternity, which is God himself, admits of no first, second,
and third, all things are naked and bare before him, and present with him, all
(his) live unto him. There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the
Just, and unjust.

A Resurrection, of what? of that which is sown, or of that which was never
sown; if of that which is sown, then it must be either of that nature that was
sown, or else of the corruption that cleaves to it; but it is the nature, and
not the corruption that cleaves unto it that rises again. And verily, the
very term Resurrection, is a forcible Argument, to prove the Dead shall come
forth of their Graves; for the holy Ghost has always spoke more properly,
then to say, There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and
unjust, when yet neither the good, nor the bad shall come forth of their
Graves, but rather something else to delude the World withal.

Having thus in few words, showed you the truth of the Resurrection of the
Dead, I now come to the manner of their rising.

The manner of the Resurrection of the Dead: And first of the Just.
THE Apostle, when he had in the fifteenth of the first of the Corinthians,
proved the truth and certainty of the Resurrection, he descends to the
discovery of the manner of it; and to the end, he might remove those foolish
scruples that attend the hearts of the ignorant, he begins with one of their
Questions; But some will say, says he, how are the Dead raised? and with what
Verse. 35. Body do they come? To which he answers: first by a Similitude of
Seed, that is sown in the Earth. In which Similitude, he inserteth three things.

First, That our reviving or rising, must be after Death, That which thou
sowest, is not quickened, except it die. Verse. 36.

Secondly, That at our rising, we shall not only revive and live, but be
changed into a far more glorious state, then when we were sown. Verse. 37. That
which thou sowest, thou sowest not that Body that shall be, etc. But God gives
it a Body as it pleases him, that is, he gives the Body more splendour,
luster, and beauty, at its Resurrection.

But Thirdly, Neither its quickening, not yet transcendent, splendour, shall
hinder it from being the same Body, (as to the nature of it) that was sown in
the Earth; for as God gives it a Body, for Honor and Splendour, as it pleases
him, so Verse. 38. to every Seed his own Body.

And indeed, this Similitude by which he here reasons the manner of the
Resurrection of the Just, is very natural, and fitly suiteth each particular;
for, as to its Burial,

First, The Corn of Wheat is first dead, and after sown and buried in the
Earth, and so is the Body of Man.

Secondly, After the Corn is thus dead and buried, then it quickneth, and
reviveth to life: so also shall it be with our Body; for after it is laid in
the Grave and buried, it shall then quicken, rise, and revive.

Again, As to the manner of its change in its rising, this Similitude also does
fitly suit, as

First, It is sown a dead Corn, it is raised a living one.

Secondly, It is sown dry, and without comeliness, it rises green and beautiful.

Thirdly, It is sown a single Corn, it rises a full Ear.

Fourthly, It is sown in its husk, but in its rising it leaves that Husk
behind it.

Further, Though the Curnel thus die, be buried, and meet with all this change
and alteration in these things: yet none of them can cause the nature of the
Curnel to cease; it is Wheat still. Wheat was sown, and Wheat arises, only it
was sown dead, dry, and baren Wheat; and rises living, beautiful, and
fruitful Wheat. It has this alteration then, that it does greatly change its
resemblance, though yet it has this power, as still to retain its own nature.
God gives it a Body, as it pleases him; but to every Seed his own Body.

The Apostle having thus presented the manner of the Resurrection of the
Saints, by the nature of Seed sown, and rising again: he proceeds, for
further illustration, to three more Similitudes.

The first is, to show us the variety and glory of flesh.

The second is, to show us the difference of Glory that if between Heavenly
Bodies, and those that are Earthy.

The third is to show us the difference that is between the Glory of the light
of the Sun, from that of the Moon; and also how one Star differs from another
in Glory. And then concludes, so is the Resurrection of the Dead. 1 Cor. 15.
39 40 41, 42. As who should say, at the Resurrection of the Bodies, they will
be ab^^^^lantly more al^e^ed and changed, then if the flesh of Beasts and Fouls
were made as noble as the flesh of men; or the Bodies of Earth, were made as
excellent as the Heavenly Bodies; or as if the glory of the Moon should be made
as bright, and as clear as the glory of the Sun; or as if the glory of the
least Star was as glorious, and as shining, as the biggest in the Firmament of
Heaven.

It is a Resurrection indeed, a Resurrection every way. The Body arises as to
the nature of it; the self-same nature; but as to the manner of it: how far
transcendant is it! there is a poor, dry, wrinkled Curnel cast into the ground,
and there it lies, and swells, breaths, and one would think, perishes;
but behold, it receives life, it chitteth, it puts forth a blade, and
grows into a stalk; there also appears an Ear; it also sweetly Blossoms,
with a full Curnel in the Ear, it is the same Wheat, yet behold how the form
and fashion of that which now arises, does differ from that which then was
sown, its glory also when 'twas sown, is no glory: when compared with that in
which it rises. And yet it is the same that rises that was sown, and no
other: though the same after a far more glorious manner, not the same with its
husk, but without it. Our brun shall be left behind us when we rise again. The
Comparison also between the Bodies Heavenly, and Bodies Earthly, hold forth the
same. The glory of the Celestial is one, and the glory of the Terrestial is
another. Now mark it, he does not speak here of the natures of each of these
Bodies: but of the transcendant glory of one above another. The glory of the
Heavenly is one, and the glory of the Earthly is another. Wherefore I say, at
our rising, we shall not change our nature, but our glory, We shall be equal to
the Angels, Luke 20. 36. Not with respect to their nature, but glory. The
nature also of the Moon is one thing, and the glory of the Moon is another: and
so, one Star also differs from another in glory.

A Beggar has the same nature as a King, and Gold in the Ore, the same nature
with that which is best refined; but the Beggar has not the same glory with
the King, nor yet the Gold in Ore, the same glory with that which is refined.
But our state will be far more altered, than any of these in the days when we
like so many Suns in the Firmament of Heaven, arise out of the heart and bowels
of the Earth.

These things thus considered, do show you how vainly they argue, that say, our
humane nature consisting of Body and Soul, shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God, and also how far from their purpose, that saying of the Apostle is, which
says, [ That flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.] And now
also because I am fallen upon the Objection it self, I shall not pass it, but
with a short dash at it. Wherefore Reader, whoever thou art, consider, that
frequently in Scripture, the word flesh and blood (as also in the place
alleged) is not to be understood of that matter which God made; which flesh
cleaves to our bones, and blood runs in our veins: but is taken for that
corruption, weakness, mortality, and evil that cleaves to it. Which weakness
and corruption, because it possesses all men, and also wholly rules where the
Soul is unconverted: therefore it bears the name of that which is ruled, and
acted by it, to wit, our whole man consisting of Body and Soul; yet I say, is a
thing distinct from that flesh and blood which is essential to our being, and
without which, we are no men. As for instance, he that is Christ's, says Paul,
Gal. 5. 24. has Crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. Who is so
vain as to think that the Apostle by these words, should mean our material
flesh that hangs on our bones, and that is mixed with our natural blood,
sinews, and veins. And not rather of that inward fountain of sin, corruption
and wickedness, which in another place he calls the old man with his
deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22. Again, The flesh lusts against the spirit, and
the spirit against the flesh: Is it our flesh that hangs on our bones, which
lusts against the spirit? and that also against which the spirit lusts?
Certainly, if the spirit lusts against our material flesh, then it is our
duty not to nourish it at all, because, by nourishing of it, we nourish that
against which the Spirit of God fights, and warreth. Nay, if the spirit lust
against the flesh on our bones, simply considered as flesh; and if it be our
duty to follow the spirit, as it is, then we must needs kill our selves, or cut
our flesh from our bones. For whatever the Spirit of God lusts against, it
must be destroyed, yea, it is our duty with all speed to destroy it. But will thou know O vain man, that by flesh here, is to be understood, not the nature
that God has made, but the corrupt apprehension, and wisdom, with those
inclinations to evil, that lodge within us. Which in another place is called,
the Wisdom of the flesh. Yea, in plain terms, flesh and blood, where Christ
says, flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is
in Heaven. Mat. 16. 16.

Nay, observe it, all these places, with many others, do rather point at a
corrupt Soul, then a corrupt Body; for indeed, sin and all spiritual
wickedness, they have their seat in the heart and soul of a man, and by their
using this or that member of the body, so defile the man; the weaknesses of the
body, or that attend our material flesh and blood, they are weaknesses of
another kind, as sickness, aches, pains, soars, wounds, defection of members,
etc. Wherefore, where you read of flesh and blood, as rejected of God;
especially, when it speaks of the flesh and blood of Saints, you are not to
understand it as me^nt of the flesh, which is their proper humane nature; but
of that weakness which cleaves to it.

Paul in another place, reckons up the works of the flesh, in many things, as
in Witchcraft, hatred, variance, strife, emulation, fornication, and many
others. But can any imagine, that he there, should strike at that flesh that
hangs on our bone? or rather at that malignity and rebellion that is in the
mind of man against the Lord, Gal. 17, 18, 19, 20. by reason of which, the
members of the Body are used this way, and also sometimes that, to accomplish
its most filthy and abusive deeds. They are Enemies in their Minds by wicked
Works, Col. 1. 21.

Thus you see that Flesh and Blood is not to be taken always for the Flesh,
that is upon our hands and feet, and other parts of our Body; but for that
sin, weakness, and infirmity, that cleaves to our whole man.

Further then, touching our real substantial flesh, it may be either
considered as God's Creature purely, or as corrupted with sin and infirmity.
Now if you consider it as corrupted, so it shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God: but yet consider it as God's Creature, and so all that God has converted
to himself, through Jesus Christ, shall, even with that Body, when changed,
inherit the Kingdom of God. The Woman whose Clothes are foul, can yet
distinguish between the Dirt and the Cloth on which it hangs; and so deals
God with us. It Is true, there is not one Saint, but while he lives here, his
Body is arrayed and infected with many corrupt and filthy things, as touching
bodily weaknesses; yea, and also with many sinful infirmities, by reason of
that body of Sin and Death that yet remains in us: But yet God I say,
distinguishes between our weaknesses, and his Workmanship, and can tell how to
save the whole Man of his People, while he is destroying the Corruption and
Weakness that cleaves to them.

And now to return to the place objected, Flesh and Blood shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. It cannot be truly understood, that that flesh which is Man's
Nature, shall not enter the Kingdom: For then, as I said before, Christ must
lose his Members, the purchase of his Blood, the Vessels and Temples of his
Spirit; for all this is our Body. Again, then Christ also in that his Body,
which is also our Flesh and Blood, is not in Glory, contrary to the whole
Current of the New Testament, Heb. 2. 14, 15. Heb. 7. 24, 25. Heb. 8. 3, 4.
Heb. 10. 10, 11, 12. Rev. 1. 18. Rev. 2. 8.

Yea, it would be Nonsense to say, there should be a Resurrection, and that
our vile Body shall be changed, and made like to the Glorious Body of the Son
of God; if this Body do not at all rise again, but some other thing, which is
not in us, and our Nature. But to be short, the Apostle here, when he says,
Flesh and Blood shall not inherit, etc. speaks properly of that Mortality and
Weakness, that now attends our whole Man, and not of our real substantial Body
it self. For after he had said, Flesh and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God; he adds, Neither does Corruption inherit in corruption: Which two
sayings, are answerable to what he presently adds; Saying, Behold! I show you a
Mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed in a moment, in
the twinkling of an Eye, at the last Trump, for the Trumpet shall sound, and
the Dead; mark, the Dead shall be raised incorruptible; that is, the Dead shall
be so raised, as that in their rising, Incorruption shall possess them, in
stead of Corruption, and Immortality, instead of that Mortality that descended
to the Grave with them. For this Corruptible; mark, this Corruptible, shall put
on incorruption; and this mortal shall put on Mortality: Mark, I say, it is
this Corruptible, and this Mortal, that must be raised, though not Corruptible
and Mortal, as it was buried; but immortal and incorruptible: it shall leave
its Grave-Cloaths of Corruption and Mortality behind it, Cor. 15. 50, 51. 52,
53.

The manner of which their Rising, the Apostle does more distinctly branch out
a little above in four particulars: Which particulars, are these that follow,

1. It is sown in Corruption; it is raised in Incorruption.

2. It is sown in Dishonor, it is raised in Glory.

3. It is sown in Weakness, it is raised in Power.

4. It is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body, 1 Cor. 15.

First, it is raised in Incorruption: We are brought into this World by Sin and
Corruption; Corruption is our Father, and in Sin did our Mother conceive us,
Job 17. 14. Psalm. 51. 5. And hence it is, that we have our Life; nnt only like
a span, shadow, or post, for shortness, but also, that it is attended with so
much vanity and vexation of spirit: But now being raised from the Dead
incorruptible, (which is also called a Begetting and Birth) these Things that
now in our Life annoy us, and at last take away our Life, are effectually
destroyed: And therefore we live for ever, as says the Spirit; And there shall
be no more Death, nor Sorrow, nor Crying; neither shall there be any more pain,
for the former things (that is, all our Corruptibleness) are passed away, Rev.
21. 4.

There shall be in our Resurrection no Corruption, either of Body, of Soul; no
weakness, nor sickness, nor any thing tending that way; as he says, He will
present us to himself a Glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Therefore when he says, it is raised in
Incorruption, it is, as if he had said, It is impossible that they should ever
sin more, be sick more, sorrow more, or die more. They that shall be counted
worthy of that World, and the Resurrection from the Dead, neither marry, nor
are given in Marriage, (though 'twas thus with them in this World) neither can
they die any more, for they are equal unto the Angels, and are the Children of
God, being the Children of the Resurrection, Luke 20. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32,
33, 34, 35, 36.

Secondly, It is raised in Glory; the Dishonor that does attend the Saint at
his departing this World, it is very great, he is sown in dishonor; he is so
loathsome at his death, that his dearest friends are weary of him, stop their
noses at him, see no beauty in him, nor set any price upon him. (I speak
nothing here, how some of them are banged, starved, banished, and so die, torn
to pieces, and not suffered to be put into Graves;) but it is raised in glory.
Glory is the sweetness, comeliness, purity, and perfection of a thing. The light
is the glory of the Sun, strength is the glory of youth, and gray hairs is the
glory of old Age. That is, it is the excellency of these things, and that which
makes them shine. 1 Cor. 15, 40, 41. Prove. 20. 29.

Therefore to arise in glory, it is first to arise in all the beauty, and
utmost compleatness that is possible to possess a humane Creature, I say, in
all its features and members, inconceivably beautiful: sin and corruption has
made mad work in our bodies, as well as in our Souls; It Is sin commonly that is
the cause of all that deformity, and ill-favouredness, that now cleaves to us,
and that also rendereth us so dishonorable at our death; but now at our
rising, we being raised incorruptible, we shall appear in such perfections, and
that of all sorts belonging to the Body, that all the beauty and comeliness,
sweetness and amiableness, that has at any time been in this World, it shall
be swallowed up a thousand times told with this glory. The Psalmist says of
Christ, That he was fairer than the Children of men, Psalm. 45. 2. and that as I
believe, in his outward man, as well as in his inward part, He was the
exactest, purest, compleatest, and beautifullest Creature that ever God made,
Isa. 42. 14. Col. 1. 18. Till his visage was so marred by his persecutions: for
in all things he had, and shall have, the pre-eminence. Why our Bodies at our
Resurrection, will not only be as free from sin, as his was before he died;
but also as free from all other infirmities, as he was after he was raised
again. In a word, if incorruptibleness can put a beauty upon our Bodies, when
they arise, we shall have it. There shall be no lame legs, nor Crump-shoulders,
no blare-eyes, nor yet wrinkled faces, Phil. 3. 20, 21. He shall change our
vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body.

Again, all the glory that a glorified Soul can help this Body to, it at this
day shall enjoy. That Soul that has been these hundreds or thousands of years
in the Heavens, soaking in the Bosom of Christ, it shall in a moment come
spangling into the Body again, and inhabit every member and vein of the Body,
as it did before its departure. That Spirit of God also, that took its leave of
the Body, when it went to the Grave, shall now in all perfection dwell in this
Body again I tell you, the Body at this day, will shine brighter than the face
of Moses or Stephen, even as bright as the Sun, the Stars, and Angels. When
Christ who is our life shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory, Exodus
34. 29. 35. Acts 6. 15. Dan. 12. 3. Mat. 13. 42, 43. Luke 20. 26. Col. 3. 3, 4.

Thirdly, It is raised in Power. While we are here, we are attended with so
many weaknesses and infirmities, that in time the least sin or sickness is too
hard for us, and takes away both our strength, our beauty, our days, our
breath and life, and all. But behold, we are raised in power, in that power
that all these things are as far below us, as a Grasshopper is below a Giant, at
the first appearance of us, the World will tremble. Job 38. 17. Judges 16. 3.
Behold the Gates of death, and the bars of the Grave are now carried away on
our shoulders, as Sampson carried away the Gates of the City. Death quaketh,
and destruction falls down dead at our feet: What then can stand before us?
We shall then carry that Grace, Majesty, Terror, and commanding power in our
souls, that our countenances shall be like Lightning, compare Luke 20. 36. with
Mat. 28. 2, 3. For this mortal must put on immortality, and this corruptible
must put on incorruption: So when this corruptible, shall have put on
incorruption, and this mortal, shall have put on immortality: then shall be
brought to pass that saying which is written, Death is swallowed up of
Victory. 1 Cor. 15. 53, 54.

Fourthly, It is raised a spiritual Body. This is the last particular, and is
indeed the reason of the other three; it is an incorruptible Body, because it
is a spiritual one; it is a glorious Body, because it is a spiritual one; it
does rise in power, because it is a spiritual Body. When the Body is buried, or
sown in the Earth, it is a Body corruptible, dishonorable, weak and natural:
but when it arises, it does rise incorruptible, glorious, powerfully, and
Spiritual. So that so far as incorruption is above corruption, glory above
dishonor, powerful above weakness, and spiritual above natural: So great an
alteration will there be in our Body, when raised again. And yet it is this
Body and not another, this in nature, though changed into a far more glorious
State; A thousand times further, then if a Hoggard was changed to be an
Emperor. Mark, It is sown a natural Body: a very fit word; for though there
dwell never so much of the Spirit and Grace of God in it while it lives, yet
so soon as the Soul is separate from it, so soon also does the Spirit of God
separate from it; and so will continue while the day of its rising be come.
Therefore it is laid into the Earth, a mere Lump of Man's Nature: It is sown a
Natural Body: But now at the day, when the Heavens shall be no more, as Job
says, Job 14. 12. Then the Trump shall sound, even the Trump of God, and, in a
moment, the Dead shall be raised incorruptible, glorious, and spiritual, 1 Cor.
15. 52. 1 These. 24. 16, 17. So that I say, the Body when it arises, will be so
swallowed up of life and immortality, that it will be, as if it had lost its
own Humane Nature; though, in truth, the same substantial real Nature is every
whit there still. It Is the same [ it] that rises, that was sown; it is sown,
it is raised: it is sown, it is raised, says the Apostle. You know, that
things which are candied, by the Art of the Apothecary, they are so swallowed
up with the sweetness and virtue of that in which it is candied, that they are
now, as though they had no other Nature, than that in which they are boiled:
When yet, in truth, the thing candied does still retain its own proper Nature
and Essence; though by virtue of its being candied, it loses its former
sourness, bitterness, stinking, smell, or the like. Just thus, at the last day,
it will be with our Bodies; We shall be so candied, by being swallowed up of
Life, as before is showed, That we shall be, as if we were all Spirit, when in
truth, it is but this Body that is swallowed up of Life: And it must needs be,
that our Nature still remain, otherwise it cannot be Us that shall be in
Heaven, but something besides Us. Let us lose our proper Humane Nature, and we
lose absolutely our Being and so are annihalated into nothing. Wherefore, it,
the same it, that is sown a Natural Body, it shall rise a Spiritual Body.

But again, as I said, concerning Things that are candied; our Body, when thus
risen, it shall lose all that sourness and stinck, that now, by reason of sin
and infirmity, cleaves to it: neither shall its lumpishness, or unweildiness,
be any impediment to its acting after the manner of Angels. Christ has showed
us, what our Body at our Resurrection shall be, by showing of us, in his Word,
what his Body was at, and after, his Resurrection: We read, that his Body,
after he was risen from the Dead, though it yet retained the very same Flesh
and Bones, that did hang upon the Cross, yet how Angelical was it at all times,
upon all occasions! He could come in to his Disciples with that very Body, when
the Doors were shut upon them: He could, at pleasure, to their amazement,
appear in the twinkling of an Eye, in the midst of them: He could be visible
and invisible as he pleased, when he sat at meat with them. In a word, he could
pass and re-pass, ascend and descend in that Body, with far more pleasure and
ease, than the Bird by the Art of her Wing, Luk 24. 38, 39, 40, 41. Joh. 20.
24, 25. Luke 24. 31, 32, 50, 51. Joh. 20. 19, 26. Act. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11. Mark 16. 19. Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, 9.

Now, I say, as we have in this World born the Image of our first Father; so,
at that Day, we shall have the Image of Jesus Christ, and be as he is. As is
the Earthly, such are they that are Earthly; and as is the Heavenly, such are
they that are Heavenly; and as we have been the Image of the Earthly, we shall
( at our Resurrection) bear the Image of the Heavenly: It is so in part now,
but shall so be in perfection then, 1 Cor. 15. 48, 49.

To mount up to Heaven, and to descend again at pleasure, shall, with us, in
that Day, be ordinary. If there were Ten Thousand Bars of Iron, or Walls of
Brass, to separate between us, and our pleasure and desire, at that Day, they
should as easily be pierced by us, as is the Cobweb, or Air by the Beams of the
Sun: And the Reason is, Because to the Spirit, wherewith we shall be
unconceiveably filled at that Day, nothing is unpossible, Mat. 10. 27. And the
working of it at that Day, shall be in that nature and measure, as to swallow
up all impossibilities. He shall change our vile Body, and fashion it like unto
his glorious Body; Now mark, according to the working, whereby he is able to
subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3. 21. As who should say, I know that
there are many things, that in this World hinder us from having our Bodies like
the Body of Christ; but when God shall raise us from the Dead, because he will
then have our Body like the Body of his Son: He will stretch forth such a power
to work upon, and in our Body, that he will remove all impossibilities and
hindrances.

Nay further, we do not only see what operation the Spirit will have in our
Body, by the carriage of Christ, after his Resurrection; but even by many a
Saint before their Death. The Spirit used to catch Elijah away, no man could
tell whether. It carried Ezekiel hither and thither: It carried Christ from the
Top of the Pinnacle of the Temple into Galilee; through it he walked on the Sea;
the Spirit caught away Philip from the Eunuch, and carried him as far as
Azotus, 1 King. 17. 11, 12. 2 King. 2. 11. Ezekiel 3. 14. Luke 4. 14. Matthew. 14.
25. Act. 8. 39. 40.

Thus the great God has given us a Taste of the power and glory that is in
himself, and how easily it will help us, by its possessing of us at the
Resurrection, to act and do like Angels; as Christ s^ith, They that shall be
counted worthy of that World, and of the Resurrection from the Dead, they shall
not die, but be equal to the Angels, Luke 23. 36.

Further, as the Body by being thus spiritualized, shall be as I have said; so
again it must needs be, that hereby all the Service of the Body, and Faculties
of the Soul, must be infinitely enlarged also. Now we shall see him as he is,
and now we shall know, even as we are known, 1 John 3. 2. 1 Cor. 13. 12.

First, now we shall see him; to wit, Christ in his Glory: Not by Revelation
only, as we do now, but then Face to Face; and he will have us with him, to
this very end, Joh. 17. 24. Though John was in the Spirit, when he had the
Vision of Christ, Rev. 1. 17. yet it made him fall at his Feet as dead; and
also turned Daniel's Beauty into Corruption, Dan. 10. 8. It was so glorious,
and so over-weighing a Glory, that he appeared in; but we shall, at the Day of
our Resurrection, be so furnished, that we shall with the Eagle, be able to
look upon the Sun in his strength: We shall then, I say, see Him as he is; who
now is in the Light, that no Eye has seen, nor any man can see till that Day,
1 Timothy 6. 16.

Now we shall see into all Things: There shall not be any thing hid from us;
there shall not be a Saint, a Prophet, or saved Soul, small or great; but we
shall then perfectly know them: Also, all the Works of Creation, Election, and
Redemption, and shall see and know as thoroughly, all the Things of Heaven, and
Earth, and Hell, even as perfectly, as now we know our A, B, C. For the Spirit,
with which we shall in every Crany of Soul and Body, be filled, I say, that
searche^h all things, yea the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. We see that
strange Things have been known by the Prophets and Saints of God, and that when
they knew but in part.

Abraham could, by it, tell to a day, how long his Seed should be under
Persecution in Egypt, Genesis 15. 13. Elisha, by it, could tell what was done in
the King of Assyria's Bedchamber, 2 King. 6. 12. Ahijah could know by this,
Jeroboam's Wife, so soon, yea before her Feet entered within his Door, though he
saw her not, 1 King. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

The Prophet of Judah could tell by this, what God would do to Bethel, for the
Idolatry there committed; and could also point out the man by name that should
do the Execution, long before he was born, 1 Kin. 13. 2. What shall I say,
Enoch by it could tell, what should be done at the end of the World, Jud. 14,
15. How did the Prophets, to a circumstance, prophecy of Christ's Birth, his
Death, his Burial, of their giving him Call and Vinegar, Of their parting his
Raiment, and piercing his Hands and Feet, Isa. 53. Of his riding on an Ass,
Also, all this they saw, when they spoke of him, Joh. 12. 41. Peter also,
though half asleep, could at the very first word, call Moses and Elias by their
Names, when they appeared to Christ in the Holy Mount, Luke 9. 33. He is very
ignorant of the operation of the Spirit of God, that scrupleth these Things:
But now, I say, if these Things have been done, seen, and known, by Spiritual
men, while their knowledge has been but in part, how shall we know, see, and
discern, when that which is perfect is come? Which will be at the Resurrection;
It is raised a Spiritual Body.

Thus, in few words, have I showed you the truth of the Resurrection of the
Just, and also the manner of their Rising: Had I judged it convenient, I might
have much enlarged on each particular, and have added many more: For the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, however questioned by Heretics, and Erroneous
Persons; yet is such a Truth, that almost all the Holy Scriptures of God point
at, and center in it.

God has, from the beginning of the World, showed to us, that our Body must be
with him, as well as our Soul, in the Kingdom of Heaven. I say, he has showed;
first he has showed us, how he will deal with those that are alive at Christ's
coming, by his translating of Enoch, Genesis 5. 24. Heb. 1. 5. and taking him Body
and Soul to himself: As also, by his catching of Elias, 1 King. 2. 10, 11. up
Body and Soul into Heaven, in a Fiery Chariot.

Secondly, He has often put us in remembrance of the Rising of those that are
Dead, at that Day.

First, By the Faith he gave Abraham, concerning the Offering of his Son: For
when he offered him, he accounted that God was able to raise him up, even from
the Dead: From whence also he received him in a Figure. In a Figure of the
Resurrection of Christ, for Abraham's Justification, and of Abraham's
Resurrection by Christ at the last Day, for his Glorification, Heb. 11. 19.

Secondly, By the Faith he gave Joseph, consuming his Bones; which Charge, the
Godly in Egypt did diligently observe, and to that end, did keep them four
hundred years; and, at length, carried them, I say, from Egypt to Canaan, Heb.
11. 22. which was a Tipe of our being carried in our Body, from this World to
Heaven.

Besides, How often did God give power to his Prophets, Servants, and Christ
Jesus, to raise some that was now dead, and some that had been long so; and
all, no doubt, to put the present Generations; as also the Generations yet
unborn, in mind of the Resurrection of the Dead. To this end, I say, how was
the Shunamites Son raised from the dead? 2 King. 4. The man also at the
touching of the bones of Elisha, 2 King. 13. 20, 21. Together with the body of
Lazarus, with Jairus Daughter, and Tabitha, and many others, Luke 8. 53, 54,
55. Joh. 11. 43, 44, 45. Acts 9. 40, 41. who after their Soul was departed from
them, Lazarus lying in his grave four days, were all raised to life again, and
lived with that very Body out of which the Soul, at their death, had departed.

But above all, that notable place in Matthew, at the Resurrection of the Lord
Jesus, gives us a notable fore-word of the Resurrection of the Just: Says the
Text, And the graves were opened, and many BODIES of Saints which slept, arose,
and came out of their graves after his Resurrection, and went into the holy
City, and appeared unto many, Matthew. 27. 50, 51, 52, 53.

When the Author to the Hebrews had given us a Catalogue of the Worthies of
the Old Testament, he says at last, These all died in Faith. In the faith of
what? That they should lie and rot in their graves eternally? No, verily this
is the Faith of Ranters, not of Christians. They all died in faith, that they
should rise again; and therefore counted this World not worth the living in
[upon unworthy terms] that after death they might obtain a better Resurrection,
Heb. 11. 13, 35.

It Is also worth the Considering, that of Paul to the Philippians, where he
says, That he was Confident, that that God, that had begun a good work in
them, would perform it until the day of Christ, Phil. 1. 6.

Which day of Christ, was not the day of their Conversion, for that was past
with them already, they were now the Children of God; but this Day of Christ,
it is the same which in other places is called the Day when he shall come with
the sound of the last Trump to raise the Dead. For you must know, That the Work
of Salvation is not at an end with them that are now in Heaven; no, nor ever
will, until (as I showed you before) their Bodies be raised again. God, as I
have told you, has made our Bodies the Members of Christ, and God does not
count us thoroughly saved, until our Bodies be as well redeemed and ransomed
out of the grave and death, as our Soul from the Curse of the Law, and dominion
of Sin,

Though Gods Saints have felt the power of much of his grace, and have had many
a sweet word fulfilled on them; yet one word will be unfulfilled on their
particular person, so long as the grave can shut her mouth upon them: But, as I
said before, when the gates of death do open before them, and the bars of the
grave do fall asunder; then shall be brought to pass that saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up of Victory: and then will they hear that most
pleasant voice, Awake, and sing, ye that dwell in the dust; for thy dew is as
the dew of herbs, and the Earth shall cast forth her dead, Isa. 26. 19. Thus
much touching the truth of the Resurrection of the Just, with the manner of
their rising.

Now you must know, That the time of the rising of these Just, will be at the
Coming of the Lord: For when they arise, nay just before they are raised, the
Lord Jesus Christ will appear in the Clouds in flaming fire with all his mighty
Angels; the effect of which appearing, will be the rising of the dead, etc. For
the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, says Paul, and with
the voice of the Arch-Angell, and with the Trump of God, and the dead shall
rise, 1 Thessalonians. 7, 8. 2 Thessalonians. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 52.

Now at the time of the Lords Coming, there will be found in the World alive
both Saints and Sinners. As for the Saints that then shall be found alive, they
shall so soon as all the Saints are raised out of their graves, not die, but be
changed and swallowed up of incorruption, immortality, and glory; and have the
Soul-spiritual Translation, as the raised Saints shall have; as he says, We
shall not all die, or sleep, but we shall all be changed in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye; For the Trump shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. And again, For the Lord himself shall
descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with
the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first, and then we which
are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to
meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. As he says
also in another place, He shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing,
and his Kingdom, 1 Cor. 15. 52. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15, 16, 17. and 2 Timothy 4. 1.

Now when the Saints that sleep shall be raised thus incorruptible, powerful,
glorious, and spiritual; and also those that then shall be found alive, made
like them: Then forthwith, before the unjust are raised, the Saints shall
appear before the Judgment Seat of the Lord Jesus Christ, there to give an
account to their Lord the Judge, of all things they have done; and to receive a
reward for their good according to their labor.

They shall rise, I say, before the Wicked, they being themselves the proper
Children of the Resurrection; that is, Those that must have all the glory of
it, both as to preheminencie, and sweetness; and therefore they are said, when
they rise, to rise from the dead; that is, in their rising, they leave the
reprobate World behind them, Luke 20. 35, 36. Acts 3. 15. Acts 4. 10. Acts 13.
30. Joh. 12. 1, 9, 17. And it must be so, because also the Saints will have
done their Account, and be set upon the Throne with Christ as Kings and Princes
with him, to Judge the World, when the wicked world are raised. The Saints
shall Judge the World; they shall judge Angels: yea, they shall sit upon the
Thrones of Judgment to do it. But to pass that, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. Psalm. 122. 5.

Now when the Saints are raised, as ye have heard, they must give an account of
all things, in general, that they have done, while they were in the World: Of
all things, I say, whether they be good or bad.

First, of all their bad; but mark, not under the Consideration of Vagabonds,
Slaves and Sinners, but as Sons, Stewards, and Servants of the Lord Jesus. That
this shall be, it is evident from diverse places of the Holy Scriptures: First
Paul says, We must all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, We Saints.
For it is written, As I live, says the Lord, every Knee shall bow to me, and
every tongue shall confess to God. So then every one of us shall give an
account of himself to God. Again, Wherefore we labor, that whether present or
absent, we may be accepted of him: for we must all appear before the Judgment
Seat of Christ, that every one of us may receive the things done in his body,
according to what he has done, whether it be good, or whether it be evil, Romans
14. 10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 5. 10.

It Is true, God loves his People, but yet he loves not their sins, nor any
thing they do, though with the greatest zeal for him, if it be contrary to his
Word; Wherefore as truly as God will give a reward to his Saints and Children
for all that they have indeed well done. So truly will he at this day
distinguish their good and bad: and when both are manifest by the righteous
Judgment of Christ: he will burn up their bad, with all their labor, travail,
and paints in it for ever. He can tell how to save his people, and yet take
vengeance on their Inventions, Psalm. 99. 8.

That is an observable place, in the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians,
and the third Chapter, If any man build, says he, upon this foundation (
Christ) Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble, every man's work
shall be manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed
by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. If any man's
work shall abide that he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward. If
any man's work shall be burnt, that man shall suffer loss, but he himself shall
be saved, yet so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

Now observe first, as I said before, the Foundation is Christ, Verse. 11.

2. The Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones, that here are said to be built upon
him, are all the actings in Faith and Love according to the Word, that the
Saints are found doing for his sake in the World, 1 Pet. 1. 7. Rev. 3. 18.

3. To build on him Wood, Hay, and Stubble, it is to build, together with what
is right in it self, humane Inventions, and carnal Ordinances; fathering them
still on God and his allowance.

4. The Fire that here you read of, it is the pure Word and Law of God, Jer.
23. 29. Joh. 12. 48.

5. The day that here you read of, it is the day of Christ's coming to
Judgment, to reveal the hidden things of darkness, and to make manifest the
Counsels of the heart, 1 Cor. 4. 5.

6. At this day, the Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Wood, Hay, and Stubble, and
that of every man, shall be tried by this fire, that it may be manifest of what
sort it is; the Wind, the Rain, and Floods, beat now as vehemently against the
house upon the Rock, as against that on the Sand, Luke 6. 48, 49.

Observe again,

1. That the Apostle speaks here of the saved, not of the reprobate, He himself
shall be saved.

2. That this saved man may have Wood, Hay, and Stubble; that is, things that
will not abide the trial.

3. That neither this man's goodness, not yet Gods love to him, shall hinder all
his Wood; Hay, or stubble for coming on the stage, Every man's work shall be
manifest: the fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is.

4. Thus, a good man shall see all his Wood, Hay, and stubble burnt up in the
trial before his face.

5. That good man then shall suffer loss, or the loss of all things that are
not then according to the Word of God. If any man's works shall be burnt (or any
of them) he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by
fire, that is, yet so as that all that ever he has done, shall be tried, and
squared by the Word of God.

From all which, it must be unavoidably concluded, that the whole Body of the
Elect must count with their Lord for all things they have done, whether good or
bad, and that he will destroy all their bad, with the purity of his word, yea,
and all their pains, travel, and labor that they have spent about it. I am
persuaded, that there are now many things done by the best of Saints, that then
they will gladly disown and be ashamed of: yea, which they have and do still do
with great devotion. Alas, what gross things do some of the Saints in their
devotion father upon God, and do reckon him the Author thereof, and so he also
prompts them forward to the doing thereof, and does give them his presence in
the performance of them! yea, and as they father many superstitions and
Scriptureless things upon him: so they die in the same Opinion, and never come
in this World, to the sight of their evil and ignorance herein. But now the
Judgment day is the principal time wherein every thing shall be fet in its
proper place; that which is of God in its place, and that which is not, shall
now be discovered, and made manifest. In many things now, we offend all, and
then we shall see the many offenses we have committed, and shall our selves
judge them as they are. The Christian, is in this World, so candid a Creature,
that take him when he is not under some great temptation, and he will
ingeniously confess to his God, before all men, how he has sinned and
transgressed against his Father; and will fall down at the feet of God, and
cry, Thou art righteous, for I have sinned; and thou art gracious, that
notwithstanding my sin, thou should save me: now I say, if the Christian is
so simple and plain-hearted with God, in the days of his imperfection, when he
is accompanied with many infirmities and temptations: how freely will he
confess and acknowledge his miscarriages, when he comes before his Lord and
Savior: absolutely stripped of all temptation and imperfection. Romans 14. 11.
Phil. 2. 10, 11. As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall how to me, and
every Tongue shall confess to God. Every knee shall bow, and reverence God the
Creator, and Christ the Redeemer of the World; and every Tongue shall confess,
that his will alone ought by them to have bin obeyed in all things; and shall
confess also, and that most naturally and freely. I mean, the Saints shall in
how many things they were deceived, mistaken, deluded, and drawn aside in their
intended devotion and honor to God.

But yet take notice, that in this day, when the Saints are thus counting for
their evil before their Savior and Judge: they shall not then, as now, at the
remembrance and confession of sin, be filled with that guilt, confusion and
shame that now through the weakness of Faith attends their Souls: neither
shall they in the least be grieved or offended, that God has before the Angels
and the rest of their holy Brethren, laid open to a tittle their infirmities
from the least and first, to the biggest and last.

For first, the God to whom they confess all, they will now more perfectly then
ever, see he does love them, and free them from all, even when and before they
confess and acknowledge them to him, and they shall, I say, have their Soul so
full of the ravishing raptures of the life and glory that now they are in, that
they shall be of it swallowed up in that measure, and manner, that neither fear
nor guilt, nor confusion can come near them, or touch them. Their Judge is
their Savior, their Husband, and Head: who, though he will bring every one of
them for all things to Judgment, yet he will keep them for ever out of
condemnation, and any thing that tends that way. Perfect love casts out fear,
even while we are here: much more then, when we are with our Savior our Jesus,
being passed from death to life. John 5. 24. 1 John 4. 18.

Secondly, The Saints at this day, shall have their hearts and Souls so wrapped
up in the pleasure of God their Savior, that it shall be their delight, to see
all things, though once never so near and dear unto them; yet now to perish, if
not according to his word and will: Thy will be done, is to be always our
Language here; but to delight to see it done in all things, though it tend
never so much to the destruction of what we love: to delight, I say, to see it
done in the height and perfection of delight: it will be when we come to
Heaven, or when the Lord shall come to judge the World. Mat. 6. 10.

But thirdly, The sole end of the counting of the Saints at the day of God, it
will be, not only for the vindication of the righteousness, holiness, and
purity of the Word, neither will it center only in the manifestation of the
knowledge and heart-discerning nature of Christ (though both these will be in
it. Revel. 2. 22, 23.) But their very remembrances and sight of the sin and
vanity that they have done while here: it shall both set off, and heighten the
tender affections of their God unto them; and also increase their joy and
sweetness of Soul; and clinging of heart to their God. Saints while here, are
swee^ly sensible, that the sense of sin, and the assurance of pardon, will make
famous work in their poor hearts. Ah; what meltings without guilt! what
humility without casting down! and what a sight of the creatures nothingness
yet without fear! will this sense of sin work in the Soul. The sweetest frame,
the most heart-indearing frame, that possibly, a Christian can get into, while
in this World, is to have a warm sight of sin, and of a Savior upon the heart
at one time. Now it weeps not for fear, and through torment, but by virtue of
constraining grace and mercy, and is at this very time, so far off of
disquietness of heart, by reason of the fight of its wickedness, that it is
driven into an ecstasy, by reason of the love and mercy that is mingled with
the sense of sin in the Soul. The heart never sees so much of the power of
mercy as now, nor of the virtue, value, and excellency of Christ in all his
Offices as now, and the Tongue so sweetly enlarged to proclaim and cry up grace
as now; now will Christ come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in them
that believe. 2 These. 1. 10, 11.

Wherefore, though the Saints receive by Faith the forgiveness of sins in this
life, and so are passed from death to life; yet again, Christ Jesus, and God
his Father, will have every one of these sins reckoned up again, and brought
fresh upon the stage in the day of Judgment, that they may see and be sensible
for ever, what grace and mercy has laid hold upon them. And this I take to be
the Reason of that remarkable saying of the Apostle Peter. Repent therefore and
be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing
shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall send Jesus Christ, who
before was preached unto you, whom the Heaven must receive till the restitution
of all things, spoken of by the mouth of all the holy Prophets since the World
began. Acts 3. 19, 20, 21.

If a sense of some sin (for who sees all? Psa. 19. 12.) and a sight of the
love of God, will here so work upon the spirit of the godly: What will a sight
of all sin do, when together with it they are personally present with their
Lord and Savior?

Yea, if a sight of some sins, with a possibility of pardon, will make the
heart love, reverence, and fear with guiltless and heart-affecting fears: what
will a general sight of all sin, and together with them an eternal acquittance
from them, work on the heart of the Saint for ever?

Yea, I say again, if a sight of sin, and the love of God, will make such work
in that Soul where yet there is unbelief, blindness, mistrust, and
forgetfulness: what will a sight of sin do in that Soul, who is swallowed up of
love, who is sinless, and temptationless; who has all the faculties of Soul
and Body strained, by love and grace, to the highest pin of perfection, that is
possible to be in glory enjoyed and possessed? O the wisdom and goodness of
God, that he at this day, should so cast about the worst of our things, even
those that naturally tend to sink us, and damnus, for our great advantage! All
things that shall work together for good, indeed, to them that love God. Romans
8. 28. Those sins that brought a curse upon the whole World, that spilt the
heart-blood of our dearest Savior, and that laid his tender Soul under the
flaming wrath of God, shall by his wisdom and love, tend to the exaltation of
his Grace, and the inflaming of our affections to him for ever and ever. Revel.
5. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

'Twill not be thus with Devils, 'twill not be thus with Reprobates; the saved
only have this privilege peculiar to themselves: (wherefore to vary a little
from the matter in hand, will God make that use of sin, even in our counting
for it, that shall in this manner work for our advantage? why then, let Saints
also make that advantage of their sin, as to glorify God thereby, which is to
be done, not by saying, Let us do evil that good may come, or, let us sin that
Grace may abound; but by taking occasion by the sin that is past to set the
Crown upon the Head of the Christ for our justification. Continually looking
upon it, so as to press us to cleave close to the Lord Jesus, to grace and
mercy through him, and to the keeping of us humble for ever, under all his
dispensations and cariages to us.

Now having counted for all their evil, and confessed to Gods glory, how they
fell short, and did not the truth in this, or that, or other particulars; and
having received their eternal acquittance from the Lord and Judge, in the sight
of both Angels and Saints: forthwith the Lord Jesus will make inquiry into all
the good and holy actions and deeds they did do in the World. Now there shall
all things be reckoned up, from the very first good thing that was done by Adam
or Abel, to the last that will fall out to be done in the World. The good of
all the holy Prophets, of all Apostles, Pastors, Teachers, and helps in the
Church: here also will be brought forth and to light, all the good Cariages of
Masters of Families, of Parents, of Children, of Servants, of Neighbors, or
what ever good thing any man does; but to be general and short, first, here
will be a recompense for all that have sincerely labored in the Word and
Doctrine, I say, a recompense for all the Souls they have saved by their Word,
and watered by the same.

Now shall Paul the Planter, and Apollo the Waterer, with every one of their
Companions, receive the reward that is according to their works. 1 Cor. 3. 6,
7, 8.

Now all the Preaching, praying, watching, and labor thou have been at, in thy
endeavoring to catch men from Satan to God, shall be rewarded with spangling
glory. Not a Soul thou have converted to the Lord Jesus, nor a Soul thou have
comforted, strengthened, or helped by thy wholesome Counsel, admonition, and
comfortable speech; but it shall stick, as a Pearl in that Crown which the Lord
the Righteous Judge shall give thee at that day. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. That is, if
thou do it willingly, delighting to lift up the name of God among men; if
thou do it with love, and longing after the Salvation of sinners, (otherwise
thou will have only thy labor for thy pains, and no more: if I do this
willingly, I have a reward; but if against my will, a dispensation of the
Gospel is committed to my charge. 1 Cor. 9. 17. Phil. 1. 15. But I say, if thou
do it graciously, then a reward follows; for what is our hope, or joy, or
Crown of rejoicing, are not even ye, says Paul, in the presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ at his coming, for ye are our glory and joy. 1 These. 2. 19, 20.
Let him therefore that Christ has put into this Harvest, take comfort in the
midst of all his sorrow, and know, that God acknowledges that he that
converteth a sinner from the error of his way, does even save that Soul from
death, and covers a multitude of sins. Wherefore labor to convert, labor to
water, labor to build up, and to feed the flock of God which is among you,
taking the oversight thereof not by constraint; but willingly, not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind; and when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall
receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away Jam. 5. 20. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4.

Secondly, And as the Ministers of Christ's Gospel shall at this day be
recompensed: so shall also those more private Saints be with tender affections,
and love looked on, and rewarded for all their work and labor of love, which
they have showed to the name of Christ, in ministering to his Saints, and
suffering for his sake. Whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he
receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. Heb. 6. 10. Ephesians. 6. 8. Ah!
little do the People of God think, how largely and thoroughly, God will at that
day, own and recompense all the good and holy acts of his People. Every bit,
every drop, every rag, and every nights harbor, though but in a wisp of straw,
shall be rewarded in that day before men and Angels. Whosoever shall give to
drink, to one of these little ones, a Cup of cold water, only in the name of a
Disciple: verily I say unto you, says Christ, He shall in no wise loose a
Disciples reward. Mat. 10. 40, 41, 42. Therefore when thou make a Feast,
says he, Call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind, and thou shall be
blessed; for they cannot recompense thee, for thou shall be recompensed at the
Resurrection of the Just. Luke 14. 13, 14. If there be any repentance among the
godly at this day, it will be, because the Lord Jesus in his person, members,
and word, was no more owned, honored, entertained, and provided for by them,
when they were in this World: For it will be ravishing to all, to see what
notice the Lord Jesus will then take of every Widows mite. He, I say, will call
to mind, even all those acts of me^cy and kindness, which thou have showed to
him, when thou wast among men. I say, he will remember, cry up, and proclaim
before Angels and Saints, those very acts of thine, which thou have either
forgotten, or through bashfulness wilt not at that day count worth the owning.
He will reckon them up so fast, and so fully, that thou will cry Lord, When did
I do this? and when did I do the other? When saw we thee a hungry, and fed
thee? or a thirst, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took
thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? or when saw we thee sick, or in prison,
and came unto thee? and the King shall answer and say unto them, verily I say
unto you, in as much as ye did it unto one of the least of these my Brethren,
ye did it unto me. Mat. 25. 37, 38, 39, 40. The good works of some are manifest
before hand, and they that are otherwise cannot be hid. 1 Timothy 5. 25. Whatever
thou have done to one of the least of these my Brethren, thou have done it unto
me. I felt the nourishment of thy food, and the warmth of thy fleece. I
remember thy loving and holy visits, when my poor members were sick, and in
prison, and the like. When they were strangers, and wanderers in the World,
thou tookest them in. Well thou good and faithful Servant, enter Thou into the
Joy of thy Lord. Matthew. 25. 21, 22, 23, 34, 35, 36.

Thirdly, Here also will be a reward for all that hardness, and Christian
enduring of affliction that thou have met with for thy Lord, while thou wast in
the World. Here now will Christ begin from the greatest suffering, even to the
least, and bestow a reward on them all: from the blood of the suffering Saint,
to the loss of an hair: nothing shall go unrewarded. Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38, 39,
40. 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. For these light afflictions which are
but for a moment, they work out for us, a far more exceeding, and eternal
weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4. 17. Behold by the Scriptures, how God has recorded
the sufferings of his People, and also how he has promised to reward them.
Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and speak all
manner of evil against you, falsely for my sake, rejoice, Luke 6. 22, 23. leap
for joy, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven. Mat. 5. 16,
17, 18. And every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or
Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Laws for my names sake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. Matthew. 19. 29.

Fourthly, There is also a reward at this day, for all the more secret, and
more retired works of Christianity: there is not now one act of faith in thy
Soul, either upon Christ, or against the Devil, and Antichrist; but it shall in
this day be found out, and praised, honored and glorified; in the face of
Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 7.

2. There is not one groan to God in secret, against thy own lusts, and for
more grace, light, spirit, sanctification, and strength to go through this World
like a Christian; but it shall even at the coming of Christ, be rewarded
openly. Matthew. 6. 6.

3. There has not one tear dropped from thy tender eye against thy lusts, the
love of this World, or for more Communion with Jesus Christ, but as it is now
in the bottle of God; so then it shall bring forth such plenty of reward, that
it shall return upon thee with abundance of increase. Blessed are ye that weep
now; for ye shall laugh. Thou tell est my wonderings, and put my tears into
thy Bottle, are they not in thy Book? They that sow in tears, shall reap in
joy. He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed shall doubtless
come again, bringing his sheaves with him. Psalm. 56. 8. Psalm. 126. 5 6. Luke 6.
21.

Having thus in brief showed you something concerning the Resurrection of the
Saints, and that they shall count with their Lord at his coming, both for the
burning up what was not according to the truth, and rewarding them for all
their good. It remains, that I now in few words, show you something also of
that with which they shall be rewarded.

First then, those that shall be found in the day of their Resurrection, when
they shall have all their good things brought upon the stage; they I say, that
then shall be found the People most laborious for God while here: they shall at
that day enjoy the greatest portion of God, or shall be possessed with most of
the glory of the Godhead then. For that is the portion of Saints in general.
Romans 8. 17. Lam. 3. 24. And why shall he that does most for God in this World,
enjoy most of him in that which is to come? but because by doing and acting,
the heart, and every faculty of the Soul is enlarged, and more capatiated,
whereby more room is made for glory. Every Vessel of Glory shall at that day be
full of it; but every one will not be capable to contain a like measure. And so
if they should have it communicated to them, would not be able to stand under
it; for there is an eternal weight in the glory that Saints shall then enjoy;
and every Vessel must be at that day filled, that is, have its heavenly load of
it. 2 Cor. 4. 17.

All Christians have not the same enjoyment of God in this life, neither indeed
were they able to bear it, if they had it. 1 Cor. 3. 2. But those Christians
that are most laborious for God in this World, they have already most of him in
their Souls, and that not only because diligence in Gods ways, is the means
whereby God communicates himself; but also because thereby the senses are made
more strong, and able, by reason of use to understand God, and to discern both
good and evil. Heb. 5. 13, 14. Mat. 13. 11, 12. To him that has, to him shall
be given, and he shall have more abundance. He that laid out his pound for his
Master, and gained ten therewith, he was made Ruler over ten Cities; but he
that by his pound gained but five, he was made Ruler over but five. Luke 19.
16, 17, 18, 19. Dan. 1. 3, 4. Often, he that is best bred in his youth, he is
best able to manage most, when he is a man touching things of this life) but
always he that is best bred, and that is most in the Bosom of God, and that so
acts for him here: he is the man that will be best able to enjoy most of God in
the Kingdom of Heaven. It is observable, that Paul says, Our afflictions work
out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Our afflictions do
it, not only because there is laid up a reward for the afflicted; according to
the measure of affliction; but because afflictions, and so every service of
God, does make the heart more deep, more experimental, more knowing, and
profound; and so more able to hold, contain, and bear more. Every man shall
receive his own reward, according to his own labor. 1 Cor. 4. 17. Psalm. 119.
71. 1 Cor. 3. 8. And this is the reason of such sayings as these; Lay up for
your selves a good foundation against the time to come, that you may lay hold
on eternal life: which eternal life, is not the matter of our Justification
from sin in the sight of God; for that is done freely by Grace, through Faith
in Christ's blood; (but here the Apostle speaks of giving of Alms) but it is the
same that in the other place he calls the far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. And hence it is, that he in his stirring them up to be
diligent in good works, does tell them, that he does not exhort them to it,
because he wanted, but because he would have fruit that might abound to their
acco^^n^, as he says also in another place, Beloved Brethren, be steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord; for as much as ye know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19. Phil. 4. 16, 17.
1 Cor. 15. 58. Therefore I say, the reward that the Saints shall have at this
day for all the good they have done, it is the enjoyment of God, according to
their works: though they shall be freely justified and glorified without works.

Secondly, As the enjoyment of God at that day, will be to the Saints,
according to their works and doings. (I speak not now of Justification from
sin) so will their praise and commendations at that day, be according to the
same, and both of them their degrees of glory; for I say, as God by
communicating of himself unto us at that day, will thereby glorify us, so also
he will for the adding all things that may furnish with glory every way, cause
to be proclaimed in the face of Heaven, and in the presence of all the holy
Angels: every thing that has for God, his ways, and people, been done by us
while here we have been. Whatsoever has bin spoken in darkness, shall be heard
in the light: and that which ye have spoken in the ear in Closets, shall be
proclaimed upon the House tops. Again, he that shall confess me, says Christ,
before men, him will I confess before the Angels of God.

Now as he of whom Christ is ashamed when he comes in his glory, and in the
glory of the holy Angels, will then lie under unconceiveable disgrace, shame,
dishonor, and contempt: so he whom Christ shall confess, own, commend, and
praise at that day, must needs have very great Dignity, Honor, and Renown; for
then shall every man have praise of God, to wit, according to his works. Luke
12. 2, 3. Mark 8. 38. Mat. 10. 32. 1 Cor. 4, 5. Now will Christ proclaim before
thee, and all others, what thou have done, and what thou have suffered, what
thou have owned, and what thou have withstood for his name. This is he that
forsook his goods, his Relations, his Country, and life for me: this is the man
that overcame the flatteries and threats, allurements and inticings of a whole
World for me; behold ^i^, he is an Israelite indeed, the top man in his
Generation, none like him in all the Earth. It is said, that when King
Ahasuerus, had understanding of how good service Mordeeai the Jew had done to,
and for him, he commanded that the royal Apparel, and the Crown, with the
Horse that the King did ride on, should be given to him, and that he should
with that Crown, Apparel, and Horse, be had through the City, in the presence
of all his Nobles, and that Proclamation should be made before him: thus shall
it be done to the man whom the King delights to honor. Esth. 6. 9, 10, 11.

Ahasuerus in this was a Type, to hold forth to the Children of God, how kindly
he will take all their labor and service of love, and how he will honor and
dignifie the same, as Christ says, Let your loins be girded about, and your
lights burning, and you your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord,
when he will return from the Wedding: that when he comes and knocks, ye may
open to him immediately, blessed are those servants, whom their Lord when he
comes, shall find watching. Verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself,
and shall make them sit down to meat, and shall come forth and serve them. Luke
12. 35, 36, 37. The meaning is, that those souls that shall make it their
business to honor the Lord Jesus Christ, in the day of their temptation, he
will make it his business to honor and glotifie them in the day of his
glorification. Verily, I say unto you, that he will make them sit down to meat,
and shall come forth and serve them; if any man will serve me, says he, him
will my Father honor. Joh. 12. 26. Job 1. 8. Joh. 1. 47. Mark 14. 9. Rev. 3,
4. Rev. 14. 12. 3, 4, 5. It has bin Gods way in this World, to proclaim the
acts and doing of his Saints in his Word, before all in this World, and he will
do it in that which is to come.

Thirdly, Another thing that shall be yet added to the glory of the Saints, in
the Kingdom of their Savior, at his coming, is, they shall every one of them
then have his Throne and place of degree on Christ's right hand, and on his
left, in his glorious Kingdom, according to the relation they stand in to
Christ, as the members of his Body; for as Christ will have a special eye on
us, and a tender and affectionate heart, to recompense to the full every good
thing that any man does for his name in this World: so also he will have as
great regard, that there be to every member of his body, the place, and state
that is comely for every such member. When the Mother of Zebedees Children
petitioned our Savior, that he would grant to her, that her two Sons might fit
the one on his right hand, and the other on his left in his Kingdom: though he
did not grant to her the request for her Children, yet he affirmed, that there
would be places of degrees and honor in Heaven, saying, To sit on my right
hand and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for
whom it is prepared of my Father. See Mat. 20. 20, 21, 22, 23. In the Temple,
there were Chambers bigger, and lesser, higher and lower, more inward and more
outward: which Chambers were types of the Mansions that our Lord when he went
away, told us he went to prepare for us. In my Fathers House are many mansions,
if it were not so, I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you, etc.
Joh 14. 1, 2, 3. The foot here, shall not have the place prepared for the eye,
nor yet the hand, that which is prepared for the ear; but every one shall have
his own place in the Body of Christ, and the glory also prepared for such a
relation: order, as it is comely in Earth, so much more in the Kingdom of the
God of Order, in Heaven; where all things shall be done in their utmost
perfections. Here shall Euoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Joshuah, David, with the
Prophets, have every one his place, according to the degree of old Testament
Saints. As God said to Daniel, Go thy way till the end be; for thou shall rest,
and stand in the lot at the end of the days. Dan. 12. 13. And here also, shall
Peter, Paul, Timothy, and all other the Church Officers have their place, and
Heavenly state, according as God has set them in the Church in the New
Testament. As Paul says of the Deacons, They that use the Office of a Deacon
well, they purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the
faith which is in Christ. 1 Timothy 3. 13. And so of all other Saints, be they
here of what Rank, Quality, or place in the Church soever, they shall have
every one his state, his Heavenly State, according as he stands in the Body.
As he says, seeing those members that are most feeble, are necessary, to them
shall be given more abundant honor. 1 Cor. 12. 22, 23. Of this Heavenly Order
in the Kingdom of Christ, when his Saints are risen from the dead, was Solomon
a notable Type in his Family, and among his Servants and Officers, who kept
such exactness in the famous order, in which he had placed all about him, that
it did amaze and confound beholders. For when the Queen of Sheba had seen the
wisdom of Solomon, and the House which he built, and the meat of his Table, the
sitting of his Servants, and the attendance of his Ministers, and their
Apparel, his Cup-bearers also, and their Apparel, and the ascent by which he
went up into the House of the Lord: there was no more spirit in her. 2 Chronicles.
9. 3, 4. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God.

Having gone thus far, I shall now come to the second part of the Text, to wit,
that there shall be a Resurrection of the wicked. There shall be a Resurrection
of the dead, both of the Just and unjust. For as the Just go before the unjust,
in Name and Dignity, and Honor, so they shall in the last day, go before them
in the Resurrection.

Now then, when the Saints have thus risen out of their Graves, given up their
accounts, received their glory, and are set upon the Thrones, (for there are
set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the House of David.) Psalm. 122. 5.
When I say, they are all of them in their royal Apparel, with Crowns of glory,
every one presenting the Person of a King: then come the unjust out of their
Graves, to receive their Judgment for what they have done in the body. As Paul
says, We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one,
(both Saints and sinner) may receive the things done in the body, whether it be
good, or whether it be bad.

But now because I would prove by the words, whatever I would have others
receive for a truth: therefore I shall in few particulars, prove the
Resurrection of the wicked.

First then, it is evident, that the wicked shall rise from the very terms and
names that the raised shall then go under, which is the very same names that
they did go under when they lived in this World. They are called the Heathen,
the Nations, the World, the wicked, and those that do iniquity; they are called
Men, Women, Sodom, Sidon, Bethsaida, Capernaum, and Tire. The Men of Ninive
shall rise up in Judgment, the Queen of the South shall rise up in the
Judgment, and it shall be more tolerable for Sodom in the day of Judgment, then
for other sinners that have resisted more light. The Heavens and the Earth that
now are, are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment,
and perdition of ungodly men. 2 Pet. 3. 7. Mat. 12. 41, 42. Mat. 11. 21, 22,
23, 24. Luke 10. 12, 13, 14. Joel 3. 12, 13, 14. Mat. 25. 32. Jud. 14. 15. Now
these Terms, or Names, are not given to the spirits of the wicked only; but
to them as consisting of Body and Soul. Further, Christ tells his adversaries,
when they had apprehended him, and shamefully entreated him, that yet they
should see him sit on the right hand of power, and coming in the Clouds of
Heaven, as John also does testify, saying, Behold he comes with Clouds, and
every Eye shall see him, and they also that pierced him, and all the kinreds of
the Earth shall wail because of him. Mat. 26. 64. Revel. 1. 7. Now none of
these sayings are yet fulfilled, neither shall they, until his second coming;
for though the Jews did many of them see him, when he did hang upon the Cross,
yet then he was not coming in the Clouds of Heaven, neither did then all
kinreds of the Earth wail because of him. No, this is reserved till he comes to
judge the World; for then shall the ungodly be so put to it, that gladly they
would creep into the most invincible Rock or Mountain under Heaven, to hide
themselves from his Face, and the Majesty of his Heavenly presence. Rev. 6. 14,
15, 16, 17. There shall therefore, that this may be brought to pass, be a
Resurrection of the dead, both of the just, and unjust. For though an opinion
of no Resurrection may now lull men asleep, in security and impiety, yet the
Lord, when he comes, will rouse them, and cause them to awake; not only out of
their security, but out of their Graves, to their doom, that they may receive
for their error, the recompense that is meet.

Secondly, The Body of the ungodly must, at the last, arise out of the Grave,
because that Body and their Soul, while they lived in the World, were
Copartners in their lusts and wickedness. God is a God of knowledge, and by
him actions are weighed. 1 Samuel 2, 3. Eccles. 12. 14. He will therefore bring
every work into Judgment, with every secret thing. And as he will bring into
Judgment every work, so will he also the worker thereof, Revel. 20. 12, 13,
14. even the Dead, small and great. It is not in God to lay the punishment
where the fault is not, neither to punish a part of the damned for the whole.
With righteousness shall be judge the World, and the People with Equity, shall
not the Judge of all the Earth do right? Psalm. 98. 9. Genesis 18. 25. As therefore
the Body was Copartner with the Soul in sinning, so shall every man receive the
things done in his Body, according to what he has done. Wherefore he says in
another place, Behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, to give every
man according as his work shall be, Rev. 22. 12. There shall therefore be a
Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust.

3. The body of the wicked must rise again, because as the whole man of the
just also that is the Vessel of mercy and glory: so the whole man of the
unjust, is the Vessel of wrath and destruction. There are, says Paul, in a
great House, not only. Vessels of Gold and of Silver, but also of Wood and of
Earth, and some to Honor, and some to dishonor. Now as he shows us these
Vessels to honor, they are good men, and the vessels to dishonor are the bad.
2 Timothy 2. 20, 21. Now as these vessels to dishonor, are called the vessels of
wrath: so it is said, that God with much long suffering, does suffer them to be
fitted to destruction. Romans 9. 22. how they are thus fitted, he also further
shows, where he says, They do after their hardness and impenitent heart,
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and the Revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God. Romans 2. 5. Which treasures of wickedness, James says, it is
treasured up against the last days, (which is the time of Judgment,) and
observe it, He says, that then it shall eat their flesh, as it were fire. Jam.
5. 12. 3. Now then their Bodies being the vessels of the wrath of God, and
again, seeing with this wrath they must be possessed at the last day, that
their flesh must with it be eaten, it is evident, that their body must rise
again out of their Graves, and before the Judgment Seat appear; for it is from
thence, that each of them must go with his full load to their long and eternal
home, where their Worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched. Mark 9. 47,
48.

Fourthly, The severity of the hand of God toward his Children, with his
forbearance of his enemies, does clearly bespeak a Resurrection of the ungodly,
that they may receive the reward for their wickedness which they have committed
in this World. We know, that while the eyes of the wicked start out with
fatness, the godly are plagued all the day long, and chastned every morning.
Psalm. 73. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Wherefore it is evident,
that the place and time of the punishment of the ungodly, it is another World.
If Judgment begin at the House of God, what will the end of them be, that obey
not the Gospel of God? and if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
ungodly and sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18. Alas, poor Creatures! they now
plot against the Righteous, and gnash upon them with their teeth; but the Lord
laugheth at them, for he sees their day is coming; for as he says, the wicked
is reserved, or let alone in his wickedness, to the day of destruction, and
shall then be brought forth to the day of wrath, Psalm. 37. 12, 13. though in
the mean time, he may go to his Grave in his banner, and rest within his Tomb.
As Peter says again, Job 21. 29, 30, 31, 32. the Lord knows how to deliver
the godly out of temptation, but to reserve the unjust to the day of Judgment
to be punished, 2 Pet. 2. 9. And Jude says, for them is reserved the blackness
of darkness for ever. Jude 13. The punishment of the ungodly, it is reserved
till the day of Judgment, which will be the time of their Resurrection.

Observe, first, The wicked must be punished.

Secondly, The time of their punishment, is not now, but at the day of
Judgment.

Thirdly, This day of Judgment, must be the same with the Resurrection of the
Dead, at the end of this World. As therefore the Tares are gathered and burned
in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this World. The Son of Man shall send
forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend, and them that do iniquity, and shall cast them into a Furnace of fire,
there shall be weeping, and gnashing of Teeth. Mat. 13. 40, 41. There shall
then be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust.

Fourthly, The Sovereignty of the Lord Jesus over all Creatures, does plainly
foreshew a Resurrection of the bad, as well as of the good. Indeed, the unjust
shall not arise, by virtue of any relation they stand in to the Lord Jesus, as
the Saints shall; but yet, because all are delivered into his hand, and he made
Sovereign Lord over them: therefore, by an Act of his Sovereign Power, they
that are ungodly, shall arise, this is Christ's own Argument, The Father judges
no man, says he, but has committed all Judgment unto the Son, that is, Count
him, and fall before him as their Sovereign Lord, even as they honor the
Father, and he has given him authority, to execute Judgment also, because he
is the Son of Man. And then he adds, Marvel not at this, for the hour is
coming, that all that are in their graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come
forth, they that have done good, to the Resurrection of life; and they that
have done evil, to the Resurrection of damnation. Joh. 5. 22, 23, 27, 28, 29.
From hence also Paul argues, saying, For this cause he both dyed, rose, and
revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. And then adds, We
must all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Romans 14. 9. 10.

Pray mind these words, Jesus Christ by his Death and Resurrection, did not
only purchase Grace, and Remission of sins, for his Elect, with their Eternal
Glory; but did thereby also obtain of the Father, to be Lord, and Head over all
things, whether they be things in Heaven, or things on Earth, or things under
the Earth, All Power, says he, in Heaven and in Earth, is given unto me, and I
have the Keys of Hell and of Death. Mat. 28. 18. Rev, 1. 18. So that all
things, I say, whether they be visible, or invisible, whether they be Thrones
or Dominions, or Principalities or Powers; all things were created by him, and
for him. Col. 1. 16. This being thus, at the Name of Jesus, every knee must
bow, and every Tongue confess that he is Sovereign Lord, to the glory of God
the Father. Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Now that this may be done, He has his
Resolutions upon a Judgement-day, See more of this in their Judgment.
in which, he to show himself his People, his Way, and Word in their Glory,
will have all his Enemies raised out of their Graves, and brought before him,
where he will sit upon them in the Throne of his Glory, and will show them
then, who is the only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Mat.
25. 31, 32. 1 Timothy 6. 14, 15.

Beloved, He comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon
all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly
deeds which they have committed, and of all their wicked speeches which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him. Jude 14, 15.

Fifthly, The great preparation that God has made for the Judgment of the
wicked, does clearly demonstrate their rising forth out of their Graves.

First, He has appointed the day of their rising.

Secondly, He has appointed their Judge, to judge them.

Thirdly, He has Recorded all their acts and doings against that day.

Fourthly, He has also, already appointed the Witnesses to come in against
them.

Fifthly, The Instruments of death and misery, are already prepared for them.

For the first, he has appointed the day of their rising, which day, John
calls the time of the dead, that they should be judged. Which time, Paul
says, is a time fixed; he has appointed a day, in which he will judge the
World, etc. This time and day, Christ brings down to an hour, saying, The hour
is coming, when all that are in their Graves, shall hear his Voice, and shall
come forth, etc. Revel. 11. 18. Acts 17. 30, 31. Joh. 5. 28, 29.

Secondly, As he has appointed the day, so he has appointed the Judge, He
has appointed a day in which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that
Man whom he has ordained, of which he has given assurance to all men, in that
he has raised him from the Dead. This Man is Jesus Christ;for it is He that is
ordained of God, to be the Judge of the Quick and the Dead. Acts 17. 30, 31.
Acts 10. 40 41, 42.

Thirdly, All their deeds and works, to a word and thought, and every one
already Recorded and Enrolled in the Books of the Laws of Heaven against that
day. The sin of Judah, is written with a pen of Iron, and with the point of a
Diamond, upon the Tables of their heart. And again, says God, Write it in a
Table, and note it in a Book, that it may be for the time to come, even for
ever and ever, that this is a rebellious House, etc. Jer. 17. 1. Isa. 30. 8, 9.

Fourthly, God has prepared his Witnesses against this day, James 5. 1. Job
20. 27. Mat. 24. 14. Romans 2. 14, 15. Malac. 3. 5.

Fifthly, The Instruments of Death, and Eternal misery, are all already
prepared, He has prepared for them the Instruments of Death, he has ordained
his Arrows against the face of persecutors, Psalm. 7. 11, 12, 13. Psalm. 21. 12.
Hell is of old prepared, he has made it deep and large, the fire, the
everlasting fire is also now of a long time prepared; the heavy weights of Gods
Curse, are also ready, and their damnation now of a long time slumbereth not.
Isa. 30, 33. Mat. 25. 41. Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 30. 2 Pet. 2, 3. But now I say, how
rediculous a business would all this be, if these things should be all prepared
of the only wise God, and there should be none to be judged; or if he that is
ordained Judge, should not either through want of power, or will, Command these
Rebels, and force them before his Judgment Seat. Glad indeed, would the
sinners be, if these things might be true. Glad I say, at very heart, if they
might be in their secret places of darkness, and the Grave for ever; but it
must not be, the day of their rising is set; the Judge is appointed, their
deeds are written; the deep Dungeon is with open mouth, ever waiting for them;
wherefore at the day appointed, neither Earth, nor Death, nor Hell can hinder:
There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust.

Lastly, Besides what has been said, I cannot but believe, there shall be a
Resurrection of the wicked at the last day, because of the ungodly
consequences, and errors that do most naturally follow the denial thereof.

For first, He that takes away the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the wicked:
he takes away one of the main Arguments that God has provided for to convince
a sinner, of the evil of his w^yes; for how shall a sinner be convinced of the
evil of sin, if he be not convinced of the certainty of eternal Judgment?
and how shall be he be convinced of eternal Judgment, if you persuade him,
that when he is dead, he shall not at all arise? (especially seeing the
Resurrection of the Dead, and eternal Judgment, must unavoidably be one the
forerunner of the other. Heb. 6. 2. It was Paul's reasoning of Righteousness,
Temperance, and Judgment to come, that made Felix tremble. It Is this also he
calls the Argument of terror, wherewith he persuaded men. This was Solomon's
Argument, and Christ's also, where he says, That every idle word that man shall
speak he shall give an account thereof, in the day of Judgment. Acts 24, 25. 2
Cor. 5. 10, 11. Eccles. 11. 9. Mat. 12. 36.

Secondly, They that deny the Resurrection of the wicked, they do both allow
and maintain the chief Doctrine of the Ranters, with most of the debauched
persons in the World. For the Ranters deny it both in principle and practice,
and the other in practice, at least. Now to me it is very strange, that these
men above all other, should both know and live in the Doctrines of the Kingdom
of God: especially, seeing the denial hereof is an evident token of one
appointed to wrath and destruction. 2 Timothy 2. 18. But to be plain, There shall
be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust: Wherefore,
whatever others may say, or profess, being beguiled by Satan, and their own
hearts, yet do thou fear him that can destroy both Body and Soul in Hell.
Matthew. 10. 28.

There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust. Rev.
20. 13. And the Sea gave up the Dead that were in it, and Death and Hell
delivered up the Dead that were in them.

Having in the first place showed you, that the wicked must arise; I shall in
the next place show you the manner of their rising. And observe it, as the very
Title of the just, and unjust, are opposites, so they are in all other matters,
and in their Resurrections.

First then, as the just in their Resurrection do come forth in incorruption:
the unjust in their Resurrection, shall come forth in their corruptions; for
though the ungodly at their Resurrection, shall for ever after, be incapable of
having Body and Soul separate: or of their being annihilated into nothing, yet
it shall be far from them to rise in incorruption; for if they arise in
incorruption, they must arise to life, and also must have the Conquest over sin
and death; 1 Cor. 15. 54. But that they shall not; for it is the Righteous
only, that put on incorruption, that are swallowed up of life. The wickeds
Resurrection, it is called the Resurrection of damnation. Joh. 5. 28. These in
their very Resurrection, shall be hurt of the second Death. They shall arise in
death, and shall be under it, under the gnawings, and terrors of it, all the
time of their Arraignment. As it were, a living death shall feed upon them,
they shall never be spiritually alive, nor yet absolutely dead; but much after
that manner, that natural death, and Hell, by reason of guilt, does feed on
him, that is going before the Judge, to receive his Condemnation to the
Gallows. You know, though a Felon go forth of the Goal, when he is going to the
Bar for his Arraignment, yet he is not out of prison, or out of his Irons for
that; his Fetters are still making a noise on his heels, and the thoughts of
what he is to hear by and by from the Judge, is still frighting and afflicting
his heart, Death, like some evil Spirit of Ghost, does continually haunt him,
and plays the Butcher continually in his Soul and Conscience, with frights
and fears about the thoughts of the sudden, and unsupportable after-clap, by
and by he is to meet withal.

Thus I say, will the wicked come out of their Graves, having yet the Chains of
eternal death hanging on them, and the talons of that dreadful Ghost fastened in
their Souls. So that life will be far from them, even as far as Heaven is from
Hell. This morning to them, is even as the shadow of death. They will then be
in the very terrors of the shadow of Death. Job 24. 17. As Christ says, Their
Worm never dies, and their fire is never quenched. Mark 8. 43, 44. From Death
to Eternity, it never shall be quenched, their bed is now among the flames; and
when they rise, they will rise in flames; while they stand before the Judge, it
will be in flames, even in the flames of a guilty Conscience: they will in
their coming before the Judge, be within the very Jaws of death and
destruction. Thus I say, the ungodly shall be far off from rising as the
Saints; for they will be even in the Region and shadow of Death. The first
moment of their rising, Death will be ever over them, ever feeding on their
Souls; and ever presenting to their hearts, the heights, and depths, of the
misery that now must seize them, and like a bottomless Gulf* must swallow them
up. They shall come out of their holes, like worms of the Earth, and be afraid
of the Lord our God. Micah 7. 17.

Secondly, As the Resurrection of the godly, shall be a Resurrection in Glory:
So the Resurrection of the wicked, it will be a Resurrection in dishonor. Yea,
as the glory of Saints, at the day of their rising, will be glory unspeakable:
so the dishonor of the ungodly at that day, it will be dishonor beyond
expression. As Daniel says, The good shall, arise to everlasting life; but the
wicked to shame, and everlasting contempt. Dan. 12. 2. And again, When thou, O
God, awakest, that is, to judge them, Thou shall despise their Image. Psalm. 73.
20. Never was Toad or Serpent more loathsome to any, then these will be in the
eyes of God, in their rising forth of their Graves. When they go to their
Graves, says Job, their bones are full of the sin of their youth, which lies
down in the dust with them. Job 20. 11. And a rise they shall, in the same
noisome and stinking condition; for as Death leaves, so Judgment finds them. At
the Resurrection then of these ungodly: they will be in a very loathsome
condition.

The ungodly at their death, are like the Thistle-seed; but at their rising,
they will be like the Thistle grown; more noysom, offensive, and provoking to
rejection abundance. Then such dishonor, shame and contempt, will appear in
them: that neither God nor Christ, Saints nor Angels, will so much as once
regard them, or vouchsafe one to come near them. He beholds the wicked a far
off; because in the day of Grace, they would not come to hand, and be saved,
therefore now they shall, all as thorns, be thrust away, as with fences of
Iron. 2. Sam. 23. 6, 7. Their rising, is called the Resurrection of the unjust,
and so they at that day will appear, and will more stink in the nostrils of
God, and all the Heavenly Hosts: then if they had the most irksome Plague-soars
in the World running on them. If a man at his Birth, be counted as one cast
forth to the loathing of his person: how loathsome, and irksom, dishonorable,
and contemptible, will those be that shall arise Godless, Christless,
Spiritless, and Graceless, when the Trumpet sounds to their Judgment, they
coming out of their Graves, far more loathsome, and filthy, then if they should
ascend out of the most filthy hole on Earth.

Thirdly, As the Just shall arise in power, so the wicked and unjust, in
weakness and astonishment. Sin and guilt brings weakness, and faintness in
this life: how much more, when both with all their power and force, like a
Giant, fasten on them, as God says, Can thy hands be strong, and can thy heart
endure in the day that I shall deal with thee? Eccless. 22. 14. Now will the
ghastly Jaws of despair gape upon thee, and now will condemnings of Conscience,
like Thunderclaps, continually batter against thy weary Spirit. It is the
Godly that have boldness in the day of Judgment; but the wicked will be like
the Chafe which the Wind drives away. 1 John 4. 17. Psalm. 1. 4. O the fear,
and the heart-aking that will seiz them in their rising! the frightful thoughts
that then will fill their throbbing hearts! Now must that Soul that has been
in Hellfire among the Devils, possess the body again. Possess it I say, with
the hot scalding stink of Hell upon it. They shall not be able to lift up the
head for ever, pangs shall take hold on them, all their hands shall faint, and
every man's heart shall melt, They shall be amazed one at another, their faces
shall be as flames. Isa. 13. 6, 7, 8. Every thing they see, hear, or think of,
shall tend to their discomfort. They must needs be weak, whom God has left,
whom guilt has seized, and whom death is swallowing up for ever.

Fourthly, As the Just shall arise spiritual Bodies, so the unjust shall arise
only as mere and naked lumps of sinful nature: not having the least help from
God, to bear them up under this condition. Wherefore, so soon as ever they are
risen out of their Graves: they will feel a continual sinking under every
remembrance of every sin, and thoughts of Judgment, in their rising they fall,
fall I say from thenceforth, and for ever. And for this Reason, the Dungeon
into which they fall, is called bottomless, Rev. 20. 1. Because, as there will
be no end of their misery, so there will be no stay or prop, to bare them up in
it. Only, as I said before, they shall not now, as before, be separate Body
from Soul; but both together, be bound in the cords of sin and iniquity, in
which they shall now tremble as Thieves and Murderers, etc. as they go before
the Judge, to hear what he will say unto them.

Now when the wicked are thus raised out of their Graves, they shall, together
with all the Angels of darkness, their fellow Prisoners; be brought up, being
shackled in their sins, to the place of Judgment; where there shall fit upon
them Jesus Christ, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Lord chief Judge
of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth. On whose
right hand, and left, shall fit all the Princes, and Heavenly Nobles; the
Saints and Prophets, the Apostles, and Witnesses of Jesus: every one in his
Kingly Attire, upon the Throne of his Glory. Joel 3. 11, 12, 13, 14. Then shall
be fulfilled that which is written, As for these my enemies, that would not
that I should reign over them, bring them before me to slay them. Luke 19. 27.

When every one is thus set in his proper place, the Judge on his Throne, with
his Attendants, and the prisoners coming up to Judgment: forthwith there shall
issue forth a mighty fire and tempest from before the Throne, which shall
compass it round about. Which fire, shall be as Bars and bounds to the wicked,
to keep them at a certain distance from the Heavenly Majesty. As David says,
Psalm. 50. 3. Our God will come, and not keep silence, a fire shall devour
before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him. And again, Dan.
7. 9. His Throne was like the fiery flame, and his Wheels like burning fire. A
fiery stream issued, and came forth from before him, etc.

This Preparation being made, to wit, the Judge with his Attendance on the
Throne; the Bar for the Prisoners, and the Rebels all standing with ghastly
Jaws, to look for what comes after: Presently the Books are brought forth, to
wit, the Books both of Death and Life. And every one of them opened before the
sinners, now to be judged and condemned. For after that he had said before,
Dan. 7. 10. A fiery stream issued, and came ^orth from before him: he adds,
thousands, thousands ministered to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him: the Judgment was set, and the Books was opened. And again, I
saw a great white Throne, and him that sat upon it, from whose face, the Earth
and the Heaven fled away, and there was found no more place for them; and I saw
the dead, small and great, stand before God, and the Books were opened: and
another Book were opened, which is the Book of Life. And the Dead were Judged
out of the things that were written in the Books, according to their works.
Rev. 20. 11, 12.

He does not say, the Book was opened, as of one, but the Books, as of many.
And indeed, they are more than one, two, or three, out of which the Dead shall
in the Judgment, be proceeded against.

First then, there is the Book of the Creatures to be opened.

Secondly, The Book of Gods Remembrance.

Thirdly, The Book of the Law.

And fourthly, The Book of Life. For by every one of these, that is, out of
what is written in them, shall the World of the ungodly be judged.

And the Books were opened.
First, The Book of the Creatures shall be opened, and that first it concerns
man's nature, The first Book opened in its first part.
and next, as it relates to all other Creatures. First, he will show in what
the principles if nature were, as they were Gods Creation; and how contrary to
these principles, the World have walked, acted, and done. The principles of
nature are concluded under these three general heads.

First, That man by his own natural Reason and Judgment, may gather, that
there is a God, a Deity, a chief, or first, or principal Being, who is over
all, and supreme above all. This instinct, I say, man merely as he is rational
Creature, finds in himself; and hence it is, that all Heathens that mind
their own natural Reason, do conclude, that we are his offspring; that is, his
Creation and Wormanship. That he made Heaven and Earth, and has made of one
blood, all Nations of men; That in him we live, and move, and have our Being,
etc. Acts 17. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

It appears further, that man by his own nature, does know that there is such a
God.

1. By his being able to judge by nature, that there is such a thing as sin, as
Christ says, Why do ye not even of your selves, judge that which is right, as
if he had said, you are degenerated even from the principles of nature, and
right reason; as Paul says in another place, Does not even nature it self
teach you, Luke 12. 57. 1 Cor. 11. 14. Now he that can judge, that there is
such a thing as sin, it must of necessity be, that he understands that there
is a God, to whom sin is opposite; for if there be no God, there is no sin
against him, and he that knows not the one, knows not the other.

2. It is evident further, that man by nature, knows that there is a God, by
those fits of fear, and dread that is often begotten in themselves, even in
every man that breaths in this World; for they are by their own Consciences,
and thoughts, convicted and reproved, judged and condemned, Man's nature is a
Book, or law to it self.
though they know neither Moses, nor Christ. For the Gentiles which have not
the Law, these are a Law to themselves, and show the works of the Law, written
in their hearts. Romans 2. 14, 15. that is, by this very thing, they hold forth
to all men, that God created them in that state and quality, that they might,
in, and by their own nature, judge, and know, that there is a God. And it
further shows it self, says he, by those workings of heart, convictions of
Conscience, and accusations, that every thought makes within them, together
with the fear that is begotten in them, when they transgress, or do those
things that are irrational, or contrary to what they see they shall do. I might
add further, that the natural proneness that is in all men, to Devotion and
Religion, that is, of one kind or another, does clearly tell us, that they by
the Book of nature, which Book is themselves, do read, that there is one great
and eternal God.

Secondly, The second principle of nature is, that this God should by man be
sought after, that they might enjoy Communion with him for ever. As I said
before, the light of nature shows man, that there is a great God, even God
that made the World; and the end of its showing him this is, that they might
seek the Lord, if happily they may feel after him, and find him, though he be
not far from every one of them, etc. Acts 17. 26, 27.

Thirdly, This light of nature teache^^, that men between themselves, should do
that which is just and equal. As Moses said, and that long before the Law was
given, Acts 7. 26. Exodus 2. 13. Sirs, ye are Brethren, why do ye wrong one
another? as who should say, you are of equal Creation, you are the same flesh;
you both judge, that it is not equally done of any, to do you wrong, and
therefore ought to judge by the same Reason, that ye ought not to wrong one
another.

Now against every one of these three principles, has every man in the whole
World transgressed, as Paul says; For both Jews and Gentiles, are all under
sin. Romans 3. 9. For as touching the first, who is he that has honored,
reverenced, worshipped, and adored the living God, to the height, both of what
they saw in him, and also according to the goodness and mercy they have as men,
received from him. Romans 1. 25. All have served, and worshipped the Creature,
more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever and so have walked contrary to,
and have sinned against this bond of nature, in this first principle of it.

Secondly, Men instead of minding their own future happiness, as nature
teaches, they have, through their giving way to sin and Satan, minded nothing
less; for though Reason teaches all men to love that which is good and
profitable, yet they contrary to this, have loved that which is hurtful, and
destructive. Yea, though sense teaches, to avoid the danger that is manifest:
yet man, contrary to Reason and sense both, even all men, have both against
light and feeling, rejected their own happiness, as Paul says, Though they
kn^w the Judgments of God, that they which do such things, are worthy of
death: not only do the same, but take pleasure in them that do them. Romans 1.
33.

Thirdly, Man instead of doing equity, and as he would be done by, which nature
it self teaches: he has given up himself to vile affections, being filled, by
refusing the dictates of nature, with all unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, envy, murder, debate, deceit,
malignity, whispering, backbiting: to hate God, to be dispiteful, proud,
bosters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to Parents, without
understanding, Covenant-breakers, without natural affections, implacable,
unmerciful. Romans 1. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.

And observe it, he does not say, that all these things are by every man, put
into practice; but every man has all these in his heart, which there defile
the Soul, and make it abominable in the sight of God. They are filled with all
unrighteousness, which also appears, as occasion serves, sometimes one of
them, sometimes more. Now man having sinned against that natural Light,
Judgment, Reason, and Conscience, that God has given him: therefore, though
as I said before, he neither knew Moses nor Christ, yet he shall perish; As
many, says Paul, as have sinned without Law, they shall perish without Law.
Romans 2. 12.

Yea, here will man be found, not only a sinner against God, but an (2 Timothy
12. 25.) opposer of himself, a contradictor of his own nature, and one that
will not do that which he judges even of himself to be right. Their sin is
written upon the Tables of their own heart, and their own wickedness and
backsliding, shall both correct, and reprove them. Jer. 17. 1. Jer. 2. 19.

It is mavelous, (if we consider) how curious a Creature man was made of God:
to behold how much below, besides and against that state and place, man acts
and does in this state of sin and degeneracy. Man in his Creation, was made in
the Image of God, Genesis 1. 26. but man, by reason of his yielding to the
tempter, has made himself the very figure and Image of the Devil. Man by
Creation was made upright, and sinless; but man by sin, has made himself
crooked and sinful. Eccless. 7. 29. Man by Creation, had all the faculties of
his Soul at liberty to study God, his Creator, and his glorious Attributes and
Being; but man by sin, has so bound up his own senses and reason, and has
given way for blindness and ignorance of God, so to reign in his Soul, that now
he is Captivated, and held bound in alienation and estrangedness, both from
God, and all things truly spiritually good; Because, says he, That when they
knew God, they glorified him not as God, but became vain in their imaginations,
and their foolish he arts were darkened. And again, having the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in them, through the blindness of their hearts. Romans 1. 21. Ephef. 4. 18.

Now for this abuse of the Workmanship of God, shall man be brought forth to
the Judgment, shall be convicted, cast, and condemned as a Rebel, against both
God, and his own Soul, as Paul affirms, and that when he reasoned but as a
man. Romans 3. 5, 6.

When this part of the Book touching man's nature, is opened, and man convicted
and caft by it, by reason of his sinning against the three general principles
thereof: then forthwith is the second part of the Book opened, which is the
mystery of the Creatures; for the whole Creation, that is before thee, are not
only made to show the power of God in themselves; but also to teach thee, and
to preach unto thee, both much of God and thy self; as also the Righteousness,
and Justice of God against sin; For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven,
against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness; because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them;
for God has showed it unto them; for the invisible things of him, from the
Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his Eternal Power, and Godhead: so that they are left without
excuse. Romans 1. 18. 19, 20.

The Creation then of the World, namely, of the Heavens, Earth, Sun, Moon,
Stars, with all other the Creatures of God: they preach aloud to all men, the
Eternal Power and Godhead of their Creator. Psalm. 8. 3. In Wisdom he has made
them all: to be teachable, and carrying instruction in them: and he that is
wise. and will understand these things, even he shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord; for the Works of the Lord are great, and sought out of
all them that have pleasure therein. Psalm. 104. 24. Psalm. 107. Psalm. 111. 2.

Secondly, As the Creation in general, preaches to every man something of
God: so they do hold forth, how man should behave himself both to God, and one
to another; and will assuredly come in, in the Judgment, against all those
that shall be found crossers, and to thwarters of what God by the Creatures
does hold fo^th to us.

As first, The obedience of the Creatures, both to God and thee; first to God,
they are all in subjection (set Devils and men aside) even the very Dragons,
and all Deeps, Fire, Hail, Snow, and Vapors, fulfilling his Word. Yea, the
Winds and Seas obey him. Psalm. 148. 7, 8. Psalm. 147. 15, 16, 17, 18. Mark 4.
41. Thus I say, by their obedience to God, they teach the obedience, and by
their obedience, shall thy disobedience be condemned, in the Judgment.

2. Their obedience to thee also, teaches thee obedience to all Superiors;
For every kind of Beasts, and of Birds, and Serpents, and things in the Sea, is
tamed, and has been tamed, and brought into obedience by mankind. Man only
remains untamed, and untruly, and therefore by these are condemned. Jam. 3. 7,
8.

Secondly, The fruitfulness of all the Creatures, in their kind, does teach and
admonish thee to a fruitful life to Godward, and in the things of his holy
Word. God did but say in the beginning, Let the Earth bring forth fruit, Grass,
Herbs, Trees, Beasts, creeping things, and Cattle after their kind; and it was
so. Genesis 115. 24. But to man, he has sent his Prophets, rising early, and
sending them, saying, O do not this abominable thing that I hate; but they will
not obey. Jer. 44. 4, 5. For if the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by some
acts of obedience, condemn the wickedness of those who do by the Letter and
Circumcision, break the Law: how much more shall the fruitfulness of all the
Creatures come in, in the Judgment, against the whole World. As Job says, By
the obedience and fruitfulness of the Creatures he judges, (and so will judge)
the people. Job 36. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.

Thirdly, The knowledge and wisdom of the Creatures, do with a check, command
thee to be wise, and do teach thee wisdom.

1. The Stork in the Heaven, the Swallow and the Crane, by observing the time
and season of their coming, do admonish thee to learn the time of grace, and of
the mercy of God. Jer. 8, 7.

2. The Ox and the Ass, by the knowledge they have of their Masters Crib, do
admonish thee to know the Bread and Table of God, and both do and shall condemn
thy ignorance of the food of Heaven. Isa. 1. 3.

Fourthly, The labor and coyl of the Creatures, does convict thee of sloth
and idleness. Go to the Ant thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise; for
she provideth her food in the Summer, and lays up against the day of trial.
Prove. 6. 6, 7. But thou spendest the whole Summer of thy life, in wasting both
time and Soul. All things are full of labor, says Solomon, only man spends
all the day idle, and his years like a tale that is told. Eccles. 1. 8. Mat.
20. 6. Psalm. 90. 9. Romans 10. 21. The Cony is but a feeble folk, yet labors
for a House in the Rock, to be safe from the rage of the Hunter. The Spider
also, takes hold with her hands, and is in Kings Palaces. It Is man only, that
turns himself upon the bed of sloth, as the door does it self upon the
hinges: it is man I say, that will neither lay hold on the Rock Christ, as the
Coney does teach, nor lay hold on the Kingdom of Heaven, as the Spider does bid
him. Prove. 30. 26. 28. Joh. 5. 40.

Fifthly, The fear that is in all Creatures, when they perceive that danger is
near, it teaches men to fly from the wrath to come, in vain is the snare laid
in the sight of any Bird; Prove. 1. 17 18. but man, man only is the foolhardy
Creature, that lays wait for his own blood, and that lurketh privily for his
own life. How I say, will every Creature fly, run, strive, and struggle, to
escape the danger it is sensible of? it is man only, that delights to dance
about the mouth of Hell, and to be knowingly smitted with Satan's snare. Romans 1.
33.

Sixthly, The dependence that all the Creatures have upon God: they teach thee
to depend on him that made thee; yea, and will in the Judgment condemn thee
for thy unlawful practices, and dealings for thy preservation. The young Ravens
seek their food from God, and will condemn thy lying, cheating overreaching,
defrauding, and the like: they provide neither Storehouse, nor Barn; but the
art so greedy of these things, that thou for them shuttest thy self out of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Psalm. 147. 9. Job 38. 41. Luke 12. 24. Prove. 17. 16.

Seventhly, The love and pity that is in their hearts to their young, and one
another: will judge and condemn the hard-heartedness that is in thee to thy own
Soul. What shall I say, The Heavens shall reveal thy iniquity, and the Earth
shall rise up against thee. Job 20. 27. That is, all the Creatures of God, they
will by their fruitfulness and subjection to the will of their Creator, judge
and condemn thee for thy disobedience, and rebellion against him.

Now as these Creatures do every day call unto thee, and lay before thee these
things: so he has for thy awakening, in case thou be asleep, and senseless,
Creatures of another nature, as

1. Thy Bed when thou lie down in it, preaches to thee thy Grave; thy sleep,
thy death, and thy rising in the morning, thy Resurrection to Judgment. Job
14. 12. Job 17. 13. Isa. 26. 19.

2. The Goal that thou see with thy eyes, and the Felons that look out at the
Grate, they put thee in mind of the Prison of Hell, and of the dreadful state
of those that are there. Luke 12. 58, 59.

3. The fire that burns in thy Chimney, it holds forth the fire to Hell unto
thee. Isa. 10. 16. Rev. 20. 14.

4. The ugly smell, stench, and steam, of the burning Brimstone, it shows thee
the loathsome, odious, and dreadful torments of Hell. Rev. 19, 20.

5. The darkness of the night in solitary places, and the fears that do
commonly haunt those that walk therein: it preaches to thee the fears and
frights, the scares and amazements, that will for ever attend all damned Souls.
Matthew. 8. 12. Deuteronomy. 28. 65, 66, 6. 7.

6. By thy delighting, when thou art cold, to lay sticks on the fire to warm
thy self, not caring how fiercely they flame therein, so thou can be warm,
and be refreshed thereby: by this I say, God preaches to thee, with what
delight he will burn sinners in the flames of Hell, for the easing of his mind,
and the satisfaction of his Justice. Ah! says he, I will ease me of my
adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. Isa. 1. 24.

7. Yea, by thy blowing the fire, that it may fasten upon the wood the better:
thou preachest to thy self, how God will blow the fire of Hell by the rigor of
his Law, to the end, it may be its flames, to purpose, kindle upon damned
sinners. Isa. 3. 33.

All these things, as inconsiderable and unlikely as they may appear to you
now, yet in the Judgment will be found the Items, and warning words of God to
your Souls. And know, that he who could overthrow the Land of Egypt, with
frogs, lice, flies, Locusts, etc. will overthrow the World, at the last day, by
the Book of the Creatures; and that by the least, and most inconsiderable of
them, as well as by the rest. This Book of the Creatures, it is so excellent,
and so full, so easy, and so suiting the capacity of all, that there is not
one man in the World, but is catched, convicted, and cast by it. This is the
Book, that he who knows no letters, may read in: yea, and that he who neither
saw New Testament, nor Old, may know both much of God, and himself, by. It Is
this Book, out of which generally, both Job and his friends did so profoundly
discourse of the Judgments of God, and that out of which God himself did so
convincingly answer Job. Job was as perfect in this Book, as we are, many of us
in the Scriptures, yea, and could see further by it, then many now a days do
see by the new Testament and old. This is the Book out of which, both Christ,
the Prophets, and Apostles, do so frequently discourse by their Similitudes,
Proverbs, and Parables: as being the most easy way to convince the World,
though by reason of their ignorance, nothing will work with them, but what is
set on their heart by the holy Ghost.

One word further, and I have done with this, and that is, God has sealed the
Judgment of the World by the Book of the Creatures, even by man's own carriage
unto such of them, which, through any impediment, have disappointed his
expectations. As thus, if thou have but a Tree in thy Orchard, that neither
bears fruit, nor ought else that is good: why thou art for hewing it down,
and for appointing it, as fuel for the fire: now thou little think, that by
thy thus judging, thou should pass sentence upon thy own fruitless Soul;
but it is so, For now is the Ax laid to the Roots of the Trees, and every Tree
that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire. For
as truly as thou say of thy fruitless Tree, cut it down, why does it cumbet
the ground? so truly does thy Voice cause Heaven to Echo again upon thy head:
Cut him down, why does he cumber the ground? Mat. 3. 10. Luke 13. 6, 7, 8.
Ezekiel. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Further, The inclination of thy heart toward fruitless and unprofitable
Creatures, does fore-preach to thee, the inclination of the heart of God
toward thee in the Judgment: If thou have either Cow, or any other Beast,
that is now unprofitable to thee, though thou may suffer them for some time,
to be with thee, as God suffers sinners in the World, yet all this while, thy
heart is not with them; but thou will take thy time to clear thy hands of them.
Why, just so shall thy Judgment be, as God says, Though Moses and Samuel
stood before me, that is, to pray me to spare this People, yet my heart could
not be toward them, therefore cast them out of my sight, and let them go
forth. Jer. 15. 1. Ezekiel. 14. 13, 14.

Thus I say, will God judge the World at the last day; he will open before
them, how they have degenerated and gone back from the Principles of nature, in
which he created them. Also how they have slighted all the instructions that he
has given them, even by the obedience, fruitfulness, wisdom, labor, fear, and
love of the Creatures; and he will tell them, that as to their Judgment, they
themselves have decided it, both by their cutting down that which was
fruitless, and by the withdrawing of their hearts from those things, which to
them were unprofitable, As therefore the Tar^s are gathered, and burned in the
fire, so shall it be in the end of this World. As men deal with weeds, and
rotten Wood: so will God deal with sinners in the day of Judgment: and will
bring in, I say, all the Counsels and warnings he has given men by these
things, both to clear up, and to agravate their Judgment to them.

The second Book that will be opened at this day, it will be the Book of Gods
Remembrance. Mal. 3. 16. For as God has in his Remembrance, Recorded all and
every particular good thing that his own People has done to, and for his Name,
while they were in this World: so he has in his Remembrance, Recorded all the
evil and sin of his adversaries; The Book of Gods Remembrance opened.
even every thing. Eccles. 12. 14. Now Gods Remembrance is so perfect every
way, that it is impossible, that any thing should be lost, that is committed to
it to be kept, and brought forth to the Judgment at the time appointed; for as
a thousand years are but as yesterday, with his Eternity: so the sins that have
been committed thousands of years since, they are all so firmly fixed in the
Remembrance of the Eternal God, that they are always as fresh and clear in his
sight, as if they were but just now in committing. He calls again the things
that are past, Eccles. 3. 15. and has set our most securest things in the
light of his Countenance, Psalm. 90. 8. As he also says in another place, Hell
it self is naked before him, and destruction has no covering. Job 26. 6. That
is the most secret, cunning, and hidden contrivances of the most subtle of the
infernal spirits, which yet are far more slethy, then men, to hide their
wickedness; yet, I say, all their ways, hearts, and most secret doings, are
clear, to the very bottom of them, in the Eyes of the great God. All things are
open and bare, before the Eyes of him with whom we have to do: who will bring
to light, the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of
the heart. Heb. 4. 13. 1 Cor. 4, 5.

Ye that say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it.
Understand, O ye brutish among the People, and ye fools, when will ye be wise?
He that planted the Ear, shall not he hear? He that formed the Eye, shall not
he see? He that chasteneth the Heathen, shall not he correct? He that teaches
man knowledge, shall not he know? Psalm. 94. 7, 8, 9, 10. See also, Hos. 7. 2.
and 8. 13. Can any hide himself in secret places, that I should not see him?
that is, when he is committing wickedness, says the Lord, Do not I fill Heaven
and Earth, says the Lord? Jer. 23. 24.

Now to know and see things, it is the cause among men, of their remembrance.
Wherefore, God to show us, that he will remember all our sins, if we die out of
Christ, he tells us, that he knows, and sees them all, and therefore must
needs remember them; for as is his sight and knowledge, so is his Remembrance
of all things.

When this Book of his Remembrance therefore is opened, as it shall be, in the
Judgment: then shall be brought forth of their hidden holes, all things,
whatsoever has been done since the World began, whether by Kingdoms in
general, or persons in particular. Now also shall be brought forth to open
view, all the transactions of God and his Son, among the Sons of men, and every
thing shall be applied to every particular person, in equity and Justice, to
whom they belong: the sins that thou have committed shall be thy own, and thou
thy self shall bear them. The Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions
are weighed.

It will be mavelous to behold, how by thousands, and ten thousands, God will
call from their secret places, those sins, that one would have thought, had
been dead, and buried, and forgotten; yea, how he will show before the Sun,
such things, so base, and so horrid, that one would think, it was not in the
hearts of any to commit; for all is Recorded in the Book of Gods Remembrance.
While men are here, they have a thousand tricks to present themselves one to
another, far more fair, and honest then they are, or ever were. As Christ said
to the Pharisees, Ye are they, who justify your selves before men, but God
knows your hearts, Luke 16. 15. I, God knows indeed, what a nest, what a
heap, what swarms; yea, what Legions of hellish wickednesses, there is with
power lurking, like Cockatrices, in those men, that one would swear a thousand
times, are good and honest men. The way of men in their sins, it is like an
Eagle in the Air, a Serpent upon the Rock, a Ship in the midst of the Sea, and
of a young Man with a Maid: says Solomon, Prove. 30. 19, 20. That is, hiddenly,
closely, covertly, burying all under fair pretenses, wipeth their mouths in the
close of their evil, saying, I have done wickedness.

But this, though it may serve for the time present, and no longer, God will
not be deluded, nor blinded, nor mocked, nor put off. Gal. 6. 7. They consider
not that I remember all their wickedness, says he, but I will reprove thee,
and will set them in order before thine eyes. Hos. 7. 2. Psalm. 50. 21. Here
will be laid open, the very heart of Cain the murderer, of Judas the Traitor,
of Saul the adversary of David, and of those that under pretenses of holiness,
have persecuted Christ, his Word and People. Now shall every Drunkard,
Whoremaster, Thief, and other wicked person, be turned, their inside outward;
their hearts right open, and every sin, with every circumstance of place, time,
person with whom, with the causes also that drew them to the commission of
every evil, be discovered to all. Here will be no hiding your selves behind
Curtains, nor no covering your selves with the black and dark night. If I say,
surely the darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be light about me;
yea, (O God) darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day,
the darkness and light are both alike unto thee. Psalm. 139. 11, 12.

The piercing Eye of God, beholds all places, persons, and things; the holy
hand of his Justice writes them down in the Book of his Remembrance; and by
his Power, and Wisdom, will he open and read to all men exactly, distinctly,
and convincingly, whatever has passed from them, or bin done by them in their
whole life; For, for all these things, God will bring thee into Judgment.
Eccles. 11. 9. Again, as God will bring out of the Book of his Remembrance,
what ever has passed from thee, against him: so also will he then bring forth
by the same Book, all things and carriages of his toward thee.

Here will he bring to thy mind, every Sermon thou have heard, every Chapter
thou have read; every conviction thou have had on thy Conscience: and every
admonition that has been given thee in all thy life, when thou wast in the
Land of the Living.

Now will God lay open before thee, what patience he extended to thee, how he
let thee l^ve one year, two years, ten, yea twenty and twenty years, and all to
try thee. Yea, now also will he bring to thy view, how many times he warned,
rebuked, threatened, and chastised thee for thy wickedness; how many awakening
Providence and Judgments he continually laid before thy face; yea, how many a
time, thou did like Balaam, run upon the point of the Sword of Justice, and
how he gave back, as being loath to kill thee. Numb. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27,
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.

Now also again, shall be brought before thee and all men, how many struglings
God had with thy heart, on thy sick Bed, to do thee good; yea, and at such
times, how many Vows, Promises, Engagements, and Resolutions, thou made
before God, to turn, if he would release thee from thy affliction, and take off
his Rod from thy back: Mar. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4* 5. and yet how thou did like the
man possessed, break, and snap in twain all these Chains of Iron, with which
thou had bound thy Soul; and that for a very lust and sin. Here also, will be
opened before thee, how often thou have sinned against thy light and knowledge;
how often thou have laid violent hands on thy own Conscience; how often thou
have labored to put out that light that has stood in thy way, to hinder thee
from sinning against thy Soul. Ah Lord, what a condition will the Christless
Soul be in at this day? How will every one of these things afflict the damned
Soul? they will pierce like Arrows, and bite like Serpents, and sting like an
Adder. With what shame, will that man stand before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, who must have all things he has done against God, to provoke the Eyes
of his Glory to jealousy: laid open before the whole Host of the Heavenly
train! It would make a man blush, to have his Pockets searched, for things that
are stolen, in the midst of a Market, especially, if he stand upon his
Reputation and Honor. But thou must have thy heart searched, the bottom of thy
heart searched; and that, I say, before thy Neighbor, whom thou have wronged,
and before the Devils, whom thou have served; yea, before God, whom thou have
despised, and before the Angels, those holy and delicate Creatures, whose holy
and chaste Faces, will scarce forbear blushing, while God is making thee Vomit
up, all thou have swallowed; for God shall bring it out of thy belly. Job. 20.
12, 13, 14, 15.

For as for God to forget iniquity, is one of the chief heads of the Covenant
of Grace, and is an Argument of the highest nature, to beget, and to continue
Consolation in the godly: so the remembrance of Iniquity, by the Lord, it is
one of the heaviest loads, and Judgments that can befall any poor Creature.
Lord, says the Prophet, remember not against us, former iniquities. And again,
if thou Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand? Psalm. 130. 3.
And the Reason is, because, that which the Lord forgets, is forgiven for
ever; but that which he remembers, it is charged for ever, and nothing can
take it away. Heb. 8. 12. Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. Though thou wash thee with nitre,
and take thee much Soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, says the Lord
God. Jer. 2, 22.

The third Book that will at this day be opened, and out of which God will
judge the World: it is the Book of the Law, or ten words given forth on the
Mount Sinai, But this Book will more specially concern those that have received
it, or that have had knowledge thereof. Every one shall not be judged by this
Book, as there delivered, though they shall be judged by the works of it, which
are written in their hearts. Romans 2. 14. As many as have sinned without Law,
shall perish without Law, and they that have sinned in the Law, shall be judged
by the Law. Romans 2. 12. That is, the Heathens that never knew the Law, as
delivered on Sinai, they shall be judged by the Law, as it was written in man's
heart in his Creation, (which is comprised within the Book of the Creatures;)
but those that have knowledge of the Law, as delivered on Sinai: they shall be
judged by the Law as there given.

Now then, this Book when it is opened, at the day of Judgment, it will, to
those to whom it especially relates, be a most terrible Law, far surpassing the
two aforementioned. This Law, as I may so say, it is the chief, and most pure
Resemblance of the Justice and holiness of the Heavenly Majesty, and does hold
forth to all men, the sharpness and keenness of his wrath' above the other two
that I have before mentioned. I say, both because it has been delivered more
plain and open, both as to the duty enjoined, and the sin prohibited; and
therefore must of necessity, fall with the more violence upon the head of all
that shall be found within the compass of it. This Law, it has in it to be
opened at this day, these two general heads. First, A discovery of the evil of
sin, that is so, against plain light and truth.

And Secondly, A discovery of the vanity of all things, that will at this day
be brought by sinners, for their help and plea at the Judgment. Alas, who can
but imagine, that the poor World, at the day of their Arraignment, should
muster up all that ever they can think of, as Arguments to shelter them from
the execution of that fierce wrath, that then with sinking Souls, they will see
prepared for them.

As to the first of these, the Apostle tells us, that the Law was added, that
the offense might aboun^, or be discovered what it is. As he says again, I had
not known sin but by the Law. Romans 5. 20. Romans 7. 7. Romans 7. 13. Thus it is in
this life, and thus it will be in the day of Judgment, that is, those that see
sin, and that in its abounding nature, and in its exceeding sinfulness, they
must see it by the Law, for that is indeed, the Glass by which God discovers
sin. Jam. 1. 22, 23, 24, 25. And the filthy spots of leprosy, that is in the
Soul. Now those that have not the happiness to see their sin by the Law in this
life, while there is a Fountain of Grace to wash in, and be clean: they must
have the misery to see it at the Judgment, when nothing is left but misery,
and pain, as the punishment for the same. At which day, those little Titles of
this holy Law, that now men so easily look over, and sin against with ease,
they will every one of them appear with such dread, and with such flaming
Justice against every offense committed: that if Heaven and Earth it self,
should step in to shelter the sinner from the Justice and wrath due to sin, it
would turn them up by the Roots. It is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass
away, then for one tittle of the Law to fail. Luke 16. 17. If there appeared
such flames, such Thunderings, and Tempests, as there were at the giving of the
Law: what flames and blackness will there appear at the execution thereof; and
if at the giving of the Law, there appeared so much Holiness and Justice, that
it made all Israel fly; yea, holy Moses exceedingly fear and quake: what will
become of these that God shall judge by the rigor of this Law in the day of
Judgment? Exodus 19. 16. Heb. 11. 21.

O what Thunderings and Lightnings, what Earthquakes and Tempests, will there
be in every damned Soul, at the opening of this Book? then indeed, will God
visit them with Thunder, and Earthquake, and great noise: with Storm and
Tempest, and the flame of a devouring fire. For behold, says the Prophet, the
Lord will come with fire, and with his Chariots, like a Whirlwind, to render
his anger with fury; and his rebukes with flames of fire. Isa. 29. 6. Isa. 66.
15.

The Lord will come with fire, that is, in the flaming heat of his Justice and
Holiness against sin, and sinners, to execute the rigor of his threatenings
upon their perishing Souls.

Secondly, The second general Head, that is contained in this Law, to be opened
at this day, is its exactness, and purity, and strictness as to all acts of
good that any poor Creature has done in this life, whereby he in the Judgment
will think to shelter, or secure himself from the wrath of God. This is the
Rule, and Line, and Plummet, whereby every act of every man, shall be measured;
and he whose righteousness is not found every way answerable to this Law, which
all will fall short of, but they that have the Righteousness of God by faith in
Jesus Christ: he must perish, as he says, Romans 3. 21. 22. Judgment also will
I lay to the line, and Righteousness will I lay to the Plummet, and the Ha^l
shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the water shall overflow the hiding
places. Isa. 28. 17, 18. That is, though men may now shelter themselves under
legal Repentance, cold profession, good meaning, thinkings, and doings: yet
all these things must be measured, and weighed in the balance of Gods most
righteous Law: and as I said, whatever in that day, is not found the
Righteousness of God, it will be found a re^uge of lies, and will be drowned by
the overflowing of the wrath of God, as the waters of Noah over-flowed the
World. Mal. 4. 1. And hence it is, that all the ungodly will at this day, be
found as stubble, and the Law as fire. As it says, From his Right hand went a
fiery Law. And again, his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a
devouring fire. Deuteronomy. 33, 2: Isa. 30. 27. For as fire, where it se^zeth, does
burn, eat, destroy, devour and consume: so will the Law, all those that at
this day, shall be found under the transgressio^ of the least tittle of it. It
will be with the^^ Souls at the day of Judgment, as it is wit^ those Countries
that are overrun with mo^^ merciless Conquerours, who leave not any thing
behind them, but swallow up all with fire and sword. For by fire, and by his
Sword, will the Lord plead with all flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be
many. Isa. 66. 16. There are two things at the day of Judgment, will meet in
their height and utmost strength, and they are sin and the Law; for the
Judgment will not be, till the iniquity of the World be full ripe. Joel. 3.
13. Rev. 14. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

Now then, when sin is come to its full, having played all its pranks, and done
all the mischief it can against the Lord of Glory: then God brings forth the
Law, his holy and righteous Law, one of which will now reign for ever, that is,
either the Law or sin: Wherefore sin and sinners, they must tremble with all
that help, and hold them up; for God will magnify the Law, and make it
honorable. Isa. 42. 21. That is, will give it the Victory over the World for
ever; for that is holy, just, and good: they are unholy, unjust, and bad.
Therefore by this Law, will the Lord rain snares, fire and Brimstone, and a
horrible Tempest, this shall be the potion of their Cup. Psalm. 11. 5, 6. Let no
man say then, that because God is so famous in his mercy and patience, in this
day of his Grace, that therefore he will not be fierce, and dreadful in his
Justice, in the day of Judgment; for Judgment and Justice, is the last thing
that God intends to bring upon the stage, which will then be to the full, as
terrible, as now his goodness and patience, and long sufferance, is admirable.
Lord, who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is
thy wrath. Psalm. 90. 11.

You may see, if you will, a few of the sparks of the Justice of God* against
sin and sinners: by his casting off Angels for sin, from Heaven to Hell; by his
drowning the old World; by his burning of Sodom, and Gomorah, to ashes;
condemning them with an overthrow, making them an example to those that after
should live ungodly. 2 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6. Jude 6. 7.

For whatsoever the Law says, it says it to them that are under the Law, that
every mouth may be stopped, and all the World become guilty before God. Romans 3.
19.

Moses seems to wonder, that the Children of Israel could continue to live,
when they did but hear the Law delivered on the Mountain, Did ever People,
says he, hear the Lord speak out of the midst of the fire, as thou have done,
and live. Deuteronomy. 4. 73. O that ye did but know the Law, and the wondrous things
that are written therein, before the Lord cause that fearful Voice to be heard,
Cursed is every one, that continues not in every thing that is written in the
Book of the Law to do them: which curse must fall on all that walk not in all
the Commandments of God, without iniquity, which none do, I say, but they that
walk in Christ, who has alone fulfilled them all. Gal. 3. 10. Ezekiel. 33. 15.
Col. 2. 10.

The Law is that which stands at the entrance of the Paradise of God, as a
flaming Sword turning every way to keep out those that are not righteous with
the righteousness of God; that have not skill to come to the throne of Grace by
that new and living way which he has consecrated for us through the veil; that
is to say, his flesh, Genesis 3. 24. Heb. 1. 19, 20. for though this Law, I say,
be taken away by Christ Jesus, for all that truly and savingly believe; yet it
remains in full force and power in every tittle of it, against every Soul of
man, that now shall be found in his Tabernacle; that is, in himself, and out of
the Lord Jesus, Col. 2. 14. Romans 3. 19. Job 18. 14. it lies, I say, like a
Lion rampant at the gates of Heaven, and will roar upon every unconverted soul,
fiercely accusing every one, that now would gladly enter in through the gates
into this City, Joh. 5. 45. So then, he that can answer all its most perfect
and legal commands, and that can live in the midst of devouring fire, and there
enjoy God and solace himself; he shall dwell on high and shall not be hurt by
this Law, His place of defense shall be the munitions of Rocks; bread shall be
given him, and his waters shall be sure; thine eyes shall behold the King in
his Beauty, they shall see the Land that is very far off, Isa. 33. 14. 15* 16,
17. Blessed then is he whose Righteousness does answer every point of the Law
of God, according to 1 Cor. 1. 30. he shall be able to escape all those things
that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man; for in himself,
ou^ God is a consuming fire, and man out of Christ, is but as stubble, chaff,
thorns, briers, and fuel for the wrath of this holy and sinner-consuming God to
seize upon for ever. Nah. 1. 6. Heb. 12. 29. Mala. 4. 1. Mat. 3. 12. Heb. 6. 7,
8. Isa. 27. 4. 2 Samuel 23. 6, 7. Who can stand before his indignation? Who can
abide the fierceness of his anger? His fury is poured ou^ like fire, and the
Rocks are thrown down by him.

Now when these three Books are thus opened, there will without doubt, be sad
throbbing and pricking, in every heart that now stands for his life, before the
Judgment Seat of Christ the Righteous Judge; and without all question, they
will be studying a thousand ways to evade and shift the stroke, that by the
sin that these three Books do charge them with, will immediately fall upon them.

But now to cut off all these at a blow, forthwith appear the Witnesses, who
are ready to evince, and make full, and Soul-killing proof of every particular
charged against them.

And the first is, God himself. I, says he, will be a swift witness against
the Sorcerers, The Witnesses give in their Evidence.
and against the Adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that
oppress the hireling of his wages; the widow and the fatherless, and that turn
aside the stranger from his right, and that fears not me, says the Lord.
Mal. 3. 5.

This must needs be of great sway with every Soul, that God should now come in.
I will witness, says God, that these things of which you are accused before
the Judge, is true. I h^ve seen all* know all, and writ down all. There has
not been a thought in your heart, nor a wo^d in your Tongue, but I have known
it altogether, all things have always bin open, and naked to my Eye. Yea, my
Eyelids try the Children of men. I have known your down-sitting, and your
up-rising; and have understood your th^ughts a far off* I have compassed your
path, and am well acquainted with all your ways. Heb. 4. 13. Psalm. 11. 4.
Psalm. 139. 1, 2 3, 4.

1. You have not continued in that state of nature in which I did at first
create you: Eccles. 7. 29. you have not liked to retain that knowledge and
understanding of God, that you had, and might have had, by the very Book of the
Creatures, Romans 1. You gave way ^o the suggestions of fallen Angels, and so
your foolish ^earts were darkened and alienated, and estranged from God.

2. All the Creatures that were in the World, have even condemned you, they
have been fruitful, but you fruitless; they have been fearful of danger, but
you foolhardy; they have taken the fittest opportunity for their own
preservation, but th^^ (...) both blindly, and confidently gone on to thy
punishment. Prove. 22. 3.

3. Touching the Book of my Remembrance, who can contradict it? Do not I fill
Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? was not I in all places to behold, to see,
and to observe thee in all thy ways? My eye s^w the Thief, and the Adulterer,
and I heard every Lie and Oath of the wicked. I saw the hypocrisy of the
dissembler. They have committed villainy in Israel, and have committed Adultery
with their Neighbors Wives, and have spoken lying words in my name, which I
have not commanded them, even I know, and am a Witness, says the Lord. Jer.
29. 23.

4. God will also come in against them for their transgressing his Law, even
the Law which he delivered on Mount Sinai, he will, I say, open every tittle
thereof in such order, and truth: and apply the breach of each particular
person with such con^^^^g Argument, that they will fall down silenced for ever.
Every mouth shall be stopped, and all the World shall become guilty before God.

Secondly, There is yet another w^^^^s, for the condemning the transgressors of
these Laws, and that is, Conscience: their Consciences also beating witness,
says (...) Apostle, Romans 2. 14, 15. Conscience is a (...) Witnesses.
Conscience, it will cry, Amen, to every word that the Great God does speak
against thee. Conscience is a terrible accuser, it will hold pace with the
Witness of God, as to the truth of Evidence, to a hairs breadth. The Witnesses
of Conscience, it is of great Authority, it commands guilt, and fastneth it on
every Soul which it accuses. And hence it is said, if our hearts or Conscience
condemn us. 1 John 3. 20. Conscience will thunder and lighten at this day; even
the Consciences of the most pagan sinners in the World, will have sufficiently
wherewith to accuse, to condemn, and to make paleness appear in their faces,
and breaking in their loins, by reason of the force of its conviction. O the
mire and dirt, that a guilty Conscience, when it is forced to speak, will cast
up, and throw out before the Judgment Seat! it must out, none can speak peace,
nor health, to that man upon whom God has let loose his own Conscience, Cain
will now cry, My punishment is greater then I can bear, Judas will hang
himself; and both Belshazzer and Felix will feel the joints of their loins to
be loosened, and their knees to smite one against another, when Conscience
stirs. Genesis 4. 13. Mat. 27. 3. Dan. 5. 6. Acts 24. 23. When Conscience is
once thoroughly awakened, as it shall be before the Judgment Seat: God need say
no more to the sinner, then Solomon said to filthy Shimei, Thou know all the
wickedness that thy heart is privy to. 1 King. 2. 44. As who should say, thy
Conscience knows, and can well inform thee of all the evil, and sin that
thou art guilty of. To all which it answers, even as face answers to face
in a Glass; or as an Echo answers the man that speaks, as fa^^ I say, as
God charge Conscience will cry out, guilty, guilty; Lord, guilty of all, of
every whit, I remember clearly all the Crimes thou layest before me. Thus I
say, will Conscience be a witness against the Soul, in the day of God.

Thirdly, As God and Conscience, will at this day be most dreadful witnesses
against the sinful man at this day: so also will those several thoughts that
have passed through man's heart, be a witness also against him. As he said
before, their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while accusing, or else excusing one another, in the day when God shall judge
the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel. Romans 2. 14, 15.

The thoughts come in as a witness for God against the sinner, upon the account
of that unsteddiness and variety that was in them, both touching God, and their
own selves. Sometimes the man thinks there is no God, but that every thing has
its rise of it self, or by chance, or fortune, The fool has said in his heart,
there is no God. Psalm. 14. 1.

Sometimes again, they think there is a God; but yet they think and imagine of
him falsely, Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self, says
God, but I will reprove thee. Psalm. 50. 21.

Men think, that because they can sin with delight: that therefore God can let
them esscape without punishment. Nay, oftentimes they think, that God does
either quite forget their wickedness, or else that he will be pleased with such
satisfaction as they are pleased to give him, even a few howling prayers,
fained and hypocritical tears, and weepings, which pass from them. Hos. 7. 14.
Mal. 2. 13. More for fear of the punishment of Hellfire, then because they
have offended so holy, so just, and so glorious a God; and so loving, and so
condescending a Jesus.

Sometimes again, they have had right thoughts of something of God, but not of
him together: either thinking so of his Justice, as to drive them from him, and
also cause them to put him out of their mind: Job 21. 14. or else so thinking
of his mercy, as that they quite forget his Holiness and Justice. Now both
these are but base thoughts of God, and so erroneous, and sinful thoughts.

Sometimes also, they have pretty right thoughts of God, both as to Justice and
Mercy, but then through the wretchedness of their unsatisfied nature, they,
against this light and knowledge, do with shut eyes, and hardened hearts, rush
fiercely, knowingly, and willingly again into their sins and wickedness. Heb.
6. 2, 3, 4. Heb. 10. 26. 2. Pet. 2. 20.

Secondly, As men have these various thoughts of God, so also their thoughts
are not steady about themselves.

1. Sometimes they think they are sinners, and therefore they have need of
mercy.

2. Sometimes again, they think they are righteous, and so have not so much
need; mark, and yet both alike rotten, and base: because, as the last is
altogether senseless: so the first is not at all savingly senseable, Mark 10.
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Luke 18. 11, 12.

3. Sometime again, they think they are Gods; that they shall never die, or
that if they do die, yet they shall never rise again; or if they do rise again,
yet they shall be saved, though they have lived vilely, and in their sins all
the days of their life. Ezekiel. 28. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 15. 12. Deuteronomy. 29.
18. 12. 20. Now I say, every one of these thoughts, with ten thousand more of
the like nature, will God bring in against the Rebels in the Judgmentday. Which
thoughts, shall every one of them be brought forth in their distinct order. He
shows to man what is his thought. And again, I know that thou can do every
thing, and that no thought can be hid from thee. Amos 4. 13. Job. 42. 2. We
read, that when the strangers at Jerusalem, did but hear the Apostle speak to
every one of them in their own Language, how it amazed and confounded them.
Acts 2. 6, 7, 8. But I say, how will they look, and be amazed, when God shall
evidently, clearly, and fully speak out all their hearts, and every thought
they have had, before them.

Now the reason and strength of this witness, will lie here, that God will by
the variety and crossness that their thoughts had one to another, and by the
contradiction that was in them, prove them sinners and ungodly; because that I
say, sometimes they thought there was a God, sometimes again they thought,
there was none. Sometimes they thought, that he was such a God, and sometimes
again, they thought of him quite contrary; Sometimes they thought he was worth
regarding, and sometimes they thought he was not: As also sometimes they
thought he would be faithful, both to mercy and Justice, and sinners; and
sometimes again, they thought he would not.

What greater Argument now can there be, to prove men, vanity, froth, a lie,
sinners, deluded by the Devil, and such as had false apprehensions of God, his
waye^, his Word, his Justice, his Holiness, of themselves, their sins, and
every action?

Now they will indeed appear, a very lump of confusion, a mass of sin, a bundle
of ignorance, of Atheism, of unbelief, and of all things that should lay them
obnoxious to the Judgments of God. This will God, I say, by mustering up the
thoughts of man, and by showing of them, that every imagination and thought of
their heart was only evil, and that continually (by showing of them what
staggering, drunken, wild, and uncomely thoughts they have had, both of him,
and of themselves) convince them, cast them, and condemn them for sinners, and
transgressors against the Book of Creatures, the Book of his Remembrance, and
the Book of the Law. By the variety of their thoughts, they shall be proved
unstable, ignorant, wandering Stars, Clouds carried with a Tempest, without
order or guidance, and taken Captive of the Devil at his will.

Now while the wicked are thus standing upon their trial, and lives before the
Judgment Seat, and that in the view of Heaven and Hell* they I say, hearing
and seeing such dreadful things, both written and witnessed against every one
of them; and that by such Books, and such Witnesses, as do not only talk, but
testify, and that with the whole strength of truth against them: they will
then begin, though poorly, and without any advantage, to plead for themselves,
which plea will be to this effect.

Lord, we did find in the Scriptures, that thou did send a Savior into the
World, to deliver us from these sins and miseries. The sinners plea for himself
at the Judgment Seat.
We heard this Savior also published, and openly proffered to such poor sinners
as we are. Lord, Lord, we also made profession of this Savior, and were many
of us frequenters of his holy Ordinances. We have eat and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets, Lord, we have also some of us,
bin Preachers our selves, we have prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have
we cast out Devils, and done many wondrous works: Nay Lord, we did herd among
thy People, we forsook the profain and wicked World; and carried our shining
Lamps before us in the face of all men: Lord, Lord, open to us. Mat. 7. 21, 22,
23. Luke 13. 24, 25, 26, 27. Mat. 25. 1, 2. 10, 11.

And all the while they are thus pleading, and speaking for themselves: behold,
how earnestly they groan, how ghastly they look, and how now the brinish tears
flow down like Rivers from their eyes, ever re-doubling their Petition, Lord,
Lord, Lord, Lord: first thinking of this thing, and then of that, ever
contending, seeking, and striving to enter in at this strait Gate. As Christ
says, When once the Masters of the House is risen up, that is, when Christ
has laid aside his mediation for sinners, and has taken upon him only to
judge and condemn: then will the wicked begin to stand without, and to knock
and contend, for a portion among them that are the blessed. Ah how will their
hearts twitter, while they look upon the Kingdom of Glory! and how will they
ache and throb at every view of Hell, their proper place! still crying, O that
we might inherit life, and O that we might escape eternal death!

But now to take away al^ cavils and objections, that of this nature will
arise, The Book of Life opened.
in the hearts of these men: forthwith the Book of Life is brought ou^ for a
conclusion, and a final end of eternal Judgment. As John says, The Books
were opened, and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life, and the
Dead were judg^^ out of those things that were written in the Books, according
to their works. Rev. 20. 12.

But this Book of Life, it is not at this time opened, because there are not
any godly to be tried; for as I have showed before, their Judgment is past, and
over, before the wicked rise. The Book of Life then, it is now opened for
further conviction of damned Reprobates, that their mouths may be stoped for
ever, as touching all their cavils, contendings and Arguments against Gods
proceeding in Judgment with them. For believe it, while God is judging them,
they will fall to judging him again, but he will be justified in his sayings,
and will overcome when he is judged at this day. Romans 3. 1, 2, 3* 4, 5, 6. Yet
not by a hasty and and angry casting them away, but by a legal and convincing
proceeding against them, and overthrowing all their cavils, by his manifest and
invincible truth. Wherefore, to cut off all that they can say, he will now open
the Book of Life before them, and will show them what is written therein, both
as to Election, Conversion, and a truly Gospel-Conversation. And will convince
them, that they neither are of the number of his Elect, neither were they ever
regenerate, neither had they ever a truly Gospel-Conversation in (...) World.

By these three things then, out of this Book, thou, who art not saved, must at
last be judged, and overcome.

First, Here will be tried, whether thou art within that part of this Book,
wherein all the Elect are Recorded; for all the Elect are written here, as
Christ says, Rejoice, that your names are written in Heaven; And again, in thy
Book, says he to his Father, are all my members written, Luke 10. 20. Psalm.
139. 16. Heb, 12. 22, 23.

Now then, if thy name be not found, either among the Prophets, Apostles, or
the rest of Saints, thou must be put by, as one that is cast away, as one
polluted, and as an abominable branch. Isa. 14. 18, 19. Thy name is wanting in
the Genealogies, and Rolls of Heaven. Ezra 2. 62. Thou art not pricked for
everlasting life, therefore thou must not be delivered from that Soul-amazing
misery; for there are no Souls can, though they would give a thousand Worlds,
be delivered at the day of God, but such that are found written in this Book.
Every one of those that are written, though never a one of those that are not
written shall in that day be delivered from the wrath to come. Dan. 12. 1.

But, O methinks, with what careful hearts will* the damned now begin to look
for their names in this Book? Those that, when once the long suffering of God
waited on them, made light of all admonition, and slighted the Counsel of
making their Calling and Election sure: would now give thousands of Treasures,
that they could but spy their names, though last and least among the Sons of
God* but I say, how will they fail? how will they faint? how will they die and
languish in their Souls? when they shall still as they look, see their names
wanting. What a pinch will it be to Cain, to see his Brother there Recorded,
and he himself left out. Absalon will now sound, and be as one that gives up
the Ghost, when he shall see David his Father, and Solomon his Brother written
here, while he with all is written in the Earth, among the damned? Thus I say,
will sadness be added to sadness, in the Soul of the perishing World, when they
fail of finding their names in this part of the Book of the life of the Lamb,
slain from the foundation of the World. Rev. 13. 8.

Secondly, The second part of this Book, is that in which is Recorded, the
nature of Conversion, of Faith, Love, etc. And those that have not had the
effectual Word of God upon them, and the true and saving operation of Grace in
their hearts, which is indeed the true life which is begun in every Christian,
they will be found still not written in this Book; for the living, the holy
living Souls, are they only that are written therein: as the Prophet says,
And he that remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that
is written among the living in Jerusalem. Isa. 4. 3. Eternal life is already in
this life, begun in every Soul that shall be saved, as Christ says, He that
believes in me, has everlasting life. And again, Who so eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
Joh. 6. 54. And hence they a^e called the living* that are written in this
Book. Here then the Lord will open before thee, what Conversion is, in the true
and simple nature of it, which where thou beholdest, thou will then be
convinced, that this thou have mist of; for it must needs be, that when thou
beholdest by the Records of Heaven, what a change. what a turn; what an
alteration the work of Regeneration makes on every Soul, and in every heart,
where the effectual Call, or the Call according to his purpose, is, that thou
who have lived a stranger to this, or that have contented thy self with the
notion only, or a formal, and feigned profession thereef: I say, it cannot be,
but that thou must forthwith fall down, and with grief conclude, that thou have
no share in this part of the Book of Life neither, the living only, are
written herein. There is not one dead, carnal, wicked man recorded here. No,
but when the Lord shall at this day make mention of Rah^b, of Babylon, of
Philistia, and Ethiopia: that is, of all the cursed ^abble and crew of the
damned: then he will say, that this man was born there, that is amongst them,
and so has his name where they have theirs; namely, under the black Rod, in
the Kings black Book, where he has Recorded all his Enemies and Traitors. It
shall be said of this man, of this ungodly man, that he was born there. Psalm.
87. 4. That he lived and dyed in the state of nature, and so under the curse of
God, even as others; for as he said of wicked Coniah, Jer. 22. 30. Write this
man childless: so he says, of every ungodly man that so departs out of this
World, Write this man Graceless. Wherefore, I say, among the Babylonians, and
Phylistians; among the unbelieving Moors and Pagans, his name will be found in
the day when it will be inquired where every man was born; for God at this day,
will divide the whole World into these two Ranks, the Children of the World,
and the Children of Zion. Wherefore, here is the honor, the privilege, and
advantage that the Godly above the wicked, will have at the day of their
counting, When the Lord makes mention of Zion, it shall be then acknowledged,
that this and that (good) man was born in her, the Lord shall count, says the
Prophet, when he wrighteth up the People, that this man was born there. Psalm.
87. 5, 6.

This man had the work of Conversion of Faith, and Grace i^ his Soul. This man
(...) Child of Zion of the Heavenly Jerusalem* which is also written in Heaven*
Blessed is the People, that are in such a case Gal. 4* 26* Heb* 12. 22, 23.
Psalm. 144. 1^^*

But poor Soul, Counters will not go for Gold now; for though so long as thou
did judge thy self by the crooked rule of thy own reason, fancy, and
affection, thou wast pure in thy own eyes: yet ^ow thou must be judged alone,
by the words and rule of the Lord Jesus. Which word shall not now, as in times
past, be wrested and wrung, both* this way and that to smooth thee up in thy
Hypocrites hope, and carnal confidence; but be thou King, or Keser, be thou
who thou will, the Word of Christ, and that with this interpretation only, It
shall judge thee in the last day. Joh. 12. 44.

Now will sinners begin to cry with loud and bitter cries, Oh! ten thousand
Worlds for a saving work of Grace, Crowns and Kingdoms for the least measure of
saving Faith, and for the love, that Christ will say, is the love of his own
Spirit.

Now they will begin also to see the work of a broken and a contrite spirit,
and of walking with God, as living (...), in this World. But alas, these things
appear in their hearts, to the damned too late; as also do all things else.
This will be but like the repentance of the Thief, about whose neck is the
^alter, and he turning off the ladder; for the unfortunate hap of the damned
will be, that the glory of Heavenly things will not appear to them, till out of
season. Christ must now indeed be showed to them; as also the true nature of
Faith, and all Grace; but it will be, when the door is shut, and mercy gone:
they will pray, and repent most earnestly; but it will be in the time of great
Waters of the floods of eternal wrath, when they cannot come nigh him. 1 Timothy
6. 15. Matthew. 25. 10, 11. Psalm. 32. 6.

Well then, tell me sinner, if Christ should now come to judge the World, can
thou abide the trial of the Book of Life? Art thou confident that thy
Profession, that thy Conversion, thy Faith, and all other Graces, thou think
thou have, will prove Gold, Silver, and precious Stones in this day? behold, he
comes as a Refiners fire, and as Full^rs Soap, shall thou indeed abide the
melting and washing of this day? Examine, I say, before hand, and try thy self
unfeignedly; for every one that does truth, comes to the light, that their
deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. Joh. 3. 21.

Thou say thou art a Christian, that also thou have repented, do believe,
and love the Lord Jesus; but the question is, whether these things will be
found of equal length, height, and breadth with the Book of Life. Or whether,
when thou art weighed in the balance, thou will yet be found wanting. Dan. 5.
27. How, if when thou come to speak for thy self before God, thou should
say Siboleth, instead of Shiboleth: that is, though almost, yet not rightly,
and naturally the Language of the Christians. Judge. 12. 4* 5, 6.

If thou miss but one letter in thy evidence, thou art gone; for though thou
may deceive thy own heart with Brass, instead of Gold, and with Tin instead
of Silver: Gal. 6. 7. yet God will not be so put off. You know how confident
the foolish Virgins were, and yet how they were deceived. They herded with the
Saints, they went forth from the gross pollutions of the World, they, every one
had shining Lamps, and all went forth to meet the Bridegroom, and yet they mist
the Kingdom. They were not written among the living in Jerusalem; they had not
the true, powerful, saving work of Conversion, of Faith, and Grace in their
Souls, they that are foolish, take their Lamps, but take no Oil, no saving
Grace with them. Mat. 25. 1, 2, 3, 4. Thus you see how sinners will be put to
it before the Judgment Seat, from these two parts of this Book of Life. But

Thirdly, There is yet another part of this Book to be opened, and that is,
that part of it, in which is Recorded those noble and Christian acts, that they
have done since the time of their Conversion, and turning to Christ. Here I
say, is Recorded the Testimony of the Saints against sin and Antichrist; their
suffering for the sake of God, their love to the members of Christ, their
patience under the Cross, and their faithful frequenting the Assemblies of the
Saints, and their encouraging one another to bear up in his ways in the worst
of times; even when the proud was called happy, and when they that wrought
wickedness were even set up. As he there says, Then they that feared the Lord,
spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of
Rememrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his Name. Mat. 3. 14, 15, 16.

For indeed, as truly as any person has his name found in the first part of
this Book of Life, and his Conversion in the second: so there is a third part,
in which there is his noble spiritual and holy actions Recorded, and set down.
As it is said by the Spirit, to John, concerning those that suffered Martyrdom
for the truth of Jesus, Write, blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, yea
says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works follow
them. Rev. 14. 13.

And hence it is, that the labors of the Saints, and the Book of Life, are
mentioned together, signifying, that the travels, and labors, and acts of the
godly, are Recorded therein. Phil. 4. 3.

And hence it is again, that the Lord does tell Sardis, that those among them
that stood it out to the last gasp, in the Faith and Love of the Gospel, should
not be blotted out of the Book of Life; but they, with the work of God, on
their Soul, and their labor for God in this World: should be confessed before
his Father, and before his Angels. Rev. 3. 5.

This part of this Book, is in another place, called, The Book of the Word of
the Lord, because in it, I say is Recorded those famous acts of the Saints,
against the World, flesh, and the Devil. Numb. 21. 14.

You find also, how exact the Holy Ghost is, in Recording the travels, pains,
labor, and goodness of any of the Children of Israel, in their Journey from
Egypt to Canaan, which was a Representation of the Travels of the Saints, from
nature to Grace, and from Grace to Glory. King Ahasuerus, kept in his Library a
Book of Records, wherein was w^it, the good Service that his Subjects did for
him at any time, which was a Type also of the manner and order of Heaven. And
as sure as ever Mordecai, when search was made in the Rolls, was found there to
have done such and such service for the King, and his Kingdom: Esth. 6. 1. 2.
so surely will it be found, what every Saint has done for God, at the day of
inquiry. You find in the Old Testament also, still as any of the Kings of Judah
dyed, there was surely a Record in the Book of Chronicles, of their memorable
acts and doings for their God, the Church, and the Commonwealth of Israel,
which still does further hold forth unto the Children of men, this very thing,
That all the Kings of the New Testament, which are the Saints of God, have all
their acts, and what they have done for their God* etc. Recorded in the Book of
Chronicles, in the Heavenly Jerusalem.

Now I say, when this part of the Book of Life shall be opened, what can be
found in it, of the good deeds, and Heaven-born actions of wicked men? Just
nothing; for as it is not to be expected, that Thorns should bring forth
Grapes, or that Thistles should bear as Figs: so it cannot be imagined, that
ungodly men should have any thing to their Commendations, Recorded in this part
of the Book of Life. What have thou done man, for God, in this World? Art thou
one of them that have set thy self against those strong struglings of pride,
lust, covetousness, and secret wickedness, that remain in thy heart, like Job
and Paul, Job 1. 8* 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

2. And do these struglings against these things, arise from pure love to the
Lord Jesus, or from some legal terrors and conviction for sin? Gal. 5, 6.

3. Do thou I say, struggle against thy lusts, because thou do in truth,
love the sweet, holy, and blessed leadings of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, its
leadings of thee I say, into his blood and death, for thy Justification, and
deliverance from wrath to com^ Phil. 3. 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 5. 14.

4. What acts of self-denial, have thou done for the name of the Lord Jesus,
among the Sons of men? I say, what house, what friend, what Wife, what
Children, and the like, have thou lost, or left, for the Word of God, and the
Testimony of his truth in the World. Matthew. 19. 27, 28. Revel. 12. 10, 11.

5. Wast thou one of them, that did sigh, and afflict thy self for the
abominations of the times? and that Christ has marked, and Recorded for such a
one? Ezekiel. 9. 3, 4. Zeph. 3. 18.

6. In a word, Art thou one of them, that would not be won, by neither fear,
frowns, nor flatteries, to forsake the ways of God, or wrong thy Conscience?
or art thou one of them that slightest those opportunities, that Satan and this
World did often give thee to return to sin in secret. Heb. 11. 14, 15. These be
the men whose praise is in the Gospel; and whose commendable and worthy acts,
are Recorded before the Judge of all the World. Alas, alas, these things are
strange things to a carnal and wicked man. Nothing of this has bin done by him
in this life, and therefore how can any such be Recorded for him in the Book of
Life: wherefore he must needs be shut out of this part also. As David says,
Let them be blotted out of the Book of the living, and not be written with the
Righteous. Psalm. 69. 28.

Thus I say, the wicked will find nothing for their comfort, either in the
first part of this book, where all the names of the Elect are, neither will
they find any thing in the second part thereof, where is recorded the true
nature and operation of effectual Conversion, of Faith, or Love, or the like;
and I say, neither can any thing be found in this third part, wherein is
recorded the worthy acts, and memorable deeds of the Saints of the Lord Jesus.
Thus when Christ therefore has opened before them this book of life, and
convinced the ungodly at this day out of it; he will then shut it up again,
saying, I find nothing herein that will do you good, you are none of my Elect,
you are the sons of perdition: For as these things will be found clear and full
in the book of life, so they will be found effectually wrought in the hearts of
the Elect, all whose conversion and perseverance shall now be opened before ^hy
eyes, as a witness, I say, of the truth of what thou here see opened before
thee, and also of thy unregenerate estate: Now thou will see what a turn, what
a change, and what a clinging to God, to Christ, and his Word and ways; there
was found in the Souls of the saved ones! here shall be seen also how
resolvedly, unfeignedly, and heartily the true child of God did oppose, resist,
and war against his most dearest and darling lusts and corruptions: now the
Saints are hidden ones, but then they shall be manifest, this is the morrow in
which the Lord will show who are his, and who they are that fear the Lord, and
who that fear him not, Psalm. 83. 3. Sam. 8. 19. Numb. 16. 5. Mal. 3. 18. Now,
you shall see how Abraham left his Country, how close good Lot did stick to God
in profane and wicked Sodom; Heb. 11. 8. 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. Mat. 19. 29. how the
Apostles left all to fo^low Jesus Christ, and how patiently they took all
crosses, afflictions, persecutions, and necessities for the Kingdom of Heavens
s^ke; how they endured burning, starving, stoning, hanging, and a thousand
calamities; how they manifested their love to their Lord, his Cause and people
in the worst of times, and in the days when they were most rejected, slighted,
abused, and abased, then shall the King say to them on his right hand (and that
when all the Devils and damned sinners stand by) Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World* (you
are indeed the truly converted Souls, as appears by the grace that was in your
hearts) For I was an hungered, and you gave me meat:! was thirsty, and you gave
me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was
sick, and you visited me; and in Prison, and you came unto me, Matthew. 25. 34,
35, 36. you owned me, stood by me, and denied your selves to nourish me and my
poor members, in our low, and weak, and most despised condition. This, I say,
the World shall see, hear, and be witnesses of, against themselves and their
Souls for ever; for how can it be, but these poor damned sinners should be
forced to confess, that they were both Christless and Graceless, when they
shall find, both in the book of life, and in the hearts of the holy and beloved
Souls, that which themselves are quite barren of, and greatest strangers to.
The Saints, by the fruits of Regeneration, even in this World, do testify to
the World, not only the truth of conversion in themselves, but also that they
are yet Christless, and so heavenless, and salvationless, that are not
converted, 1 Timothy 6. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 2 Timothy 2. 2. But alas, while we are
here, they will evade this testimony, both of our happiness, by calling our
Faith, fantacy; our communion with God, delusion; and the sincere profession of
his Word before the World, hypocrisy, pride, and arrogance: yet, I say, when
they see us on the right hand of Christ, commingled among the Angels of light,
and themselves on his left hand, and commingled with the Angels of darkness;
and, I say, when they shall see our hearts and ways opened before their eyes,
and owned by the Judge for honest hearts, and good ways, and yet the same ways
that they hated, slighted, disowned and contemned; what will they, or what can
they say, but thus, We fools counted their lives madness, and their end to be
without honor, but how are they numbered with the Saints, and owned by God and
Christ.

And truly, was it not that the world might, by seeing the turn that is wrought
on the godly at their Conversion, be convinced of the evil of their ways, or
be left without excuse the more in the day of God (with some other reasons)
they should not, I am persuaded, stay so long from Heaven as they do, nor
undergo so much abuse and hardship as frequently befalls them. God, by the
lengthening out the life of his people that are scattered here and there among
men in this world, is making work for the day of Judgment, and the overthrow of
the implacable, for ever and ever, and, as I have said, will by the Conversion,
life, patience, self-denial, and heavenly mindedness of his dear children, give
them a heavy and most dreadful blow. Now When God has thus laid open the work
of Grace, both by the boo^ of life, and the Christians heart; then, of (...)
self, will fall to the ground, their pleading what gifts and abilities they had
in this world, they will now see that gifts, and grace, are two things; and
also, that whosoever is graceless, let their gifts be never so excellent, they
must perish and be lost for ever: wherefore for all their gifts, they shall be
found the workers of iniquity, and shall so be judged and condemned, Matthew. 7.
22, 23. That is a notable place in the Prophecy of Ezekiel, Thus says the
Lord, says he, If the Prince (the Prince of life) give a gift to any of his
sons, that is, to any that are truly gracious, the inheritance, o^ the profit
that he gets thereby, shall be his sons; that is, for the exercise of his gift,
he shall receive a reward; but if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of
his servants, (that is not a son) then it shall be his (but) to the year of
liberty* after it shall return to the Prince, etc. Ezekiel. 46. 16, 17. This day
of liberty, it is now, when the Judge is set upon the throne to Judgment, even
the glorious liberty of the children of God, Romans 8. 21. wherefore then will
Christ say to them that stand by, Take from him the pound, and give it to him
that has ten p^unds, this servant must not abide in the house for ever, though
with the son it shall be so, Joh. 8. 35. Luke 19. 24. A man may be used as a
servant in the Church of God, and may receive many gifts, and much knowledge of
the things of heaven, and yet at last, himself be no more than a very bubble
and nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3.

But now I say, at this day, they shall clearly see the difference between
gifts and grace, even as clearly, as now they that have eyes can see the
difference between gifts and ignorance, and very foolishness: This our day does
indeed abound with gifts; many sparkling wits are seen in every corner, men
have the Word and truths of Christ at their fingers ends; but alas, with many,
yea, a great many, there is naught but wits and gifts, they are but words, all
their Religion lies in their tongues and heads, the power of what they say and
know, it is seen in others, not in themselves: these are like the Lord on whom
the King of Israel leaned, they shall see the plenty, the blessed plenty that
God does provide, and will bestow upon his Church, but they shall not taste
thereof, 2 Kings 7. 17, 18, 19, 20.

Before I conclude this matter, observe, that among all the objections and
cavils that are made, and will be made, by the ungodly, in the day of the Lord
Jesus, they have not one hump about election and reprobation, they murmur not
at all that they were not predestined to eternal life; and the reason is,
because then they shall see, though now they are blind, that God could in his
Prerogative Royal, without prejudice to them that are damned, choose and refuse
at pleasure; and besides, they at that day shall be convinced, that the^e was
so much reality, and downright willingness in God, in every tender of Grace and
mercy, to the worst of men; and also so much goodness, justness, and
reasonableness in every command of the Gospel of grace, which they were so
often entreated and beseeched to embrace, that they will be drowned in the
conviction of this, that they did refuse love, grace, reason, etc. love, I say,
for hatred, grace for sin, and things reasonable, for things unreasonable and
vain. Now they shall see they left glory for shame, God for the Devil, heaven
for hell, light for darkness. Now they shall see, that though they made
themselves beasts, yet God made the^ reasonable Creatures, and that he did with
reason expect that they should have adhered to, and have delighted in, things
that are good, and according to God: yea, now they shall see, that though God
did not determine to bring them to Heaven against their hearts and wills, and
the love that they had to their sins: yet then they shall be convinced, that
God was far from infusing any thing into their Souls, that should in the least
hinder, weaken, obstruct, or let them in seeking the welfare of their Souls.
Now men will tattle and prattle at a mad ra^e, about election and reprobation,
and conclude, that because all are not elected, therefore God is to blame that
any are damned: but then they will see, that they are not damned because they
were not elected, but because they sinned, and also that they sinned, not
because God put any weakness into their Souls, but because they gave way, and
that wilfully, knowingly, and desperately, to Satan and his suggestions; and so
turned away from the holy Commandment delivered unto them; yea, then they will
see, that though God at sometimes did fasten his cords about your heads, and
heels, and hands, both by godly education, and smarting convictions: yet you
rusht away with violence from all, saying, Let us break these bonds asunder,
and cast their cords from us. Psalm. 2. 1, 2, 3. God will be justified in his
sayings, and clear when he judges; though thy proud ignorance thinks to have,
and to multiply, cavills against him, Psalm. 51. 4.

But secondly, as the whole body of the Elect, by the nature of conversion in
their hearts, shall witness a non-conversion in the hearts of the wicked; and
as the ungodly shall fall under the conviction of this cloud of Witnesses. So
to increase their conviction, there will also be opened before them all the
labors of the godly, both Ministers and others, and the pains that they have
taken, to save, if it had been possible, these damned wretches; and now will it
come burning hot upon their Souls, how often they were forewarned of this day;
now they shall see, that there was never any Quarter Sessions, nor general
Jail-delivery more publicly foretold of, then this day. You know that the
Judges, before they begin their Assizes, do give to the Country in Charge,
That they take heed to the Laws and Statutes of the King: Why R^bel, thou shall
be at this day convicted, that every sermon thou have heard, and that every
serious debate thou have bin at about the things of God, and Laws of eternity,
they were to thee as the Judges Charge before the Assizes and Judgment began.
Every exhortation of every Minister of God, it is as that which Paul gave to
Timothy, and commanded hi^ to give in charge to others: I charge thee before
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, says he that thou
observe these things, and again, I give thee charge in the sight of God, who
quickneth all things, and before Jesus Christ, who before Pon^us P^la^e
witnessed a go^d confession, that thou keep this Commandment without spot,
unrebukable, until the appearing of Jesus Christ; these things give in charge,
says he, that they may be blameless, 1 Timothy 3. 21. and c. 6. v. 13. This, I
say, have thou heard, and seen, and yet thou have not held fast, but have cast
away the things that thou have heard, and have bin warned of; alas, God will
multiply his Witnesses against thee.

1. Thy own Vows and Promises shall be a Witness against thee, that thou have,
contrary to thy light and knowledge, destroyed thy Soul, as Joshuah said to the
children of Israel, when they said the Lord should be their God. Well, says
he, Ye are Witnesses against your selves, that ye have chosen the Lord to serve
him; that is, if now you turn back again, even this Covenant and resolution of
yours will in the great day be a witness against you, and they said, we are
witnesses, Jos. 24. 20, 21, 22.

2. Every time you have with your mouth said well of godliness, and yet gone on
in wickedness; or every time you have condemned sin in others, and yet have not
refrained it your selves; I say, every such word and conclusion that has
passed out of thy mouth, sinner, it shall be as a witness against thee in the
day of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, as Christ says, Matthew. 12. 36, 37. By
thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. I
observe, that talk with who you will, they will with their mouth, say, serving
of God, and loving of Christ, and walking in ways of holiness is best, and
best will come of it. I observe again, that men that are grossly wicked
themselves, will yet, with heavy censures and Judgments, condemn drunkenness,
lying, covetousness, pride, and whoring, with all manner of abominations in
others; and yet, in the mean time, continue to be neglectors of God, and
imbracers of sin and the allurements of the flesh themselves. Why such souls,
every time they speak well of godliness, and continue in their sins; they do
pass Judgment upon themselves, and provide a witness, even their own mouth,
against their own Soul, at the Judgment seat; Out of thy own mouth, says
Christ, will I judge thee thou wicked servant; thou knew what I was, and that
I loved to see all my servants zealous, and active for me, that at my coming,
I might have received again what I gave thee with increase: thou ought
therefore to have bin busying thy self in my work for my glory, and thy own
good, but seeing thou have, against thy own light, and mouth, gone contrary;
Angels, take this unprofitable servant, and cast ye him into utter darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; he sinned against his light, he
shall go to hell against his will, Matthew. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.

The very same I say, will befall all those that have used their mouth to
condemn the sins of others, while they themselves live in their sins. Says
God, O thou wicked wretch, thou did know that sin was bad, thou did condemn
it in others; thou did also condemn, and pass Judgment upon them for their
sin, Thou art therefore inexcusable, a man, whosoever thou art, that have thus
Judged; for thou that judge, do the same thing: Wherefore, wherein thou
have judged another, thou have condemned thy self. I must therefore, says
Christ, look upon thee to be no other but a sinner against thy own mouth, and
cannot but judge thee as a despiser of my goodness, and the riches of my
forbearance; by which means, thou have treasured up wrath against this day of
wrath, and Revellation of the Righteous Judgment of God, He that knows to do
good, and does it not, to him it is sin. Romans 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Thus will God,
I say, judge and condemn poor sinners, even from and by themselves, to the
fire, that Lake of Brimstone and fire.

Thirdly, God has said in his Word, that rather then there shall want witness
at the day of Judgment, against the works of iniquity: The very dust of their
City, that shall cleave to his Messengers that publish the Gospel, shall it
self be a witness against them; and so Christ bid his Servants say, into
whatsoever City, ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the
streets of the same, and say, even the very dust of your City, which cleaves
to us, we do wipe off against you, etc. But I say unto you, says he to his
Ministers, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom at the Judgment, then for that
City. Luke 10. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

It may be, that when thou hear that the dust of the street, (that cleaves
to a Minister of the Gospel, while thou rejectest his word of Salvation) shall
be a witness against thee at the day of Judgment: though wilt be apt to laugh,
and say, the dust a Witness! Witnesses will be scarce where dust is forced to
come in to plead against a man. Well sinner, mock not, God does use to confound
the great and mighty, by things that are not, and that are despised. And how
say thou? if God had said by a Prophet to Pharaoh, but two years before the
Plague, that he would shortly come against him with one Army of Lice, and a
second Army of Frogs, and with a third Army of Locusts, etc. and would destroy
his Land; do thou think it had bin wisdom in Pharaoh, now to have laughed
such tidings to scorn? Is any thing to hard for the Lord? has he said it, and
shall he not bring it to pass? You shall see, in the day of Judgment, of what
force all these things will be, as witnesses against the ungodly.

Many more witnesses might I here reckon up, but these at this time shall
suffice to be nominated; for out of the mouth of two or three witnesses, every
word shall be established. And at the mouth of two or three Witnesses, shall he
that is worthy of death, be put to death. 2 Cor. 13. 1. Deuteronomy. 17. 6. Joh. 8. 17.

Thus then the Books being opened, the Laws read, the witnesses heard, and the
ungodly convicted: forthwith the Lord and Judge proceeds to execution. And to
that end, does pass the sentence of eternal death upon them, saying, Depart
from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. You are now by the Book of the Creatures, by the Book of Gods
Remembrance, by the Book of the Law, and by the Book of Life, adjudged guilty
of High Treason against God, and me; and as murderers of your own Souls. As
these faithful and true witnesses here have testified, every one of them
appearing in their most upright testimony against you. Also you never had a
saving work of Conversion, and faith, past upon you, you died in your sins;
neither can I find any thing in the last part of this Book that will serve your
turn, no worthy act is here Recorded of you. When I was an hungered, you gave me
no meat; When I was a thirsty, you gave me no drink; When I was a stranger, you
took me not in; I was naked, but ye clothed me not; I was sick and in prison,
but ye visited me not.

I have made a through search among the Records of the Living, and find nothing
of you, or of your deeds therein: Depart from me ye cursed, etc. Mat. 25. 41,
42, 43.

Thus will these poor ungodly Creatures be stripped of all hope and comfort, and
therefore must needs fall into great sadness and wailing, before the Judge;
yea, crying out, as being loath to let go all for lost, and even as the man
that is fallen into the River, will catch hold of any thing, when he is
struggling for life, though it tend to hold him faster under the water, to
drowned him. So, I say, while these poor Creatures, as they lie struggling and
twining under the ireful countenance of the Judge; they will bring out yet one
more faint and weak groan, and there goes life and all; their last sigh is
this, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and gave thee no meat? or when saw we
thee thirsty, and gave thee no drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took
thee not in? or naked, and clothed thee not? or when wast thou sick, or in
prison, and we did not minister unto thee? Mat. 25. 44.

Thus you see, how loath the sinner is now to take a Nay of life everlasting.
He that once would not be persuaded to close with the Lord Jesus, though one
should have persuaded him with tears of blood: behold how fast he now hangs
about the Lord, what Arguments he frames with mournful groans; how with shifts
and words, he seeks to gain the time, and to defer the execution; Matthew. 25.
10, 11. Lord open unto us! Lord, Lord, open unto us! Lord, thou have taught in
our streets, and we have both taught in thy name, and in thy name have we cast
out Devils. Mat. 7. 21, 22, 23. We have eat and drank in thy presence. And
when did we see thee an hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick,
or in prison, and did not minister to thee? Luke 13. 25, 26, 27, 28. O poor
hearts, how loath? how unwillingly do they turn away from Christ? how loath are
they to partake of the fruit of their ungodly doings? Christ must say, depart
once, and depart twice, before they will depart. When he has shut the door
upon them, yet they knock, and cry, Lord open unto us; when he has given them
their answer, that he knows them not, yet they plead and mourn. Wherefore, he
is fain to answer again, I tell you, I know you not whence you are, depart.
Luke 13. 25, 26, 27.

Depart] O this word, depart! how dreadful is it? with what weight will it fall
on the head of every condemned sinner! for you must note, that while the
ungodly stand thus before the Judge: they cannot choose but have a most famous
view, both of the Kingdom of Heaven, and of the damned wights in Hell. Now they
see the God of Glory, the King of Glory, the Saints of Glory, and the Angels of
Glory; and the Kingdom in which they have their eternal abode. Now, they also
begin to see the worth of Christ, and what it is to be miled upon by him; from
all which they must depart, and as I say, they shall have the view of this, so
they will most famously behold ^he pit, the bottomless pit, the fire, the
Brimstone, and the flaming beds that Justice has prep^red for them of old.
Jud. 4. Their Associates also, will be very co^spicuous, and clear before their
watery eyes. They will see now, what and which are Devils, and who are damned
Souls; now their great Grandfather Cain, and all his brood, with Judas and his
Companions, must be their fellow-sighers in the flames and pangs for ever. O
heavy day! O heavy Word!

This word [ depart] therefore, it looks two ways, and commands the damned
to do so too. Depart from Heaven, depart to Hell: depart from life, depart to
death: depart from me] now the Ladder does turn from under them in deed. The
Savior turns them off, the Savior throws them down. He has given him
authority to execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of man. Joh. 5. 27.
Depart from me. I would come to have done you good; but then you would not: now
then, though you would have it never so willingly, yet you shall not.

Depart from me ye Cursed] You lie open to the stroke of Justice for your sins;
ye forsaken, and left off God, ye Vessels of wrath, ye despisers of God and
goodness. You must now have vengeance feed on you; for you did, when you were
in the World, feed on sin, and treasure up wrath against this day of wrath, and
Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. Romans 2, 3, 4, 5* 6.

Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire.] Fire is that which of all things is
the most insufferable, and insupportable. Wherefore, by fire, is showed the
grievous state of the ungodly, after Judgment. Who can eat fire, drink fire,
and ly down in the midst of flames of fire? yet this must the wicked do. Again,
not only fire, but everlasting fire. Behold how great a fire a little matter
kindles. A little sin, a little pleasure, a little unjust dealing and doing:
what preparation is made for the punishment thereof. And hence it is, that the
fire into which the damned f^ll, is called the Lake, or Sea of fire. And
whosoever, says John, was not found written in the Ro^k of Life, was cast into
the Lake of fire and Brimstone. Revel. 20. 15. Little did the sinner seriously
think, that when he was sinning against God, he was making such provision for
his poor Soul; but now it is to late to repent, his worm must never die, and his
fire never shall be quenched. Mark 9. 49. Though the time in which men commit
sin, is short, yet the time of Gods punishing of them for their sin, is long.

Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels.] In that he says, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: he insinuates
a further conviction upon the Consciences of the damned. As if he had said, as
for this fire and Lake that you must go to, though you thought but little of
it, because you were careless, yet I did betimes, put you in mind of what would
be the fruits of sin, even by preparing of this Judgment for the Devil and his
Angels. The Devil in his Creation, is far more noble then you, yet when he
sinned, I spared him not. He sinned also before man and I, upon his sinning,
did cast him down from Heaven to Hell, and did hang the Chains of everlasting
darkness upon him, which might, yea, ought to have bin a fair item to you to
take heed; but you would not. Jud. 6. Genesis 31. 2, 3, 4, 5. Rev. 20. 1.
Wherefore, seeing you have sinned as he has done, and that too, after he had
both sinned, and was bound over to eternal punishment: the same Justice that
lays hold on these more noble Creatures, must surely seize on you. The World
should be convinced of Judgment then, because the Prince of the World is
judged. Joh. 6. 8, 9, 10. And that before they came to this condition of
hearing the eternal sentence rattle in their ears; but seeing they did not
regard it then, they must and shall feel the smart of it now. Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

God would have men learn both what mercy and Justice is to them, by his
showing it to others; but if they be sottish and careless in the day of
forbearance, they must learn by smarting in the day of rebukes, and vengeance.
Thus it was with the old World, God gave them one hundred and twenty years
warning, by the preparation of Noah for the flood that should come; but for as
much as they then were careless, and would not consider the works of the Lord,
nor his threatening them by this preparation: therefore he brought in the flood
upon the World of the ungodly. As he does hear the last Judgment upon the
workers of iniquity, and sweep them all away in their wilful ignorance. Mat.
24. 37, 38, 39.

Wherefore I say, the Lord Chief Judge, by these words [ prepared for the
Devil and his Angels] does as good as say, this fire into which now I send
you, it did of it self, even in the preparation of it, (had you considered it)
forewarn you of this that now is come upon you. Hell fire is no new, or unheard
of thing, you cannot now plead, that you heard not of it in the Wo^ld, neither
could you with any reason judge, that seeing I prepared it for Angels, for
noble, powerful, and mighty Angels; that you poor dust and ashes should escape
the vengeance.

Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. The sentence being thus passed, it remains now, the work being
done, that every one goes to his eternal station. Wherefore, forthwith this
mighty Company, do now with heavy heart, return again from before the
Judgment Seat: and that full hastily, God knows, for their proper Center, is
the Hell of Hell; into which they descend like a stone into a Well, or like
Pharaoh into the bottom of the red Sea. Exodus 15. 10. For all hope being now
taken from them, they must needs fall with violence, into the Jaws of eternal
desperation, which will deal far worse with the souls of men, and make a
greater slaughter in their tortured consciences, then the Lions in the Den with
Daniel, could possibly do with the men that were cast in among them. Dan. 6. 24.

This is that which Paul calls Eternal Judgment, Heb. 6* 2. because it is
that which is last and final. Many are the Judgments that God does execute
among the Sons of Men, some after this manner, and some after that, diverse of
which, continue but for a while, and none of them are eternal, no, the very
Devils and damned spirits in Hell, though there is the longest and most
terrible of all the Judgments of God, yet on foot: yet I say, they must pass
under another Judgment, even this last, great and final Judgment. The Angels
that kept not their first state, but left their own Habitation, he has
reserved in everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the great
day. Jude 6. And so also it is with damned souls; for both Sodom and Gomorah,
with all other, though already in Hell in their souls: yet they must (as I have
before showed) all arise to this judgment, which will be their final
judgment. Other of the judgments of God, as they have an end, so the end of
many of them prove the profit of those on whom they are inflicted, being I say,
Gods Instruments of Conversion to sinners: and so may fitly be compared to
those petty judgments among men, as putting in the stocks, whipping, or
burning in the hand: which punishments, and judgments, do often prove
profitable to those that are punished with them; but eternal judgment, it is
like those more severe judgments among men, as beheading, shooting to death,
hanging, drawing, and quartering which soop all, even health, time, and the
like, and cut off all opportunity of good, leaving no place for mercy or
amendment: these shall go away into everlasting punishment, etc. Mat. 25. 40.
This word, depart, etc. is the last word the damned for ever are like to hear.
I say, it is the last voice, and therefore will stick longest, and with most
power on their slaughtered souls: there is no calling of it back again, it is
the very wind-up of Eternal Judgment.

Thus then, the judgment being over, the Kingdom cease to be any longer in
the hand of the Man Christ Jesus; for as the Judges here among men, when they
have gone their Circuit, do deliver up their Commission to the King: so Christ
the Judge, does now deliver up his Kingdom to his Father. And now all is
swallowed up of Eternity. Mat. 21. 8. The damned are swallowed up of eternal
justice and wrath; the saved, of eternal life and felicity; and the Son also
delivers up, I say, the Kingdom to the Father, and subjects himself under him
that did put all things under him, that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 24,
25, 26, 27, 28.

For now is the end come, and not before, even the end of the reign of death it
self; for Death, and Hell, and sinners, and Devils, must now together into the
Lake, that burns with fire and Brimstone. Rev. 20. 14, 15. And now is the end
of Christ's Reign, as the Son of Man, and the end of the Reign of the Saints,
with him in this his Kingdom, which he has received of his Father, for his
work sake, which he did for him, and for his Elect. Then comes the end faith
Paul, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God the Father: But when
shall that be? why, he answers, saying, When he shall have put down all Rule,
and all Authority and Power; for he must reign, says he, until he has put
all his enemies under his feet, ( which will not be, until the final Sentence
and Judgment be over;) for the last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death.
For God has put all things under his feet, but when he says, all things are
put under him: it is manifested, he is accepted, that did put all things under
him. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also
himself be subject to him, that did put all things under him, that God may be
all in all.

All things being now at this pass, to wit, every one being in its proper
place, God in his, Christ in his, the Saint in his, and the Sinner in his; I
shall conclude with this brief touch upon both the state of the Good and Bad
after this Eternal Judgment.

1. The Righteous now shall never fear Death, the Devil, and Hell more: And
the Wicked shall never hope of life.

2. The Just shall ever have the Victory over these things: But the Wicked
shall everlastingly be swallowed up of them.

3. The Holy shall be in everlasting Light: But the Sinner in everlasting
Darkness. Without light, I say, yet in Fire ever burning, yet not consumed,
always afraid of death and hell, vehemently desiring to be annihi^^ted to
nothing. Continually fearing to stay long in Hell, and yet certainly sure they
shall never come out of it. Ever desiring the Saints happiness, and yet always
envying their felicity. They would have it, because it is easy and
Comfortable; yet cannot abide to think of it, because they have lost it for
ever. Ever laden with the delight of sin: and yet that is the greatest
torture, always desiring to put it out of their Mind, and yet assuredly know
they must for ever abide the guilt and torment thereof.

4. The Saints are always inflamed with the Consideration of the Grace that
once they embraced: but the Wicked, most flamingly tormented with the thoughts
of rejecting and refusing it.

5. The Just, when they think of their sins, they are comforted with the
thoughts of their being delivered from them; but the Ungodly, when they think
of their righteousness, will gnaw themselves, to think that this would not
deliver them from Hell.

6. When the Godly think of Hell, it will increase their Comfort; but when the
Wicked think of Heaven, it will twinge them like a Serpent. Oh this Eternal
Judgment! What would a damned Soul give, that there might be, though after
Thousands and Hundreds of Thousands of Millions of Years, an end put to this
Eternal Judgment. But their misery is, they have sinned against a God that is
Eternal; they have offended that Justice that will never be satisfied; and
therefore they must abide the Fire that never shall be quenched. Here is
Judgment, Just, and Sad.

Again, As it will be thus with Good and Bad in general, so again, more
particularly, when the Wicked are thus adjudged and Condemned, and also
received of the Fiery Gulf; then they shall find, That as he that busieth
himself to do good, shall have more glory than others; So they that have been
more busy and active in sin than others, they shall have more Wrath and
Torment than others. For as doing good abundantly, does enlarge the Heart to
receive and hold more Glory; So doing evil abundantly, does enlarge the Heart
and Soul to receive Punishment so much the more. And hence it is that you have
such Sayings as these, It shall be more tolerable in the Judgment for Sodom,
than for others; that is, then for those that had sinned against much greater
Light and Mercy: For these, as he says in another place, shall receive greater
Damnation; Yea, it stands to reason, that he who had most Light, most
Conviction, most means of Conversion, and that was highest toward Heaven, he
must needs have the greatest Fall, and so sink deepest into the Jaws of Eternal
Misery, Luke 10. 12. Luke 20. 47. As one Star, that is, as one Saint, differs
from another in Heaven; so one damned Soul shall differ from another in Hell.
It is so among the Devils themselves, they are some worse than others: Matthew.
9. 34. Mar. 3. 22. Beelzebub is the Prince; or the Chief of the Devils; That is,
One that was most glorious in Heaven; Chief among the reprobate Angels before
his Fall, Isa. 14. 2. and therefore sinned against the greater Light, Mercy,
and Goodness: and so became the Chief for wickedness, and will also have as the
wages thereof, the Chief of Torments. For that will be true of the damned in
Hell, which is prayed for against Babylon. Revel. 18. 7. How much she has
glorified her self, and lived deliciously; so much torment and sorrow give her.
Can it be imagined, that Judas should have no more torment, who betrayed the
Prince of Life and Savior of the World, than others who never came near his
Wickedness by ten thousand degrees? He that know his Masters Will, and prepared
not himself, neither did according to his Will, shall be beaten with many
stripes. With many mo^e stripes, than others that through ignorance did commit
sin worthy of many stripes. But what should I thus discourse of the degrees of
the Torments of the damned Souls in Hell? For he that suffers least, will the
waters of a full Cup be wrung out to him. The least measure of wrath, it will
be the Wrath of God, eternal and fiery Wrath, insupportable wrath; it will lay
the Soul in the Gulf of that Second Death, which will for ever have the
Mastery over the poor damned perishing Sinner. And Death and Hell were cast
into the Lake of Fire: which is the Second Death. And whosoever was not found
in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of fire, Rev. 20. 14, 15.

FINIS.

