AN Expository COMMENT, DOCTRINAL, CONTROVERSAL AND PRACTICAL Upon the whole
First CHAPTER OF THE Second EPISTLE of St Paul TO THE Corinthians.

By Anthony Burgess Pastor of Sutton-Coldfield in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Abel Roper at the Sign of the Sun in
Fleetstreet, near St Dunstans Church, 1661.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
AMongst the several reasons, why there ought to be a special care and holy
diligence in writing of Books, these two are none of the least. First, A
difficulty of having pure and right intentions therein, even the Glory of God,
and the Edification of others. For as in Preaching, so in Printing; Pride,
Vainglory, and Self Ends are apt to creep in, whereby there is a temptation to
accumulate those things, which may be for ostentation, more than utility. And
Euge Bernarde, been scribis, may importunately press it self into the heart,
as well as benedicis. Insomuch that we are to look upon the time, wherein we
are preparing any thing for the public view, as the hour of temptation,
earnestly praying unto God for humility, mortification, and a public frame of
heart. For as Gregory once said, Tutius auditur veritas, quam praedicatur, The
Auditor is in more safety, while hearing, than the Preacher, while speaking,
because of the vain motions which are ready then to arise in the heart; so is
the Reader in less temptation than the Author of the Book. A second cause of
such exact watchfulness, is the difficulty of working those Truths in a
savoury experimental power, upon our own hearts, which we communicate to
others; whereby we may fear least while we write for others, we our selves be
(...), unapproved. Quid tibi proderit lingua aurea, si cor ferreum? What will
a Golden Tongue advantage, if a man have a senseless heart at that time? This
then is a cause of godly trembling, Ne illae literae vicariae oris nostri, in
die judicii, adversus nos proferantur, as Tertullian said; Least our writings
witness against us, as publishing those things, the experimental power whereof
we never felt upon our hearts. Such considerations as these may be apt to
deter from writing. For as for those ordinary and customary Apologies against
the severe Momusses, and sharp Aristarchusses of the world, they are
comparatively contemptible. But yet though there be these Lions in the way, we
are not through slothfulness to hide our talent in a napkin, but where
Opportunity offers it self, there to embrace (...), (...), for the
edification of others. And I know no way so conducible to the spiritual
advantage of others, as the Interpretation and Explication of the holy
Scriptures. Its a pleasant and profitable work to be digging gold out of this
mine, to adorn the Temple of God; to be cutting down timber out of this wood,
for Gods house; to be plucking off the leaves and fruit of this tree of life,
which are both medicinal and alimental. The Scripture is medicum myropolium, an
Apothecaries shop, whereby all the spiritual diseases of the soul may be cured.
It Is Bellicum armamentarium, a Magazine of war, by which all errors and
here^ies are to be destroyed. It is augustissimum sacrarium, a^most august
treasury of all spiritual good things. How much better then is it to be
gathering honey here, than to sting in polemical Controversies? To keep the
sweetness and the fatness we may enjoy here, than to be torn by these
brambles. Now among other parts of the Scripture, I have taken the second
Epistle of the Corinthians to comment upon, and practically improve, not only
because of the universal concernment of that excellent matter contained
therein, but also because there are few, who have selected that Epistle on
purpose to treat upon. So that whereas there are many Books of the Scripture
particularly expounded, and illustrated by several learned Authors, yet this
has been past by. Yea when the former Epistle has had its Commentators, as
Martyr, Pareus, Morton, yet this has been pretermitted. As therefore God shall
give life and opportunity, I shall endeavor the true and sound Exposition of
this Epistle, especially so as to reduce all Doctrinals and controversals to
practicals and experimentals, which is the life and soul of all. For to have
Books only in our heads, and not in our hearts, does bring (as Solomon says)
much weariness to the flesh; yea sometimes much detriment, as Gerson speaks
of a young man in his Tractate, De simplificatione cordis, who by an indiscreet
laboriousnesse in reading Anselm's Meditations, fell into such a bodily
distemper, that the very beholding of a Book, that was written, would
afterward put him into an horror and vertiginous giddiness. Thus worldly
reading (as I may so call it) causes death, but spiritual and godly improving
of the Books we peruse, will be like oil to the wheels, that the work of grace
may succeed more prosperously. I shall not trouble thee with an enumeration of
what different, and yet profitable matter, is treated on in this first Chapter
presented to thy view, that is done to thee by another hand in the Table or
Contents; only my request is, that the Errata, which may some times be
committed, and the rather, because of my distance from the Press, may not
prejudice the Discourse. And if in so long a Work, some things are spoken,
that required a more distinct Explication, and further Illustration (as happily
upon a Review may appear) cast this into the account of humane imbecility. For
if even great Pillars of the Church have acknowledged, that they did Scribendo
proficere; and, Docere, ut discant; how much more ought Tantillitas nostra,
being conscious of my own imbecility? It Is a true saying of Austins, speaking
of the imperfections of Readers and Writers, in his Epistle to Euodius Epist.
150. Laborant homines in discendo, and brevia non valent intelligere, prolixa
non amant legere: laborant itidem in docendo, qui and pauca tardis, and multa
pigris frustra ingerunt. However, let that which the Apostle says to these
Corinthians, be also truly applicable to us, That these things are not written
with ink only, but the Spirit of God; not in Books only, but in the flesbly
tables of our heart. So prays

The affectionate well-wisher of thy Souls good Anthony Burgess.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON. I. 2 Cor. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and
Timothy our brother, unto the Church of God, which is at Corinth, with all the
Saints which are in all Achaia. WHy our Savior is called Jesus Christ, and
Saul, Paul, who of a cruel Persecutor becomes a faithful Preacher of the
Gospel of Christ. Why God of great sinners often makes most eminent Saints.
SERMON. II. Learning an excellent gift of God, though through the corruption of
man, it is often made an Engine to promote the Kingdom of the Devil, yet by the
grace of God it is very useful in his Church. SERMON. III. Paul's Name being
prefixed to his Epistle, shows it to be of Divine Authority, though of it self
not a sufficient argument to prove it. The Penmen were only Instruments, God
the principal Author of the Scriptures, and therefore we should rest satisfied
with their style and method, and not question their Authority. How to arm our
selves against the Devil, and all Heretics opposing the Divinity of the
Scriptures. SERMON. IV. What an Apostle was. Christ in the building of his Church
used extraordinary Officers, but did not follow the Model of the Jewish
Government. What were the Properties and Qualifications of an Apostle. SERMON. V.
The Divine Call of Church Officers is clearly to be known, and faithfully to be
improved. What advantages will follow upon a true Call, both to the Officers
themselves, and the People. SERMON. VI. Of the proper and appellative Names of
our Savior, Jesus, and Christ. In what sense he is Jesus a Savior, and how
Christ the anointed of the Lord. SERMON. VII. Church Officers are appointed by
Christ, and all Church Power radically seated in him as King. What Duties
follow thence to be practiced by Church Officers and People. Some things are
highly esteemed in the Church, which are much despised by the world. SERMON.
VIII. In what sense Paul says of himself, He was an Apostle by the will of
God. Showing likewise how all Church-offices and Privileges, come merely from
the will and good pleasure of God. SERMON. IX. Paul's mentioning of Timothy,
shows, That the godly, though exalted above others in Office and Gifts, yet are
humble toward them. SERMON. X. There is a great deal of difference betwixt the
Persons whom God calls, and also in the manner of his calling them. Education
under godly Parents not to be rested upon, but our hearts are to be sought
into, whether they be really changed, or no. SERMON. XI. How much it concerns
Church Officers to agree in matters of Religion. What means may conduce to it.
Universities and Nurseries of Religion, of how great use they are to the Church
of Christ. SERMON. XII. Of the Name and Nature of a Church. SERMON. XIII.
Concerning the efficient, instrumental, formal, and final cause of a Church.
SERMON. XIV. Of the Notes and Signs of a true Church. SERMON. XV. Why Paul writes
to the Church, not the Churches of Corinth. What is implied in the Churches
being called the Church of God. SERMON. XVI. Of the City of Corinth. God
sometimes gathers a Church amongst the most profane people. A Church, though
many ways defiled, may be a Church still, as it was with the Corinthians.
SERMON. XVII. A further Discovery of the truth of this Assertion, that a Church
may be a true Church, though much defiled both in Doctrine and Manners. SERMON.
XVIII. The Pre-eminence of the Church of God above all Civil Societies. As
likewise concerning Paul's writing this second Epistle to the Corinthians; how
hard a thing it is for Churches to keep within their proper bounds; and what
great care Ministers ought to have, to use all means lawful to promote the
Churches, which they have relation to. SERMON. XIX. Of the Name and Nature of a
Church-Saint. SERMON. XX. External Holiness is not enough to bring us to Heaven,
without the inward renovation of the Heart. SERMON. XXI. Wherefore it is a
Christians Duty to join himself to Church-society; and in what cases he may be
excused. What are the false grounds why some neglect this Duty. The soul of the
poorest Saint is to be regarded, as well as of the richest. SERMON. XXII. 2 Cor.
1. 2. Grace be to you, and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ. How Grace and Peace, and such like spiritual Mercies and Privileges,
are to be desired before any temporal Mercies whatsoever. SERMON. XXIII. Of the
Name, Nature and Pre-eminence of the Grace of God above all other things. SERMON.
XXIV. Who are fit subjects to partake of the Grace of God. As likewise Rules
and Scripture-characters of the Grace of God, by which we may rightly
understand, and judge of it. SERMON. XXV. Of the Nature of true Gospel-peace, and
wherein it chiefly consists. SERMON. XXVI. A further Discovery of the Nature of
true Gospel-peace, with the Effects of it; and some Directions how to attain
it. SERMON. XXVII. Of the Names of God; it is he alone who can give Grace and
Peace to his People. He is a Father to all Believers, even the weakest as well
as the strongest. SERMON. XXVIII. Of the Dominion and Lordship of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. SERMON. XXIX. 2 Cor. 1. 3. Blessed be God, even the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort. Of
the Duty of Thankfulness, Blessing and Praising God for all his Mercies. SERMON.
XXX. Of Praising God, and that for all, but especially for spiritual Mercies.
SERMON. XXXI. How Christ is the Son of God: and how the consideration thereof
is the foundation of all a Christians comfort. SERMON. XXXII. How God is a
merciful Father, the Father of all mercies to his children. SERMON. XXXIII. Of
the mulitude, variety, properties and objects of Gods mercies. SERMON. XXXIV. How
God is the God of comfort, yea of all comfort and consolations to all those
that are his. SERMON. XXXV. Some Propositions clearing the Doctrine of Gods
mercy, from both Doctrinal and Practical Objections. SERMON. XXXVI. 2 Cor. 1. 4.
Who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them
which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted
of God. That God not only can, but does actually comfort his People, and how he
does it. SERMON. XXXVII. That Believers only are the Subjects of the comforts and
consolations of God. SERMON. XXXVIII. How God will comfort his People in all both
their spiritual and temporal Afflictions, which all the Art of Philosophy can
never do. SERMON. XXXIX. What are these Apples which Christ refreshes his Spouse
with? Or what are those Scripture-grounds of comfort, which support the hearts
of Gods children under all their afflictions. SERMON. XL. How God may be said to
comfort his children in all their tribulations, though many of them may live
very disconsolate. SERMON. XLI. The works of Gods Spirit upon his People, are not
only for their good, but likewise for the advantage of others. SERMON. XLII. That
those only can make fit applications of spiritual things to others, who have an
Experimental knowledge of them in their own souls. SERMON. XLIII. It is a special
Duty incumbent upon every one both Minister and Christian, to apply comforts to
the Afflicted in a right manner. SERMON. XLIV. That the same grounds of comfort,
which revive the hearts of one godly man, may do the same likewise to another.
SERMON. XLV. 2 Cor. 1. 5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
consolation abounds by Christ. The true and unfeigned owning of Christ, is
always accompanied with some, sometimes with great Afflictions. SERMON. XLVI.
The same Doctrine prosecuted, showing the Object for which Christians are to
suffer, if they would suffer for Christ. SERMON. XLVII. What Qualifications they
must be endowed with, who suffer in a right manner for Christ. SERMON. XLVIII.
How many ways, and by what means Christ comfortteh those who suffer for him.
SERMON. XLIX. How and why God always proportions a Saints comforts to his
sufferings, and often makes them to overflow. And why he often denies comforts
to his People in their troubles. SERMON. L. 2 Cor. 1. 6. And whether we be
afflicted; it is for your consolation, and salvation, which is effectual in the
enduring the same sufferings, which we also suffer: or whether we be comforted,
it is for your consolation and salvation. The Saints sufferings are for the
Churches good. SERMON. LI. The Afflictions which others suffer for Christ, make
much for our comfort and salvation. SERMON. LII. How salvation is promoted and
advanced by our sufferings for Christ. SERMON. LIII. Afflictions not in
themselves, but as improved by patience, conduce to our salvation. What goes to
the producing of patience. SERMON. LIVE. Motives exciting us to a patient
submission unto God under all the Afflictions he lays upon us. SERMON. LV. All
the Dispensations of God carry on and further the salvation of his people.
SERMON. LVI. 2 Cor. 1. 7. And our hope of you is steadfast, knowing that as you
are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the consolation. Of
Paul's hope and persuasion of the Corinthians, with the Reasons and Grounds of
it. SERMON. LVII. Of our partaking with others in their suffering for Christ, and
how this is a way to interest our selves in the joy and glory which such
sufferers enjoy. SERMON. LVIII. 2 Cor. 1. 8. For we would not, brethren, have you
ignorant of our trouble which came to us in Asia, that we are pressed out of
measure, above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life. How useful
it is to the children of God, to know the Afflictions which the Saints suffer
for Christ's sake. And why the preaching concerning the Saints afflictions, even
from Heathens, is necessary to Christians, though for the present they be in
peace and quietness. SERMON. LIX. The Ministers of the Gospel find much
opposition from the carnal and worldly Professors. Who are these carnal and
worldly Professors. SERMON. LX. A further Discovery of such, who take up Religion
merely from carnal motives and worldly respects. SERMON. LXI. Of the different
judgment that Faith and Flesh pass upon Afflictions. SERMON. LXII. How the voice
of the Spirit, and the voice of the Flesh differ in Afflictions. And why it is
necessary a man should know them asunder. SERMON. LXIII. What is to be understood
by Paul's being pressed above measure: as likewise, how neither natural, nor
moral strength can carry us through troubles in a gracions manner. SERMON. LXIV.
The natural fear of Death is not taken away by Graces. What are the Uses of it.
SERMON. LXV. Of the natural and sinful fear of Death. How to discern between
them; and from whence the sinfulness of that fear proceeds. SERMON. LXVI. 2
Cor. 1. 9. But we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not
trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead. The truly godly may
sometimes pass false sentences upon their own Persons and Actions, and Gods
Dispensations toward them. SERMON. LXVII. The People of God often pass false
judgment upon the Dispensations of God toward them. The Reasons from whence
the false judgment proceeds; with Rules to prevent it. SERMON. LXVIII. Of humane
and divine Trust, and of the true and proper Objects of our confidence. SERMON.
LXIX. What are those secret and inward objects, that men are apt to place their
confidence in; and wherein even the Saints themselves may be guilty of that
sin. SERMON. LXX. Whether Paul speaks these words in his own person: and
wherein the sinfulness of Self-confidence appears. SERMON. LXXI. Of the Nature,
Object and Matter of our Divine Trust, or Dependence upon God. SERMON. LXXII.
What is required in our trusting in God, ex part subjecti. And of the
excellency of this grace. SERMON. LXXIII. Of the Expression, God who raises the
dead, how it is to be understood, and what it implies. SERMON. LXXIV. 2 Cor. 1.
10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver: in whom we trust
that he will yet deliver us. We are not to consider Gods Mercies in general
only, but their several aggravations also. SERMON. LXXV. Privative and preventing
Mercies are to be accounted of, as Positive. SERMON. LXXVI. Of the Necessity of
Gods continuing his Mercies to us, as well as his conferring Mercies upon us.
SERMON. LXXVII. Former Experience should be a sufficient Argument for future
confidence. SERMON. LXXVIII. Of Motives to trust in God, and the Opposites to it,
Presumption and Despair. SERMON. LXXIX. 2 Cor. 1. 11. You also helping together
by prayer for us, that for the gift bestowed upon us by the means of many
persons, thanks may be given by many, on our behalf. How we are to rely upon
God, and yet make use of requisite means too. SERMON. LXXX. The highest in gifts
and graces, should desire the prayers of the meanest. And People ought to pray
for their Ministers, as well as Ministers for their People. SERMON. LXXXI. How,
and why we should praise God for all his mercies vouchsafed to us. SERMON.
LXXXII. God is the fountain of all our mercies, they are his gifts, and why.
SERMON. LXXXIII. Of the Necessity and Usefulness of public Ordinances; and of
the Churches Interest in its Ministers mercies. SERMON. LXXXIV. 2 Cor. 1. 12. For
our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had
our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you-wards. SERMON. LXXXV.
What is required to a good and well-ordered conscience. SERMON. LXXXVI. Further
Discoveries of what is required to a well-regulated conscience, with
Distinctions concerning it. SERMON. LXXXVII. A Believer may be assured of the
uprightness of his heart in the performance of Duties. What is required to such
an Assurance. SERMON. LXXXVIII. Of the Impediments which keep us from Assurance;
commands for it, and Cautions about it. SERMON. LXXXIX. Of the true Nature of
godly Simplicity and singleness of Heart. SERMON. XC. A further Discovery of the
true Nature of godly Simplicity both toward God and man. SERMON. XCI. Of the
true Nature of godly Sincerity. SERMON. XCII. A further Discovery of the Nature
and Effects of godly Sincerity. SERMON. XCIII. Of fleshly Wisdom, with some
Principles of it. SERMON. XCIV. Principles of fleshly Wisdom used in the
Propagation of the Gospel. SERMON. XCV. Of the grace of God which Paul exalts
above fleshly Wisdom, and ascribes all unto. SERMON. XCVI. Wherein the grace of
God appeared toward Paul in his Ministerial Labors. SERMON. XCVII. Of a good
and godly conversation in the world. SERMON. XCVIII. Of Gods Presence with the
Ministry, how it renders the People inexcusable. SERMON. XCIX. 2 Cor. 1. 13. For
we write no other things unto you, then what you read or acknowledge, and I
trust that you shall acknowledge even to the end. Of the convincing Nature of
Godliness in Ministers and private Christians. SERMON. C. It Is Perseverance that
is the crown of Holiness. SERMON. CI. 2 Cor. 1. 14. As also you have acknowledged
us in part, that we are your rejoicing, even as ye also are ours, in the day of
the Lord Jesus. Of the mutability and changeableness there is in the Affections
of the best Churches, to their spiritual Guides and Officers. SERMON. CII Of the
mutual rejoicing which ought to be betwixt Minister and people. SERMON. CIII. Of
the Rejoicing a faithful Minister has in an obedient people. SERMON. CIV. Of
the great changes that will be in the Day of Christ's coming. SERMON. CV. A
further Discovery of the great changes that will be wrought at the Day of
Christ's second coming. SERMON. CVI. 2 Cor. 1. 15. And in this confidence I was
minded to come unto you before, that you might have a second benefit. Of the
Encouragements a Minister has from the hopes of doing good to a people. SERMON.
CVII. Of the Necessity of a constant Ministry, not only for the constituting,
but to an establishing the Church. SERMON. CVIII. 2 Cor. 1. 16. And to pass by
you into Macedonia, and to come again out of Macedonia unto you, and of you to
be brought on my way toward Judea. All Christians, especially Ministers, ought
to lay out themselves wholly for Gods glory, and others good. SERMON. CIX. Of the
Office of Apostles, and particular Pastors; and of the Peoples esteem of their
Minister. SERMON. CX. 2 Cor. 1. 17. When I therefore was thus minded, did I use
lightness? or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh,
that with me there should be Yea, yea, Nay, nay? Of the sinfulness of Levity
and unconstancy in the children of God. SERMON. CXI. Of the sinfulness of
Inconstancy, and lightness in matters of Religion. SERMON. CXII. Of walking
according to the flesh. SERMON. CXIII. Of Principles in general, and a godly man's
in particular. SERMON. CXIV. Of the kinds and sinfulness of Lying. SERMON. CXV. 2
Cor. 1. 18. But as God is true, our word toward you was not yea and nay. GOD
is True. SERMON. CXVI. The personal failings of Ministers are often cast upon the
Ministry it self. SERMON. CXVII. Of changing in matters of Religion. SERMON.
CXVIII. A further Discovery of the sinfulness and reproach of Inconstancy,
especially in a Minister. SERMON. CXIX. 2 Cor. 1. 19. For the Son of God Jesus
Christ, who was preached among you by us, even by me, and Sylvanus, and
Timotheus, was not Yea, and Nay, but in him was Yea. Christ the Alpha and Omega
of all Preaching. SERMON. CXX. Our Lord Christ is the Son of GOD. SERMON. CXXI.
Christ is Jesus, a Savior to his People. SERMON. CXXII. Of Assistants required
in the Ministry: false charges laid against it; and the happy Agreement of it.
SERMON. CXXIII. The truths of Christ, and the Ministers of it, are always the
same. SERMON. CXXIV. 2 Cor. 1. 20. For all the promises of God in him are yea,
and in him amen, unto the glory of God by us. Of Gods Promises to man. SERMON.
CXXV. A further Discovery of the Nature and Sorts of Gods Promises. SERMON.
CXXVI. How all the Promises are confirmed in Christ. SERMON. CXXVII. Of the
usefulness and unchangeablenesse of the Promises of God. SERMON. CXXVIII. The
Promises give glory to God, both as they are made by him, and believed by us.
SERMON. CXXIX. 2 Cor. 1. 21. Now he which establishes us with you in Christ, and
has anointed us, is God. Our Settlement and Establishment in the faith of the
Promises, is the gracious work of God alone. SERMON. CXXX. Of Gods confirmation
of us upon his Promises, by his own grace. SERMON. CXXXI. The most eminent for
Godliness need to be established by God, as well as the meanest, which
Establishment is in Christ Jesus. SERMON. CXXXII. Of the spiritual Anointing
which Believers receive from God. SERMON. CXXXIII. 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has also
sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. Gods People are
his sealed ones. SERMON. CXXXIV. Of Gods Spirit Sealing his People. SERMON. CXXXV.
A further Discovery of the Spirits sealing the People of God. SERMON. CXXXVI. Of
the Object, Manner and End of the Spirits sealing. SERMON. CXXXVII. Whether all
the People of God are his Sealed ones. SERMON. CXXXVIII. Of Grace, as it is the
Earnest of Eternal Glory. SERMON. CXXXIX. What is employed in Gods giving us the
Earnest of his Spirit. SERMON. CXL. 2 Cor. 1. 23. Moreover, I call God to record
upon my soul, that to spare you, I came not as yet to Corinth. Of Swearing.
SERMON. CXLI. Of Oaths and several Expressions used in Swearing. SERMON. CXLII. It
is lawful in some cases to swear; how and when it is thus lawful. SERMON.
CXLIII. Ordinary Swearing reproved and put to silence. SERMON. CXLIV. Of the holy
Prudence that Ministerial Power is to be managed with. SERMON. CXLV. 2 Cor. 1.
24. Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy;
for by faith ye stand. Of Ministers power over the People. SERMON. CXLVI. The
Comforting of the Afflicted, one great part of a Ministers work. SERMON. CXLVII.
God only the Lord of our Christian Faith.
To the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER,
THe Authors habitation being far distant from the Press, he could not have
the correction of it, and therefore some mistakes have passed, which are to be
corrected thus. ERRATA.
Page 58. lin. 7. dele (hatred of sin.) p. 85. l. 25. for of, r. if. for
beginnings, r. endings. p. 89. l. 8. dele never such. p. 176. l. 27. for
ministerial, r. immaterial. p. 203. l. 8. for Hostia, r. Austin. p. 385. l. 11.
dele not. p. 554. l. 27. add to my observation. p. 610. l. 29. for left, r.
kept. p. ^75. l. 25. for alienate, r. alleviate. p. 638. l. 14. for afflict, r.
affect.



The Reader is also desired to take notice, that the Contents, marginal Notes
and Table, were gathered by another hand, and not the Authors, wherein if
there be any error at any time committed, heartily to pass it by.

Abel Roper.

AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations UPON THE First Chapter of the 2d
Epistle of Paul TO THE CORINTHIANS.
SERMON. I.
Why our Savior is called Jesus Christ, and Saul, Paul, who of a cruel
Persecutor becomes a faithful Preacher of the Gospel of Christ. Why God of
great sinners often makes most eminent Saints.

2 COR. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timothy
our brother, unto the Church of God, which is at Corinth, with all the Saints
which are in all Achaia.
IN this Chapter is considerable, the Preface, and the main The Division of the
Chapter, and of the Verse.
Substantial Matter treated of.

In the Preface we may take notice of the Inscription, and the Salutation.

In the Inscription are these parts:

1. The Efficient instrumental Cause of the Epistle, described by his Name, and
by his Office. His name Paul: His Office an Apostle.

This is further amplified: Why our Savior called Jesus Christ.


1. From the Author of his Office, Jesus Christ, Jesus, because of the
Beneficium conveyed to us by him; Christ, because of the Officium undertaken by
him.

2. From the Manner how, or impulsive Cause; By the will of God.

In the Inscription there is also mention of a Companion or Person, conjoined
with Paul, not to dictate this Epistle, but as an approver of it, who is
described from his name, Timothy; and from his relation, a Brother.

In the next place, we have the Subject to whom this Epistle is directed, and
that is either more special, the Church of God, described by its local
situation (at Corinth.) Or else more generally, with the place where they live,
All the Saints which are in all Achaia.

The Verse divided into these parts, will afford several Observations. And

1. Let us consider the Author instrumental (for the Spirit of God is the
principal) described by his name Paul; and in that briefly consider his Name,
and his Person Why this Apostle called Paul, who sometimes was called Saul.
what he was. His name is Paul, so constantly in his Epistles, but in the
History of his life in the Acts of the Apostles, he was constantly called Saul,
till Chap. 13. In the Greek (...) and sometimes (...). Now concerning his name,
the conjectures of learned men are diverse. Beza thinks Saul and Paul to be
the same name with a different dialect. Others say, he had two names, and they
are different. Chrysostom thinks Christ did in an immediate manner give him
this name, thereby making Paul his servant in a peculiar manner; Imposition of
names being a demonstration of dominion. Thus he altered Abraham's and Jacobs
names. Others they say, it was in an humane way he was named Paul, either
because of the conversion of Sergius Paulus, mentioned Acts 13. the Proconsul,
who out of indeared affection to Paul, would have him called by his name; or as
Austin thinks, Paul assumed it himself, as signifying one that is little, to
show his modesty, he calling himself the least of all the Apostles. But
Sc^ligers conjecture seems most probable, That when the Jews were brought in
subjection to the Romans, they had commonly two names, one of their own Nation,
and another Roman, to ingratiate themselves, and also for more familiar
converse; and therefore Saul is not called Paul, till upon the setting him
apart to preach unto the Gentiles. But this is not so great a matter, as the
consideration of his person, and his life what he was, and by the history of
his life, which he himself also makes often mention of; he was a cruel and
bloody persecutor of the Church Paul's persecution of the Church of Christ. His
conversion to it.
of Christ, being mad against the Saints, and haling them before the high
Priest, never satisfying his wolvish disposition against the sheep of Christ:
At last he is converted in a miraculous and wonderful way, and of a persecutor
made an eminent Apostle of Jesus Christ. So that we may with greater wonder
say, Is Paul amongst the Apostles? then they did once, Is Saul amongst the
Prophets? Here is a wolf made a lamb, a vulture become a dove, a Bramble made a
Mirtle-tree. This work of Gods grace in making such a change upon Paul, may
justly be esteemed as wonderful a work, as those miracles that were wrought
upon men's bodies, though it were the resurrection from the dead. Observe,

That God may and does sometimes take of the greatest sinners, and make them
God of great sinners often makes most eminent Saints (...)
eminent instruments of his glory.

The worst of men sometimes his grace makes to be the best of men; we need go
no further than these very Corinthians to whom Paul writes, Acts 18. God tells
Paul, He had much people in that City, and yet of all the places in the world,
you would think the preaching of the Gospel would never have done good there;
but God even in this wilderness, did make to himself a pleasant garden. Paul
might have wrote this, Paul once the greatest of sinners, to the Corinthians
the greatest of sinners.

To open this, let us take notice of Paul his sins, his work of grace, and
his serviceableness after his conversion.

For his sins, how great they were he himself does aggravate them sufficiently;
Paul's sins great.
insomuch that he says, he was the chiefest of all sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. In
what sense Paul could say this truly is disputed; for it is plain, he was not a
greater sinner, than such who sinned the sin against the holy Ghost. Some
therefore restrain it to converted sinners, as if Paul meant, he was the
greatest sinner that ever How the chiefest of sinners.
was converted. Others understand it thus, that he was in the number of the
greatest one of the chiefest, and that seems most genuine. He was a
blasphemer, a persecuter; the blood, sighs and groans of many Christians would
witness against him. And although he says, he did this in ignorance, yet that
did not excuse him; for he confesses himself a blasphemer, and a persecuter
for all that: for this ignorance was vincible, it was affected and wilful, he
had means to the contrary. Behold then here a worse sinner than Mary Magdalen,
out of whom seven Devils were cast, for her sins were carnal and bodily, but
Paul's sins were spiritual, and seated principally in his soul, so that as
the Devils are spiritual wickednesses, thus was Paul; and because he was thus
corrupted in his spirit, his disease was the more incurable. For, If the eye be
dark, how great is that darkness? The profane gross sinner, he is easily
convinced, he is presently apprehensive of his evil; but where sinfullness has
possessed the vital parts of the soul, the mind and the heart, what hope can
remain for such an one? This made our Savior say, The Publicans and Harlots
entered the Kingdom of Heaven above the Pharisees. Now Paul he was a Pharisee,
and most zealous above others for the tradition of his fathers, and therefore
thought his wild zeal to be true love to God. A man then so great a sinner,
and yet so self-confident, that he had all the disadvantages in the world, yet
is converted, and that when he had for some while lived in such a way, being
habituated and rooted in it. For, as some think, he was converted about the
thirtieth year of his age.

2. The work of grace was admirable and wonderful. Twice the Apostle himself
The work of Gods grace wonderful.
relates it, while he was in the way, breathing out threatenings to the Church
of God, even in this his wicked posture, He was stricken to the ground, and a
glorious light shone round about him. That as they say of some lightning, it
melts the sword; while it does not hurt the scabbard at all: Thus Paul's body
not being any way hurt in this miraculous Vision, his soul was wonderfully
melted and changed, insomuch that he cries out, Lord, what will thou have me
to do? This instance of Paul's conversion is an hammer to beat down the
Arminian Doctrine: here they labor and sweat to give a clear answer. Some of
them confess, that Paul was peremptorily elected, and that we are not to judge
of men's ordinary conversion, by that which was extraordinary. Indeed we grant,
that many things were wonderful and extraordinary in Paul's conversion. It is
not for men now to expect such a Vision and voice from Heaven immediately
speaking to them; but this we urge, That if God could do thus on Paul's heart,
insuperably and irresistibly working on it, making it of unwilling, willing,
and yet not the natural liberty of Paul's will destroyed, then God may still
demonstrate the same efficacy of grace, and yet man in conversion not be turned
into a stock or stone, as they charge the Orthodox. As Paul then had been a
sinner above measure, so he had also grace exceeding gracious in an overflowing
manner to him. Therefore how frequently and joyfully does Paul speak of the
riches of grace, and Gods unspeakable grace to him, always debasing himself,
as the greatest of sinners, and the least of all Saints, not worthy to be
called an Apostle, and magnifying grace always running out like the Sea, when
he comes to speak of Christ and grace.

In the third place, His serviceableness, that was as wonderful, I labored
Paul's serviceableness admirable.
more than they. The Heathens Hercules is not comparable to him. To read how
much he did, and how much he suffered for Christ, may make us stand amazed, yet
still he says, Not I, but the grace of God, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Chrysostom does
infinitely expatiate upon all occasions in the praise of Paul, but Paul himself
was like Moses, whose face shined gloriously, but he did not know it. And thus
Paul, though above all others in doing and suffering for Christ, yet accounts
of himself as nothing, and gives all to the grace of God; as none preached more
than he did, so none wrote more Epistles than he did; he took care of all the
Churches. Thus he, who formerly did his utmost to root out the Church of God,
is now as zealous and active to establish and propagate it. So that you see
three wonderful things in Paul, his sin, his conversion, and his godly life
afterward.

In the next place, let us consider what Reasons there may be, why God will
choose such great sinners out of their high impieties, especially to be
Apostles and Officers in the Church of God, seeing that the Scripture in those
qualifications for an Elder, requires, That he be without blame, and one of a
good report, 1 Timothy 3. 5. Therefore in the Apostles, who were the chief
Officers, called by the Ancient, Otuli Dei, Seeds Christi, and Oculi Ecclesiae,
this was much more to be expected. But there are these Reasons may be given.
Reasons why God of great sinners often makes such eminent Saints. 1. On Gods
part. 1. Hereby the power of God is manifested.


First, Hereby the power and strength of God is made evident. If men of
civility only, and of ingenuous principles were brought home to Christ, it
might be thought something of men did promote our salvation; but when there is
a direct and violent opposition in a man's ways, yet to become converted and
obedient, this may make us acknowledge with Paul, The exceeding greatness of
his power to us who believe, Ephesians. 1. 19. And if (setting aside some
extraordinary circumstances) there is the same kind of power seen in every man's
conversion, that was in Paul's; then it is plain, that God does not only use
moral suasions, as Arminians would have it, but also efficacious operations. So
that we may bless God for this president of Paul's conversion; we may all by
that see, what is done in the heart of every man, when turned to God. We do
justly admire the power of God in Creation, and in all the wonderful
deliverances the Church has; but the power of God upon men's hearts, making
them to love and delight in those things, which formerly they hated; This may
make us to sing Psalms in the admiration of Gods great power about the new
creation, as well as the old creation of the world.

Secondly, As Gods Power is hereby evidenced, so also his Wisdom; and that in a
twofold respect: 2. Hereby the Wisdom of God is clearly evidenced. 1. In
converting Paul when in the height of his impieties.


1. Converting Paul at that very time, when he was in the height of his spirit,
acting with the greatest violence against Christ. This season was most
admirable; for hereby it did plainly appear, That it was not of Paul that
willed, or runned, but of Gods good pleasure. Hence Ephesians. 1. Paul speaking of
Gods predestination, does over and over again resolve all into his good
pleasure, and that he does all things according to the goodness of his will.
What then will become of that vocatio congrua, so much boasted of by some, as
if men were converted, because God did foresee, that if they were put into
such a condition with such circumstances, then they would readily consent to
Gods Call? But was Paul's conversion accompanied with a vocatio congrua? Did
God stay till he had a fit bait or snare to catch Paul in? Now all was here the
clean contrary, Paul was never in higher opposition against God; never were the
doors of his heart more fastened up with iron-barres than at this time; and
then, and never till then does God convert him. That as it is with Gods Church,
he never helps till all things be desperate; therefore he is called, The God
that raises the dead, 2 Cor. 1. and he that calls things that are not, as if
they were. Thus many times it falls out, when men are more treasuring up
their sin, and adding higher degree of opposition, even then God takes off
their hearts, and thereby the Wisdom of God is the more seen, of such crooked
timber to make so excellent a building. To raise up Lazarus, when he is not
only dead, but buried and rot^ing in the grave; this makes us astonished at
Gods Wisdom.

And then in a second respect, Gods Wisdom is seen, Because such firebrarnds
2. Because such firebrarnds plucked out of the fire, are the fittest to
enkindle a fire in the hearts of others.
plucked out of the fire, are fittest to kindle a fire in the hearts of others:
When we shall be able to say, Lo, here is a man as profane, as bitter and
cruel a scoffer, and enemy of all godliness, as ever you were: He was one of
your company; you took wicked counsel together, you were often drunk or unclean
together; and now behold what a change is made upon him? He prays, he
humbles himself, he cries out of his former conversation; if he had the whole
world given him, he would not be such an one as once! Certainly, when God does
thus, it does wonderfully shame and confound all wicked men. What a conviction
was this to all other Pharisees, when it could be said, Behold here Paul a
Pharisee, one of your own Sect, as desperately cruel and malicious, as any of
you! Oh, but behold how he is changed, he builds up that way he once destroyed!
Now he counts all those things you dote on so much, but dung and dross in
comparison of the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

3. In converting of such, above all God shows the freeness and mere riches
3. Hereby he shows the freeness of his grace.
of his grace. For what can Paul say to justify himself with? Where were
merits, and dispositions in Paul? At this very time Paul might have had a
thunderbolt from Heaven fallen upon him, which might have shaken him into Hell:
And behold a gracious arm stretched out to save him from thence! And for this
cause it is, that none like Paul does so amplify the grace of God, and is so
frequently naming of Jesus Christ; and therefore it is Paul's whole design in
his Epistles, to take off all from works, and any thing in our selves, and to
give all to the grace of God. And thus Austin, a second Paul in some respect,
he in his former times had been a great sinner, involved in unclean lusts, and
a cursed Ma^e, but when converted, what Ancient did so clearly, fully and
pregnantly maintain the true Doctrine of Grace, as he did? He had not only read
Books, but his own heart and experience to confirm this truth. Therefore those
opinions, that Paul was predestined, because God foresaw the good works he
would do; or that God by a Scientia media knew Paul would consent to Grace,
calling of him, if put into such a condition, and that thereupon God did ordain
him to eternal happiness, all these Doctrines, and the like, are mere Antipodes
to Paul's discourse and expressions in his Epistles.

Thus you have the Reasons on Gods part; now on man's part, God may therefore 2.
On man's part. 1. That hereby they may be more humble in themselves.
take such, rather than others, Because hereby they may be always kept humble
in themselves. Thus Paul finds these old wounds now and then bleeding afresh;
he remembers what he has been to his great sorrow and humiliation; yea hereby
a man is preserved from any dangerous fall afterward. Peter and David after
they had been converted unto God, we read of their falls again, breaking their
bones, and recovering with bitterness and much difficulty. But concerning Paul
after his conversion, we never read of any scandal he fell into; yea, he says,
He knew nothing by himself, 1 Cor. 4. viz. in any gross miscarriage, for the
old bitterness would never out of his mind.

Lastly, God may do this to provoke all Formalists and civil Justiciaries to
Lastly, that all Formalists and Justiciaries might be provoked to an holy
jealousy.
an holy jealousy. What shall such as lay wallowing in their mire, that were
like the impure Swine, become Sheep to Christ, shall get Crowns of Glory upon
their heads, and we who were never like any of such Publicans, with our
glistering goodness be thrown into hell?

SERMON. II.
Learning an excellent gift of God, though through the corruption of man, it is
often made an Engine to promote the Kingdom of the Devil, yet by the Grace of
God it is very useful in his Church.

2 COR. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle, etc.
WE have considered Paul as a great sinner, yet made an Apostle, of dung made
a pearl. Let us now take notice of him, as a learned man, and so made use of by
God for the Ministry of the Gospel. That Paul's learning
Paul was endowed with much learning, was so evident to Festus, that he told
him, Much learning had made him mad. And the Lycaonians called him Mercury,
Acts 14. He was for a while educated at Tarsus, where he was born, and it is
recorded by Strabo, as Lapide cites him; That the Tarsenses were so wholly
given to literature, that they did excel Athens and Alexandria. And that he
had perused humane Authors, appears in that three times he alleges Greek
Poets. Now besides this, he went also to Jerusalem, and there was brought up at
Gamaliel's feet, an eminent Doctor amongst the Jews. And if there were nothing
else but his Epistles he wrote, this would abundantly declare the rare and
admirable wisdom he was endowed with. Insomuch that Chrysostom 3. Hom. upon 1 Corinthians. speaks of a Dispute between a Christian and a Grecian; Whether Paul
was not to be preferred before Plato? though Chrysostom condemns the
Christians argument as ridiculous and absurd. Indeed the Apostle speaks 2
Cor. 11. 6. That though he was rude in speech, yet not in knowledge. Now it is
questioned by Interpreters, In what sense Paul says, He was rude in speech?
Austin thought, he said so only by concession, and in the repute of the false
Apostles, who accounted him so. But Chrysostom, and others think, Paul speaks
properly, and that he was really so; not but that he was full of learning, only
he did not use those affected ways of humane eloquence, as he speaks in
another place. He did not write as a Demosthenes, whom Plato censured as (...)
and (...), an hunter of words, and a curious Artificer therein; yet he has
masculine and strong eloquence; such as becomes the divine and admirable matter
he propounds. And certainly, to paint a Jewel would take off the proper luster
of it. The more naked and plain divine truths appear, the more lovely they are,
and do more immediately insinuate into the heart. And if he said of Tully's
eloquence, because it is not so affected and fancifull, That he had made great
progress in Rhetoric, who could delight in his Latin. We may more truly say,
he has attained to some good sufficiency in Christ's school, who sees more
excellency in Paul's Epistles, than in all humane Writers. Paul therefore had
true and solid wisdom, and was also endowed with acquired abilities in humane
learning. So that whereas Christ chose fishermen that were unlearned; here we
see him making use of one that was skillful and learned. So that God can make
use of all; and as Austin said, Qui dedit Petrum piscatorem, dedit and
Cyprianum Rhetorem. So that we may observe,

When men of great learning and parts are chosen by God and sanctified, they
When men of great parts and learning are chosen by God and sanctified, they
become eminently useful in their place Christ's choosing of illiterate men to be
Apostles, makes not for the choosing of such now to be public preachers.
become eminently useful in their place.

To amplify this Doctrine, consider, That though Christ at first did choose
Fishermen, and other illiterate persons, yet that makes nothing at all to that
Anabaptistical position, That men abiding in their Trades, and destitute of
learning, may take upon them to be public Preachers of the Gospel. For that
instance does rather make wholly against them. For

First, Though our Savior called them while illiterate, yet after their call,
he took them into his fellowship. So that they were like a College living
together, whereof Christ was the Head and Master; and thus he trained them up
with himself for two years before he sent them abroad to preach. And

Secondly, When he enlarged their Commission, before they did execute it, they
are commanded to stay at Jerusalem, where they received the holy Ghost in a
wonderful manner, and were enabled to speak in all strange tongues, and were
also enabled to work miracles for the confirmation of their Doctrine. Now let
the Adversaries demonstrate such an extraordinary effusion of Gods Spirit on
them, and we shall not envy, if all the Lords people can so prophecy. And

Lastly, As soon as they were called at the very first, they left their trades,
they gave themselves to attend upon their work they had undertaken, whereas
these plead for the retaining of their Calling still; private Christians then,
though they are allowed to improve their gifts in a mutual edifying way, and
may (if they will) find matter enough to exercise themselves therein, yet they
may not usurp this Authority and Office in the Church, without a lawful Call
thereunto.

2. Learning whether in the arts and tongues, is an excellent qualification in
Obs. 2. Learning an excellent qualification in man, the choicest of Gods gifts
in a common way.
men, and the chiefest of Gods gifts in a common way.

For as Popery like a thick darkness did then cover the face of the whole
earth, when all learning was buried, so when there came a Reformation in that
kind, the Arts and the Tongues being more generally known, then also began the
Reformed Religion to be so eminent. So that if we consider man, as he is
rational, learning is his proper and peculiar perfection; and therefore far
above wealth, or beauty, or strength, or any natural perfection whatsoever. In
the times after the Apostles, when extraordinary things ceased, then they were
learned men that God did for the most part raise up in his Church, both to
govern the members thereof, and to profligate Heretics: such were Tertullian,
Origin, Austin and Cyprian; of whom Austin said, That he came with the
Egyptian spoil one of Egypt, and enriched Israel; by humane learning he did
adorn the Church of God.

3. It cannot be denied, but where learning has been in any high degree, there
Obs. 3. Learning through the corruption of man, often made an engine to promote
the Kingdom of the Devil.
through the corruption of man, it has been sometimes made a weapon against,
and an engine to promote the Devils kingdom.

Insomuch that the learned men of the world have done the Devil more service
than any other men. For the Devil at first did not use an Ass, or any such
dull creature to seduce Eve, but the Serpent, Because he was more subtle than
any other beast upon the earth, Genesis 3. 1. Thus still the Devil loves to
appear in Serpents, in wise men, in great learned men, and plausible Scholars,
knowing that such are like Samson, That can destroy many at one blow. Thus all
the Heathen Philosophers, they were great enemies unto the ways of God. Who
disputed for their Idolatry, and against the Christian Religion, but their
Sophisters, their learned men? For that word was used in a good sense at first;
and the reason is, because man being naturally corrupted, and the wisdom
thereof being enmity to God, Romans 1. 8. The more wisdom, and the more
abilities a man has, the greater adversary he is to God; as the stronger or
greater the toad is, the more poisonous he is. So that learned men, if not
godly, they come out like so many Goliah's against the people of God. Austin
wrote to a learned Heathen, Ornari a te diabolus quaerit, Learned men they
adorn the Devils way, and make his Kingdom and Laws to be accepted; and withal
it is hard to have this talent of gold, and not to make an Idol o^ it. It Is hard
to be learned, and not to be puffed up with it. So that whereas the way of the
Gospel, and the Scripture, is in a plain but solid and majestical way, they are
apt to deride and contemn it; witness Austin's confession of himself, That he
loved Tully' s works, better than the Bible. And Hierom tells us, That he was
so addicted to humane learning, that in a vision he was terribly beaten and
afflicted, hearing this voice, Ciceronianus es non Christianus. So that we
grant, That many learned men are kept off from the humble and low way of
Christ, they cannot stoop to his yoke, and all because of their learning. But
yet

4. This is not from the nature of learning it self, it is from the abuse of it.
This is not from the nature of learning it self, but from the abuse of (...).


As the Apostle says, Not many noble men, not many rich men has God called, 1
Cor 1. 26. But this is not, because nobility, or wealth, are in themselves
sin, but because such things do many times become a snare to us. Learning
therefore of it self, and in its own nature, has no such poisonous quality;
and therefore it is a most irrational thing to say, That learning can be no more
sanctified than sin. For was it not in Paul, who as Tertullian expresses it,
did sanctify the Poets verses he alleged? And are not learned men, if
Orthodox, and loving of the truth more able to convince the errors of the
learned gainsayers? Have not the eminent Lights in the Church of God, in all
ages, been learned men? Was not the Egyptian learning sanctified to Moses? And
now learning is more necessary since the Apostles times, then formerly. For in
those days, they were endowed with miracles, which were a strong demonstration
of the infallible Doctrine that was preached, and they could speak in Tongues,
and some had the gift of interpretation, and prophesying by immediate workings
of Gods Spirit; but none can now pretend to any such thing. What private man
could have been able to have read so much as one verse in the Bible, had there
not been men learned in the Original Tongues, who translated it into our known
Language? Neither can those Ministerial qualifications which the Apostle
requires in every Elder, That he be able to teach, to divide the Word of God
aright, to be able by sound Doctrine to convince the gainsayers, be performed
without learning. Yea, Does not the Apostle Peter charge the wresting of
Scripture to their own destruction upon unstable and unlearned men, 2 Pet. 3.
16. The assistance of Gods Spirit necessary to an holy and sanctified
understanding and interpretation of Scripture.


5. This must also be acknowledged, That all the learning in the world cannot
help us to a sanctified and holy understanding of the Scripture, no, not so
much as the true interpretation of it without the Spirit of God: and if learned
men cannot do it without Gods Spirit. much less unlearned. Therefore we must
not oppose learning to grace, or to Gods Spirit. For how many have written
Comments upon the Bible, that have been very learned men, yet from that sweet
flower they have turned all to poison, and through the corruption that was in
their hearts, have made it a Book to vent all their heretical and damnable
opinions? So that there must necessarily be the Spirit of God, besides
learning, First, to lead us into all truth. And then secondly, to sanctify it
to our own hearts in an experimental and powerful manner. For men may be very
Orthodox, and yet know nothing of the work of grace upon their own souls.

These things explained concerning a twofold consideration of Paul, as a
sinner, and as a learned man. Let us make some practical Use of it. And

First, We see our duty, when God makes use of such great sinners, not to
upbraid Use 1.
and revile them with their former impieties; but rather to admire the wisdom
and power of God, not to reproach Peter for his Apostasy, or Paul for his
persecutions, as the Donatists did Austin for his former miscarriages; but to
bless God that gives us such real testimonies of his grace. When some Papists
upbraided Beza with his youthful verses he made, Isti homines (says he)
invident mihi gratiam Dei, These men envy me the grace of God, as the elder
brother did the Prodigals conversion. It is disputed by Casuists, Whether a
profane ungodly Minister formerly, though now truly converted, is to be
continued in his Ministry, at least in that place, where he has lived so
scandalously? Some are rigid for the negative; Yea, the Novatians of old would
not admit any Christian that had grossly sinned, though repenting, to
Church Communion. Others are more mollified, and hold such Ministers, truly
manifesting their conversion and repentance ought to be received, and that as
Ministers again. But the determination of this Case concerning a particular
person, would be difficult, because circumstances may much alter the matter.
But in the general, we see Christ appointing Peter to feed his sheep, though he
had apostatized in so dreadful a manner. Neither may we run to that absurd
and impious Position of some, who said, the Apostles delivered a more perfect
way of Discipline, than Christ did; because (say they) Christ received Peter
again, and gave him Commission for his Apostleship through the whole world. In
the Old Testament David and Solomon are used as Penmen of the holy Scripture,
though polluted once with sin in a scandalous manner. And here we see Paul,
though formerly a notorious sinner, and adversary to the Gospel, yet is
appointed by God to be a chosen vessel to carry his name. And certainly, the
receiving of such after their serious, and public satisfaction to the Church
of God, or to ministerial imploiment may be of great use. For hereby he will be
the more industrious and diligent to reduce other sinners, especially such as
he has been an occasion to lead into sin. Thus David promises, Psalm. 51.
Then will I teach transgressors thy Law. And Christ bids Peter, When he is
converted to confirm his Brethren. Oh what zeal and holy revenge will seize
upon such a man's heart, to make all the world see, that he would now set up the
way of Christ, as he did once the Devils way, especially such as he has been a
means to seduce, and harden in sin, over those he will weep and mourn! How
greatly will this lie upon his heart, such it may be will lie damned in Hell,
and I have been the cause of it? It may be some are now in Hell, cursing the
day that ever I was a Minister or Pastor to them, because I encouraged, and
made their hearts bold and glad in wickedness. Oh then, if such agonies and
estuations be in their souls, in what pain and travail will they be to snatch
such out of the fire, whom they have been a cause to thrust in!

Does God sometimes call even great sinners, and that to eminent honor Use 2.
in his Church? Then here we see a notable encouragement even for the most
profane to hearken to these offers of grace. Might not you justly have
expected, that God should have made your condition as hopeless, as the Devil!
Though God would out of pity, have converted some of mankind, yet he might have
barred out all such notorious and profane sinners as thou art. But oh the
goodness of God, that will not have thee to say, My sins are greater than can
be forgiven; I am a viler person than grace ever can, or will convert. What?
May the Prodigal son not only be received into favor, but the Father will
run and meet him, weep over him, put honor upon him? Why then does not this
kindle a fire in your bowels? Why do you not cry, even me, even me, Lord, the
chiefest sinner of many thousands do thou draw to thy own self?

From the second consideration of Paul, be exhorted to pray to God, that Use 3.
he would raise up many Paul's in his Church, godly and learned Ministers, that
by godliness may subdue sin, and by learning may conquer heresies; such as
these are both burning and shining lights; such as these are Stars indeed, both
for the light they give, and the purity of their conversation. Happy is the
Church of God, when such Stars shine in her. If we have godly Ministers, and
not learned, then the subtle Papist and Heretic, will be ready to prevail. If
we have learned, but not godly, then all holy order will beneglected, then
profaneness and impiety will lift up its head; but both together make a
blessed Church.

SERMON. III.
Paul's Name being prefixed to his Epistle, shows it to be of Divine Authority,
though of it self not a sufficient Argument to prove it. The Penmen were only
Instruments, God the principal Author of the Scriptures, and therefore we
should rest satisfied with their style and method, and not question their
Authority. How to arm our selves against the Devil, and all Heretics opposing
the Divinity of the Scriptures.

2 COR. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, etc.
HItherto we have considered Paul under a two-sold respect; there remains one
more observable thing from the mentioning of himself, which is not to be
omitted. For it may be demanded, Why he prefixeth his name in this Preface? And
the Answer is, That as he expresses his Why Paul prefixed his name to his
Epistle.
calling of Apostleship to bring Authority to his person; so he also mentions
his name to obtain credit to what he does write; that they may be assured this
is his Epistle, and not sent to them by any other. For if the Corinthians were
ignorant of the Author of it, or that he was not one, who was guided by the
Holy Ghost, they would not have much regarded it. So that from hence observe,

Inasmuch that Paul' s name is set to this Epistle, it is thereby of Canonical
and Paul's name being prefixed to this Epistle, argues it to be of Divine
Authority.
Divine Authority, and so ought to be received with all faith and obedience.

Paul's Epistles were never doubted of, except that to the Hebrews, (which is
attributed to him) as the Epistle of James, the 2d of Peter, the two last
Epistles of John, and the Revelation have been, but were always received into
the Canon. Indeed there were the Elioniti, (called so, say some, from the
Hebrew word, because they were poor, and simple in understanding) These with
such succeeding them in many opinions did reject all Paul's Epistles, not but
that they thought they were made by him, only they rejected his Doctrine,
because they thought he was an adversary to the Law, and contrary to Moses.

This truth about the Canonical Authority of this Book, and the rest in the
Bible, is of very great concernment, not only because of the weighty
controversies and disputes both of old, and alate herein; but also because of a
practical consideration. For though men do generally profess themselves to be
Christians, and say, They acknowledge the holy Bible, as of Divine Authority,
yet where is the man almost, that lives, as if he did believe it to be a true
Book? For does any wicked man, that goes on in his impenitent ways, believe
the Word of God to be true, that condemns him, that forbids and threatens his
ways, that tells him assuredly, that if it be true, and the Word of God,
without reformation, he will be as assuredly damned, as if he were in Hell
already? Can a man then believe this to be Gods Word, and yet be so desperately
mad, as to live in a full contrariety to it? If therefore this very Epistle be
received as the Word of God, that it is no Apocryphal or humane Invention, but
Paul wrote it, as inspired and directed by the Holy Ghost. How can ye, how dare
ye reject the counsel and admonitions contained therein, both as you are a
Church, and as you are particular persons?

But to enlarge this Doctrine, consider these things:

First, That the mere prefixing of a name, though of some holy Author, is The
prefixing of the name of the Author, not a sufficient argument of it self to
prove the Divine Authority of any book.
not enough barely of it self, to confirm the Divine Authority of the
Scripture. For although indeed most of the Books both in the Old and New
Testament, have their names prefixed, yet some of them have not, as of Judges:
So in the New Testament, the Epistle to the Hebrews, has not the name of its
Author: But these are few only in respect of those, whose Authors are known.
All the Prophets begin their Prophecies with their Names, and the Authority
they have by God, that greater faith may be given to what they deliver. If then
the Author of some Books be not known, yet if these Books have all those
(...), and marks, which other Books have, for their Canonical Authority, then
they are to be received as the Word of God. Therefore (I say) a mere
Inscription of the Name, without other signs, is not enough: for there are
false Gospels, that go under the name of Thomas and Barnabas; yea, there is a
third Epistle said to be of Paul to the Corinthians: and Paul's Epistles to
Seneca, are mentioned by Austin and Hierom with some respect, though both
Papists and Protestants reject them as Apocryphal. We must therefore besides
the Name, consider those other Arguments, which prove the Divine Authority of
the Scripture, and see whether they be in it, or not. It does appear that even
in Paul's time there were some deceivers, who would counterfeit Letters, as if
written by Paul, and set his Name thereunto, to get the more Authority. This he
informs the Thessalonians of, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. That they should not be shaken
in mind by word or letter, as from him, etc. You see there were some, that
preached the instant approach of Christ's coming; and they alleged Paul for it,
Paul said so, and Paul wrote so. Hence it is that to prevent such mistakes, he
does so often mention his own hand in writing, The salutation of me Paul with
mine own hand, 1 Cor. 16. 21. Gal. 6. 11. Col. 4. 18. 2 These. 3. 17. Phil. 1.
9. he put his own hand, as well as his own name to his Epistles.

Secondly, Consider that Paul, and so all other Penmen of the holy Scripture,
The Penmen of the Bible only the instruments used by God in an extraordinary
way, not the authors of it.
they were not the principal Authors, but instruments used by God, and that
not in a general or common way. As when godly men make Sermons, or write Books,
but in a peculiar, and extraordinary manner; So that there could not be any
mistake or error. This is witnessed by Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is
(...), given by inspiration. All Scripture] And although the Books of the Old
Testament were it may be then only written, yet it holds by proportion, of all
that shall afterward be written. Peter also confirms this, 2 Pet. 1. 21. For
the Prophese came not of old time by the will of man, but holy men spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. The whole Word of God then, came not by men's
inventions, neither was it any design in them, to make such a Canon or Rule
for men to walk by; but they were inspired by God both in the speaking and
writing of it, so that both for matter and words they were infallibly guided.
And therefore, though Chrysostom, and others, do admit of some repugnancy in
the holy Writers of the Bible, in matters of less moment; and say, That this
makes more to prove the Divine Authority of the Bible, because hereby it does
appear, that they did not all conspire and agree together; yet this is
dangerous to hold so. For if they might err in matters of Less moment, why not
in greater? Besides the Text says (...), All Scripture, that is, the whole
Scripture in all the parts of it. So that the Bible it is Gods Book, it comes
from him, he has commanded it as a Rule, in which we must search, and by which
we are to order our lives. Oh then, with what reverence and respect should we
receive it! There we see the mind of God, the will of God, who would not think
that there should be nothing done in the Church of God, but what is according
to the Bible, the Doctrine of the Bible, the Worship of the Bible, the good
Order of the Bible. Yea, that there should be nothing done in Nations, in
Cities, in Towns, in Villages, in Families, but what the Bible commands. For
that being the Word of God, all Laws, all humane Authority and Power, are to
submit to that. And certainly, this is an infinite mercy, That in all things
necessary to salvation, we may know the will of God, what he would have us to
do. It Is not then Paul or Peter, but God himself whose Authority you despise,
when you will not obey the commands in their writings; for they are but the
Penmen, or rather those that did dictate it; for Paul had some others
sometimes to write his Epistles, as it is thought, Tertius wrote that to the
Romans. Therefore because he wrote that to the Galatians with his own hand, he
takes notice of it, Gal. 6. 11. that thereby they might be the more earnest
against those false teachers, that would bring in the Ceremonial Rites for
Justification; yet though the Holy Ghost did thus inspire and direct the holy
Writers thereof, both for matter and words, that does not hinder, but that it
was in a suitable way to their Gifts and Parts; Therefore there is a great
difference between the Prophet Isaiah's and Amos's Prophesies in respect of the
style, and so of Luke and John.

Hence thirdly, Seeing the Scripture is thus inspired by God, and the Penmen
The Scripture being inspired by God, we should rest satisfied in the style and
method of it.
were moved by him in the composing of it, this should teach us to rest
satisfied in the style and method of it. For the style, because it has not the
florid, and Rhetorical Ornaments, that humane Authors have, therefore some
have disdained it. Yea, how many had rather read some quaint English Books, or
Poets, or Orators, rather than that? Oh be ashamed of that curiosicy and
vanity of thine, if thou art not ashamed to believe in a crucified God, in
Christ, though born in a manger! Why of such a Scripture that does in a plain,
but majesticall manner relate these things? They say, where mines of Gold are,
there grows little Grass, and few Flowers. Thus where divine and holy matter
is, affectation of words, and humane eloquence would be a disparagement to it.
The Scripture is in a style full of Efficacy and Majesty suitable to God, who
speaks it; and therefore the very Heathen could say, That Moses wrote his
History like one that was of God. And for the Method also, that some are
Historical, some Prophetical, some Moral; all this is from the Wisdom of God.
Therefore it is profane arguing on Bellarmin's part, who says, That if God had
intended the Bible to be Rule of Matters in Faith, it would have been put into
some other mould, like a Catechism, or some Body of Divinity. But what
arrogance is this, to prescribe to the Spirit of God? And this may satisfy us
in that Question made by some, Why Paul did write thus in an Epistolary way?
Why, it was by way of Epistles that he wrote, rather than in another manner?
For although some give Reasons, as, Because it was the way of the greatest, and
most learned to answer to questions propounded by others. Hence we have the
rescripta, and responsa prudentium. Or, because it is a more familiar way, and
apter to beget love. Hence Gregory called the whole Bible, An Epistle sent from
the Omnipotent God to Mankind. Though (I say) these Reasons be given, yet it is
best to acquiesce in the Wisdom of God.

Fourthly, Christians should not willingly enter into those Disputes, which The
authority of the Scripture not to be questioned or disputed of.
are apt to be raised about the Authority of the Bible, and how we come to know
they are the Books of God. Austin spoke fully to this, when he acknowledged
that God had taught him, that such were not to be heard, who would say, Unde
seis hos libros? etc. How do ye know these Books to be from the Holy Ghost, and
that the Authors thereof were guided by him? For this is the first principle
of Christianity; We cease to be Christians, if we deny the Authority of them.
So that as in all Arts, there are the prima principia, which are not to be
questioned, and are indemonstrable; So is the Scipture to Christians. They are
like the Sun, that is visible by its own light. And indeed it would be a vain
attempt to undertake such a proof to a Christian; seeing nothing can be
apprehended of greater Authority with him than the Scripture it self. Therefore
the people of God should stop their ears against all such Disputes. For it was
the Devils way of old to make Eve question the truth of Gods Word. Yet

In the fifth place, Because the importunity of Papists and Heretics, yea Yet
to arm our selves against the Devil, and all Heretics, it is good to consider,
1. That we have as good ground to believe the Scriptures were written by their
acknowledged Penmen, as that any humane works were made by their Authors.
and sometimes the Devil himself, who does assault Gods own children; In this
very point it is good to consider these particulars:

First, That we have as great a testimony to believe that the Books of the
Scripture were written by those holy men to whom they are ascribed, as we have
to believe any works were made by humane Authors. That Plato's works were made
by Plato, that Tully's works were made by Tully; thus that Paul's Epistles were
made by him: Yea, we have far greater reason, for there were miracles wrought
by most of those, who wrote those Books, which could not but confirm their
Authority in writing; whereas Plato and Aristotle, these never wrought any
miracles. Now then, if there were no more, this is something, That there is not
so much reason to doubt of these Books as made by such men, then of any humane
Author that ever wrote. And as thou have no doubts there, so neither may any
be made here. But

In the second place, We must go higher, for this is but an Humane testimony,
and so only begets an Humane Faith. They introduce Humanity 2. Hence it
follows, that we must believe the matter therein to be of God.
in stead of Christianity, who affirm, We believe that there was such an one as
Jesus of Nazareth, upon no higher motives, then that there was such an one, as
King Henry the Eighth. Therefore this principle once granted, as it must be,
then it will necessarily follow, That we must receive the matter therein, as
the word of God, and not of man. For this being their Writings, and they
therein declaring, that they are sent of God, and that their Doctrine is of
Heaven, it must necessarily follow, That the ultimate motive of our Faith, is
that Divine Revelation, and Authority appearing therein. So that if this be
cleared in an humane way, that such men there were once, and they wrote those
things; as the malicious adversaries who wrote against them do confess, then
they therein declaring of whom they come, and from whence enabled, we do no
longer receive their works, as we do humane works, but as the word of God.
Humane Faith may make way for a Divine Faith; but this Divine Faith cannot be
ultimately resolved into it. And if to this

In the next place, you add, The wonderful Doctrine informing us about 3.
Hitherto we are to add the heavenly Doctrine and matter of the Scriptures; as
also the consent of all, and martyrdom of many Christians and miracles,
testifying the truth of them. 4. To these we are earnestly to beg the
assistance of the Spirit of God.
God, and the way of reconciliation of a sinner with him; as also the purity
and holiness of the promises, the excellency of the reward promised, and the
terrible threatenings denounced: as also the fulfilling of predictions spoken of
many years before; the miracles wrought to confirm it; the Universal Consent of
all Christians in those Books, except some doubt for a while about a few, which
was afterward quickly removed; as also the patient Martyrdom of many millions
to testify this truth. These and other things may abundantly quell all those
Disputes and atheistical reasonings that may rise in thy heart. But that these
may persuade thee, Thou art earnestly to pray for the Spirit of God, which
alone works a Divine Faith in us, in and through the Word, without which
though all those Arguments be spread before us, yet we remain Atheists or
Scepticks.

Use. Is this Epistle then of Divine Authority? Is it not so much Paul, as God
by Paul? Take heed then of rejecting any duty, or truth contained therein.
Among other passages take notice of that, 2 Cor. 4. 15. He that is in Christ is
a new creature; old things are passed away, all things are become new. If this
be received as a Divine Truth, then what will become of you, who yet lie in
your old lusts and sins? Is this Gods Word? Oh tremble then, thou that have
thy old rags upon thee! None is in Christ, but a new creature: Is not this
place enough to convert the whole Congregation? Do ye need any more to cast off
all your former impieties? But how long shall we complain, Who believes Gods
word?

SERMON. IV.
What an Apostle was. Christ in the building of his Church used extraordinary
Officers, but did not follow the Model of the Jewish Government. What were the
Properties and Qualifications of an Apostle.

2 COR. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, etc.
THe next thing considerable, is Paul's description from his Office, and that
Why Paul calls himself an Apostle.
is, an Apostle. He names his Office, thereby to be received with Authority.
And that they might honor his Calling, it being of great consequence for those
who come in the Name of the Lord, to be assured of their Calling.

The word Apostle is sometimes used more largely for one that is sent; and What
an Apostle was.
so in an eminent manner is applied to Christ himself, Heb. 3. 1. Yea, some
say, it is used generally for any Messenger; and they instance in Phil. 2. 25.
where Epaphreditus is said to be the Philippians messenger, (...); and so it
seems by the Translation, our Translators understood it; but Salmasius does
vehemently contend, pleading also the consent of the Ancients, that it is to be
understood of an Apostle, and that Paul never uses the word, but of eminent
and chief Officers in the Church, so that he is called the Philippians Apostle,
because he was a special fellow laborer with Paul, in planting of that Church.
Two kinds of Apostles, primary and secondary.
Therefore he distinguishes of Apostles, making two kinds of them: and indeed
the Scripture plainly insinuates it. The primary-Apostles, those who were
immediately called by Christ, being twelve in number. Or secondary, and these
were sent by the Apostles: They were the Apostles Apostles. For seeing that
many came in at the Apostles preaching, insomuch that they were not able to
manage all things themselves, they therefore assumed as assistants others, whom
they called Apostles. Therefore 2 Cor. 11. 5. and Chap. 13. 11. we read of some
that are called (...), the chiefest Apostles. So that the name was given to
others besides the eminent twelve. And of these Salmasius and Illyricus
understand that place, Ephesians. 4. 11. where the Apostle says, God had set in
his Church some Apostles, etc. that is (say they) some choice and eminent
Teachers. But Salmasius by these secondary Apostles seems to mean the
Evangelists, whereas those are distinguished in that enumeration. It Is enough,
that others were called Apostles besides the twelve, and that they were
Coadjutors with them in the planting and propagating of the Gospel.

Now the Apostle Paul, though he was none of the twelve immediately called by
Christ, yet because he had such an extraordinary Call afterward by Christ,
while glorified in Heaven, which none else had, but he, therefore is justly
reckoned with the other, and so accounted as the thirteenth Apostle. Thus that
which was of such exceeding rich grace, and so extraordinary a privilege to
Paul, yet he was not pussed up with it; but 1 Cor. 15. 9. makes a new Greek
word, He was less than the least, and looks upon himself as an abortive, and
one born out of due time. Observe

That Christ in the first planting of the Christian Church, did appoint
extraordinary Christ in his first planting of his Church appointed
extraordinary Officers, which he called Apostles.
Officers, which he called Apostles.

That as God in the first plantation of the people of Israel, when he brought
them out of Egypt, and imbodied them together, did guide them and provide for
them in an extraordinary way, which did wholly cease, when they came to be
settled in Canaan. Thus did the Lord Christ, in the beginning of his Church use
many extraordinary things, as Officers and Miracles, which now have no more
continuance, though the advantage of these does still belong to us. For those
very miracles, though wrought long since, and those extraordinary Officers are
yet of spiritual influence. That Christ did appoint Apostles, and how,
appears in their first Institution of them, Luke 6. 13. and Matthew. 10. 2. and
this he did of large bowels, and compassions to those whom he would save; They
were sent as so many Ambassadors, to woe and beseech people in Christ's stead
to be reconciled with the Father. He did not take a way by immediate
inspiration and efficacy upon men's hearts, as he might have done. For he that
could cure the dead, though he were distant from them, could also have poured
his Spirit upon all flesh, though bodily absent from him, yet he was pleased to
use this mediation of man, as being more suitable and fit instruments for to
work upon us.

To improve this Doctrine, consider

First, That it is observed by learned men, That our Savior in the edification
Our Savior in the building of his Church, did not follow the Government of the
Jewish.
and building of the Christian Church, did not follow the Jewish Church
Government, which was formerly appointed by God, viz. by an high Priest, and
chief Priests with the Levites under them. Therefore the Officers of Christ's
Church are not to be called Priests or Levites, though sometimes the Ancients
call the Elders and Deacons so; but that is by allusion only. For, as was
said, our Savior did not propound that form in the Old Testament to follow: So
that all those endeavors which have been used to conform the Church of Christ
to the Jewish in Government, and Ceremonial Worship; as to have a Pope, because
an high Priest; to have glorious vestments in the Worship of God, because the
Priests had; this is to go contrary to Christ. For indeed if our Savior did
follow any thing, it was the Synagogues and their Orders. Hence learned men
show, That the chief Ruler of the Synogogue, he had his Messengers to go up and
down to the several Synagogues upon special employment, and these were called
Thelichin, Apostles: So they had two sorts of Elders, which were made by
imposition of hands, and they had Excommunication in their Synagogues. Yea,
some say, both Baptism and the Lords Supper were taken as Rites from the Jews
then in use; for they had such an initiation of all Proselytes, and when they
took such in, they took in their children also: And so for eating of bread, and
drinking of wine. Only they add, That when Christ took up these, he changed
the nature of them: They were Rites and Ceremonies before, but Christ made them
Sacraments. But let the learned debate these things. This is enough to us, That
Christ he did as the chief Head of his Church, choose some, whom he called
Apostles, for to begin and propagate his Church. The properties of an
Apostles.


Therefore in the second place consider, That these Properties go to make an
Apostle, so that he could not be an Apostle, who had not these qualifications.
As

First, It was necessary that he should have an immediate Call from Christ. 1.
He should have an immediate call from Christ.
So ye read they all had. Therefore when Judas was fallen from that Office, the
other Apostles did not presume to choose one in his room by themselves, but
they did solemnly call upon God, who by lot gave direction, who should be the
man; and then Paul, as you heard, he was immediately called by Christ from
Heaven, and therefore often says, He was not an Apostle of men, or by men, but
wholly and solely by the will of God. Thus as there were Prophets in the Old
Testament, and so also some in the New, who were immediately inspired by God;
so there were such who also had an immediate Call from God; and it was the
consideration of this Call that did so imbolden them, especially against all
traducers and false accusers, as appears by Paul himself in this Epistle. But
now you must know, That though the Pastors and Teachers, which in after ages
have ruled in the Church, had not such an immediate Call from God, but mediate
by man, yet even they also are truly appointed of God. Even the ordinary
Officers are in Christ's stead, and are to be received as from God, for they
have as true a Call, though not as immediate. As Abel Adam's son was as truly
a man, though in an ordinary way, as Adam, who was immediately made by God.
Hence Ephesians. 4. 11. Christ is said to set in his Church Pastors, as well as
Apostles. This is necessarily to be observed, because that we are apt to
despise that Office, which has not an immediate Call.

Secondly, It was required to the Apostles to be the first builders and
planters of 2. The Apostles were to be the first builders of the Church.
Churches. Therefore they were called, the salt of the earth, because by them
God did wonderfully season the world. They were the light, because the world
was in darkness, before they were raised up. So that although Christ himself be
properly the foundation, and all Churches are built on him as a Rock, yet the
Scripture says, We are built upon the Apostles. Likewise Ephesians. 2. 20. Jesus
Christ being the corner stone. So, Revel. 21. 14. The twelve Apostles, are the
iwelve foundations. Hence Divines usually distinguish between Fundamentum
fundans, and fundatum. The Apostles they are a foundation, but yet need another
foundation, which is the Lord Christ. Besides, it is the Doctrine of the
Apostles, and not their persons, which the Church is built upon; only they
were next to Christ, the first founders and builders of the Christian Church.
Hence we read that Paul had the Apostleship for the Gentiles, and Peter for the
Jews, Gal. 2. 8. And in this sense Cameron has a singular opinion of that
place so much vexed by Interpreters, viz. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock
will I build my Church; he understands it of Peter, and that he was the
secondary Rock (Christ being the chiefest) upon which the Jewish Church was
built, for by his Ministry they were converted. But this is capable of several
Objections.

Thirdly, It was requisite to the Apostles, that they should be eyewitnesses
3. They should be eyewitnesses of what Christ did and suffered.
of what Christ did and suffered, that so their testimony might be the more
undoubted: And therefore even the Apostle Paul, though converted after Christ's
death and resurrection, yet acknowledges, that Christ was seen of him also;
but for the other Apostles, they were present with Christ: And therefore the
Apostle John, 1 Epist. 1. 1. begins his Epistle thus, That which we have seen
and felt. This eyewitness, and familiar conversation also with Christ is
mentioned, Acts 10. 41. God showed Christ, not to all the people, but unto
witnesses chosen before of God even to us who did both eat and drink with him.
And this is that which confirms the History, some of them relate, for they
were present in the acting of those things they record, and their faithfulness
and honesty is abundantly testified otherwise. So that although we did not see
and behold what Christ did, and his miracles with our own eyes, yet those
Apostles did, who are without all suspicion.

Fourthly, The Apostles were universal Officers; they were not limited or 4.
They were universal officers.
fixed to particular Churches: as the Pastors were, but the whole Church of God
was their flock; Therefore they are called, the light of the world, and the
salt of the earth, not Judea only: And thus the Apostle professed, He had care
over all the Churches; Therefore you see to how many Churches he directs his
Epistles; and although Paul makes his Apostleship for the Gentiles, and Peter
for the Jews; yet that was either by consent, or else, though they did
principally attend to these, yet they did also declare the Gospel to others, as
it is plain in Cornelius his case, that Peter did preach to the Gentiles.

Fifthly, They were endowed with the Spirit of God in an infallible manner; 5.
They were endowed of an infallible spirit.
so that while they were on earth, they were a kind of visible infallible
Judges. Whatsoever person or Churches did resort to them, for the determining
of any case of Conscience, they could decide infallibly. Therefore the Apostle,
1 Cor. 7. though he says in the point of marriage, that it was he, and not the
Lord; yet that is, he had not express command from the Lord, otherwise he was
infallibly directed in that resolution by the Spirit of God. And howsoever it
be disputed, When this Spirit of infallibity was bestowed on them? As also,
Whether they could grow in knowledge, or no? For it is plain at their first
mission, they were not freed from Doctrinal Errors, as about Christ's temporal
Kingdom; their doubt of the Resurrection, and ignorance about preaching to the
Jews. Yet it is most probable the Apostles had this bestowed on them in a more
large manner at the Pentecost, and Paul at his conversion. As for that fault
charged on Peter, Gal. 1. that he did not; (...), it was not an error in
judgment, but in fact. For although the Apostles were preserved from errors,
this privilege being for the gathering of Churches at first, yet in respect of
practice they might and did err, thereby needing always forgiveness of sins.
Only for Doctrine they could not, because on them, that is their Doctrine, the
Church is said tobe built.

Sixthly, They were likewise endowed with miraculous gifts, so that they 6.
They were endowed with miraculous gifts.
abounded in all wisdom and knowledge, as also in all tongues. For God calling
them to such an Universal Office, he would not fail in bestowing of them those
necessary means that did conduce thereunto. Not that it was necessary they
should be endowed with the knowledge of the Mathematics, or such other Arts,
but with what was conducible to that end. Now miracles they were necessary,
because they preached that Doctrine, which was wholly new to the world, and
could not be demonstrated by Reason: therefore miracles were required to
confirm it.

Seventhly, They were the chiefest and highest Officers in the Church. They 7.
They were the chiefest and highest officers in the Church.
were the Stars of the first magnitude, these were next to Christ himself,
and yet though in so exalted and glorious an Office, there was one Devil
amongst them, Judas the Apostate. So that none have cause to boast in any
Church Priviledges. Those that are called here beatissimi and sanctissimi by
their Office may be misrrrimi in hell.

Eighthly, They were all equal in respect of Power and Authority. Our Savior
8. They were equal in power and authority.
said equally to them all, Whose sins ye remit, they shall be remitted. Peter
has no supremacy over the rest. They might differ in gifts, graces, and labor
or work for God, and love from Christ, as John was beloved above all; but in
respect of Authority none was superior to others.

Ninthly, They were temporary Officers, and therefore did cease with the
persons. Even as Miracles, so Apostles were only for the first planting of 9.
They were temporary officers.
the Church, so that they have no successors in their Office. Hence it is high
arrogance for the Pope to call his, the Apostolical Sea.

Tenthly, Though extraordinary Officers, yet they did contain what was
inferior. 10. Though they were extraordinary Officers, yet they contained what
was inferior under them. Lastly, though they were thus admirably qualified,
yet they did not convert all below them.
Hence Peter calls himself a fellow elder; and John in his two last Epistles
styles himself, the elder, not the Apostle; so that the ordinary Pastors
succeed the Apostles in what they had as ordinary, viz. to preach the Word, and
dispense the Sacraments.

Lastly, Though thus admirably qualified, yet they did not convert all before
them. But many resisted their Doctrine, many grew enemies and opposite to them:
Insomuch that all but John were put to violent deaths. It Is then no wonder, if
ordinary Pastors do not reform a whole Congregation, if they be hated and
opposed; for can they expect to be better than the Apostles? Do not then think
with your selves, if we had such as the Apostles to preach to us, immediately
called of God, and that could confirm their Doctrine by miracles, then we
would presently submit; This is but deceit and hypocrisy. And certainly,
though the Apostles be taken from us, yet we have their Doctrine. Paul speaks
by his Epistles to us still. We need not with Austin wish to hear Paul
preaching.

SERMON. V.
The Divine Call of Church Officers is clearly to be known, and faithfully to
be improved. What advantages will follow upon a true Call, both to the Officers
themselves, and the People.

2 COR. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, etc.
WE have considered Paul under the second adjunct attributed to him, viz. his
Apostleship, Paul an Apostle; whereupon we treated on the Office of the
Apostles. We proceed to a second Observation. For whereas Paul does therefore
mention his Call to that glorious Office, thereby to be received with greater
reverence and authority: as also to encourage himself against those false
Apostles, who used their utmost endeavor to bring him into reproach with the
Corinthians. We may thence observe this, It is of great consequence both to
Ministers and people to be informed of the Divine Call of their Church Officers.


That it is of great consequence both to the Ministers of God, and the people
to be fully informed of that Divine Call, which the Officers of the Church have
toward them.

That they who preach may be able to say, We come in the Name of the Lord to
you. It is not we that have obtruded our selves, but God that has invested us
with this Office over you. And they also who hear, may say, We esteem of you as
the stewards of God; we receive you as Ambassadors from the Lord to us.

To pursue this, first, Consider that there are many large disputes both in old
Both ancient and modern Writers have much disputed about the Call of
Church Officers.
and later writers about the Call of Church Officers. As the truth it self is
subject to many difficulties: So the perverse disputes of men have made it more
intricate and entangled; only this we may observe, That the several parties
which are in Religion that hold any Ministry, or such an Office at all, and
that by Divine Institution (for some deny such an Institution) they still
monopolize and appropriate the Call to themselves; with them only is the true
Church; with them only are the true Officers of the Church. And no doubt that
way of Religion, which can say, with them only is the true Call, and the true
Church Officers, and the right administration of Ordinances, does infinitely
excel all other ways. For Gods promise and success does accompany only his
own Officers, and his own Ordinances. As the people of God, will not hear a
stranger, but flee from him; so neither will God go along with such strangers.
It Is only to his Apostles and their Successors, that he promises to be with
to the end of the world. Therefore that Church who can upon just grounds say,
that with us are the true Officers, with us are Christ's institutions punctually
observed; no doubt but with them is Christ present, and with them is the
Kingdom of Heaven. This was the great advantage Abijah pleaded in his
Remonstrance against Jeroboam, who had devised a new Ministry and a new
worship, 2 Chronicles. 13. 9, 10, 11. Where he pleads, That in Jerusalem was the
true succession of Priests, and there was the charge of God kept, and that
therefore God himself was with them. To have therefore a true Call, is of so
great concernment, that all pretend to it. The Papist charge the Protestant,
That their Ministers have no true Call: The Protestant returns the same
charge to them. The Brownist, he says, neither Papist nor Protestant have true
Calls. Yea and the Protestants themselves, because of their different opinions
in Church Government, have also different opinions about the Call of
Church Officers. So that it being of such consequence, no wonder if the Devil
keep up this controveesie as much as may be in the Church, especially if he
pursue this design, to make the world believe, That the faithful Ministers of
God have no true Call: for this is to strike at the very root of all. Hence it
is also, That in the several ages of the Church there have been false Prophets
and false Apostles. Yea our Savior Mat. 26. says, There will be also false
Christ's; and the Apostle says, The Devil transformeth himself into an angel of
light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. But my intent is not at this time, to dispute the Nature
of a Ministers Call, and how you may discern it from false Calls, when you may
conclude the Minister you live under has a true Call. For all this will be
more properly handled toward the the end of this Epistle, when the Apostle is
compelled to plead his Call against those that questioned it.

In the second place, It Is not enough to plead a Call, and that a true one,
unless there be also a faithful improving of it, unless the Office be executed
It is not enough only to have a true Call, but that Call must be likewise
faithfully improved.
according to the institution of it. Paul does not glory in the mere Title and
Office of an Apostleship, but supposes also his faithful dispensation of it.
Yea he was so careful herein, that he professes, He knew nothing by himself,
viz. of negligent and ill administration in this Office, 1 Cor. 4. 2. Yea he
says, That he kept his body, lest while he preached to others, he himself
should become a reprobate, 1 Cor. 9. 27. Judas was an Apostle, yet he had
little cause to boast in that Office, seeing he was a Devil at the same time.
Grant therefore that some may make it clear, that they have a Call from God,
yet if they are not faithful and diligent therein, the greater will be their
condemnation be. Suppose the Pope could prove (which yet he can never do) that
he does succeed Peter, and that in Universal Jurisdiction, yet if he did not
succeed likewise Peter in his Doctrine, in his diligence and life, he were
inexcusable: and well did the Painter draw Peter with too red a color, as
blushing at the enormities of his Successors. So that two things go to make a
complete Officer in the Church, his Divine Call, and his faithful
administration thereof; and this later is necessary, because without diligence
therein he cannot expect that promise, and assistance of God, which otherwise
would be communicated unto him.

These things premised, let us consider, what are the great practical
concernments, which will follow those who have a true Call of God. And

First, For the Officers themselves there are these encouragements: What
advantages follow upon a true Call. 1. To the Officers themselves 1. They may
expect Gods assistance.


1. He may justly expect Gods assisting of him with such qualifications of zeal
and courage, as are necessary to that work. Thus the Apostle speaking of all
the Ministers of the Gospel, says, We have not received the spirit of fear,
but of power and love, and a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7. It Is God that gives us
such a spirit, where God calls to an Office; there he gives suitable
assistance. For as it is with the general Call of Christians, because God
calls them to holiness, therefore he furnishes every one with grace, without
which happiness cannot be enjoyed: So it is in peculiar special Offices; if in
civil, he gives Saul another spirit, and much more in holy functions. Hence he
touched Isaiah's lips with a coal of fire from the altar. Though Jeremiah
pleaded he was a child, yet God promised to enable him; And when Moses did
again and again excuse his inability to the Office God put upon him, The wrath
of God was kindled against him, Exodus 4. 11. saying, Who has made man's mouth?
who makes the dumb, or deaf, etc? Have not I the Lord? If then God calls, he
can give wisdom, mouth and spirit, such as none shall be able to withstand. Oh
then, what a comfortable support is here! When thou art dejected under the
thoughts of thy insufficiency and weakness, thinking thou shall fail under the
burden, and prove a reproach to the Office: Yet because God has called thee,
thou may imbolden thy self, thou may say, Lord, I came not hither of my
own will, I am not in this place and Office by my own seeking, but all is of
thy will and ordering, and therefore do thou own thy own servant. Though I am
weak, thou art not: who is the Father of Spirits, but thou alone? Therefore
under all imperfections, do thou run unto God, who has set thee in that
Office.

2. As he may expect assistance, so also Protection and Defense in all the 2.
Gods protection.
dangers they are assaulted with. For it cannot be, but he that is called of
God, if he do the work of God zealously and impartially, but he will raise up
many enemies, and find great opposition in his work. Now as our Savior told
his Disciples of their danger, That they should be haled before Rulers, thrown
into prisons, and cast out of Synagogues; yet he bids them, Take no thought
what they should say (viz. not in a sinful distrustful manner) because at
that very time it should be given them, what to speak, Mark 13. 11. He does not
forbid a lawful premeditating, but that which is accompanied with slavish,
worldly fears, and humane distrust, as if the Spirit of God would not be ready
to assist. Does not Paul reckon up the several dangers that he was every day
in, insomuch that his safety was every day miraculous? Yet God delivered him
out of all. He prayed to be delivered from absurd and unreasonable men, and God
heard him. Thus Jeremiah likewise, he did undertake a very difficult Province,
he was to deal with Scorpions and tigers, yet Jer. 1. 17, 18, 19. God bids him,
Not be dismayed at their faces, for he had made him a defenced City, an iron
pillar, and a brazen wall, etc. They might fight against him, but never
prevail. This then is a blessed reviving, when in the midst of all thy
assaults, all the troubles thou do conflict with; this man reproacheth thee,
that man revileth thee, thou can appeal to God, O Lord, Is not all this,
because I do the work commanded? Is not all this, because thou have sent me,
and because I am an Ambassador in thy Name? Certainly, if David did so
severely avenge himself upon the Ammonites for the injury done to his
Ambassadors; No less will God reward those, who despise those he sends. And
therefore it is one of the great wonders in the world, That Christ has
maintained a Ministry in his Church for so many hundred years; when all the
malice and policy that could be devised, has been employed to overthrow it.
Yea God has in most ages, still stirred up some with admirable zeal and
courage to withstand the deluge of corruptions that were in those days: and
though many have been violently put to death, yet some have been wonderfully
protected, as John the Evangelist, Athanasius and Luther.

3. They may expect wonderful success and fruitfulness in their labor. For
seeing God has sent them, and they come in his Name, their labor shall not be
in 3. Success and fruitfulness in their labors.
vain. The Apostles, though few, were made salt enough to season the whole
world. At one Sermon, Peter converted three thousand, Romans 15. 19. Paul tells
us, The Gospel did spread it self by his preaching; yea some of Caesar's own
household became converts. Thus does the Lord wonderfully cooperate with his own
instruments; insomuch that Divines have a Rule, Qualis vocatio, talis
successus; yet this must be wisely understood: for as in the Scripture many
precious godly women went barren, and had the reproach of not bearing children,
as Sarah and Hannah: So many eminent servants of God, though called by him, and
owned (as it were) by name, yet have not had such success in converting of
souls, as others had. Yea Christ himself did not convert so many as the
Apostles. Isa. 49. 2. Christ speaks notably to this, of this protection by God,
yet the little success he had. So that it is the Scriptures complaint of
stretching out the hands in vain all the day long, to a gainsaying people.
Therefore The word commonly more succesful to those who never had it before.
we are to distinguish of people, for they are either such as never had the
Word of God preached to them; or such, who though enjoying of it for many
years, yet have so universally apostatized, that a Reformation is like a new
plantation of the Gospel. Now to such a people as these, commonly the Word has
been successful, and multitudes have been caught in the Net of the Gospel.
Commonly at such seasons there has been a preparedness made for the Gospel to
run and to be glorified. Thus you see the Romans, Corinthians, and many
Heathenish places were converted from their Idols to serve the living God. Thus
also among the Jews, when Christ came as a reformer to that apostate people, he
says, That the harvest was great, but the laborers were few, Luke 10. 2.
There were more to be converted, but no instruments to do it; and therefore he
bids them, Pray unto God, to send laborers into his harvest: As with ground
new broken up, there the labourer has the greater hopes.

But in the second place, There are a people, that have long lived under the
means of grace, and have often resisted the Spirit of God in the Ministry. Now
The Word less successful to a people that have lived long under the preaching
(...).
for the most part there is very little conversion wrought on such. Not but
that Gods arm is as strong as ever, and the Word is as powerful an instrument,
and God does approve of his Officers, only the unworthiness and
unprofitableness of the people have deserved, that God should give them up to
spiritual judgments, and that no Ministry or preaching should ever do them any
good. And therefore you see, when Isaiah was sent to preach to the people of
Israel, Chap. 6^. it was not to open their eyes, or soften their hearts, but
the clean contrary, to shut their eyes, and harden their hearts. Do not
therefore question the Call of a Ministry, if the work of conversion be not so
general, as might be expected. For consider the people, are they not like the
ground the Apostle speaks of, that having often drunk in rain, yet bringing
forth nothing (...)sing? Heb. 6. 7, 8. A terrible place it is, if they had been
a people bringing forth herbs fit for use, then God had a blessing for such
ground, but because they are only briars and thorns, the end is to burnt. So
that though the Ministry does not work in a saving way, yet it is in a damning
way; and this discovers the Call to be of God, as well as the former, because
he punishes people thus for their unthankfulness and unprofitableness. But

2. The Ministry of God is not only for conversion, but edification, and
building up. If therefore God makes the Word useful for further illumination
and sanctification, this discovers it to be of God. Hence Ephesians. 4. 13, 14.
There A twofold Use of the Ministry besides conversion, to increase grace, and
prevent error.
is a twofold use of the Ministry spoken of, One to perfect and to carry
forward to an higher stature in Christ; and the other, to prevent errors, and
to safeguard against all heretical ways. Now the edifying and building up of
the godly is of great importance. The Apostles wrote their Epistles chiefly for
this end, to increase that godliness, which was already begun.

Lastly, The Minister, whose call is of God; and discharges it faithfully
shall Lastly, They may expect a greater reward from God.
have a great reward from God. They that turn others from their sins, shall
shine as the stars in the firmament; The Apostles shall sit upon twelve
thrones; whereas those who run without a Call, and work without a Commission,
their labor is in vain, and God will ask, Who has required these things at
their hands? Yea both they and their Office shall be destroyed; so that in
stead of a reward they will meet with severe punishment. Then on the peoples
part, it is of great consequence for them to be assured of this, Let a man
esteem of us (1 Cor. 4.) as 2. What advantage the people may have by being
assured of their Ministers call.
the stewards of God. Oh if you receive the Ministers as from God, as having
commission from him, with what reverence and obedience will this be? But
especially you will take heed of opposing and setting against them, lest ye
should be found fighters against God.

Therefore let the Use of this be of Conviction, especially to such, who
acknowledge Use.
us the true Ministers of the Gospel: You who receive us as your Ministers, and
cry out against all those that question their Call. Now out of your own mouths
you will be condemned, if you do not receive their Word, as it is indeed the
word of God, and not of man. Oh therefore do you discover the experimental work
of the Ministry upon your hearts! Let it be said of you, as of these
Corinthians, They were his Epistle to be read, and seen of all men; You are our
walking Sermons, all may see what we preach by your lives; you are our Sermons
to be read and seen of all men.

SERMON. VI.
Of the proper and appellative Names of our Savior, Jesus and Christ. In what
sense he is Jesus a Savior, and how Christ the anointed of the Lord.

2 COR. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, etc.
THe second main particular considerable in this inscription, is the Efficient
Cause or Author of this Apostolical Office, he mentions, and this is said to
be Jesus Christ.

These words may be considered, either absolutely, as they declare unto us the
Lord Christ: Or relatively and respectively to Paul's Apostleship. And from
both these considerations, profitable matter will afford it self.

In the absolute consideration, we may take notice of our Lord and Saviors
Description.

1. Of his proper Name, which yet does denote his Office, Jesus. 2. His
appellative Name, Christ. We shall conclude both these at this time. And
For the first word Jesus, Osiander, otherwise a learned man, has a singular
Of the proper Name of our Savior Jesus.
opinion, viz. That Jesus comes from Jehovah, only the Hebrew letter Shin is
interposed, because he is called Shiloh, Genesis 49. his conceit being, that as
Christ himself was compounded of two Natures; so ought his Name to be of two
names; the one, viz. Jehovah, signifying his Divine Nature; and the other
Shiloh his humane Nature. One Argument he urges is from Phil. 2. where God is
said to give Christ a Name above all Names. Now (says he) the Name Jesus was
common to many others; therefore he had such a peculiar name, as none ever had.
But that is a gross mistake, as if Name were there taken for a Word, and not
for the Person or Office signified thereby. No less absurd is his notion also,
That whereas the word Jehovah was ineffable, not pronounceable before (a
figment of the Rabbis) by this addition of (...) it is made utterable. To this
purpose almost Castalio likewise, who makes the word compounded of Jehovah and
Ish vir, as if it were God-man; but not only the general consent of all, but
the reason that the Angel gives of this Name, makes it evident, that Jesus is
the same with Joshua, (for so the Septuagint render that word sutably to a
Greek termination) and so comes from Jashang, to save; and therefore the Angel
says, He shall be so called, because (...) he shall save his people from their
sins. So that this name is very expressive, In nomine Jesu totum latet
Evangelium, The whole Gospel lies in this name of Jesus, or a Savior. The
Greek word (...) is so comprehensive, that Tully says, The Latinists cannot
comprehend it in one word, sospitator comes nearest to it.

In the Old Testament we read of two very eminent that had this name, and both
of them are made Types of Christ: Joshua, who lead the people of Israel into
Canaan, when Moses could not do it: So Christ brings us to Heaven, which was
impossible to the Law; and Joshua the high Priest, mentioned by Zechary, who
being first accused, because of his despicable garments, was afterward covered
more gloriously. So Christ our high Priest, in the time of his Humiliation, was
condemned, and of no reputation; but in his Exaltation was magnified and
exalted gloriously. The word thus explained, we observe,

That the Lord Christ is a Jesus, a Savior to his people. The Lord Christ is a
Jesus, a Savior to his people.


This truth should be sweeter than the honey or the honeycomb to the lost
sinner. Christ has some names of terror and dread, as when he is called a
Lion and a Judge; some again of love and comfort, as this of Jesus, which, as
Bernard says, is, In ore mel, in aure melos; not that the name, or the sound
of words is such; and therefore that superstitious custom of bowing at the
name of Jesus, was not for some hundred of years after Christ, and has no
Scripture institution. But the Office signified by name is to be cordially
improved by the believing soul.

Therefore to explain this, Consider^

First, That Christ is not a Savior in any temporal or worldly sense. It Is 1.
Christ is not a Savior in temporal sense.
true, God is said to be the Savior o^ the whole world, because of his
preservation, which extends to all; but Christ is a Savior, because he saves
his people from their sins; Mat. 1. It was a corrupt opinion among the Jews,
yea the Disciples were leavened with it, That Christ should come, and be a
temporal Savior, as Joshua and Moses I were ^^but this salvation is wholly
spiritual; it is from our sins, from the Devils; and condemnation, which as it
is the greatest salvation, and none could be a Savior, in this sense, but
Christ: So it ought to be of the greatest esteem with us. Therefore the Gospel
is called (...), it being the most happy and blessed news that can be, for
broken and undone sinners to hear of a Savior. Do not then come to this
Savior for loaves, for outward advantages, but if sick for sin, and burdened
under the load of it, come to this Savior for ease.

Secondly, He is a spiritual Savior, but not in a Socinian sense, as if 2. He
is not a spiritual Savior only by example.
he did only save us by example, and giving us a pattern of holiness, but not
saving us by his blood, as a ransom and atonement made to Gods justice for us.
The Scripture is clear, not only to inform us of being our Savior; but in what
manner; and indeed the manner how, viz. by becoming a curse for us, and
suffering in our stead, as a Surety, does wonderfully aggravate the love of
Christ, and make it love unspeakable.

Thirdly, He is not a Savior in an Huberian sense, as if he did actually 3. He
does not actually save all.
save all. For he says, That as Adam did actually condemn all, so Christ did
actually save all, that is, put them into a state of salvation, so that if they
fall from that, and are condemned, it is a new wilful transgression of their
own: but the Text says, He shall save his people, not all from their sins.

Fourthly, He is not a Savior in an Arminian sense, as if he were a Savior 4.
He is not a Savior only habitually, or upon condition.
only habitually, aptitudinally, or upon condition. If men did believe in him,
and receive him, as a Savior by impetration, not application; for this is to
make the whole fruit of Redemption uncertain, and that he might have been a
Savior, and yet not one saved. But

Fifthly, He is a Savior in an efficacious applicatory manner. Those that he
intentionally died for, he will save. This good Shepherd will find out his lost
sheep, and not expect till the lost sheep come and find him, which will never
be. They are his sheep he lays down his life for. It Is his people he saves
from their sins. So that those of whom Christ is a Savior, he will in time
cause by effectual grace, that they shall come home to him, and be made
partakers of the glorious benefits that flow from his death.

Thus you see in what sense he is a Savior, take notice of the properties of
it.

1. It Is a spiritual salvation; and therefore carnal and natural men, who feel
1. He is a spiritual Savior.
not themselves spiritually undone, they will never run after him. The godly
soul that complains of the guilt of sin, of the power of sin, of the
remainders of corruption, he it is, that cries out, Oh let this Savior come
and save me! And he can the more affectionately do it, because he himself was
saved and delivered by God, from the cries and agonies he conflicted with. The
Apostle aggravateth this for our comfort, Heb. 5. 7. He made supplications with
tears unto him, that was able to save him from drath. And Heb. 4. 15. because
he was tempted like us, sin only excepted; we are therefore exhorted, to
come boldly to the throne of grace. And hence some consider that of Zechary
Chap. 9. 9. where the daughter of Zion is exhorted in rejoice greatly, because
her King comes having salvation. (The word being in Niphal) they render it
Salvatus, being first saved himself, and then saving us; howsoever this
experience of our infirmities makes him the readier to save us: but to whose
heart is this truth welcome save to the spiritual Christian?

2. He is the sole Savior. Act. 4. There is no other Name under heaven by 2.
He is the sole Savior.
which we can be saved. It Is high presumption to add other Saviors and
Mediators to him under any distinction whatsoever, so that we must go to him
alone. And truly this is a very hard duty, witness all that Pharisaical and
Justiciaryrighteousness which is in the world. How unwilling are men to
renounce all their own righteousness, to trust in him alone, to rest upon him
only?

3. He is a full and sufficient Savior; there is no defect or fault in him, he
3. He is a full and sufficient Savior.
cannot say, he has not salvation enough; yes he has enough for thee, and
every godly man else. Hence he is called (...), and (...), by Simeon, Salvation
in the very abstract, as having all the fullness of it in him. Hence he is said
to be able to save to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. Oh let this vanquish all thy
fears and dejections, saying, Can Christ save some sinners indeed, but not so
heinous a wretch as thou judge thy self to be?

Use 1. Of Instruction. Judge then your selves to be undone and lost by reason
of sin. Christ says, He came to save that which was lost, Matthew. 18. 11.
Use. Of Instruction
As long therefore as thou art full and well in thy self, and do not come
often into Gods presence, saying, Oh I am a lost man! Oh my sins have undone
me, all the world cannot save me! What shall I do, O Lord Christ, Be a Jesus,
be a Savior to me? Till (I say) thou art in these sad agonies, Christ is no
Savior to thee. Shall the Disciples in danger of drowning, Matthew. 8. 25. cry
out, Lord save us, we perish? And the Israelites, when Dathan and his Accomplices
were swallowed up, cry out, we die, we perish, and are consumed: How much
rather should the sense of our sins affect us?

Use 2. Of Instruction. Be not discouraged, if truly humbled, though guilty of
great sins: Why is he a Savior, if thou art not lost? If thou had no sins,
there Use 2. Exhortation.
would be no need of a Savior.

The second Description is from his Appellative Name, Christ, which is as Of
the appellative Name of our Savior Christ.
much as anointed, or the Messiah. The word is used sometimes generally to all
the people of God, Hab. 3. 13. The whole body of Israel is there called Gods
anointed; and to this sense Grotius brings that place, Heb. 11. where Moses is
said to account the reproaches of Christ better than the treasures of Egypt.
By anointed, he understands the people of Israel. But that is not so probable.
It Is more specially attributed to those that are chief amongst the people of
God, Psalm. 105. 15. where God is said to rebuke Kings for his peoples sake,
saying, Touch not my anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm; that is, Abraham,
Isaac, and others, who were in eminency of esteem with God: He does not mean
Kings there, but his eminent servants. Hence it is also that amongst the Jews,
their chief Officers, Kings, Priests, and sometimes Prophets were anointed. Now
Christ because he did excel all these, being the true Trismegist, the King,
Priest and Prophet; Therefore he was called the Messiah, or anointed one, (...)
in a transcendent manner. Hence from Daniel, Chap. 9. 24. The anointing of the
most holy; he was called the Messiah, as if none deserved the name but he.

Now you must know there is a twofold anointing, or a twofold Oil, which In
what sense Christ is said to be anointed
the Scripture speaks of; one material and visible, which was used in the Old
Testament; the other material and invisible, which is the Spirit of God, with
the graces thereof. When therefore Christ is called the anointed, and God is
said to anoint him, Act. 4. 27. and Psalm. 45. 7. And also the people of God are
said to have the anointing, 1 John 2. 27. Hence Hierom said, Disce Christianum
nomen tuum interpretari. This is wholly to be understood after a spiritual
manner. For as Oil was in the Old Testament used significatively, to represent
the graces of Gods Spirit; hence every thing dedicated to God, was to be
anointed; to teach us, That no approaches unto God, without sanctification,
were acceptable. So in the New Testament, the Spirit of God and his graces,
still retain the name of anointing. The Jews out of extreme hatred to Jesus
Christ, will not call their Messiah, whom they expect (...) but (...). Now
Christ is therefore the Messiah, the anointed one, that he may be a Jesus,
without this he could not have been a Savior. Observe,

That the Lord Jesus is anointed to be our Savior. The Lord Jesus was anointed
to be our Savior. What the title Christ implies.


Therefore he is called the Messiah, the Christ; and the chief scope of the
Evangelists, is to prove, that Jesus of Nazareth, then born, was the Christ,
the Messiah. For as Antichrist must be discovered by having all the peculiar
characters, that the Scripture attributes to him: So must Jesus be proved to be
the true Christ by having all the Prophecies and promises fulfilled in him.
This title Christ does briefly imply:

First, His solemn inauguration and consecration to that Office of a Savior.

Secondly, The full qualifying of him for that work, both in fitness of
Person, and fulness of graces. Therefore (as you heard) God is said to anoint
him. And certainly if Moses were enabled to bring Israel out of Egypt, and
Joshua into Canaan, notwithstanding all the oppositions in the way, fear not
but Christ the anointed will bring all his children to Heaven, notwithstanding
all contrary power.

Use of Encouragement to every believer, Christ is anointed to be thy Savior.
Use 1. Of encouragement.
Therefore he wants nothing for that Office, and God desires no more. Though
thou art wretched and sinful, yet thou have not a weak sinful Christ. Thou
may now always live in a Jubilee. Did the poor Israelite, whose Land was
morgaged, and houses sold, trouble himself about money, when that time came? No
Jubilee was better than money that released all debts, etc. Thus the Lord
Christ is anointed to save thee; Christ is better than perfect obedience, than
Adam's integrity, than freedom from all sin; Christ was anointed with the
Oil of gladness, let it be Oil of gladness and joy to thee.

2. Is Christ thus anointed? Then labor to partake of this ointment, Use 2. Of
Exhortation.
1 John 2. 27. What a glorious expression is there of all the godly? They have
an anointing that teaches them all things, viz. practically, in necessaries to
salvation. A man may be a very knowing man, and yet have not this anointing,
but the oil that was poured on our Aaron, descends on his skirts to all his
people, Ps. 45. God is there said to anoint Christ above his fellows, that is,
as some expound, above all anointed Kings or Priests; but others render the
Preposition min propter, for his fellows, viz. all the godly, which are made
his brethren. Let then thy life be like that Alablaster box of ointment.

SERMON. VII.
Church Officers are appointed by Christ, and all Church Power radically seated
in him as King. What Duties follow thence to be practiced by Church Officers
and People. Some things are highly esteemed in the Church, which are much
despised by the world.

2 COR. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, etc.
THe Author and Fountain of Paul's Apostleship has been considered absolutely,
under those two names Jesus Christ. We shall now take notice of them
relatively. For herein does the name of the Apostle breed reverence and esteem
with believers, because Jesus Christ himself does appoint them. So that the
Apostle does not make himself the ultimate object, into which their faith and
obedience, is to be resolved, but the Lord Christ. Insinuting hereby, that if
they reject him, they also refuse Christ himself. It is not in his own name
that he comes, neither does he intrude himself into this Office, but he is
sent by Christ, and comes in his Name. Now although, when he is said to be the
Apostle of Jesus Christ, we may understand it finaliter, because his whole work
and office was to advance Christ, to exalt him, to study and preach nothing but
him, yet it is chiefly to be understood efficienter; For his meaning is, he had
his Office, and his Power from Christ. Observe,

That the Lord Christ, as Head of his Church, does appoint all Officers
therein, so that they act and officiate in his Name. Christ as Head does
appoint all the Officers of the Church


The Apostle speaks this fully, 2 Cor. 5. 20. We are ambassadors for Christ,
we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God. What an efficacious
Argument is this for your attention and bedience? The Ministry is not an humane
invention; neither do we plead our own interest, or act in our name, but it is
Christ's interest, we are his Ambassadors, we come in his Name to you. It is he
that gives us our commission to preach and baptize, insomuch that all the
affronts, contempts and rebellions that our Ministry meets with, for it is sake
it redounds upon Christ himself; and what is done against us, coming in his
name is taken by the Lord Christ, as done against himself; He that hears you
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me, Luke 10. 16. See how heinous a sin it is, and how
far it reaches thus to reject those who have Christ's commission to watch over
a people. It is not for our selves, but for your good, ye should know these
things.

But let us consider the Doctrine; and to explain that you must know,

First, That the learned do from the Scripture find a twofold Kingdom A
two-sold Kingdom attributed to Christ in Scripture.
attributed unto Christ. The one as he is God, having the same Essence with the
Father, and so ruling over the whole world. The other as he is Mediator, and
Head of the Church, and so the chief Governor and Shepherd thereof in a
peculiar manner. The first is called his Essential and natural Kingdom. The
second his Dispensatory and Donative. The Sacinians have occasioned this
distinction. For when we bring those places, where Christ is said to be King,
and Lord, to be exalted above all principalities, to prove his eternal
Godhead. They answer, This is a constituted Godhead; Christ was not thus
King, till after his resurrection; and therefore (say they) it was given him in
time, whereas if it were an essential attribute of God, it must he had from all
eternity. To this it is answered, That Christ as God had right to all that
glory and honor, which was given him in time; but then as Mediator, so it was
a reward, at least a consequent of his obedience and humiliation. So that they
grant, Christ did in time receive a Mediatory Kingdom and glory, whereby he was
made Head of his Church, and to rule in with supreme power and authority,
though from the Father; neither does this derogate from his Deity, to say it
was given him; for it was not given him to make him more perfect, only to
perfect his Church, and it is a gift of such a thing, which only can be
attributed to God; for none but he that is God can be Mediator and Head of his
Church, because he that is so, must be the cause of all the grace and spiritual
benefits which are in the Church.

Secondly, Christ being thus exalted as Head of the Church, all Church Power is
radically and f^^tally seated in him. So that the power to make All
Church Power radically seated in Christ.
Church Officers, does not arise originally from the people, as (they say)
civil power does, and is therefore called (...), on humane ordinance, but it
comes from the Lord Christ. Hence Matthew. 28. 18, 19. when Christ had said, All
power is given me in heaven and earth, then from this power, he appoints them,
to go teach and baptize. Thus in another place he says, John 20. 21, 22, 23.
As my Father has sent me, so I send you, whosoever sins ye remit, etc. From
his Mediatorship ye see, he gives the Keys of Government to his Officers. This
also in a lively manner is affirmed, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11. where Christ's ascension
is spoken of, and his glorious exaltation, That he might fill all things, that
is, appoint all things in his Church, whereupon he enumerateth all Offices, and
shows that they have all their Commission from Christ, and that both, the
ordinary, as well as the extraordinary.

Therefore in the third place, The Officers in the Church are properly servants
Church Officers are properly servants to Christ.
to Christ, and receive their power and commission from him. It Is not the
Church but Christ, that has set Officers in his Church. The Church indeed may
apply the person to the office, but Christ institutes and applies the office
to the person. The Church cannot make a Minister in this sense, viz. to
institute the office, for then it might appoint other offices, then Christ
has, only it may design the person. For Christ is the fountain of all
Church Power, and officers receive their authority from him. It Is true, that
the Apostle says to the Church of Corinth, All things are yours, 2 Cor. 4. 5.
And in another place, We are your servants for Jesus sake; but the meaning
thereof is ministerially; their office, and the execution, that was wholly for
the Churches edification, not that they had their power from the Church. For
who can think that Paul had his authority from men, when he disclaimeth it so
often, yet he reckons himself in the number of those that are servants for
their spiritual benefit.

Thirdly, Although it be disputed, Whether the power of appointing Officers and
Laws in the Church belongs to Christ as a Prophet, or a King. Some This power
of appointing Officers and Laws in the Church, belongs to Christ as King
say, as a Prophet he does thus govern his Church, yet it is more probable that
be does this as a King: So that Christ as a spiritual King over his people,
does appoint what officers, what Ordinances and Orders he pleases: so that you
must know that this is part of Christ's Jus regale, and they come equally from
the same fountain, both to appoint an Officer and an Ordinance. The Church can
no more appoint a new Office, than it can a new Ordinance, a new Sacrament.
This is greatly to be observed, because the Governors in the Church, or the
civil Magistrate for politic considerations have instituted new Offices, and
many times made the Government of the Church, suitable to that of the
Commonwealth, equalizing spiritual Officers with Civil; but this may be no more
done, then to appoint a new Ordinance; and the reason is, because both Offices
and Ordinances are for supernatural effects, to convert, to build up in grace.
Now none may appoint any thing for such high ends, but those only who are able
to accomplish them: Christ only can convert, therefore he only can appoint an
Officer, or Ordinance for conversion: Besides, to appoint new Officers, would
redound to Christ's dishonor, as if he were not either wise, or able enough to
appoint all things in the Church necessary to attain salvation, whereas the
Apostle prefers Christ above Moses, That he was but as a servant, but Christ
as a son in the house, Heb. 3.

Use of Exhortation; first, To the Church Officer. Does he come with Christ's
Use. Exhortation. 1. To Church Officers.
Commission? Does he appear in his Name? Then let him be sure to improve his
Office according to Christ's command. If Paul be an Apostle of Jesus Christ,
then his work will be to exalt Christ; our power, says he, is not for
destruction, but edification, 2 Cor. 13. It Is a capital crime for an
Ambassador to vary from his Cossimission, to go contrary to that. This should
daily lie upon our hearts, To what end have I this Office from Christ? Is it
not to labor in his vineyard? Is it not to convert souls? Do not all the
names, which Church Officers have, employ labor, work and diligence?
Especially these things they must take heed of:

1. That they turn not the Office of Christ into matter of pride, dominion
Church Officers are especially to take heed of, 1. That they turn not their
Office into matter of pride and earthly interest.
and earthly interest. Even the Apostle himself said, Not as having dominion
over your faith, but helpers of your joy, 2 Cor. 1. ult. And the Apostle Peter
forbids the lording over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 3. This tyranny in the Church
by the Officers thereof, has been a fatal destruction thereunto. When the
Sun has been in the Eclipse sad alterations must needs follow, say
Astrologers. As not into pragmatical domination, so neither may they turn it
into earthy and worldly advantages, setting up their own name, their own
greatness, or their own worth thereby, which the Apostle often disclaimeth; But
we are to walk, even as Christ himself in his office, who sought not himself,
neither did he mind his own will, or his own glory. And certainly, the higher
the Office is, the greater will thy account be, and thy condemnation the
heavier. Oh the dreadful account that is to be made at that day concerning
this talent!

2. Of laziness and idleness. For the work is of great consequence, The blood
of souls will speak more terribly than the blood of Abels body. How 2. Of
Idleness.
severe was the master in that Parable of our (...) to him who hid his talent
in a napkin? Luke 19. 20. he is called an unprofitable servant, and must be
cast into utter darkness.

Use 2. To you that are the people. If we have our Commission from Christ, Use
2. To the people
then take heed how you reject the Word we speak from him. The Apostle makes a
comparison between him that refused Moses speaking, and Christ speaking, and
says, How much forer punishment shall he be thought worthy of, Heb. 10. 29.
Every Sermon your condemnation will rise higher upon you. Think not that our
words will pass away: No, God says by the Prophet, They shall not return in
vain: for if it be not a saving and converting word, it will be an hardening and
condemning one. No wonder if our Savior spoke one Parable to this very
purpose, and concludes, Take heed how you hear, Mark 4. 24.

The second thing observable from this relative consideration is, That the
Apostle Why Paul styleth himself, An Apostle of Jesus Christ.
intending to beget awe and esteem in the hearts of those he wrote unto, he
mentions his Office, and from whom he had it, An Apostle of Jesus Christ.
This was a greater glory (says Chrysostom) then if he had styled himself any
temporal Officer in the Civil State. For he does (says the same Father) as if
one next to the Emperor should write to a certain people, giving himself that
title of honor, which was next to the Emperor. Thus does Paul, The Apostle of
Jesus Christ. This could not but astonish and startle all his opposers and
enemies, yet if you do consider, with a worldly respect, what Christ himself
was, and so any Officer under him, you must judge it the most contemptible and
despicable thing that can be, that which a carnal man would have been ashamed
to own; for Christ himself was called, The Carpenters son, and bred up at
Nazareth, a most despicable place; and his outward condition was so low, that
he says, He had not where to lay his head. And as for his Apostles, what
repute they had in the world, Paul himself tells us; when he says, They were
accounted the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4. 13. Yet see how the Apostle
glories in this title, as that which might justly awe the consciences of those
to whom he wrote. From this observe,

That those things are of high account and respect in the Church of God, which
Those things are highly esteemed in the Church, which are despised by the
world: As
in the world are very despicable and despised.

As, That which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abominable before God, Luke
18. So that which is abominable and loathsome before men, is highly esteemed
with God.

We might instance in many things,

First, Christ who is the Head of the Church, and the chief cornerstone, yet
he was rejected 1. The person of Christ.
by those, who by their Office was builders: Yea, Christ crucified was
accounted foolishness to the Gentiles. Insomuch that had not God promised
Christ, To give him the Nations of the Earth; and had actually lifted him up,
above all principalities and powers. We should have thought, there would not
have been one City, much less one Nation, especially not so many Nations
adoring him as God: We may truly say, This is the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes. Christ is called by the Apostle, The King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; which 2 Timothy 5. 16. Drusius says, was the Title and Style of
the great Kings of Persia; but who, except the Christian, would admire Christ
more than the Persian King? Therefore it was a wonderful work upon those
Wisemen of the East, that they should come and bring such presents, and worship
Christ, though an Infant, whom they found in a mean place at Bethlehem, and in
the meanest place there, but where God gives spiritual eyes, there is a
spiritual excellency discovered, where the world sees nothing but
contemptibleness.

Secondly, For the Officers of Christ. In worldly considerations, how low 2.
The Officers appointed by him.
and despised are they? But to those who are spiritual, and acknowledge the
Order and Institutions of Christ, they esteem them, as the Stewards of God, and
the Ministers of Christ, insomuch that it is the cause of contemning Religion,
when their Office is despised. Paul was so received by the Galatians, as if he
had been an Angel from Heaven; Yea, Christ himself; They would have pulled out
their eyes to have pleasured him. And we see in the after ages of the Church,
how much the Ministers of Christ were had in esteem, insomuch that it greew
unto an excess. Now though the carnal, worldly man bears no such respect to
them, yet those, who are led by Scripture, do highly esteem them, and that
for their works sake.

Thirdly, The Duties prescribed by Christ, they are such as the world 3. The
Duties prescribed by him.
condemns, either for folly or pusillanimity, as, Faith in Christ alone for
salvation, self-denial, readiness to take up our Cross; To love our enemies,
to do good to those that hate us: Are not these such things that the
magnanimous and gallant spirits of the world do disdain?

Fourthly, The privileges and encouragements, which Christ also inviteth with,
they are not such baits, as will take in the world. Psalm 4. Who will show 4.
The Privileges of the Gospel.
us any good? that is the vote of the world. As for the light of Gods
countenance, justification, and assurance of Gods grace, these things they do
no more esteem than the Swine does Pearl.

Lastly, The due execution of the Censure of the Church, upon just 5. The due
execution of Church Censures.
grounds, to cast out the impenitent sinner. This the world contemns; but yet
you see how powerfully it wrought upon the Incestuous person. And Matthew. 18.
when our Savior had said, He that would not hear the Church, must be like a
Publican and Heathen, lest they should despise this, he says, Whatsoever ye
bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven.

Use of Exhortation. To admire the power and wisdom of God, who has Use.
kept up Church Officers, Church-ordinances in the world, when there are no
outward pompous motives to persuade thereunto.

SERMON. VIII.
In what sense Paul says of himself, He was an Apostle by the will of God:
Showing likewise how all. Church-Offices and Privileges, come merely from the
will and good pleasure of God.

2 COR. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, etc.
WE are now to consider the last particular in this Inscription, as it is
divided to us, and that is the impulsive Cause, or rather, the Manner how Paul
obtains this Apostleship, which is said to be by the will of God.

Here is much comprehended in this expression; for hereby is declared, That How
many ways the will of God is taken.
it was not man, but God that called him; and therefore they should take heed,
lest while they set themselves against his Office, they fight against God
himself. The will of God (...) is used sometime for the Effect and Object of
his will, being the same with (...), Psalm. 40. 8. and in many other places.

2. For the (...), the very act of willing, Romans 9 15. And

Lastly, For the attribute and property in God, whereby he wills; but this
being the same with his Essence is infinite, and so transcendently differing
from man's will, which is supposed to be a faculty distinct from the soul, and
so an accident having also many imperfections accompanying of it, because it is
the will of a finite creature.

It is not proper in this place to enter upon those great and large Disputes,
which are de voluntate, or of the will of God. Though it might be operosum, yet
it would not be operae pretium, especially in this place, where it is mentioned
upon a particular consideration, viz. as that whereby Paul was made an Apostle.
Paul does not here attribute any thing to himself, but all to the good will of
God; for (...) here is as much as (...), his beneplacitum, his good pleasure,
both approving and procuring Paul's Apostleship. From whence observe,

That it is the mere will and good pleasure of God that calls us to any
privilege It is the mere will and good pleasure of God that calls us to any
office or privilege in the Church.
or office in his Church.

As for Paul's own particular, he is often affected with this grace of
Apostleship, as he calls it, which was vouchsafed to him, whereas he had been
the chiefest of sinners. And lest it should be thought, that Paul indeed might
well attribute his Office, and all to Gods grace, because he was so notorious a
sinner you may read that Christ speaks to all his Apostles, that he alone not
for their merits, had appointed them to that Office. Joh. 15. 16. Ye have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you.

Let us illustrate this Doctrine. And We have all Church Priviledges from the
mere will of God.


First, Every privilege we have in the Church of God, we obtain it by the mere
will of God. And this must needs be so, for our call to the Church Priviledges,
such as Justification, and Adoption, and Salvation, are greater and higher
mercies than any peculiar Office never so eminent. If God has called thee to
sanctifying grace in an effectual manner, this is far greater than to be made
an Apostle. Judas was chosen to an Apostleship, but not to salvation, and
therefore his end was dreadful.

The Scripture speaks of a twofold Call, That general one, which belongs
There is a twofold Call, the one general, the other particular, both which
come from God.
to all the people of God, who are his called ones, and that according to his
purpose; and a special particular Call to some Office or Relation; and both
these are of the will and good pleasure of God. For our effectual Calling as
Christians, This is frequently ascribed to be of grace, not by works we have
done, Romans 9 15, 16. It Is not of him that wills. You see, it is not our will,
our power, or strength, but of God that wills. Thus Jam. 1. 18. Of his own
will begat he us. This consideration then should humble all the godly, as Paul
says here, An Apostle by the will of God: so may thou, a Believer by the
will of God, justified by the will of God; it is because God will have it so; my
will, my power, nor the will of any man else, could not effect it for me. And
this is for the general, as we are called to be believers.

But then more especially, concerning Gods will, as to particular Relations and
Offices, especially in Gods Church. It is good to take notice of that old
distinction, A fourfold distinction concerning the Call of Officers. 1. Some
are called only by the will of God, not at all by the will of man.
which Hierom had long since, concerning the Call of Officers in Gods Church.
For there are some (says he) that were called only by the will of God, and of
Christ, not at all by the will of man. Thus were the Apostles, they were
appointed Officers by the mere will and appointment of Christ. And therefore
Gal. 1. 1. we see in what a special manner Paul was an Apostle by the will of
God; for he says, He was neither an Apostle of men, or by men, but of Jesus
Christ; nor of men, that is, he was not chosen by their votes and suffrage; nor
by men, that is, he was not as the ordinary Pastors, who though called of God,
yet were made so by men, as Timothy and Titus ordained Elders in every City
where they had to do.

2. There are those who have their Call of God, but by men, such as we now 2.
Some have their call of God, but by men.
mentioned. For though their Call was partly by the will of man, yet not
solely. Therefore God is said 1 Cor. 12. to set these ordinary Officers in the
Church, as well as extraordinary. As Joshua, though appointed by Moses to be
chief Magistrate to the people of Israel, was as truly of God, as Moses, though
not so immediately.

3. There are those who are of men only, but not of God; and they are all such,
3. Some are of men only, not at all of God.
who by unlawful and sinful ways get into the Ministry, and so have an
outward Authority and Office, though they be wholly unworthy, and unfit in
themselves. These are indeed by the will of God; but it is a permissive will
only, or by his just anger against an unworthy people.

Lastly, There are those, who have neither Call from God, or men; that are 4.
Others have their call neither from God nor men.
Preachers neither by the will of God, or of men, but their own self-will.
These are intruders, that approve themselves, that judge themselves fit without
the advice of others, These run and are not sent.

In the next place, Let us consider how comprehensive this is, when Paul says,
An Apostle by the will of God, and it is not useless: for every Minister ought
to say so, I am a Minister of the Gospel by the will of God; and the people
ought to say, Such an one is our Pastor by the will of God. It is God that had
a special hand that he should be our Pastor, and we his flock. And

1. It is more than a mere bare will of permission. Paul did not mean Gods mere
permitting and suffering of him to be so, for thus all the false Apostles, all
In what sense Paul here says, By the will of God. 1. It is more than his
permissive will.
the false and corrupt Teachers that are, they are by the will of God. It was
by Gods will that any unworthy and corrupt Teachers have ever crept into the
Church of God, 1 Cor. 11. There must be heresies, God will have it so; but how?
It is only his permissive will, whereby he suffers sin to be. It was a custom
that some Church Officers had to say, They were so permissione divina, by
divine permission, as thinking themselves unworthy, only God suffered it to be
so. Even as Bernard styled himself vocat us Abbas, as if he had only the name,
not the reality: but it is well, if this was not proud humility. To be sure as
God sometimes suffers evil Governors in Civil Affairs, so he does also in
Church-administrations.

2. Paul is an Apostle not by Gods just and angry will, raising him up for the
2. It is not his angry and just will.
sins and punishment of a people; but it was from Gods good pleasure. And
this consideration is very terrible; God has not only a permissive will, but a
just ordaining will of evil and ungodly Officers at some times, to some people,
for wise and holy ends, God in great anger does will such Officers and
Ministers to God sometimes does justly send ungodly Ministers amongst a people.
a people, that shall be blind guides, that shall be thieves and robbers, that
shall be ravening wolves, and shall lead many to hell with themselves. Sad and
fearful is the condition of such a people. See a notable place for this, 1
King. 22. 22, 23. where God is described as a just Judge sitting upon his
Throne, and an host ready to wait on him. Now there was wicked Ahab, who
desired such Prophets that would speak no evil to him, that would flatter him,
and thereupon see what God says to the lying Spirit, he bids him Go, and be a
lying Spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets, and he shall persuade and
prevail. Thus the Lord still does. There are many people love not a Minister,
that will reprove sin, that will promote godliness and holiness; but let them
have a man, that will let them be at ease in their sins and formality. Now
God in his just anger, and by his provoked will brings such a Minister to such
a people: You would have such, and God will have you have such, and they shall
persuade and prevail. To this purpose also, Jer. 5. 30, 31. Now this will of
God in ordering such Officers, is sometimes to increase the condemnation of the
Officer himself, and to draw out his sins more. They are Officers in the Church
through the anger of God to themselves; they will gnash their teeth that ever
they were entrusted with such power, for thereby they become more wicked. Had
not Judas better have been the poorest wretch in the Church of God, then such
an eminent Officer? It is sometimes also for the wickedness and ungodliness of
a people; and therefore even those that are godly, who live under such
providential Ministers (I call them providential Ministers, because they are so
by his providence in anger, not by his approving will) they are to consider two
things:

1. To bless and praise God, that the lying Spirit in the Minister has not
prevailed on thee; that he has not led thee into the ditch, that his poison
has not fallen on thee: Oh admire Gods goodness herein! And withal

In the second place, Humble thy self under Gods hand. It is his will it should
be so, as yet the providence of God does manifest him offended with such a
people.

3. The will of God does imply, that Paul was not an Apostle by chance or mere
hap, but that there was a directing hand of God in it. And certainly such a
consideration 3. It was by the directing will of God, not by chance
would much imbolden Paul; for as he was by the will of God made an Apostle, so
by the same will he should continue, and be preserved in the same,
notwithstanding all oppositions whatsoever. And thus all the godly Ministers of
the Gospel find the good will of God toward them, that they were at first set
apart for that function, or by some providence of God brought to desire it.
They may find many times a peculiar will of God, that sometimes when their
friends would have it otherwise, yet God would have them Ministers. And thus
also for their designation to such a people. How many times are great
discoveries of Gods will, that where there was no likelihood, yet God would
have him Pastor to such a people? It is of great use both for Minister and
people to observe the special will of God. For as in civil relations of husband
and wife, there God many times discovers a peculiar will of his bringing them
together, which made the Wiseman say, Riches were an inheritance, but a wife
was the gift of God. Riches and an inheritance are also the gift of God; but
those relations are in a more peculiar manner of him. And it is good for those
that are in such relations to quicken themselves by meditation on the will of
God, that brought such things about, beyond all expectation, or humane
providence. Thus also it ought to be in spiritual relations: Oh it is good to
lay to heart, how the will of God has been, that thou should live under a
powerful Ministry, it may be all thy life time, and it has been denied to
others, who often have sought to God for such a mercy. Act. 16. 6. You may
there read, that Paul while in his travails preached the Word every where where
he came, yet was forbidden to preach in Asia; yet at the same time at the sixth
verse, There stood a man, and cried, Come over into Macedonia, and help us. See
how the Spirit of God like the wind blows where it lists, commands Paul
to one place, and forbids him another.

4. It implies, That it was no merit or desert in Paul, which advanced him to
4. It implies, it was not Paul's merit, but Gods will that advanced him to this
office.
this Office. For as believers, John 13. are said, Not to be born of the will
of men, or of the will of the flesh, but of God, which takes all from man, and
gives all to God: So it is in this work of the Ministry; it is not because men
have parts, or learning, or holiness, that God sets them apart for such an
Office, but God himself. God tells Jeremiah, Chap. 1. 5. That he had sanctified
him from the womb, that is, set him apart to be his Prophet; and this was
before any good at all could be in him. And this also Paul himself
acknowledges, Gal. 1. 15. where he says, He was separated from the womb. And
observe, how both the work of grace, and his Apostleship came together; and the
fountain of all is made Gods pleasure, When it pleased God to call me. Thus you
see, that those who are raised up to be serviceable in the Church, have all
from God, both (...) and (...), Potentia and Potestas, as they are sometimes
distinguished. Hence it is that this will of God does not reach only to the
appointing of him to his Office, but the inward preparing and fitting of him
for that work. Thus you see that all things necessary for a good Minister is
comprehended in this, That he is so by the will of God.

But you may say, What if a Minister should at first enter into this Office
Concerning those who enter upon the Ministry only upon carnal and corrupt
motives.
merely by the instigation of a corrupt will? Nothing at first made him intend
the Ministry but hopes of preferment, and getting a livelihood in the world?

I answer, It is indeed a most blessed thing, when it is with a Minister, as
with Paul; he was made an Apostle at the same time, when God did also inwardly
reveal his grace to him: when from the youth the workings of sanctification,
and zeal to convert souls, has put them upon the Ministry; but where such
corrupt principles did prevail, and were the only motives to be a Preacher of
the Gospel, there must be great humiliation for them: and no doubt many godly
Ministers of the Gospel have greatly bewailed their sinful entrance into the
Ministry, that they had only corrupt and carnal motives stirring them up
thereunto; and when this is done, no doubt God will accept of their labors,
and they be made the more zealous for God.

Use of Exhortation, both to Ministers and People to study and meditate more
Use.
upon the will of God in these things. Am I a Minister by the will of God? Are
these my flock by the good pleasure of God? Was it of God, that I was separated
and set apart for this work? This will be a great Goad both to duty and
comfort. And

For the People, it is for you to look up to God more in this matter: Can you
say, Such an one is a Pastor to you by the will of God, not by his permissive
will, or providential will only, for this may be in wrath and anger to you; but
his approving and appointing will? If so, take heed how ye resist the will of
God.

SERMON. IX.
Paul's mentioning of Timothy, shows, That the Godly, though exalted above
others in Office and Gifts, yet are humble toward them.

2 COR. 1. 1. And Timothy our brother, etc.
THis is the second part of the Inscription, wherein we have the person
conjoined in this Salutation, and he is described by his name Timothy, and by
his relation, our brother.

The Apostle does in several Inscriptions in his Epistles likewise name this
Timothy, not that he helped Paul in composing of them, but partly for Timothies
encouragement, to show the good esteem he had of him. As Nazianzen (if my
memory fail not) in his Funeral Oration upon Basil, declaring the excellency
that was in him, said, If Basil had lived in Paul' s time, he would have
prefixed his name in his salutatory Prefaces, as he did Timothy and Sylvanus,
etc. And partly because Timothy, as to the Corinthians had a peculiar relation.
For 1 Cor. 4. 17. Paul had sent him to them, to put them in remembrance of
their duty; and it seems, being now returned again unto Paul, he informed him
of the Churches estate there. So that Timothy might well be mentioned, as
having some peculiar relation to their Church Affairs. In some other Epistles,
he joyneth other persons, is Sosthenes, etc. Yea, Gal. 1. he conjoyneth all the
brethren that were with him.

So that we may attribute this to that great humility which was in Paul, that
though so eminent and transcendent in Office and grace above all others, yet is
pleased to make others sit (as it were) upon the Throne with him, and not to
arrogate all things presumptuously to himself. Indeed the Popish Commentators,
they instance in the Pope, that he calls other Bishops Brethren; but all
know, that what title soever he may use, yet he claims an universal
Jurisdiction over them. But in Paul it was otherwise. From whence observe,

That the truly godly, though eminent in Office and Graces, yet are exceeding
The truly godly, though eminent in office and grace, yet are humble in
themselves and condescending to others.
humble, and condescending to those that are far inferior to them.

Paul, though an Apostle, esteems of Timothy as a brother, though in other
respects, he was his son, begotten by his Ministry. The truly godly, and the
wicked, they are discovered by their spirits. The spirit of pride and ambition
is in all corrupt teachers; And therefore when Austin the Monk was sent over by
the Pope for the conversion of England, as they call it, the Monks that were
then in the Land opposed him, concluding he had not the Spirit of Christ in
him, because he was so full of pride and lordliness; but all the true Officers
of Christ, they are endowed with that Spirit which Christ himself had. Now the
holy Ghost descended in the form of a Dove upon him. And he bids all learn of
him, for he was lowly and meek. Hence he tells his Disciples, That he will not
any more call them servants but friends. Yea after his resurrection he says,
Go tell my brethren. The Apostle aggravateth this great condescension of
Christ, Heb. 2. 11. That though he was the only Son of God, yet he humbled
himself to become man, and so was not ashamed to call believers brethren.
Therefore there cannot be a clearer instance of this humility and condescension
then was in Christ himself. Now all the godly they are followers of Christ in
this, as well as in other respects; inso much that it is a certain
qualification in all the godly, that though God has never so much above
others, yet they become condescending to the lowest Christian: Even as Christ
himself disdained not the least that came to him. Hence you have that command,
Mind not high things; but condescend to men of low estate, Romans 12. 16. Even
the poorest and meanest that are godly, are to be cherished and nourished by
those that are more eminent. The head must not despise the foot, because both
are in the same body. Hence also at the tenth verse in that Chapter, you have a
paradoxal exhortation, In honor to prefer one another; How can that be? Even
because there is no godly man, though never so excellent, but a weaker and
meaner Christian may exceed him in some things. Thou have more gifts, more
abilities, but it may be another has more sincerity than thee. Besides, every
godly man, though in the highest form, is acquainted with those infirmities and
corruptions that are in his own heart, which he thinks such, though far
inferior to him, are not guilty of; and hence arises that duty of preferring
one another amongst the godly.

But let us consider, Wherein this humility in godly superiors does discover
it Wherein the humility of the godly discovers it self to their inferiors.
self to inferiors. And

First, It is evident in that they dare not take that honor to themselves,
which others looking upon them as far above them are apt to give them, when
it is not convenient or proper for them. This certainly is a great discovery of
an humble spirit, when they do even tremble at those praises and reverence, yea
reject and refuse it, when it is immoderate. How often are inferior Christians
so dazelled with the luster of those admirable gifts and graces which are in
some superiors, that with John to the Angel, they are ready to make a god of
such, and set them up too much, so as to worship them? But the more godly any
such superiors are, the more they refuse it. We see this notably in Peter,
Act. 10. 25, 26. when Cornelius fell down at Peter's feet, and worshipped him;
Peter took him up, saying, Stand up, I my self also am a man; and at another
time when the Barbarians would have sacrificed to Paul and Barnabas, accounting
them as gods, with what fear and trembling, rending their clothes at such
blasphemy did they come and forbid them? Act. 14. 15. Thus you see, let the
godly be never so admirable in gifts and graces, yet they will not take more
than is due to them. Certainly, if the Angel forbad John, desirous to worship
him, saying, I am thy fellow servant, worship thou God; how much rather may
every man, though the chiefest of thousands say, I am your fellow servant, I am
subject to sin and infirmities as well as you; praise God therefore, and give
glory to God. As the Apostles when they had cured a lame man, said, Why do ye
look upon us, as if we had done it by our own power? So the godly when enabled
to preach wonderfully, to pray admirably, or perform any gracious acts above
others, they say, Look not upon us, but upon God. What an admirable expression
of humility is that in Paul? 2 Cor. 12. 16. where he is afraid any should think
of him above that he sees, or hears to be in him.

Secondly, The humble condescension of the godly to others, is seen, In their
bearing with their infirmities, and weaknesses in their understanding. Though
they have not such quick abilities, such enlarged capacities, as others have,
yet they do not reject them or despise them. This counsel Paul, Romans 4. gives
to the strong Christian, That he should not judge, or despise the weak: Was not
this admirable in Christ himself? How weak and slow of understanding were his
Disciples, though they had been so long under his Doctrine? yet for all that he
disdaineth them not, but he is ready upon all occasions to give them further
instruction. And Paul, though indeed he does sharply reprove such, as having
great opportunities of knowledge, yet were carnal and babes still, as he speaks
to the Corinthians and the Hebrews; yet for all that he does not cast them off,
but uses all means to promote them to further perfection. The eminentest men
are condescending to the lowest capacities, where they sind godliness and an
humble desire to learn.

Thirdly, Their humble condescension is seen, In the acknowledging and
rejoicing at the graces and gifts which they see God bestows upon others.
Thus Paul, how often does he profess his praises unto God, and continual
thanksgivings in the behalf of them he writes unto for this particular? Yea
they heartily desire such growth in grace, and such plenty of abilities and
gifts, though it should be to the overshadowing and eclipsing of them: Even as
John said about Christ with joy, He must increase, but I must decrease, John 3.
3. And as Moses, Would all the people of God might prophecy, Number. 11. 23. So
can they say and delight in such gifts that God shall give to others, though
inferior. It Is a great sin, and high pride in Superiors, to envy, and to
look with an ill eye, upon the gifts which God may bestow upon those that are
not of their rank. Not that such who have no gifts, should presume as if they
had; or those that have gifts, should intrude upon public preaching, before
the examination and approbation of others. To dislike this, is not to envy the
gifts and graces that are in others.

Fourthly, Their humble condescension is seen, In desiring the prayers, and the
communion even of those, who are far below them. Does not Paul often desire
the prayers of those he wrote unto, though he was an Apostle; yea he desires
to be with them, that he may be comforted by them. There is no godly man, let
him have never such extraordinary gifts, and great enjoyments of God, yet he
needs the prayers of the meanest of Gods children; yea and by their communion
may obtain a great deal of good. They may learn the practice of several graces,
and be much quickened up by them.

Lastly, Their humble condescension is seen, In the compassionate restoring and
reclaiming of such who have gone astray. There is a weakness of parts, and a
weakness of graces. Now when some through this latter weakness, have been
overcome by temptations, they do not superciliously and scornfully reject such,
but labor in a spirit of meekness to recover them. Christ himself is a
president for this, when he compares himself to the Shepherd that went and
fetched the lost sheep home upon his own shoulders. As also to that good
Samaritan, who poured oil into the wounds of that wounded passenger to Jericho.
This counsel the Apostle gives such as are spiritual, Gal. 6. 1. To restore
such as are fallen in the spirit of meekness. And Paul himself, with what tears
and sorrow did he bewail some Corinthians that had defiled themselves?

If you ask, What grounds there are, why the godly, though thus exalted by God,
Why those who are so exalted above others, are yet so humble toward them.
are yet humble to others? The Reasons are,

First, Because they are humbled toward God, and such must needs be humble
toward men. They have these grounds to humble them Godwards.

1. The sense of all that iniquity which formerly they have committed, or for
the present they do commit. Thus Paul from the consciousness of his former
impieties did till his death go halting with the apprehension of his former
miscarriages. They are easily kept low to others, whom God keeps low to
himself. This leprosy upon them will make them ashamed. Though God has set
them on the Pinnacle of the Temple, yet they have corruptions as others; they
feel infirmities in themselves, as well as there are in others. Yea in the
general, they are condescending to the meanest acts of service, that may
promote the spiritual welfare of others. The Disciples wondered to see Christ
talk with a woman, John 4. thought it below his greatness, as a Prophet to do
so; but he said, It was his meat and drink to his Fathers will, even in that
particular. Thus at another time, He washed his Disciples feet, to teach them
humility.

2. They are humble toward God, and so toward men, Because all they have is
from the gift of God, it is he alone that makes the difference. The Apostle 1
Cor. 4. 7. speaks enough to keep the best man in the world, though he had the
gifts and graces of Angels, low and humble in himself. Who makes thee to
differ from another? And what have thou that that thou have not received? 1
Cor. 4. 7. If then all they have comes solely from Gods gift, he calls to an
office, he also gives abilities, then they cannot glory in themselves, but
walk humbly with God in all things.

3. They are humble under Gods hand, Because they do not add at all to God. He
does not need any man's parts, or gifts, and therefore he passes by many, and
will never make use of them, who yet if God had pleased might have been far
more serviceable than thou art. For did not God reject the Angels, who by their
intellectual natures and agility thereof, might have done God more service than
thou can do? Yea the ablest man may look upon all the subtle Heretics, all
the learned men, that have in all ages been promoters of the Devils Kingdom,
and then say, Who has made me to differ from these?

Lastly, They are humble toward God, Because by how much the more God has
lifted them up, the more talents he has bestowed on them, the greater must
their account be. So that there is more cause of trembling and humiliation
under all eminencies and gifts, then any tumor or puffing up. For they are more
liable to a severe account, and if they miscarry their condemnation will be
greater. Thus you see what cause such have to be humbled toward God, and where
that is, there will be an humble condescension to others.

In the second place, A godly man, though exceeding eminent is humble toward
others, Because the meanest godly man, is heir of the same glory, and partaker
of the same salvation with him. So that if you consider them alike in Christ
there is no difference, God respects them alike. In Christ (says the
Apostle) there is no bond, or free, but all are one in Christ, Gal. 3. 21. And
upon this account it is, that Masters are exhorted, To do that which was equal
to servants, that were believers, because they had the same Lord. Only you must
know, that there is a true humility and a counterfeit one; Grace does not put
upon the latter, but the former. For a counterfeit humility makes a man
pusillanimous, not keeping up the due authority of his place and office. The
Apostle, though so humble, that he judged himself less than the least of the
Apostles, yet says, He would magnify his Office, and he pleads for it
against all opposers whatsoever.

Use. To discover our spirits, how we are when exalted to any Office, or
enlarged Use.
by any gifts: Are not we who are apt to charge pride in others, guilty of a
great deal our selves? We look upon those that are higher with a censorious
eye, not considering that there are many under us, who measure out the same
judgment to us Take then the Apostles advise, Be clothed with humility; the
Greek word is rarely, 1 Pet. 3. 5. used. This ought to be a garment all over
us; nothing but the spirit of humility should breath and live in us. And indeed
this is the way to be made higher still. For God gives grace to the humble;
and the humble he will teach his way.

SERMON. X.
There is a great deal of difference betwixt the Persons whom God calls, and
also in the manner of his calling them. Education under godly Parents not to be
rested upon, but our Hearts are to be sought into, whether they be really
changed, or no.

2 COR. 1. 1. And Timothy our brother, etc.
WE are upon the Person conjoined in this Inscription; and that is Timothy,
who is likewise inscribed in the Preface in several other Epistles.

Some have thought that because of this conjunction of him with Paul, that
therefore Timothy did assist Paul, in making and composing of some Epistles:
But that is not probable. He does it (as you heard) to encourage Timothy, and
also hereby manifesting his modesty, and humble condescension.

We have then the Person described by his name, Timothy; and by his relation,
Brother. Not in a large sense, as Paul sometimes calls all believers Brethren,
but in a special respect, because of his Office he was in, though at other
times he calls him Son; of which in its time.

Let us first consider his Name, and so his Person; and then his relation.

His name is Timothy, as much as one that is for the honor of God; and so
indeed he proved in an admirable manner instrumental thereunto. We may read of
what parents he came, Acts 16. 1, 2. his Father was a Grecian, and an Infidel,
but his Mother a Jewish woman, and one that believed. For Paul in 2 Timothy 1. 5.
gives a great commendation of his Grandmother and Mother, and so to himself, as
if their faith had been hereditary. For although his Father was a Gentile, yet
because his Mother believed, she took so much pains with him, as that he knew
the Scriptures from his youth up. Insomuch that Nazianzen said, It was a great
benefit to have godly Parents, especially to have a godly Mother; because the
mother, if holy, has many opportunities to instill holy principles into the
children, while young. And therefore Solomon speaks much of the instructions,
which his Mother gave him.

Concerning this Timothy therefore, two things are observable:

1. That he being educated in an hopeful, godly way from his youth, and for
the good report that he had in the Church of God, as appears, Acts 16. 2. As
also because of some Prophesies and extraordinary Revelations, what an useful
instrument he would be in the Church of God, Paul took a great affection to
him; and made him an Officer in the Church, while he was a young man. So that
Timothy was in respect of his condition clean contrary to Paul; Paul a
persecuter, a blasphemer, an enemy, and that for a long while; but Timothy
hopeful, and a disciple from the youth up.

The second thing observable is, That though Timothy was thus brought up with
godly Parents, and so knew the Scriptures from his youth. And as Calvin
thinks, because of that expression, 2 Timothy 5. where he was persuaded of the
unfeigned faith that was in Timothy, as well as his Mother, that it does relate
not to Timothy at that time, who was no doubt an eminent believer, but to his
infancy or younger years, yet that seems not coherent with that which Calvin
says in another place, viz. 1 Timothy 1. 2. where, because Paul calls Timothy his
own Son in the faith, he says, That Paul was his spiritual Father in
begetting of him to Christ. It is therefore disputed, Whether Timothy was not
converted from his youth, or by Paul's ministry afterward, as he did Onesimus,
while in bonds? Some think, because he calls him (...), his germane, or sincere
Son, not spurious, that he was the means of his conversion; as 1 Cor. 4. he
says, He had begotten the Corinthians by the Gospel. Others say, because he
was so greatly instructed in the Christian faith, and so hopeful, Paul took
him for a companion, and much delighted in him; and therefore Timothy a young
man was serviceable to Paul, aged in propagating the Gospel; as a son to the
father: and this the Apostle insinuates upon a large commendation of Timothy,
Phil. 2. 22. Others they think, That though Timothy might be converted from his
youth, yet Paul did further instruct and convert him in the things of Christ,
and so it was equivalent to a conversion. Now all these three respects may be
allowed of, and have their seasonable matter of Doctrine.

But let us first consider, The great difference between Paul a convert, and
Timothy a convert; one from his younger years a blasphemer, an high sinner; the
other a disciple, and unblameable in his life; then observe,

That there is a great difference both in the persons, and the manner of There
is a great deal of difference both in the persons that are converted, and in
the manner of their conversion.
conversion of those, whom God is pleased effectually to call, and to make use
of.

They are not of the same condition or qualifications, that God calls;
neither are they brought home in the same manner. This Doctrine has its great
usefulness, as will appear.

But let us consider the various conditions, and then the different manner of
their conversion.

First, Some are great and notorious sinners: Others again, are of a more civil
and sober life. Some have from their youth up been kept from all gross sin,
as Joseph, Daniel, Obadiah, and our Timothy in the Text. Others again have been
very foul and scandalous, as Paul, Mary Magdalen, and diverse of the
Corinthians. Thus God cutteth down sometimes crooked trees, and sometimes
straight, and makes his spiritual building of them. God can turn a barren
wilderness into a pleasant spring, He can raise up children to Abraham out of
stones. God is free in the work of grace, and so takes sometimes a great
sinner, and sometimes such as are unspotted in their ways.

Secondly, There is a great difference sometimes in their constitutions; some
are of a more fierce and choleric temper; others again of a more mild, and
meek temper. Moses, he is said to be the meekest man that was upon the earth:
But Elijah seemed to be a man of more fire and passion. Among the Apostles,
John discovers himself to be a man of much love, as he was also much beloved;
but Peter appears to be a man of more zeal, and sometimes inordinate heat, as
when he struck off Malchiu his ear. Thus all the godly are not of the same
constitution and temperament; some are more passionate choleric; others more
mild and temperate, yet God he chooses of all sorts.

Thirdly, There may be difference in their externals; Some are rich, others
poor; some are great in place and office, others are mean and inferiors. For
although 1 Cor. 1. Paul says, Not many noble, not many wise, not many rich
has God chosen, yet some he has, though not many. Yea, those that have been
by their callings greatly engaged to sin, and to act against Christ, yet even
of such God has called some; some of the Pharisees, yea some of the Priests
that were the most prosessed enemres to Christ, are yet said to believe in him.
And thus in times of Reforneution from Popery, although Luther said, In the
Monasteries and Frieries there was greater opposition to the Gospel, than in
the very Alehouses and Brothel-houses; yet Luther himself, and some others
were Monks. Yea, as he says of himself, Insanissimum Monachum, mad in doting
upon Popish opinions, yet God converted them.

Thus you see a world of difference in the Externals of those that God calls; We
might also add the Difference in respect of their Vicinity and Consanguinity.
God calls sometimes out of a wicked Family, a wicked generation, a wicked place,
where there is none else scarce that minds any thing that is godly. In Caesar's
household there were some that believed; sometimes you have a Child converted,
when Parents and all the Kindred are desperate enemies to God: Sometimes again,
you have Parents and Children, and all godly, as it was with Timothy, in
respect of his Mother and Grandmother.

In the next place, Gods conversion of his people is in a different manner.
Some have been in an extraordinary manner, as Paul, and many in the Primitive
times: Others in the ordinary way of the Word; some ^ave had more strange and
remarkable passages to convert them than others.

2. Some have more deep humiliation, and greater terrors upon them than
others. As some children are born with more pain and difficulty than others.
Thus Paul, he was greatly humbled in his spirit, and brought low, whereas
Matthew the Publican seemed to be converted, without such deep impression on
his heart. Mary Magdalen likewise had great humiliation and bitterness of
spirit, else she could not have wept so abundantly as to wash Christ's feet. But
we read of Lydia, when God opened her heart, that she desired to entertain the
Apostles, and discovered not such commotions of soul.

3. There is great difference sometimes in the continuance, others are longer
in the birth, they have many conflicts, sometimes they are even entering the
Haven; and then some violent storms drive them back again. Thus Austin
confesses of himself, That he had many troubles on his heart, and had many
resolves and prayers against his sins, yet still he gave back again, and
would procrastinate, he would weep and pray, but sin again, till at last God
brought him out of the womb of sin, and he returned no more to his vomit.
Others again, as many we read of in the Scripture, were immediately wrought
upon, and with all gladness received Christ.

Lastly, There is variety in the occasions, and in the time. In the occasions,
one affliction has been an occasion to some such or such a correction upon
them; a wife may sometimes be an occasion to her husband, or an husband to a
Why God is pleased to call such different persons, and in such a different way.
wife: Yea, a maidservant was to Naaman both an occasion of his soul and
body's health likewise. And thus for time likewise, some are converted sooner,
and some later; only you must know, that though there may be this difference,
yet in these things all agree.

1. That the work of grace is wrought invincibly and irresistibly in all. There
are none that by their own power, or free will make themselves to differ from
others, all are passive in the work of Regeneration. And

2. Though afflictions may be an occasion and a motive, yet it is the word of
God that is the only ordinary means of our conversion.

Now the Reasons why God uses these various dispensations to all sorts, may be,

First, To show the freeness of Grace. For if one sort of persons only be
converted, it might be thought some merit or desert were in them, which was not
in others.

Secondly, Hereby likewise God shows, That he does not need any. It Is not
because he wants such, that he converts them, for if so, then only great men
and learned men would be converted.

Lastly, It might be, that none of any rank should despair; and therefore the
command is 2 Timothy 2. That we should pray for all, because God would have all to
be saved; that is of all sorts, whether Kings, or Governors, who were then
most unlikely, because the greatest enemies to Christ's Kingdom.

Use 1. Does not God keep then to one way in respect of the persons and manner
of conversion? Then this should teach every godly man, Not to make his
conversion a measure of others; unless they have been humbled and wrought upon
in such a measure, and with such kind of temptations, we are apt to judge
harshly of them. Now although every one that is regenerated is brought to see
himself lost and undone, and thereby to believe in a Savior, yet the measure
of sorrow, and degree of humiliation may be in one, more than in another.

Use 2. Of Direction to the people of God, that in these various dispensations
of Gods grace, They should mutually consider one another. Does God choose thee
a meek mild man, grudge not, or censure those, who are rough and of a more
passionate disposition? But let all the children of God admire the grace and
power of God, that does subdue all things to himself. And though thou may
not have that temptation or infirmity in thee, which thou judge in another,
yet thou may have another corruption of another nature: So that the
consideration of this, should breed great love amongst the godly, and every one
be provoked to give glory unto the grace of God, which is all in all.

The second Doctrine is gathered from the necessity, if not of conversion, yet
of that which was almost equivalent to Timothy, though enjoying very godly
education. And from thence observe,

That none are to rest upon their godly education under godly parents, but None
are to rest upon their godly education, but all are to search their own hearts,
to see whether they be wrought upon or no.
they are to consider whether the work of Grace has ever been wrought in them
or no.

Calvin (as you heard) thought Paul a spiritual Father to Timothy, and that he
was converted by his Ministry, though of such excellent education; and all
agree, That whatsoever seed of grace he might have in his younger years, yet
there was a more perfect and complete informing of him by Paul.

Briefly to open this, Consider

First, That it cannot be denied, but that some may be converted from their
youth; that they have had the holy fear of God upon them, ever since they were
able to understand any thing. 1 King. 18. 12. Obadiah told Elisha, He feared
the Lord from his youth. And thus John Baptist did partake of the holy Ghost,
while he was in his mothers womb: and it is a most blessed mercy thus to have
our spiritual and natural life together: They are preserved from those wounds
that others go halting with to the grave. Yet

In the second place, They are not to rest upon this, who have lived civilly
from their youth, and followed their good education. For good Education is one
thing, and Regeneration is another thing. The one is but external, and makes
only an outward Reformation; but the other is internal, and makes a spiritual
change, Mat. 19. 20. We read of one, He had kept all the commandments from his
youth; who said, he spoke according to his education and instruction. For the
Pharisees taught, That the Law required no other obedience then what is
outward. Now he had kept himself from any outward pollution, or gross
transgression. But we have a remarkable instance in King Joash, 2 Chronicles. 23. 2.
Jehoiada a godly man brought up that King in a godly manner, and he did that
which was right all the while Jehoiada lived, but when he died, than he
hearkened to the counsel of others, that were the means of his ruin. Therefore
consider, whether thou have any more then the remnants of good education upon
thee; in time of temptation thy rottenness will be discovered. But

Thirdly, Grant that thou have received grace from the very womb; yet know,
That upon thy growing up, the world will make a great change and alteration
upon thee. For they were but the seeds and initials of grace, it is the word of
God that must further complete and perfect thee. Therefore that illumination,
and degree of sanctification, which thou shall be partaker of, will be (as it
were) a new thing to thee, thou will think thy self to have been in the dark,
and to have known nothing comparatively to what now thou do. So that
although we are not to puzzle and perplex the godly, with the knowledge of the
time when and where; and how they were converted, as if that were necessary;
yet we are to find that God made a change upon us; we are not what we would
have been by nature; we find God making those tender plants, or that little
mustard seed to grow up into a large and great Tree.

Use of Examination. See what God has done upon thy heart, as well as parents.
Use.
It will be no sure argument to plead, I had a godly father, and godly parents,
I have been always used to godly duties; but search, and again search, whether
thou art a new creature.

SERMON. XI.
How much it concerns Church Officers to agree in matters of Religion. What
means may conduce to it. Universities and Nurseries of Religion, of how great
use they are to the Church of Christ.

2 COR. 1. 1. And Timothy our brother, etc.
WE are now to take notice of the second Description, that Timothy is adorned
with, and that is a brother to Paul. He is called a brother, not in a large
sense, as all believers likewise are, but because of a special relation, he
being also a Church Officer, though in an inferior degree to Paul. And he
styleth him brother, not only from his humility and low condescension: Of which
already; but also to show his consent and agreement with Paul in all those
things treated of in the Epistles. As he calls him Brother, so he often uses
the compellation of a Son, because he was not only the instrument, either of
conversion, or further institution of Timothy in the ways of Christ: but
because in the ministration of the Gospel, Paul was a father to him, directing
him how to manage his ministerial employment; and therefore he writes two
Epistles to him, which he does to none else; and all are to direct and guide
him in his Office. So that it was Timothy's great happiness to have such a
Gamaliel, as Paul was, and to be brought up at his feet, as he was at Gamaliels.

There are two profitable Observations deduceable. First, In that Paul calls
him Brother; hereby showing their consent and agreement in the matter
delivered. We may observe,

That the consent and agreement of Church Officers in religious matters is of
The consent of Church Officers in matters of religion, is of great use and
moment.
great use and moment.

If Paul should have written one thing, and Timothy another, or the clean
contrary, this might have occasioned great distraction amongst the Corinthians,
not knowing what to believe, or which way to take. Consent is so great a
matter, or unity, that the Roman party makes it a note of a true Church,
although they cannot greatly glory in that note.

To understand this,

First, There is a most perfect and absolute consent and agreement, and that
not only in matters of Religion, but also in all civil ordinary things. So that
all the Officers of the Church have the same velle, and the same nolle, which
the Heathen said was true friendship indeed. Now such a consent as this, is not
to be expected in this life. That glorious privilege will be in Heaven, where
not only several sects and opinions shall cease, but also there shall be no
more diversity in their wills and affections. The Apostolical Church could not
be thus happy. For we read of the Apostles twice contending, who should be the
greatest amongst them? and this came from pride and carnal affections:
afterward we read, Act. 25. 39. of a paroxysme, or a sharp contention between
Paul and Barnabas, which was so great, that they departed one from another, who
before had been companions in a fruitful manner to publish the Gospel of
Christ. If such spots can be found in these Suns, no wonder if they be in the
Moons, the lesser lights of the Church. Yea Gal. 1. there we may read of an
high contest, and that was not indeed about a doctrinal matter of Religion, but
in practice, which did relate to Religion: for there Paul resisted Peter to the
face, and blamed him before them all. Thus you see, that though there were
none, but Paul's and Barnabasses, none but Paul's and Peter's, and such eminent
Apostles in the Church of God, yet we could not look for such an absolute and
perfect concord, that there should not be the least difference in any thing.
The Church never was, or will be like the upper region, that is not molested
with the least turbulent vapor.

Secondly, There is a full conformity or agreement in the substantials and
necessaries of Religion; and also in all the accessories and circumstantials
therein. And this is the next perfect Unity to the former; and this was in the
Apostolical Church. Those that were the true Officers of Christ, had no
difference either in Doctrine or Church Government, or worship of God; but they
were all unanimous, as far as may be observed. Indeed Act. 15. 1. we read of
some Pharisees who were said to believe, That they taught a necessity of
circumcision and observation of Mosaical Rites to the converted Gentiles, which
made a very great rupture and schism in the Churches, while newly planted. And
although there was a Council gathered together to stop this breach, and Decrees
made to regulate the Church herein, yet it should seem that their Authority and
Interest did not pluck up this division by the root. For Paul in some of his
Epistles, makes this his great doctrinal scope, to establish them in their
Christian liberty; but for the Apostles themselves, and the faithful Officers
in the Church, they seemed as to teach the same thing, so to walk in the same
order, and ways of Christ.

Lastly, There is a consent and agreement in the essentials, and fundamentals
of holiness; but difference and hot dissentions in those things, that are
praeter, or circa- fundamentals, as also in matters of Discipline and
Government. Now although we maintain against Papists, That by the good blessing
of God, all the Reformed Churches (excluding Socinians, etc.) do agree in the
essentials to salvation: yet it must be likewise granted, That in respect of
accessories, there are sad divisions, and woeful rents in the Church of God.
The name of Lutherans and Calvinists, as also of several forms of Government,
do argue, that there is a great breach amongst us. And this we must expect to
have always in the Church, as long as men are subject to ignorance, mistakes,
and carnal affections. And therefore we are not to be offended and scandalized
at it, much less hearken to Popish Emissaries, who take this advantage amongst
weak people, to persuade them, that the Church of Rome is therefore the only
true Church.

These things premised, let us consider what are cementing and uniting
principles; what do conduce to Unity amongst the Officers of God in his Church.
What are those things that conduce to Unity amongst Church officers.
And

First, That which is always willing to be last is Humility, and a spirit of
meekness and moderation. You never heard of an humble man, that he was a
disturber of the Church, or broacher of heresies. Heretics have always been
proud, haughty and ambitious men, as Marcion, Nestorius, and others, especially
the Pope of Rome, who exalts himself above all that is called God. Were then
men of more humble and lowly spirits, having low apprehensions of their gifts
and abilities, this would wonderfully make to consent and agreement.

Secondly, Earnest and servent prayer unto God for the holy Spirit. For seeing
it is the Spirit of God that is promised to lead us into the truth; And Officers
of the Church have a more peculiar promise for it above ordinary believers, as
being in a more peculiar Office, and receiving a proper Commission from Christ:
It is therefore necessary to implore this assistance of Gods Spirit. For
whereas the Papist does scornfully, and with derision ask, How comes it about,
that seeing every Sect in the Protestants, does lay claim to the Spirit of God,
all owning it to be their guider in their several ways? How comes it about,
that yet these spirits are so contrary to one another? Can the holy Spirit of
God be opposite to it self? To this calumny it is easily answered, That all
Officers and Teachers, do not equally, and in the same measure partake of Gods
Spirit. For besides that, there is not now any such measure of it given to any
Officers in the Church, that makes them infallible; There is an inequality and
difference in the degrees of partaking of this holy Spirit of God, so far as
it is communicable. Some have it more in the gift of illumination; some more in
the gift of sanctification; and withal some are more negligent and faulty than
others. And therefore the holy Ghost is not communicated to all alike. For
pride, negligence, want of servent and earnest prayer, makes the Spirit of God
to keep off from us. Oh then, that all who have inspection in the Church of
Christ, were more earnest for Gods Spirit, that he would enlighten us, and
direct us; howsoever that he would so sanctify us, that if we did err, yet we
shall not be obstinate and pertinacious in it.

Thirdly, An uniting principle is to take heed of self-will and self-conceit,
to make our wills and humors, or apprehensions, the Law and Rule of truth. The
Apostle amongst other qualifications in an Elder requires, Tit. 1. 7. That he
be not self-willed, (...), one that pleases himself, or is self-conceited of
his own abilities. For all herefies and divisions are bred in the womb of this
self-conceit: and commonly the more ignorant, and the less knowing, the more
obstinate and self-conceited. For the more knowledge any man has, the more he
apprehends his own weakness and ignorance; he also sees the strength of such
arguments, which one of a shallow capacity can no more reach unto, than a Pigmy
can the Pyramides. More principles might be offered unto you, but I have spoken
to this at large from John 17. where our Savior prays over and over again
for unity amongst believers, as if it were the only pillar of all sound
Doctrine, and true holiness. Only the usefulness of this agreement is seen in
the good influence that it will have upon the body of believers; a divided
Ministry, will also make a divided people. If those bright luminaries of
Heaven, should oppose one another, as the Moon does sometimes the Sun, what
sad Eclipses does it produce? We read 1 Cor. 3. that amongst these Corinthians
there were heavy divisions, though that seemed to be the peoples sin most, who
made such a difference, one saying, I am for Paul, another, I am for Apollo.

Let the Use be, To us all to importune God, who is the God of peace, and who
alone can fashion the hearts and minds of men alike, that he would bless the
Church with this Unity. Oh how greatly would godliness flourish, errors be
discouraged, if it could be said, of all believers, which is spoken of the
primitive Christians often, That they met together with one accord, and with
one heart! Oh how blessed is it to see the whole Church of God, rather than one
family, or City to dwell together in Unity!

The next thing observable is, in that Timothy, who is here called a Brother,
is at other times very often called a Son. And besides the Reasons insisted
on the last day, there is another mentioned, Phil. 2. 22. that Paul was as a
Father to him, instructing of him about his Ministerial Office, and therefore
had two Episties wrote to him for the managing of Ecclesiastical affairs in a
godly manner. This great help and tuition (as it were) Timothy had from Paul,
being made a Church Officer, while he was young. Observe,

That it is of great consequence to such who in their young years are set apart
for It is of great use to young to have the guidance of solid and experienced
Ministers.
the Ministry to have the guidance of those who are more solid and experienced.

Thus Christ himself, though he could have immediately furnished his Apostles
with admirable and sufficient abilities for the great work of Apostleship, yet
kept them two years, as the Harmonists gather, under his peculiar charge and
information. In the Old Testament likewise, though the gift of prophecy was by
immediate inspiration, yet we read that even then there was the College of the
Prophets, and the sons of the Prophets, 2 King. 2. 7. So we read 2 Chronicles. 34.
22. of the College of the Prophets. Hence it is also in the New Testament,
that the Apostle directing of Timothy, how to keep up the sound Doctrine of
Christ after his departure, gives this notable instruction, 2 Timothy 2. 2. That
what Doctrine he had heard from Paul, he should commit to faithful men, that
should teach others. That is a very full and pregnant Text. For the usefulness
of Universities, that there should be Nurseries, wherein young ones should be
trained up to deliver the sound Doctrine to their Posterity after them. Though
in those primitive times there was such a plentiful effusion of the Spirit of
God in the gifts thereof, yet he there commands, that faithful men should be
chosen, who should commit to posterity, one age after another, the true
Doctrine of Christ; and therefore in the primitive times, before there were
Universities, the Bishops house was a Nursery to train up young Disciples. And
in Origen's time, he began to be a Catechist, and to set open a School in
reference to the Christian Religion. If there be in such public Nurseries and
Universities, gross abuses, men degenerating into laziness, and not fulfilling
the general intention of the Founders, the abusers are to be purged away, but
not the order or manner of education it self. If it be said, The the Spirit of
God is that which alone inableth a man to such Offices and Employments. We
grant that the Spirit of God is the alone Sanctifier of all gifts and
abilities; but yet now the Spirit of God does not work in an immediate and
miraculous manner, else why is there not working of Miracles? Why do they not
speak in all Tongues? Why do they not understand Hebrew and Greek, which are
the original Languages the Scripture was written in? If therefore we must not
look for the Spirit of God in such an immediate way, it must be in a mediate
and acquired way. And this ordinary way does not exclude Gods Spirit, but
supposes it. For if in those days, when miraculous gifts were ordinary, yet
see what charge Paul lays upon Timothy, to give himself to reading and
studying of the Scriptures; especially that is observed by Calvin, 1 Timothy 4.
13. Till I come, give thy self to reading; he would not have him so much as
neglect that little time. No wonder if in these later days such duties are more
vehemently to be pressed.

Use of Exhortation to you that are people; to be of more public spirits in
your prayers, not only regarding your present age, but that the truths of God
may be handed from age to age; that the Universities may be pure fountains, and
hopeful Nurseries, from whence may come such, who shall be able to propagate
the pure Doctrins of Christ. Peter was careful that after his decease the pure
Doctrins of Christ might be preserved. And so for your children, and childrens
sake, that they may not live in times of ignorance and darkness, importune God
earnestly, that he would keep up such faithful men and good ways, that may
propagate the Gospel to the worlds end.

SERMON. XII.
Of the Name and Nature of a Church.

2 COR. 1. 1. To the Church of God, which is at Corinth, etc.
FRom the Persons inscribing, we come to the Persons inscribed, or to those to
whom this salutatory Preface, and so the whole Epistle is directed; and that is
set down, 1. More particularly, and then more generally. More particularly; and
they are described by the relative condition and estate they are in, viz. a
Church [To the Church] which is further described topically from the place
where it is, At Corinth.

Let us consider this particular first. And for the opening the word Church, we
might spend much time therein; but I shall briefly explicate it.

The word is used, and that only in Act. 19. for a Civil Assembly. Yea, it is
What the word Church is used for in Scripture.
said (...), The Assembly was confused. The Athenians called their public
meetings (...); The word is used in Thucidides, as the learned observe. The
Hebrew has two words Cohel, which is for the most part translated Ecclesia by
the Septuagint, and Gnedeth which is translated (...); the Church, does rather
answer Cohel, than Gnedeth, because under the New Testament it is not fixed. As
for such who would understand that place, Mat. 18. Tell the Church, of a Senate
or Civil Power, it is so improbable, that it is not worth time to confute it. The
word therefore is most frequently used in the New Testament, for an holy
Society gathered together in an holy manner for holy ends. And thus it is used
either for the Catholic, invisible Church, which is the whole body of Christ,
that shall be saved, as when he is said, Ephesians. 5. To give himself for his
Church; and the Church is made the wife of Christ. And Col. 1. 24. it is called
the body of Christ. This Church is meant in the Creed, when we believe there is
an holy Catholic Church, and so a Communion of Saints, though some would have
it a communion in holy things. To this Church belonged all the godly that lived
in the Old Testament. For that is a dangerous error of the Socinians, that
make the Church in the Old Testament specifically distinct from that in the
New, as if they were not saved by the same Christ, and the same faith, as we
are under the Gospel.

Now it is very necessary to distinguish this Catholic invisible Church from a
visible particular one. The Papists confounding these, and making their Roman
particular Church, a Catholic one, and applying such Texts of Scripture, as
are spoken of the Universal invisible Church, to their particular, do thereby
grossly mistake in pleading for the infallibility and perpetuity of their
Church. But

Secondly, The Scripture does use the word Church for a visible company of
persons professing faith in Christ, and then it has several acceptions. For
sometimes it is used for the general Company of believers, Act. 8. 3. Thus Paul
is said to persecute the Church. Or else more particularly, and for a Church at
such a place, as the Church at Jerusalem, the Church at Corinth. Again, the
word Church is sometimes used more strictly, for the People only, as distinct
from Pastors. Thus the Epistles of John are directed, To the Angels of the
seven Churches. Thus the Elders are exhorted, Act. 20. 28. To feed the Church
of God, over which they were set. And in this sense the Remonstrants speak
confidently, That the word Church is most commonly used, and that never, or
very seldom, it comprehends the Officers also. But this is not so, for Mat. 18.
Tell the Church, by the Church must needs be meant Officers at least with the
Church, for they are said to bind and lose, which power is given to Officers
only. It Is true, they, and so Grotius, by Church understand a multitude, or
more, in opposition to those two or three witnesses, that were required before:
But the Context may easily be improved to overthrow that 1 Cor. 12. 28. God is
there said to set in his Church, some Pastors, and Teachers, that is, as part,
but the chief part of the Church. Even as the Stars are set in the firmament,
but as parts of the Heavens, though the more noble and fulgent parts. Again,
when the Apostle here writes to the Church of Corinth, he must needs
comprehend the Officers as well as the People, because he writes about such
duties, wherein the Officers were interested, as the censuring of the
incestuous person; he speaks also of Prophets, which were extraordinary
Officers in that Church, and they are blamed for maladministration about the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. So that although Grotius thinks that abuse
was, because they had no constituted Officers, yet it is plain they had some,
because they had the administration of the Sacraments.

Lastly, The word Church is applied sometimes to an essential Church, as it is
called, for a company of believers simply as such believing in Christ, of which
often in Scripture, sometimes for an organized Church, that is, formed and
stated in that godly order by a Ministry, Government and Discipline conjoined
together. So that they make a particular flock being bound to submit to their
Pastors, as their peculiar Pastors, and Pastors bound to watch over them, as
their peculiar flock. Whether indeed this Church of Corinth was one
Congregational Church, or one Church aggregated of several Congregations, is
disputed. But of this in its time. This Church of Corinth was formed and stated
in some order, though there were great abuses in it. As for our common use of
the word Church, taking it for a place, or the material building, that is an
improper speech, but allowable by a Synecdoche, as the word (...) signifies,
both the place and persons therein convened. And although one or two learned
men from 1 Cor. 11. would have the word used there for a place; yet the
arguments are not cogent; for the people are properly the Church, it is they
that Christ has redeemed, they are to be built up by Pastors and Teachers,
whereas the material Church is built by manual Artificers, not needing an
Apostle, but a Carpenter.

This may suffice for Explication, only let this be added, that the Greek word
relates to Gods calling, it signifies a Society called by God. So that the
Apostle directs his Epistle to that Society or company of persons that did come
our from the Heathenish Idolatries and abominations, that the other Corinthians
lived in, and did profess their faith in Christ, with obedience to him. From
whence observe,

That a Church is a company called of God by the preaching of the Word to the
What we are properly to understand by a Church in Scripture.
profession of faith in Christ, and an observation of all that solemn worship
and Ordinances which Christ has appointed, with a life in external conformity
thereunto.

This is a Church. When you read of a Church at Jerusalem, a Church at Corinth,
the seven Churches of Asia, you are to understand such a company. And this
Doctrine about a Church is much to be insisted on. People are generally carnal,
ignorant and profane. And although they would think it an high reproach to
have the name of a Church denied them, or to be cast out of the Church, as so
many Heathens, yet they do not attend to the nature of a Church, nor to the
properties of those who are to be members thereof. It is true, there are vast
and infinite Disputes about a Church, and every sect or party, is ready to
monopolize and appropriate that name to them, That they are only the Church.
But these great Disputes about it, argue we should be more careful to
distinguish, lest we take Babylon for Jerusalem, lest we take that for Gods
Temple, which is indeed a den of thieves. Does not the Popish party glory in
the name of a Church? Do they not make it necessary to salvation to come into
communion with it? and yet it is the place, that Gods people are called to come
out of, lest they partake both of her sins and punishments.

But let us examine the chief particulars in the Doctrine, which is a popular
deseription of a Church. And

First, We say, It is a Society or Company. So that one man cannot be called a
Church. It Is absurd in the Papists, that when they have lifted up the name of a
Church like a Gorgons head, to turn all men into stones, that they must not
mutter a word against it; when you come to examine, what this Church is; at
last it is but one man, and that is the Pope. What number goes to make a
Church is not defined. To a formed organized Church, there must be so many at
least, that Church duties, which are essential, may be performed; and a
distinction between Governors, and governed maintained; otherwise where two or
three are, there is a Church, said Tertullian. Again, In that it is a Company,
we see, That it is not lawful for a man to think of serving God alone by
himself, when there is an opportunity of joining to a Church. You read Act. 3.
and 4. as any persons were converted, presently they joined themselves to the
Church. It is true, there may be such persecutions, or other impediments, that
Christians have wandered up and down, and could not enjoy public or private
meetings; but this absence from Church Communion was an heavy burden on their
spirits. And as David, when banished from the public Ordinances, lamented it
more than banishment from his own house, and land, and native country. Thus
they cried out with him, As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pant
our souls after thee, O God. You see then it is a duty to be of a Church. Hence
because a Church is a company, we are diligently to attend to what is our duty,
as we are a Church, and this you had need hear of often. For you must know you
are under a twofold consideration; One Absolute, as a private and single
person, and so you have several duties to attend unto. 2. Relative, as you are
a member of a Church, or part of such a Society; and so there are choice and
special duties. Your solemn Church-duties, such as hearing, praying, and all
other public worship, are to be preferred above all private. He can never be a
good Christian that is not a good member of that Church he is of. As in
Politics it is acknowledged, he cannot be bonus vir, which is not bonus civis,
not a good man, that is not a good Citizen. Now certainly, here is a wonderful
neglect and general fault in all our Congregations; we attend not to our
Church-duties, to our Church Communion, what God does require of us, as a
Society, as a spiritual Company; there would not be that neglecting of the
Assemblies, those wicked and ungodly meetings, to be drunk, to be carnally
merry and jolly, which are directly contrary to Church-meetings. Nothing does
so resemble Heaven, as the Church Assemblies spiritually performed; and to such
meetings God has promised his more peculiar presence and assistance. But of
this more in its time.

In the next place, there is added in the Doctrinal Description, That it is a
Company of persons called of God by the preaching of the Word: Wherein are
considerable, the Efficient Cause, and the Instrumental. The Efficient is God,
Called by God. And first, In that they are said to be called by God. This
implies these things:

1. That it is the mere goodness and grace of God that makes a people to be a
Church. Therefore they are thus named Ecclesia. The Grecians called their
Assemblies so, because of some humane Authority gathering them together; but
the people of God are called a Church, because God calls them. So that as there
is a difference between a garden and a wilderness; the one is naturally so, but
the other is planted by art and industry; nature does not of it self,
especially since man's fall, bring forth gardens and choice flowers, but there
is great art and culture required thereunto. Thus it is with the Church, men
are made the Church by Gods grace, but they are the world of themselves. The
world and the Church are two opposites, God makes the one, and is present in a
special manner there, but sin and Satan make and rule in the other. When the
Psalmist said, It is he that has made us, not we our selves, we are the sheep
of his pasture. Calvin understands it of their Church making; it was the
goodness and power of God that made them so. Hence it is, that it is often
compared to, and called the Kingdom of Heaven, because it is original is from
Heaven, and their Laws and Ordinances are heavenly. Thus you see, to be made a
Church is not by our humane will and power, as men make themselves Cities and
Corporations, but by a special grace of God.

2. When therefore we are said to be called by God, that does necessarily
suppose a terminus from which we are called. It Is a company of persons called
out from the world, wherein once they were. Hence the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. does
oppose the world, and the Church together; and the world is said to be without
God, then when he gathers a Church, He calls them out of the world; as Lot was
called out of Sodom, which was ready to be destroyed with fire and brimstone:
or as a man is called out from an house that is ready to fall into its fulness;
and this it is that makes it to be such an admirable privilege and blessedness
to be of the Church. For the world is sure to perish, is sure to be damned;
there is no abiding therein; as if an Israelite had continued in an Egyptians
house, when the destroying Angel passed by, he was sure to be killed. Thus
there is no way but of damnation in the world, without this Ark of the Church,
every one must necessarily perish. But this is that which should make all our
hearts ache and tremble at, to consider, That though the Church be called out of
the world, yet it is almost degenerated into the world again. Look over the face
and conversation of all Churches, Are they not become the world? Is not a
garden made a wilderness? Is not the lusts, the profaneness, the ignorance,
the impieties that are in the world to be found in the Church like wise? And
what has been the sad occasion of so many to say, Our Congregations are no
Churches, that a man cannot with a good conscience stay amongst you, or have
communion with you? Is it not because of the universalimpiety they see amongst
us? As if the Church of God, which is like the Ark in other things were in this
also, that all kind of things unclean, as well as clean, swine as well as
sheep, vultures as well as doves, were to be taken into it. We see, as it has
been Gods work, to turn the world into Churches: so it has been the Devils
work to turn the Churches into the world again. But woe be to the wicked man,
that is so in the Church of God, God will be sure to punish you! A nettle or
weed in the garden is sure to be plucked up, whereas in the wilderness it may
grow, and never be meddled with.

SERMON, XIII.
Concerning the Efficient, Instrumental, Formal and Final Cause of a Church.

2 COR. 1. 1. To the Church at Corinth.
WE are describing the nature of a particular visible Church; and in that have
discussed the Efficient Cause, with the manner of his efficiency, expressed in
those words [Called of God] what is implied in that, has been examined: only
there remains a necessary distinction to be attended unto, of Gods call; that
it is twofold, either External only, or External and Internal also; or an
Effectual, and Ineffectual Calling. For though this distinction be hated by
some men, yet the Scripture is very clear, That there are many called, who yet
are not chosen: and when he says called, it is not meant only actively on Gods
part, as some were called, but yet refused, and would Gods call as the
efficient cause of the Church, is either external only, or external and
internal also.
not so much as outwardly profess obedience, but called is to be understood
passively on man's part, so that he gives some outward conformity to Gods call.
There is an external reception, and submission to it, but yet there is no true
inward sanctification: Insomuch that some who are called the children of the
Kingdom shall be cast forth; and they are said not to be all Israel, who are of
Israel. In the Old Testament we read of many who outwardly submitted to the
profession of Gods commands, who yet were not found at heart; and therefore our
Savior in the course of his Ministry did not direct his preaching more to any
subject almost then this, viz. to have the internals of grace, as well as
externals; so that we may say, There is a called and elected Church, and a
called Church only not elected; and this is to take off all Churches from
idolizing and doting upon the Ordinances and external administrations which are
in a Church, as the Jews did, and as most Christians do. We are to go further,
and to see whether we be indeed and really Christ's body, as well as seemingly.
For if we do compare a Church called only, with the Church called and elected,
and to the spiritual privileges that are promised; so our Divines use to say,
That it is but equivocally a Church; they have no true acceptance with God. If
there should be a Society professing faith in Christ, and have pure
administrations, but not one in the Society having true real sanctifying grace;
this Society in respect of God and Christ has no true communion with them.
They have but the name, not the nature, and so are equivocally, not univocally
a true Church. For why should it be otherwise with a Society, then every member
of it taken singly? Now it is certain in such a supposed Society, where all are
professors, but not one member truly godly, there every individual person,
notwithstanding all Church enjoyments, yet has no lively interest in Christ,
he is but as a glass eye or wooden leg in the body, that has no vivifical
nourishment, or is animated by the soul; and therefore such are said to be De
corpore Ecclesiae, but not de anima, if then this be true of every member of
that Church, it must be also true of the Church taken collectively: Only this
is true, if we consider such a company relatively to God. But then, if we
consider them quoad nos, in respect of men, who cannot judge the hearts, nor
know when true grace is in any man's soul, then such a Church, or a Society may
be called truly a Church. For it is the external profession, and outward
submission to Christ's order, that does make a Church visible to us; and
therefore in such a Church, there are true Ordinances, true Administrations.
And this is the rule we must go by in joining our selves to a Church, and
keeping external communion with it, if it be a called Church, though not
elected, and be so far orthodox and pure, that we may have communion with
them without sin. This is a Church to us, howsoever God may look upon them,
as having a name to live, but were dead, as God said of Sardis, Rev. 3. 1.
which yet was a Church. This distinction is of a twofold use, to prevent two
mistakes:

First, Of such, who confound an external Church with an elected, making Gods
call, and his election in an equal latitude, thinking that because none but
predestined and truly sanctified men are of the invisible Church, therefore
none but such are also of the visible. And then,

Secondly, Of those, who if they be of a Church, especially cleansed from
superstitions and profaneness; if the Church be a Reformed Church, they rest
in those external administrations, and never attend to the work of grace
indeed. For if among Papists, though so greatly polluted, yet the Church is
made an Idol to them; no wonder if the Reformed Churches are prone to put
confidence in Church-reformations, without attending to internal
sanctification. But the Apostle tells us, Gal. 6. 15. That in Christ Jesus
neither circumcision, or uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new creature,
that is, no externals in the Church of God, though of his own institution avail
any thing without regeneration. Therefore rest not in this, that you are called
of God, that ye are his Church; for many taken out of his Church, shall be
damned, as well as out of the world; yea more in the Church, that is, the
visible Society professing of Christ, will be damned then saved, as appears
by that expression twice repeated by our Savior, as being of so great
concernment, being worthy to be heard again and again, Many are called, but few
are saved, Mat. 22. 14. and 20. 16. And thus much of the Efficient Cause, with
the manner [Called of God.]

In the next place, There is the Instrumental Cause, and that is by the
preaching of the Word. For so we read upon Christ's giving his Apostles
commission to The instrumental cause of the Church is the preaching of the Word.
teach and preach to all Nations, there were Churches gathered in every place.
And this is to be understood of the ordinary way. For whether the Word even as
read, may not in some extraordinary cases be a means to bring some one person
or more to the Church of God, is not here to be disputed: for we speak of the
solemn, ordinary, instituted means of God, and so there is no other way but the
preaching of the Word. Hence Romans 10. 14, 15. you see there a concatenation and
chaining of calling upon God, and believing together; of beliving and hearing
together, and of hearing and the Ministry together.

But it is objected by the Socinians, That if the preaching of the Word be an
instrument to gather a Church, then it cannot be a note of the Church. For that
which is antecedent to a Church, and is before the Church is, cannot be a note
of it.

To this we may answer, That it is both an instrument to gather a Church, and
then a note of it, when gathered; neither is there any absurdity therein. It Is
true, that very numerical preaching, which at first made the Church, cannot be
a mark or note of it, but the same specifical preaching, or that which is like
it, that does truly declare where the true Church is. So that by this we may
see, the dignity and usefulness of the Ministry; for by that God is pleased to
raise up all the Churches that are in the world. God who did immediately create
the world, and used no instruments, yet in planting of his Church does, and
therefore they are workers with him, 2 Cor. 6. 1. Neither is the Ministry only
necessary to constitute a Church, and then afterward useless, as Episcopius
says. Where people have the Scriptures, there the Ministry is of no necessity.
Yea the Socinians make it only a matter of order and convenience. For Ministers
are not only appointed to gather Churches at first, but when they are planted,
continually to water them. Therefore Ephesians. 4. their usefulness is showed even
to constituted Churches; For the further building them up, even till they come
to a full stature in Christ. And therefore the Apostles thought it not enough
to make Churches, to erect new spiritual Societies, that should profess Christ;
but Elders were to be ordained in every Church, that were to have constant
residence amongst them, and to give them daily food, watching over their souls,
and therefore their title of Shepherds, and the people being called a Flock, do
evidently demonstrate the necessity of a Ministry not only at first, as
miracles were, but perpetually even to the coming of Christ.

Thirdly, There is in the Description, the Formal Cause; to which also may be
The formal cause, the solemn observation of Church communion. Wherein
consists the nature of Church communion.
reduced the Final Cause. The Formal Cause is in the public, and solemn
observation of that Church Communion which God has required. I shall only
mention that formal and external Communion, wherein it consists: And that is,

1. In the solemn assembling and meeting of themselves together, Heb. 10. 25.
The Apostle does there reprove the neglect of this duty, which is the seminary
and fountain of all holiness; while the coals lie together they keep their
heat, and inflame one another. Thus it is our communion in the Assemblies that
is the means to keep up grace and holiness. How much did David bewail his
banishment from the Ordinances, as you heard? And is it not the highest
censure, and most dreadful punishment that can be, for a Christian upon just
grounds to be cast out of the Church? Is not this to fall into the Kingdom of
Satan? Is it not to be delivered up to him? Now then, if it be next to hell it
self, thus to be cast out of Church Communion and the public Ordinances, Why
do thou wilfully bring this upon thy self? Thy own slothful, and profane
careless heart makes thee neglect the public Assemblies. This is a sin of an
higher nature than thou art aware of, for God is present in Church Assemblies,
you have the benefit of the prayers then poured forth; the Ordinances are of
enlightening and quickening efficacy. Now for thee voluntarily to deprive thy
self of this spiritual advantage, is a sin of an high degree. Indeed when
want of health, or other just impediments keep us from the Assemblies, God can
then make up the public benefits in private. But I speak of a voluntary,
wilful omission of such public Communion. Oh little do such men consider,
that they have but a day! Their life is but a day, and the season of grace is
but a day; and do thou neglect that day, when it may be, thou shall never
have such a day again, never have a Sabbath any more? That carnal plea also of
getting as much good at home, and they can edify themselves as well with
reading books in private, unless in case of necessity (as I said) is ungodly
and unjustifiable excuse; for this is to make Church Communion, and holy
Assemblies to be of no necessity, and so wholly to overthrow them.

2. In this solemn meeting there are these public duties, wherein the Church
is to employ her self.

1. Public prayer to God. This in the primitive times was done so servently
and zealously, that they did even seem to besiege Heaven, and to take it by
force. Oh what prevailing power must the Church have with God, when they are so
many wrestling Jacobs! If the effectual servent prayer of one righteous man
prevails much, how much m^ joined together? If it were a Congregation of
Jo^s, how mightily should we prevail with God? But we m^ Chrysostom, How are
all the grave and holy things of Go^ formality, and a show? How many in our
Congregatio^end to this public duty of prayer? They fear not, lest ^any A^ in
the Congregation. So that for thy deadn^ the sins ^est in, God be angry with
our Assemblies, and ^t be graciously ^ent with us. Thou art a dead fly in this
box of ointment. The profane man little thinks what obstructions he makes in
our public petitions, by his wickedness unrepented of.

2. There is the public preaching of the Word; And this necessarily supposes
a formed and stated Church, wherein are Governors and governed* Those who by
Office preach, and those who by duty hear. This public Ministry in the Church
of God, is not for convenience, or good order merely, but it is an institution
of Christ, and has several effects attributed to it, as conversion of such who
are in their natural condition, the edifying of those, who are converted; for
instruction, that men be not led aside with errors and strange Doctrine; for
rebuke and reproof of such who walk disorderly, etc. And therefore because of
the necessity of it, those who have commission to do it, have manifold
directions about it, To preach in season and out of season; and the reason
seems strange, Because there are many, who will not endure sound Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Yea, there is a woe to them, if they be negligent herein, 1 Cor. 9.
16. And in all this they are to be instant and industrious, it being a cursed
thing to do the work of the Lordnegligently. The matter they preach, must be
holy, savoury and nourishing, compared therefore to food: You are to come to a
Sermon with an hungry stomach. Yea, as new born children, ye are to swallow
down the sincere milk of the Word. And therefore to preach froth and mere
fancifull things is as absurd, as if a man should invite another to a dinner,
and provide him nothing but the pictures of some meat. It Is compared to seed;
the Husbandman will not sow his ground with chaff: Yea, it is compared to a
two-edged sword, that is quick and piereing into the very secret thoughts of
men's hearts. It is for want of such soul-piercing and soul-saving preaching,
that people are lulled, or sleep in their sins; that there is nothing but
formality and customariness in most men. The word of God is to flash in your
faces like so much lightning, and to make even the proudest and the most
scornful to tremble within them. They must speak as the Oracles of God. What
is that, but as men filled with the Spirit of God, breaking out like fire from
them? And with such proportionable affections are you to hear: This is to meet
as the Church of God, no man sleeping, no man drousie, or wandering, and roving
in his mind; but to say with the Centurion, We are all here, to hear what God
will say to us.

3. The Administration of Sacraments according to Gods order, and such holy
ways as he has appointed. The Sacraments are of infinite consequence to the
Church of God; and when people through their ignorance and profaneness make
themselves unfit subjects, they are enemies to their souls. For though God be
present in the Word and prayer, yet his sacramental presence is in a more
indeared and peculiar manner.

Lastly, There is that godly Discipline, and holy Order in Church Communion,
which is as the hedge to the field of corn. Take away this holy order, the
Church will become a gangrened body, either with heresies or profaneness.
Hence is that binding and losing of sinners: Hence is that command of casting
out wicked obstinate persons, of pirging out the old leaven, because a little
leaven will quickly sour all, 1 Cor. 5. Hence also are those duties of
admonishing, and noting such as go astray, and the turning from those that walk
disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3. These several acts of Church Discipline commanded in
the Scripture, are very evident. And although there are a generation of men,
who would with scorn and pride cry it down, as lordly and Popish, and I know
not what; yet at last it will be found, that that it was only their lusts and
love to sin, their hatred of sin, their hatred of powerful godliness,
which provokes them hereunto. What would they have said, if they had lived in
Tertullians, Cyprians, Chrysostomes and Austin's days, when there was such
zeal in Church Discipline against all profaneness, that in some things they
were immoderately severe? If then this be the external form of
Church Communion, if in these things Church Assemblies are to be exercised, let
us mourn for our general Apostasy, that in some sense our Church Assemblies
have been like the world at first, a mere chaos and confusion: Not that ever
any Church will be so reformed, as that it will not need further Reformation:
But only let us endeavor to attain what degree of purity may be had.

SERMON. XIV.
Of the Notes and Signs of a true Church.

2 COR. 1. 1. To the Church at Corinth, etc.
YOu have heard what is to be understood by this expression of a Church. The
true Doctrine about this being so necessary, I shall further enlarge my self,
not entering into the whole Commonplace of a Church: for that would be too
prolix, and ere this Epistle be ended, we may happily meet with more Texts,
that may afford further knowledge in this point. Only I shall after the popular
definition of a Church, give you the Notes, or Marks, whereby we may come to
know, what is, or where is the true Church. For this has been a great
controversy between Papists, and us.

There are indeed some of late, as the Remonstrants Episcopius, etc. Object.
who say, This dispute and enquiry about the marks of a Church, is wholly
useless and needless. For (say they) either we have to do with an Infidel, or
a Believer; if with an Infidel, it is absurd to tell him of the Notes of a
Church, who does not believe there is any such thing as a Church at all. And
for a Believer, he is in the Church already, and so they are useless to him.
But this is merely frivolous. For

1. When we have to do with an unbeliever, we must not in the first place Answ.
Why needful to know the Marks of a true Church.
deal with him about a Church, to prove that we are the true Church, but that
there is a God, who is to be worshipped, as natural light will convince of
this. Then, that this God has made known how he will be worshipped. Next, that
the Scriptures do contain this revealed will of God. And when this foundation
is said, then out of Gods Word we are to inform him of a Church. So that in
order, there is, first, The Word of God to be discovered: 2. What is the true
sense and meaning of it. Lastly, That what society has this, there is a true
Church. And

Secondly, Even Heathens by hearing of the Word preached, have by the Grace of
God been converted, and so the Word preached, which was at first instrumental
to convert them, does afterward by way of a sign or mark, confirm them
therein. The Apostle tells us of an unbeliever, coming into Church-meetings,
who is so wrought upon, that he cries out, Verily God is here, 1 Cor. 14. 25.

And as to the Believer the notes of a Church are necessary, for the further
confirming and establishing of him. For seeing that every Party or Sect says,
They are the true Church, and with them only is Communion to be had,
condemning other meetings, as false, as the Synagogue of Satan, and as
necessarily damning all those that continue in that Communion different from
them: It is thereby of great use, that we should have such Notes or Marks, to
conclude that where such are, certainly there is a Church; for we are not to be
Scepticks or Seekers. When the Scripture commands us, To tell the Church, Mat.
18. To conjoyn our selves to the Church of God, it plainly intimates, that
such a Society may be known. Even as there was a Star to guide the Wisemen unto
Christ.

In the second place, There are three things necessary to make a Note, or a
What things necessary to make a Note or Mark.
Mark of a Church.

1. It must be more known than the thing it self. 2. It must be proper and
peculiar to that thing alone, of which it is a Note. For if it be common to
others, it cannot be a Note. Sense is not a Note of a man, because it is common
to a beast. And
Lastly, It must be inseparable. For if it does not always agree to it, then
we cannot tell how to discern that we look for.

Now for such Notes of the Church, the Protestants say, there are these three
What are the Notes of a true Church.
only.

1. The pure preaching of the Word, with the public receiving and professing
of it. 2. The right and orderly administration of the Sacraments. 3. The due
use of holy Order and Discipline. Where these things are, there we may
conclude, that certainly Gods true Church is, and with such a Society we may
lawfully join.
Thirdly, Only when we give these three Notes, we do not make all of the same
equal necessity. Discipline and holy Order is for the well-being of a Church.
This Church of Corinth was a Church, though that was neglected. It is true,
this is greatly to be pressed for, and the introducing of Christ's order into a
Church, is like the bringing of the Ark into Obed-Edoms family. So that without
this, manifest impiety being suffered, God will be so highly provoked, as to
give a Bill of Divorce to it, and take away his Gospel from such an unworthy,
people; yet this is not made essential to the being of a Church. So also the
administration of Sacraments. There was a time, when the Church had none, viz.
before Circumcision was appointed; but since Christ's appointment of them, there
they ought to be used, where the way and manner he has appointed can be
attained. For the dispensers of those holy Mysteries must take heed, That they
give not pearl to swine, nor encourage profane men in their impieties, by
giving them the testimonies of Gods love, whom yet he abhors. Therefore that
which is infallibly necessary, and always accompanying a true Church, is the
preaching of the Word in a right manner, with the public receiving and
profession of this. I add, the public profession; because the Word may be
purely taught to a people, who yet are not the Church, because they do refuse
and reject the Gospel tendered to them, as the Jews did, and many Heathens; so
that there must be a manifest and public profession of it. And besides the
true preaching of the Word is only a sign of a true Minister, not of a true
Church, unless they give their consent thereunto. So that when our Divines say,
The pure preaching of the Word is a Note of the Church; They include and
suppose the public receiving of it by the people; yea some do clearly express
it. By this pure and true preaching of the Word, we may discern the true Church
from Jews and Pagans, as also from Heretical and Idololatrical Societies, yet
pretending to a Church.

Fourthly, When these Notes, especially the former, are said to be proper and
inseparable to the Church of God: You must always remember here is a latitude
in the application of these Notes. For some Churches may have the Word more
soundly preached, and the Sacraments more dispensed than another, and yet for
all that not to be denied to be Churches. This Church of Corinth was foully out
of order: And so most of those Churches in Asia were sharply reproved, yet they
did not cease to be a Church. Yea the Church of Israel had many corruptions
both in worship and life, yet it was a long while ere God did cast her off. So
that we must not for some defilements either in the Doctrine, Worship or
Manners of a Church, presently deny her to be a Church, and separate from her,
for this is against Scripture information. Yea, there is no Church so perfect,
but needs some Reformation. They may build hay and stubble, though they keep
the foundation. So that he must go out of the world, that would live in a
Church, where nothing is amiss. Even that Church of Smyrna the Apostle
mentions, Revel. 2. 8. that was as her Name, signifying sweet smelling, and
fragrant like a Garden, or bed of Spices, yet she was troubled with some, who
said, They were Jews, but were not, but were of the Synagogue of Satan. But of
this more, when we come to the next Doctrine.

Fifthly, These then being the visible Marks of a visible Church, we must not
confound them with the properties of the Church invisible. The Church of God
has as it were a twofold Form; one Internal and Essential, which consists in
their Union with Christ, and communion with his benefits. Now none but those
that are truly godly are of the Church in this invisible manner, he must be
regenerated and graffed into Christ, that can have any saving benefit by
Christ. But then,

2. The Church of God has an External and outward Form, which consists in the
external profession of faith, and observance of Christ's Ordinances. Now a man
may be of the Church in respect of this outward standing, though he be not
truly godly. Therefore Dr Ames said well, That it was a false thing, which
Bellarmine objected to us, about the constitution of a Church; as if we
required internal graces, to the making of a man a member of the Church, in
respect of the visible state of it. We read in the New Testament, that upon the
outward profession of their faith, they were baptized, and received into the
Church, though it is plain all of them had not true internal grace. So then,
when the Question is put, Whether may a man that is not truly godly, be of the
Church or no? You must distinguish between the inward form of the Church, which
is union with Christ the Head, and so he is not, no more than a wooden leg is a
member of the body, that is not animated by the soul, and the External visible
state of it, and so he is of the Church, till by his obstinacy in wickedness,
he be cast out as unworthy. We must not therefore give those Notes of the
Church as visible, which belong to it only as invisible, viz. Election,
Vocation, and Justification, etc.

Sixthly, The Papist to avoid this extreme, he gives such Marks of a Church,
as savor rather of worldly ambition and pride. Yea the true Church of God many
times is known by the contrary Marks; they give amplitude and universality, as
also temporal felicity. Now this is rather a Description of some worldly
Monarchy than Gods Church. For, as for the Churches amplitude, though
absolutely in it self, it may be sometimes numerous, yet at other times it has
been brought into a narrow compass. Elijah thought none was left, and God
speaks of but seven thousand that did not how the knee to Baal, which was a
very inconsiderable number to the Idolaters. Therefore respectively to the
wicked of the world, even when they are most ample, they are but a little
flock. And as for any glorious felicity, though the Church of God has
sometimes had her respite and halcyon days, yet for the most part a crown of
thorns has been on her head; and therefore she is justly called, the Militant
Church, while in this world, because of her spiritual conflict with all sorts
of enemies. So that the Church of Christ may sometimes say, as Christ once did,
The Foxes have their holes, and the Birds of the air their nests, but the Son
of man has not where to lay his head. Thus the Foxes of the world, the crafty
subtle men have great abundance many times, when the Church has hid her self
in the wilderness. And Fowls of the air, men of proud and lofty minds, have
their nests; when the Church like Noah's Dove, has not where to set her foot.

Seventhly, I shall not enlarge my self to prove these only to be the proper
Notes of the Church, only consider that place, Act. 2. 41, 42. where you have
all of them conjoined together: 1. They received the Word gladly. There is a
solemn profession of it. 2. There is the administration of the Sacraments; They
were baptized, and continued in breaking of bread, with prayers. There is the
solemn calling upon God. And as an epitomizing of all this it is said, Then were
added unto the Church about three thousand souls. Thus 1 Timothy 3. 15. the Church
is called, The pillar and foundation of the truth, that is, by the Ministeries
preservation of it, and the peoples submitting unto it.

Lastly, If to this it be objected, as Socinians do, who hold this way of Notes
to find out a Church, to be useless and vain, That true Doctrine cannot be a
sign of the Church, because it is the Form and Essence of it. Now How the form
of a thing may be a Note or Mark of it.
that which notifieth the essence of a thing, must be distinct from it. To this
it is answered, That the form, as it gives being to a thing, so it gives to
distinguish from others, Forma dat esse, and distingui. Although we do not say,
True Doctrine is the Note of a Church, but the external preaching, and
receiving of it, that is a Note, incurring into our senses: Even as Reason,
though it give a man his rational being, yet speaking is the proper and true
sign, that manifests this: So let true Doctrine, or a true faith be the soul
and life of a Church, yet the external profession is the outward Note and Sign
of it. And if further it be said, That every Sect does claim to it self the
pure preaching of the Word, and the right administration of Ordinances;
Therefore these cannot be a sign. It Is answered, The consequence is denied, for
true preaching and confession is a sign, although Heretics pretend thereunto.
As true Miracles were a sure Argument to prove the truth, although others have
done, and Antichrist will pretend to true Miracles. And indeed, though all
Sects, as the Socinians especially, pretend much to the Scripture, yet it is
not the words only, but the sense of it, that is by the Context and Scope to be
discovered, that is the word of God. Therefore Irenaeus of old said elegantly,
That Heretics making the Scripture to speak what sense they pleased, did as if
a man should take the Statue, or Image of a King, and so transpose the parts of
it, as to make it the image of a Dog, or some other vile thing.

These things concluded on, let us draw some Uses by way of Corollaries. As

1. In that the holy Ghost is pleased to appropriate this Word in the New
Testament to his people, which among the Heathens signifies the meaner sort of
people; for that they called Ecclesia, and it was opposite to (...), the
Senate, which consisted of more noble men. Hence we may see, who they are that
are most commonly called to be of his Church, even the meaner sort, Not many
rich, not many noble has God called, 1 Corinthians. 1. We should not despise the
Church of God, if it be not so externally pompous and glorious as Kingdoms and
States. For Christ is more peculiarly present with his Church, and shed his
blood for that.

2. That if we speak properly, the Church is not a material place, not this
building of stones and wood, but the people of God meeting there. Indeed it may
tropically be well enough, called a Church, as Synagogue is applied to the
place, He built us a Synagogue, whereas properly it signifies the people
meeting together, as you heard. Thus Concio amongst the Latins, signifies
both the place, and the company met together. Bellarmine would have the word to
signify a place, 1 Cor. 11. as also where it is said, Let the woman keep
silence in the Churches. And those learned men Fuller and Mede expound it so in
1 Cor. 11. But there is no necessity of such Interpretation. But though the
Scripture does not call it so, we may by a Trope give it that name, and use
must authorize in these things. Though Ifidore Pelusiota in one of his
Epistles, sharply reproving a Bishop, that adorned the material place with
Images and Ornaments, but neglected the Church of God, the true professors he
persecuted, does call the people (...), and the place (...).

Lastly, Is it a Church, a company called by God? Then this shows of what
consequence Unity and Concord is amongst all the Members thereof. How can a
body be kept together without ligaments and nerves? How can the building stand,
if the wood and straw be not aptly fastened and cemented together? How can the
Church subsist, if there be not Love, Union and Concord? It Is observable, Phil.
4. 2. that the Apostle thought it not too low a thing, even in canonical
Scripture, to entreat two women that were at difference to be of the same mind,
I beseech Euodias, I beseech Syntyche, that they be of one mind. Two godly
women differing, the Apostle does passionately entreat reconciliation and
agreement, how much more then would he have entreated the Pastors and Officers
in the Church, to take heed of discord?

SERMON. XV.
Why Paul writes to the Church, not the Churches of Corinth. What is employed
in the Churches being called the Church of God.

2 COR. 1. 1. To the Church of God, which is at Corinth, etc.
THe Nature of a Church has been considered, with the Marks thereof, from the
name (...) given here to the society of believers at Corinth. So that we might
dispatch this, only in that the word Church is used in the singular number, The
Church at Corinth, not Churches. It Is disputed, What one Church it was, whether
one single Congregation exereising all Church Government within it self; or a
combined and collective Church, united into one, but consisting of particular
Congregations: and it may seen^ probable, that this Church of Corinth was a
combined or associated Church, partly because Act. 18. we may read of much
people that God had in that place; and therefore Paul staid above a year there,
which argued a multitude of converts. The plenty also of their Teachers and
Officers, with the diversity of tongues. And lastly, in that 1 Cor. 16. 19.
Aquila and Priscilla are mentioned, with the Church in their house. It is true,
what is meant by the Church in an house is controverted; we find the expression
four times in Scripture, Romans 16 15. where Aquila and Priscilla are saluted,
with the Church in their house. So 1 Cor. 16. 19. these persons are mentioned
again with the Church in their house. Col. 4. 15. There one Nymphas is saluted
with the Church in his house. Phil. 2. There likewise Philemon is mentioned,
with the Church in his house. Mr. Mede does from hence infer, That even in
the Apostles days, and so in the primitive times, that the Christians had
public places, fixed and settled, being set apart for the public Assemblies to
worship God in, answering those places of Arnobius and others, who told the
Heathens they had no Templa, nor Aras; he says, these mentioned in the Texts
named, did set apart, some piece of their house for that end. But it should
seem by other passages, that in the Apostles days there were no fixed places
for to meet in. Therefore sometimes they meet in one house, and sometimes in
another; yea, They went from house to house. Others they think, by the Church
in their house, is meant many believers. For they say, Whereas when other
families are saluted, only some are named; sometimes the Master of the house is
omitted, as, Salute the household of Narcissus, because he was thought to be an
infidel. Yea, Calvin thinks, it is that infamous and wicked Nar^issus, so
notorious wicked, and great with Nero, of whom Historians speak. Now when the
Apostle salutes the men, and the Church in their house, it was, because there
were no unbelievers, but all were of the Church. Howsoever it be, it is plain
there were many believers in that family more than ordinary, and therefore
called a Church, which should argue, That the Church of Corinth was a combined
Church. That passage also makes it likely, 1 Cor. 14. 34. Let your women be
silent in the Churches: Your women] therefore he speaks of the Corinthians
there, who are said to have Churches; and yet here it is called a Church.

This will still appear the more likely, if we consider, that here were
believing Jews, as well as Gentiles in this Church of Corinth, as Estius
observes in the Preface to the first Epistle. Therefore when the Apostle
speaks of some, who said they were of Cephas, that relates to the believing
Jews; yet because they were few comparatively to the Gentiles, therefore the
Apostle writes to them, as if all were Gentiles, as Chap. 12. 2. Ye know that
ye were Gentiles, carried away to dumb Idols, etc. Hence the same Author says,
That it was one Church collected of all the believers in that place, Licet esse
potuerint in eadem civitate distinctae, ut it a dicam parochiae. As for the
notion of a learned man, That the Jewish believers, and Gentile believers did
make two distinct Churches, and had two distinct Bishops, which he thinks
would salve some seeming contradictions in Ecclesiastical History, that being
of an heterogeneous nature to my purpose, I pass it by.

Thus also the Church of Jerusalem is called a Church, which yet by many
probable Arguments seems to be more than one. Neither may we think, that
Christ has invested one single Congregation (ordinarily) with all Church
power. For that president and example of a Council or Synod, mentioned Act. 15.
does inform, That there are to be Synods, not only by way of advice, but by
power, and that over particular Churches.

We proceed to the next thing considerable in this description of the Church,
and that is the efficient Cause, the Church of God. This distinguishes the
Church from all civil and mere political Assemblies. For, though the Earth be
the Lords, and the fullness thereof; yet the Church is the Lords in a more
peculiar and appropriated manner. Sometimes the Church is named absolutely
without any addition, as when Paul is said to persecute the Church. Sometimes
it is restrained to the place. Thus the Church of Ephesus, the Church of
Laodicea, but most commonly, it is the Church of God, or the Church of Christ.
Sometimes both are put together, as 1 These. 1. 1. To the Church of the
Thessalonians which is in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ. So also 2 Thessalonians.
1. 1. And certainly, if so be the Apostle considering us merely as creatures,
makes use of, and sanctifies that of the Poet, For we are his offspring, how
much more is it true of us, as members of a Church. Observe,

That a Church is Gods people in a more peculiar and special manner.

Though he be the God of the world, yet in a more special manner he is A Church
is Gods people in a more special manner than others.
a God of his Church. The consideration of this truth, may tend much to our
spiritual edification. For if we are of God, how much should it humble us to
see any thing amongst us, that is of sin or the Devil? Is ignorance or
profaneness of God? so, are humane superstitions of God?

But to open this, let us consider what is implied in this, when a Church is
said to be the Church of God.

First therefore, this shows, That a Church is a supernatural Society, it is
spiritual company of men. So that a Church is not like a civil Corporation, or
like Kingdoms and Commonwealths, which are by mere humane Institution and
agreement, though Magistracy it self it be of God, but are supernatural; and
therefore it is called the Kingdom of Heaven, and Jerusalem which is from above;
so the Church is called Gal. 4. 26. even while it is here on Earth, before it
is triumphant in Heaven. Now the Church is a supernatural Society many ways,
in which respect it may be called the Church of God in a more eminent manner.
For in respect of its Efficient, so God alone is the author of it, called
therefore Ecclesia, because God by his Word calls them from their Heathenish
Idolatries and practices, making of them a Church. Thus the people of Corinth,
when they were securely indulging themselves in all manner of impieties, having
no thoughts or desires to be a Church, God by Paul calls them to be one. Even
as God by his breath, caused the dry bones to gather together, and to live; or
as at the day of Judgment, God by the voice of an Archangel, will raise the
dead in the grave who have no life or sense in them. Thus it is the Lord that
made Churches every where in the preaching of the Gospel. It was the gracious
work of God that found us out in Britain, and made a Church to himself, so that
we are loca inaccessa to the grace of God and his Spirit, though to humane
power. It is true indeed, God is the God of the world, he created Heaven and
Earth with all therein; yet though God did thus immediately create the world at
first, we do not say the creatures therein are Gods grace, or that they have a
supernatural being. For it is not enough to make a thing grace or supernatural,
that God does immediately create it, but that his power be in a peculiar and
extraordinary manner, and that for supernatural effects and ends. Oh therefore,
how greatly should we be affected with the grace and power of God in creating
to himself a Church out of the world? He might have no more made a Church here,
or there in the Earth, then he did in Hell; and he that at first planted a
curious Garden, and put man therein, is much more wonderful in making of a
Church to himself; yet how brutish and earthly are we? We can bless God for
the world, and the comforts thereof, that the Earth brings forth food for us,
that we have the Air to breath in, the glorious Sun to be a daily light to
us, yet we are not thus affected with Church-mercies and Church-ordinances.
David indeed upon the former consideration, cried out, Lord, what is man, that
thou art thus mindful of him, etc? But we may much rather from these
supernatural respects.

Secondly, It Is supernatural, in respect of the purchase given for them, the
price paid to make them the Lords. For you must know, upon Adams fall all
mankind was excommunicated, unchurched, as it were; and therefore cast out from
Paradise, and Gods gracious presence: and hence it is, that we are said
naturally to be without God; yea the Devil is said to be the god of the world.
Thus until God makes us a Church, we are under the power of Satan wholly; and
therefore to be cast out of the Church, is to be delivered to Satan. Thus then
being fallen off from the Lord, and now become the Devils, in whom he reigns,
we could not be purchased from this thraldom, but by the death of Christ; and
therefore we are called the Church of Christ, as well as of God, because though
conquered by Gods Spirit, yet we are bought by his blood; and this the Apostle
urges, That therefore we are none of our own, but are to live to him. We are
to be his peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 15. Thus it cost more
to be Gods Church, then to be the world at first; for he spoke, and it was
made, but here, Christ died, and so it was purchased. What a powerful
engagement is this, for all of a Church to walk holily? What did Christ die,
that you should wallow in the filth of your sins? What will you deny the Lord
that bought you? If thou will be ignorant, and profane, Why do thou not go
out from the Church of God? Why do thou not turn Heathen and Pagan again?
For certainly the Churches of Christ have no such profane customs.

Thirdly, It Is supernatural, and of God, in respect of the Order, Laws, Rule
and Government it is to walk by. The Doctrine believed is revealed by God. The
Worship practiced is to be appointed by God. The Government and Order is to be
commanded by God. And thus, Beloved, we might at large show you, That all
things that are essential in the Church, are to be of God. No Doctrine, no
Worship, no Administration of Sacraments, but what is of God. We might show
you, what God has appointed in the Credendis, and Agendis Ecclesiae. Oh that
this were well understood by us! What makes men so wilful for their lusts, for
their superstitious customs, but because they consider not the Church is a
spiritual house, and the Laws and Orders thereof are appointed by Christ
himself? If the Church be of God, all things therein must be of God likewise.
Hence our Savior says, Every plant that is not of my Fathers planting, shall
be rooted out, Mat. 15. 13. What makes men rage and fret, if things in the
Church be not according to their own humors and lusts? Is it not because they
do not attend to this, That it is Gods Church? It Is not the Popes Church, nor
the Magistrates Church, but Gods Church. Surely this truth would make us in all
things ask, as Christ did in another case, Whose image and superscription has
it? Give unto God the things that are Gods.

Fourthly, It Is supernatural, and of God, even in respect of the manner of
doing all things in the Church. Every solemn duty is to be done as from God,
and through him, even in an holy and divine manner. The Minister must preach,
as enabled of God: The hearer must hear, as strengthened thereunto of God. The
Apostle praises the Thessalonians, That they received the Word, not as the
word of man, but of God. As the Apostle speaks of his administration of the
Gospel, 2 Cor. 2. 17. As of God in the sight of God, so ought all our
Church Assemblies to be performed. What Jeremiah then has his head full enough
of water to make lamentation for the formality, customariness, and mere
external service that is done to God in our Assemblies? Men are become like
Idols, having eyes they see not, ears they hear not, hearts they understand
not, whereas our praying, our hearing, our approachings in these Assemblies
should be as of God; not Nature, or Custom, or the Laws of men, but the Spirit
of God mightily working in us, should put us upon these things: Whereas now we
see people in Church Assemblies, finding no more of the gracious power and
presence of God, then if they were in their markets, or other civil meetings.
As the Apostle said, Do ye seek an experiment of Christ in me? So ought it to
be here, we are to demonstrate in our Church Assemblies, experimental works of
Christ upon us. As the duty is of God, the Ordinance is of God, so should the
frame, and disposition of our hearts be of God.

Fifthly, The Church is of God in respect of his protection and gracious
presence. God promises his presence, and delights to be in the Assembly of his
Saints, Matthew. 18. 20. When two or three are gathered together in my Name, I
will be in the midst of them. It Is the gracious presence of God that blesses
Ordinances. Hence Christ is described, Revel. 1. 13. VValking in the midst of
the golden Candlesticks, that is, the Churches, and the Ordinances therein. We
are apt to complain, if Gods blessing goes not along with us in outward
undertakings: We can say, as Moses to God, If thy presence go not along with
us, we will not go up. When it may relate to our outward advantage; but we do
not take notice of Gods presence in the Assemblies, why God is not amongst us
to hear our prayers, why God is not present with the Word to make it an
enlightening, a converting Word. It should affect your hearts more than it does,
if in every Sermon, the Spirit of God has not fallen upon thy heart like fire;
if it has not melted, quickened, enlivened thy soul. Oh say, why did God
withdraw himself, if he visited the hearts of others, yet not mine? I was dead,
lukewarm, and found no efficacy come from Christ. What sins am I guilty of?
What have I done that makes God thus absent himself from the public Ordinances
at least to me?

Sixthly, The Church is of God, in respect of all the supernatural Effects and
benefits, which alone are communicated there. In the Church of God alone is
Justification, Sanctification, Assurance of his favor; In the pool of Bethesda
only did the Angel come in. In the waters of Jordan only could Naaman be
healed. In the Ark only could there be external safety from the waters: And
thus in the Church only there are those soul-mercies to be obtained.

Lastly, The Church is of God finaliter, Because the enjoyment of God is the
proper end of all Churches. It Is true, all civil societies are to make the
glory of God their ultimate end; but yet the immediate end, is to acquire a
temporal and political blessedness; but the end of Gods Church is more
transcendent and spiritual, for therefore are preaching, hearing; therefore are
Sabbaths, and our solemn Assemblies, that we might have more enjoyment of God,
that our doubts may be answered, our corruptions mortified, our graces made
more fervent and zealous. This made David so esteem the Tabernacle of the Lord,
and desiring rather to be a doorkeeper there, then to have any earthly
greatness. What was it the material Tabernacles that David so longed for? No,
it was the enjoyment of God in those Ordinances. But as little children admire
the fine outside of some excellent Book, when they understand not the
excellent matter contained therein; so says Chrysostom, many regard the
outsides, and externals of religious duties, not knowing at all, what the
spiritual effects thereof mean. Oh then let ignorant and wicked men tremble! If
the Church be of God, how come thou to be of the Devil, and to do his works?

SERMON. XVI.
Of the City of Corinth. God sometimes gathers a Church amongst the most
profane people. A Church, though many ways defiled, may be a Church still, as
it was with the Corinthians.

2 COR. 1. 1. To the Church of God, which is at Corinth.
THe next thing to be treated of, is the Description of this Church by the
place where it is, viz. at Corinth. And that we may understand the great grace
and power of God in gathering a Church to himself out of this City; it is good
to observe, what the Learned speak of it. It was called so (they say) from
Corinthus the son of Orestes, or of Pelops; but when they had in a
dishonorable manner abused some Roman Ambassadors; they were destroyed by a
Roman named Lucius Mummius, who from his victory over them was called
Corinthiacus; but Augustus taking delight in the place restored it, and sent a
Colony thither to inhabit it. And it is plain by Acts 18. that they were then
under a Roman called Gallio their Proconsul. It was the chief Town or
Metropolis of Achaia; and because of the two Havens there, famous for Traffic,
and thereby abounding in all wealth and riches. These things are observed in it:

1. It was notable for learning and knowledge. Periander one of the seven wise
men, is said to be of it; and therefore Cicero calls it, Totius Graeciae
lumen.

2. It was famous for wealth and riches, especially their Brass called
Corinthiacum was esteemed better than gold or silver, of which Josephus
speaks sometimes. Augustus did so delight in dishes made of it, that he was
called Corinthiarius. Their buildings also were very curious and glorious;
insomuch that Tirinus quoteth out of Vitruvius, that it was an ambition to
build houses forma Corinthiaca. But

Lastly, That which is commonly the consequent of wealth and plenty, they were
infamous for uncleanness and wantonness. For there was a Temple to Venus, where
were a thousand Maids, besides others set apart to be prostituted, which was
accounted so glorious, that thereby they could the better advance themselves in
Marriage. Here also they adored the Heathenish god of all uncleanness called
Cothys. Insomuch that (...), says Suid^^, is as much as to be wanton, to be
lascivious. To corinthize was as much as much as to be unchaste. Here
Demosthenes is said to refuse that whore, which demanded so great a price for
the carnal knowledge of her, saying, Tanti poenitentiam non einam; and because
their abominable uncleanness was at so dear a rate; therefore (say some) came
that Proverb, Non cuivis datur adire Corinthum; though Suidas and others,
understand it of the difficulty of reaching into the Haven; and it should seem
that after many were turned Christians, yet they were very prone to this bodily
filthiness; and therefore in no Epistles does the Apostle so industrlously set
himself against fornication as in this; and here was that abominable
uncleanness committed even amongst them, while a Church, That was not so much
as named amongst the Heathens.

Thus you see they were a proud, rich, high and lascivious people, and yet for
all that, Act. 18. Paul is commanded in a vision to stay there, Because God had
much people in that place. And although he was so necessary to all other
Churches, yet he spent a year and an half in converting and confirming of
people unto God. From whence observe,

That even amongst the most profane, and unlikeliest people that are, God God
amongst the most profane people sometimes gathers a Church to himself.
may sometimes gather a Church to himself.

The Apostle having reckoned up, 1 Cor. 6. 11. monsters of men, rather than
men, whereof some are said to be effeminat^, and abusers of themselves with
mankind, he adds (...), and these things, as if they were peccata, not
peccatores, were some of you, but now ye are justified, now ye are washed. God
then does sometimes make Blackmoors to become white; and though man cannot, yet
he sometimes does make figs to grow of thorns, and grapes of thistles.

I have spoken to this truth in Paul's case, and therefore shall be brief. Only
the reason why God may build his house of such crooked timber, and make his
Temple of such rough stones, may be to show the freeness of his grace, and the
efficacy of it. Both which are opposed by Arminians and Papists, but gladly
acknowledged by the godly man, who has had experience of it. For the freeness
of Gods grace, that is seen two ways, Absolutely and Comparatively.
Absolutely; For when God shall call such to himself, who are so utter unworthy,
that deserve all the vengeance and wrath God can inflict upon them, this must
discover grace to be exceeding free, and gracious. In stead therefore of the
curses of the Law, thou meetes^ with the promises of the Gospel. In stead of
hell and damnation, God vouchsafes Heaven and salvation. What can be freer
then Gods love, and his gift herein? Thou art so far from being in a state of
congruity or fitness that thou art in direct opposition and contrariety.

Again, The grace of God is manifested to be free comparatively. For who can
give a reason, why God calls these Corinthians, and not Athenians? Were the
Corinthians the only deserving men in the world? Yea, there were more civil and
moral people than they; yet to these, and not to many others is the grace of
God communicated. Is not that admirable which our Savior speaks of Chorazin
and Bethsaida. That if such things had been done in Tire and Zidon (Mat. 11.
21.) they would have repented long ago in sackeloth and ashes? You see then
that the grace of God is not so much as offered to some, who yet externally at
least would have demonstrated more humiliation and reformation, when yet it is
plentifully bestowed on those, who are contemners and despisers of it. The
freeness then of Gods grace to some, and not to others is admirable, and
shows that there is no such thing as Universal Grace. Common Grace is no
Grace, as Austin said well; neither is God an accepter of persons in this
thing, for that is committed only in things of justice; but in matters of
liberality, there the free, liberal man may give as he please, to one, and not
to another.

In the next place, This discovers the efficacy of Gods grace. For must it not
be the great power of God, as shall convert such an obstinate and profane
people to himself? Grace may be much acknowledged, as Pelagians did, especially
Papists and Arminians; but it is not gratia, except it be gratuita omni modo.
Therefore except we hold, that grace does not only reveal the object, or
morally persuade the subject, but invincibly and irresistently determine and
incline the heart to apply it; so that it comes not from the good use of our
Free Will, but the discriminating power of grace, which gives both to will and
to do, we give not all, no nor the chiefest to grace, but make our will to be
the more principal discriminating cause. We are therefore to affirm, That God
converts both per modum sapientiae, and potentiae; that Gods work upon us is
Ethico-physical in bringing of us home unto him. It Is by way of moral
arguments, therefore we are not as stocks and stones; yet by way of power and
invincible efficacy; therefore it is not we that make grace efficacious, but
grace makes our will: And this truth is not so much proved by books and
demonstrations of Authors, as it is from experience. When God takes sometimes
the worst of men, and makes them the best of Saints: Is here any previous
goodness? Is here any probum ingenium, or docilitas animi, that the
Remonstrants talk of so much? No, the Scripture speaks of every one in a state
of enmity and rebellion against God, when grace comes to convert them.

Therefore let the Use be of Exhortation to all such, who have felt this lively
power of God raising them out of the grave of sin, who have been taught of
God inwardly, as well as by the outward Ministry, with all joy and thankfulness
be astonished at the free and unsearchable riches of Gods grace to thee. How
many does God pass by, of better parts, of greater abilities, of higher
conditions in the world, that might have done him more service, and pitch his
love upon thee? Oh do thou abhor all those presumptuous and proud opinions of
Free Will, and power to make Gods grace effectual to thee! Do not bid such as
bring such Doctrines, God speed. What does not thy own experience, does not the
wonderful power of God upon thee, subduing and overcoming thy heart, when thou
wast full of carnal prejudices, and sinful reasonings abundantly convince thee
of this? Let thy own heart, and experience confirm thee more than all their
subtle distinctions can unfettle thee.

But I pass from this, and come to a second Observation, which Calvin on the
place takes notice of. He calls it a Church (says he) though it were so
greatly polluted; though both for Doctrine and practice, there were such great
disorders, yet for all that he does not unchurch it, he owneth them still for
the people of God, though they were greatly to be reformed, as to the Church
administrations; neither are his exhortations to the godly to separate and
leave the Church-communions, though thus defiled; he gives no command to such
a thing, but rather exhorts them all in their places to amend and reform, To
purge out the old leaven that was amongst them. Therefore to forsake polluted
Assemblies, and leave them hopeless, seems to be a great neglect of our duty;
we are rather to stay, that by our abode and presence, we may rectify things
that are crooked. The Doctrine is,

That a Church may be a true Church of God, although it be defiled with A
Church may be a true, though defiled one.
many corruptions several ways.

As a godly man may be truly godly, and yet subject to many failings. Thus a
Church also may be truly Gods Church, the Body of Christ, yet many distempers
and sad confusions amongst them. This truth is worthy of all diligent
prosecution, because many men, though otherwise good, out of a tenderness and
misguided zeal, may separate from our Congregations, deny them to be true
Churches, and all because they see many things amongst us that are matter of
grief, and a great stumbling block to them. This I confess is, and has been a
sad temptation; but a particular Christian is is not to excommunicate and
unchurch a Church, till God has given a Bill of Divorce to it, and has cast
it quite off. An impatiency to bear any evil, or disorders in a Church, is not
presently to be commended and yielded to, to the utmost. A Christian must have
wisdom, and a sound mind, as well as zeal and a tender conscience. Even the
Reformed Churches did not wilfully and voluntarily depart from the Church of
Rome, but did stay to cure and heal Babylon, until they drove them away with
fire and sword. So that our leaving the Roman Church was not a Schismatical
separation, but a forced discession or departure from them. But of this it may
be more afterward.

Let us for the present take notice of what corruptions and disorders were here
What were the corruptions amongst the Corinthians.
at Corinth, which yet he calls the Church of God. And

First, Whereas the Apostle comprehends all Religion in these things, Tit. 2.
12. Righteously, soberly, and godly. Righteously, in respect of religious
duties toward God. We may see how the Corinthians were blameworthy in all. And

1. For their sins of unrighteousness; The Apostle sharply reproves them
for their contentions and quarrellings, even so far, that they went to Law
with one another, and that in the Heathen Judicatories, which was a great and
grievous reproach to the Christian Religion. How would the Heathens deride and
scoff, to see those that were Christians, and out of appearance from love to
heavenly things, forsaking the world and earthly advantages, thus to implead
one another about meum and tuum, about money matters, or other civil rights, to
sue one another before Heathens Judges? What could this produce, but to make
the Heathens say, They talk of leaving all, and following a crucified Christ,
but they will not abate of their earthly rights to one another, not in the
least measure? Which did so grieve the Apostle, that he conjureth them, What
have ye never a wise man, to be an arbitrator amongst you? Why do ye not
rather suffer wrong? Nay, they were so far from such meek, self-denying
spirits, that they rather did wrong and defraud one another. Now see how
zealous the Apostle is in this, 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 3. he says, Dare any of you,
having a matter against another go to Law? Dare any of you, supposing the
Gospel, the meekness of Christ, the self-denial and contempt of earthly things,
with the scandal redounding to Religion, would sufficiently awe their
consciences? Again, verse. 4. he tells them, that the things pertaining to this
life (...); for about them they quarrelled so much, were so inconsiderable,
that they should appoint the least esteemed in the Church for to end such
inferior work. Again, verse. 5. I speak it to your shame: And verse. 7. There is
utterly a fault amongst you. Thus you see that in matters of Justice between
man and man, there were great offenses. Only by the way, let none gather from
these expressions of Paul, that it is unlawful to go to Law, or appeal to the
Civil Magistrate to know his due right, when that is detained from him. For
that is many times so far from being a sin, that it is a duty; it would be a
sin not to pursue it: as you see Paul pleaded his right, and would not go out
of prison, when they had done it against Law, till the Magistrates came to
entreat him, provided that there be those qualifications, which Paul
insinuates.

1. That this impleading be not before Heathens and Pagans, who hate the How
it is lawful for Christians to go to Law.
Christian Religion. 2. That we have such Meekness of spirit as willingly to
suffer wrong, did not the Gospel of Christ, or the Law of the Land, or the good
of others require it of us. And
Lastly, That we be willing to refer all our controversies to any just and
wise arbitratours. If these things be premised, and yet unreasonable and absurd
men will make a spoil, and a scoff of men, then both Religion, and Justice
calls them to defend themselves, and it would be a sin to neglect it.

In the second place, for Sobriety, which is the expression of such graces as
belong to our selves, viz. Temperance and Chastity. How grossly did the
Corinthians offend here? There were some that had repented of their fornication
and uncleanness; and for drunkenness, some did presume to come to the Lords
Table, not freed from it. Thus you see many of them were rather beasts than a
Church.

Lastly, For Godliness or Religion, there were also sad disorders about that.
There were some that denied the Resurrection, that said, Let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we shall die; these were Atheists. And certainly had this been
the Assertion of the whole Church, and not some few only amongst them, if it
had been their Catholic and Universal Doctrine, maintained by all, they had
ceased to be a Church, they had degenerated into mere Atheism; but it was some
only that were thus infected. Again, Another offense in Religion was, their
great Church-divisions, some exalting Paul, some Apollo; insomuch that in stead
of edifying and building up one another; they were divided into as many Sects
almost, as they had Teachers. And then lastly, There was horrible confusion and
ungodliness in respect of Church Order. All godly Discipline was laid aside,
the administration of the Sacraments was promiscuous, come who would come,
though in their unworthiness, they might receive it. And although Gods judgment
was upon them, either the Plague, or some general disease, and that because no
better order was about the Sacrament, yet for all that they did not judge or
condemn themselves. Thus this Church was like a very Chaos, and yet a Church
still.

SERMON. XVII.
A further Discovery of the truth of this Assertion, that a Church may be a
true Church, though much defiled both in Doctrine and Manners.

2 COR. 1. 1. To the Church of God, which is at Corinth, etc.
THis Church of Corinth is dignified (as you heard) with this glorious Title of
the Church of God, notwithstanding those manifest and notorious depravations
that were amongst them, and that of all sorts.

This truth we entered upon, and before we give you some demonstrations to
evidence it, it is good to take notice of some observable particulars, which
tend to the clearing of it. Only this must be premised, that whereas a Church
may be denied to be so, either from its constitution, or from its conversation.
We are speaking of the later way, and so consider,

First, That the soundness and purity of Churches does admit of degrees: That
Some observations clearing the truth, that a Church, though defiled may be the
Church of God.
as one Star does excel another in glory, yet both Stars: So one Church
may greatly transcend another in orthodoxy and purity, and yet both be
Churches. In those seven Churches of Asia, there were some reproved more than
others. We cannot expect that all Churches should be of the same measure in
knowledge and grace, no mor than particular Christians: and therefore we are
not to conclude such a Church is no Church, because not so pure as another
Church, no more than such a man is not a godly man, because he has not such a
measure of Illumination and Sanctification, as another. And to say in the
general, That it is a Christians duty to find out the purest Church in the
world, and there to associate himself with it, must needs fill a Christian with
infinite perplexities of conscience; as also to expose him to insupportable
outward inconveniences. Let us not therefore do with a Church, as a godly
tender heart is apt to do with himself, because he finds many failings and
great imperfections, therefore he is ready to judge that he has no grace at
all. Thus because there are several disorders and distempers in such a Church,
which are deservedly daily matter of groan, and sorrow to thee, therefore thou
beginnest to sentence such a Church; as no longer Gods Church. Again, seeing
that there are gradual differences of soundness and purity in Churches, this
should also make every Church take heed of appropriating the glorious name of a
Church, or Saints, or Christians to themselves only, as if none were Saints or
Christians, but what are members of their Society. This is and has been a most
uncharitable proud disposition of some Churches. The Popish Church says, There
is no sanctity or holiness, but with them. Inter Catholicos (says Bellarmine)
multi quidem sunt mali, sed inter haereticos ne uniu quidem est bonus. What a
censorious condemnation is this? Not one good Protestant (whom they call
Heretics) not in all our Churches. Thus they only appropriate the name of
Church and sanctity to themselves. So the Donatists did of old, they enclosed
the Church only amongst themselves; they called none Christians but themselves:
To become a Donatist was to become a Christian with them. So that we see, it is
very hard for Churches not to admire their own ways and constitutions,
thinking that none are Churches but themselves; there may be pharisaical
Churches, that may condemn other Churches as Publicans, as well as it is so in
persons; whereas it is good to observe, that the Scripture does describe
Christians by such names as do not at all relate, or distinguish by any
Government, or external constitution, to be a believer, to be a Saint, to be a
Christian. These titles denote either some inward qualification or external
profession, but do not at all insinuate, what kinds of order or way they are
in; yet this is not so to be understood, as if Christ's order and way, his
Government and Discipline were an indifferent or arbitrary thing; only it is to
show, that we are not to monopolize godliness amongst our selves, merely
because of a Church-constitution, although we are not to receive any form or
spiritual order in our Churches, but of Christ's appointment. There is a great
difference and latitude in the soundness and purity of Churches.

Secondly, When we speak of a Church being Gods true Church, though greatly
corrupted, we must take heed of two extremes, the first of those, who therefore
would have no Reformation, though there be never so many disorders, but say,
It Is wisdom and prudence to let all things be, as they have been, for it may
be Gods Church, though there be diverse abuses. Take heed of such carnal
indulgence as this, because it is the Church of God, therefore make no more
stir, let errors and profaneness alone, let disorders continue; and this
many times is palliated with fair specious pretenses, that such endeavors to
reform, will breed great discontents and divisions, in stead of having a pure
Church, it may be made no Church at all, especially this is the more difficulty
obtained, if it be a Reformation in worship and manners; for we are more
willing to sit down under an Orthodox Church, then a pure Church. We can more
easily endure to have sound Doctrine established, then pure and holy Order,
because this does so directly contradict our lusts, and pleasures. Hence
Malachy prophesies of Christ's repurgation of his Church, as a very dreadful
time, even like the day of judgment, Mal. 3. 2, 4. Christ is there said to sit
as a refiner, and as a purger to take away dro^, but who shall abide the day of
his coming? Christ's coming being thus like the Refiners fire, and the Fullers
soap, was as terrible as the day of judgment to them, Who may abide it (says
he?) You see then orthodoxy is sooner received than godly and holy order; but
we are to know, that though we have many things to glory in, that we are a true
Church, that we have excellent preaching, and many learned Officers in it, yet
if there be not an endeavor to take away all offenses and scandals, there is
great matter of humiliation. The Apostle speaks notably in this matter to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5. 6. Your glorying is not good, etc. The Corinthians they
gloried and boasted in many things, but as long as they did not cast out the
old leaven, or the wicked man, but this leaven was in danger to leaven the
whole lump, therefore he tells them, Their glorying was not good, there was
greater cause to be deeply humbled, because of such disorders amongst them. Let
us not then, though we can and may prove our Church to be the Church of God,
therefore sit down and take our rest, as if therefore reformation of
corruptions were needless: No the Apostle does far otherwise to this Church
of Corinth, though he call it the Church of God, yet his Epistle is full of
sharp reproof to them; he is very zealous and lively in putting of them upon
this, that they became a new lump, that they be made as it were a new Church,
and a new Congregation. Far be it therefore from us to excuse or connive at
our public impieties, because Corinth, though so polluted is a Church: No, we
are to tremble and humble our selves under such disorders, they are great
provocations of Gods anger. You see God did begin to judge and chasten this
Church of Corinth; God takes notice, and is very angry with all these
disorders, and great neglect. Therefore if you observe those Epistles of Christ
from Heaven, to the seven Churches of Asia, where their works were not perfect,
where there were any decays; yea, if Christ had any thing against them, though
there were other things commendable, yet he will take notice and rebuke them
therein; yea, to some he threatens to take away their Candlesticks, that is,
their Ordinances, and to unchurch them. Oh then, let us humble our selves under
Gods hand for all our Church-sins, all our Assembly-iniquities, lest the wrath
of God break out upon us!

The second extreme we are to take heed of, is, That because of the corruptions
that are in a Church, we are not so far transported with misguided zeal, as
to take no notice of the truth of a Church. Some are apt so to attend to a true
Church, that they never matter the corruptions of it. Others again, they do so
eye the corruptions, that they never regard the truth of it: but it is good to
avoid both these extremes; Whence comes that impatiency in us to bear any evil
in a Church? Whence is it that we uncharitably rend from it? Is it not because
we do not consider it may be a true Church, and salvation is there to be had,
yea conversion and regeneration, though there be many things to be reformed?
There is no Church so pure, but that there are some imperfections in it; no
Church so reformed, but in some things it needs a reformation. Thou may go
from Church to Church, and be like Noah's Dove, not know where to set thy feet:
if thou look for absolute perfection in any Church whether thou go. As there
is no constitution of the body, which has an exact temperament ad pondus, but
some humor or other does predominate; so there is no Church that is of such a
perfect frame, but it has its several grievances, and though it may be freed
from those evils they separated from, yet they may be assaulted with others
that are as destructive of a Church in a contrary way, though freed from
tyranny, yet not from divisions, and daily subdivisions amongst themselves. So
that in these things we are diligently to make the Scripture our Rule.

Thirdly, Though that Church be a true Church where we live, yet if many
corruptions do abound therein, we must take heed, That we do not pollute our
selves thereby, or become partakers of any sin indulged amongst them. As we
may not sinfully separate upon this ground, because they are no Church, so
neither may we continue so, as to pollute and defile our selves with any known
sin. The Apostles exhortation to the Corinthians under these manifold
pollutions, is, that every one in their proper place, should endeavor their
new moulding. So that under Church-pollutions, thou art to consider, what God
calls thee to do, to rebuke, exhort, admonish; and if this will not do, to
complain to Church Officers, who are to guide and watch over the flock; and if
yet this will not do, then to be the more earnest with God in prayer, to bring
about Reformation notwithstanding all the gainsayings of wicked men: To mourn
and sigh unto God, as a Lot in Sodom, vexing thy righteous soul continually; as
a lamenting Jeremiah among the apostatizing Israelites. And certainly God does
in a special manner take notice of such, who do mourn for those abominations,
that they cannot remove or take away, Ezekiel. 9. 4. when thou can appeal to
God, saying, O Lord, these corruptions, these disorders, they grieve me to the
very heart! I cry out daily, Woe be unto me, because I dwell with men of
polluted lips. This will much engage God to thee. Likewise we read, Revel. 3.
4. in what a special manner God takes notice of a few names in Sardis, which
had not defiled their garments. To be therefore in the midst of a defiled
Church, and yet to keep thy self unspotted, this is admirable; as they record
of the river Alpheus, which though it run into the Sea, yet it keeps its own
natural sweetness; though we have communion with the Church in those things,
that are commanded by God, yet we are not to partake with them in any evil way:
as those seven thousand in Eli^ah's time, though they did not depart from the
Church of Israel, yet they would not bow their knee to Baul.

In the next place, Let us demonstrate this, that a Church may be Gods Church,
Reasons showing the truth of it.
though it be greatly corrupted. And

First, It may be seen from the induction of several Churches; as for example,
the Church of the Jews, they were Gods people, and God did own them as his;
yet, as appears by the Prophets complaints and daily reproofs, they were full
of Idolatries and all moral impieties; and for all this, there were many
repentings and turnings in Gods bowels, to speak after the manner of men,
before he would call them Lo-ammi, a people no more to him. But you may say,
That was in the Old Testament, when the Spirit of God was not poured out so
effectually. Consider then besides, this Church of Corinth, the Churches of
Galatia; were not they far infected with doctrinal pollutions and vicious
lusts of the flesh? That the Apostle mentions not any where, such zeal and
sharpness as he does to them, threatening them with Apostasy from Christ, and
that having begun in the Spirit, they would end in the flesh. We might instance
also in several other Churches: But as the Father said elegantly, We need not
drink up the whole Sea, to know whether the water be saltish; a drop or two
will suffice.

Secondly, This may be demonstrated from the relation and comparison, the
Church is adorned with, in reference to Christ. It Is often compared to Christ's
wife; now the wife continues a true wife, and is not to be deserted, unless
for Adultery, which breaks the conjugal knot; otherwise though she have many
sad infirmities, which may make the relation bitter and uncomfortable, yet it
does not unwise her. The Church is also Christ's body; now a body is not
forsaken by the soul, though it be a sore body, a leprous body; a leper is a
man, though a leper: It Is Christ's ^arden; now this may have many weeds in it,
and many things defile it, yet it is not presently made a waste wilderness.
Thus it is with the Church of God, she may have many failings in Doctrine and
manners, yet not be quite unchurched.

Thirdly, From a godly man. A true child of God may have sad falls, as we see
in Peter and David, yet for all this not be quite excluded out of the Covenant
of grace; they did not lose their sonship, even in those sad transgressions,
and will God be more severe to a whole Church than to one person?

Use of Instruction, what a deal of prudence and wisdom is required in every
godly man under Church-pollutions? To know what to do, to understand how to
deport himself; for this he must be guided by the Word, and the advice of those
that are faithful, on the one hand, not to be stupid or careless, much less
complying and communicating with the Church defilements; and on the other side,
not to be so transported with misguided zeal and impatiency against evil, as
there by to rend the Church causlesly, and to sin our selves, because others
sin.

SERMON, XVIII.
The Pre-eminence of the Church of God above all Civil Societies. As likewise
concerning Paul's writing this second Epistle to the Corinthians; how hard a
thing it is for Churches to keep within their proper bounds; and what great
care Ministers ought to have, to use all means lawful to promote the Churches,
which they have relation to.

2 COR. 1. 1. To the Church of God, which is at Corinth.
THis clause has been fruitful for much spiritual and edifying matter, I
shall conclude it at this time. There are three things more, which are to be
deduced from this subject. And

First, Whereas you see, that the Epistle is not directed to the Magi^^^ or
Civil Governors of the City; neither is the least notice taken of their wealth
o^ external pomp. We may observe,

That the Church of God, as it is a Church, does far surpass all Civil
Societies, The Church of God as a Church does far surpass all civil Societies,
and temporal dignities.
and temporal Dignities.

The Apostle owneth nothing in this famous City, but their faith, their
profession of Christ, and subjection to him. A Church is a supernatural
Society, for supernatural and spiritual ends, where God is in a more special
manner present; and therefore though the civil Magistrate be also of God, and
civil Societies they are of him, yet not in that peculiar relation as a Church
is. Thus the Psalmist says, Psalm. 87. 2. The Lord loves the (...) of Sion,
more than all the dwellings of Jerusalem, that is, the Assemblies of his people
met together in holy Ordinances, above all other their civil meetings, though
never so pompou^ and magnificent. Therefore it is good to consider, that in all
the inscriptions which the Apostle (...) to any Churches, he does not at all
speak of any civil or temporal Dignities, that the places where the Churches
were, had but only ^on of their spiritual titles, as a Church, Saints,
Believers, Beloved of God. And certainly, if we do truly consider things, these
Titles do as far trans^^nd all civil glory, as the Heavens do the Earth. The
Apostle writing to the (...) in all that Epistle takes no notice of the glory
of that City, which was the Orbis Domina, and which they usually called aeterna
Urbs; he mentions their faith, which was known to the whole world, Romans 1. 8.
not the Roman and warlike power whereby they were so terrible to all Nations.
It is good to consider this; for how few Churches do esteem of, or judge
themselves by their Church consideration, but by their civil respects? As they
are such a City, such a Corporation, glorying in their Liberties and Charters;
whereas the consideration of themselves as a Church, should far more possess
their hearts.

Briefly to understand this, consider

First, That the Church and Commonwealth, or any civil Society, are two
distinct things; the Church is one thing, and the State another thing. In the
times of Heathen Magistrates, and while there was outward persecution, by the
civil Powers which then ruled, it is plain; for the City of Rome, and the Church
of Rome in Paul's time were wholly different. So at Corinth, the civil
Magistracy of the Town did not seem to be Christians, the Corporation of the
Town was not (as I may say) made a Church. The Christian Religion was not at
this time established in Corinth by the City-Laws and Government; only many in
Corinth were become believers. So that it is plain, The same Corinthians, as
they were a Church, lived by other Laws, and by different principles, then as
members of the City of Corinth. As he was a Citizen, so he met in their civil
Judicatories, so he acted according to the Laws of the City (provided nothing
was against Gods command) but as a member of the Church there, so they meet
with others in spiritual communion, for holy and spiritual ends. Thus it is in
a State, while they are generally Heathenish. But some have doubted, Whether if
a Commonwealth become Christian, then there is any difference there between the
Church and such a Christian State? Whether then they are not all one? But
certainly by the first Institution, and plantation of Churches, by Christ and
the Apostles, Churches were founded and imbodied; their Officers, imploiment,
and the end of their Society appointed, without any relation to the civil State
and Government where they lived. And therefore a Christian State, does not
civilly govern, nor bear the Sword, punishing with death; neither are there
supreme Governors, Lords or Noblemen in it, as a Church; for then these should
be Church Officers, and instituted by Christ; a Justice of Peace is not of
Christ, as a Pastor in the Church. Neither on the other side are the preaching
of the Word, the administration of Sacraments, the exercising of
Church Censures, the effects of a Christian State, but as a Church. So that
it is necessary by Scripture to acknowledge these two, a Church, and the State,
as two distinct Societies, though the same men may be members of the same.

Secondly, It Is a most blessed thing, when the civil State and Church are
happily united together, so that both in their several stations do promote the
Kingdom of Christ. There are extremities on both sides, some exclude all civil
Government from the matters of the Church or Religion; as if the Magistrate,
and the civil power had nothing to do to appoint any thing in reference to
these spiritual matters, which if so, then Kings and Queens could not be
nursing Fathers and Mothers in the Church; Then the Magistrate should not be
the Custos utriusque tabulae; then holy Magistrates should sin in reforming
abuses and corruptions which are crept into the Church of God, which yet
Hezekiah and Josiah did; and so likewise Constantine did, to his great praise,
saying to the Officers of the Church, he was (...), He had an external
Episcopacie and Superintendency.

Then in the second place, there is another extreme error, which is to
confound the State and the Church, as if Christ had appointed no distinct
Officers or work, but that any man authorized by a commission from the civil
power, was hereby enabled to do any Office in the Church, and that Christ had
not set Pastors or Teachers in his Church, but civil Governors. Now how
blessed and happy has it been, when these Societies have been friendly
complying, and furthering one another. The Commonwealth helping and furthering,
defending and protecting the Church: The Church also performing all
Church-Ordinances, in such a manner, that God may bless that state, and make it
to be as Obed-Edoms house, while he entertained the Ark, Quamdiu respublicae
manent hospitia Ecclesiae tamdiu suns duraturae.

Hence in the third place, The Devil and his instruments have always labored
the ruin of godliness, by making divisions, and using several stratagems to
overthrow the harmonious Unity that ought to be in the Church of God, and civil
State. In Popery, we see abominable mischief came to Religion by the usurping
of the name of the Church; for they excluded the Magistrates and supreme
Governors, from any Government therein, and at last pleading exemption from
all Obedience and Subjection to the chief powers, though so expressly contrary
to Paul, Romans 13. Thus they make a few only, yea but one, the Pope at last, to
be the Church, and then attribute to him a power to dispose of Kingdoms and
States, where and to whom he pleases, directly and immediately, say some; and
those who do most mince it say, indirecte, and in ordine ad spiritualia. On the
other side, sometimes the civil State has been jealous, yea and violently
perscuting the Church of God, as if that of Julian were true, A Church and a
civil Society could not stand together; as if Christ had commanded such things
of his Church, that were inconsistent with, and would utterly overthrow all
civil Government. Thus Pilate, he was jealous, because he heard of Christ's
Kingdom; and although it be known that his Kingdom is not of this world, that
Church power is wholly spiritual in order to men's souls, yet how often are the
Governors suspicious about it? But these particulars are of large
consideration, and handled by learned Authors. I come therefore to show, That
a peoples consideration of themselves as a Church, should be preferred above
all their civil Glory and Dignity. It ought to be more (as one Emperor said)
to be a Member of the Church, then an Emperor of the whole world. The Church
of Rome in Paul's time, while pure in the faith, was more admirable, then the
City of Rome, which was Queen over the whole world.

The Grounds why we are to give this pre-eminence to a Church-consideration,
Reasons showing the truth of it.
are

First, Because a Church-constitution is supernatural, all is of God in a more
special manner, then in civil Societies. For although all civil Powers be of
God, and the making of civil Societies, of making Nations and Kingdoms be in an
extraordinary manner attributed to him in the Scripture, yet still this is in
the course of Nature, but a Church is planted by the grace of God, and it is
above the work of Nature, either ordinary or extraordinary, to be made such a
Society.

Secondly, As we are a Church, we have the nearest relation and reference to
God; not as a City, or a Corporation are, but as a Church are we his House, his
Body, his Vinyard. Neither can we expect such presence of God in our civil
Assemblies and Judicatories, as in Church-meetings. The power and grace of God
is in a more powerful and special manner discovering it self there.

Thirdly, Hereby we have greater Titles, and more noble Dignity; Although it is
true in the account of the world, nothing is more contemptible. The Church is
called the Kingdom of God; we are hereby the children of God; the Covenant of
Grace is made with us. So that all who are not of the Church, be they never
such glorious, victorious, and wise Nations, yet they are without God, and they
are under the Kingdom of Satan, whereas Gods Church is the Object of his love,
there he is said to delight to dwell.

Use of Instruction to Believers, who are the Church of God, to consider Use 1.
that title and relation they are in as such. Though great, though rich, though
honorable, yet let it not be accounted equal to the being one of Gods Church.
If the Devil should show thee the glory of all the world, promising to bestow
it on thee, upon condition thou renouncest thy Church interest, and Church
membership, with great indignation refuse it. What high esteem was put upon the
being a Roman Citizen? Paul stood upon his Roman freedom in a particular case;
but this is nothing to be of that free City, which is Jerusalem from above,
even in this Earth. By meditating on this, thou will be more thankful to God,
that he has made thee one of his Church, than if he had given all the Turkish
Empire to thee, for that is but as Luther said, Mica cani, a crum to the dog,
in respect of the childrens bread.

Again, The consideration of a Church-priviledge and interest, will make thee
most to attend to that, in disposing and settling thy self, when at liberty. Use
2.
Most people look to live, where the best trading is, the greatest privileges,
or best earthly accommodation. But if thou art one free to settle thy self
where thou may; thou that fear God will look upon Church advantages as
the greatest glory and profit of all.

Lastly, This will take off all those general thoughts, which do almost reign
every where, to consider of men by their Cities and Towns, not by Use 3.
their Churches; It Is the Town at such a place, the Corporation at such a
place, but no attending to that place, as it is a Church of God. Hence it is
that we are wholly drowned in the thoughts of our selves, as a Town, as a
Parish in civil respects, but never considering the relation of a Church, and
what duties we are obliged unto thereby.

The two other Observations are to be dispatched in a little room, as Why Paul
writes this second Epistle to the Corinthians.
from the Apostles writing a second time to the Church of Corinth, which he
seldom did to any Church, but to that of the Thessalonians, and to Timothy a
single person. One reason whereof amongst others, was, because that his former
Epistle had taken some good effect; and whereas they had been too remiss before
about their indulgence to that incestuous person, it seems this Epistle had
now so awakened them, that they began to be too severe to him, though repenting
and humbling himself, as appears, Chap. 2. 6, 7. whereupon he exhorts them,
To comfort him, lest he be swallowed up with too much sorrow. It Is true, there
were other reasons, why he wrote this second Epistle, but this is one amongst
the rest. From whence we might observe,

That it is very hard for the Churches of God to keep within their proper bounds
about Church-administrations. It is very hard for the Church of God to keep
within their proper bounds in Church-administrations.


Nothing is more ordinary, than to fall from one extreme to another. These
Corinthians that were so negligent in good order, that many pollutions were
suffered amongst them; insomuch that Gods judgments had surprised them for
their default herein. Now when awakened to do their duty, they are ready to
overdo, and from too much remisness, to fall into too much severity. Thus in
many other things we might instance, how the Churches of God have fallen from
one extremity to another; but this subject, especially as it relates to
Church Discipline will be more sutably treated of in Chap. 2.

I therefore briefly raise a third Observation, and that is from the Apostles
care, and zeal to build up the Church of God. For whereas he could not come to
the Corinthians as yet, lest any Church-corruption or disorders should arise
thereby, he endeavors by writing to do that in his absence, which he would not
do by his presence. From whence we may gather,

That it is the Ministers duty, not only by personal preaching, but by all other
It is a Ministers duty to use all lawful means to promote the Church he has
relation to.
lawful ways to promote that Church, he has any relation unto.

When Paul cannot preach, he will write. This zeal in Paul drew out those many
Epistles, that now we have recorded in Scripture. Our Apostle speaks notably
to this, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 17, 18. and Chap. 3. 1. where he shows his cordial
affections toward that people, with what violence he was kept from them; and
because Satan hindered him, he says, He could no longer forbear, but would be
left at Athens alone, without any comfort or solace, rather than not to send to
them, that so they might not be moved from the Gospel. Thus at other times we
see this glorious Apostle, when present, yet not contented with his public
preaching, did from house to house, as occasion served with tears, beseech and
testify every one to cleave unto the Lord.

From this example of Paul, who though an Apostle, and so not bound to attend
on particular Churches, yet did by letters confirm and quicken those Churches
he had planted. We see how great and grievous a sin a voluntary and
unnecessary non-residence is, in those Pastors, who by their Office are bound
to a particular Flock, and to watch over them. For though in some weighty cases
for the good of the whole Church they may be detained from their Flock, yet
voluntarily and slothfully to do this, will at last be found a grievous
soul-murdering sin.

Use 2. To reprove that people, who complain of too much preaching, and too
much ministerial imploiment, thinking it needless.

SERMON. XIX.
Of the Name and Nature of a Church-Saint.

2 COR. 1. 1. With all the Saints which are in all Achaia.
WE are now arrived at the last clause in this verse, which contains a more
general Description of those to whom he directs this Epistle. Some Epistles are
called Catholic, because not inscribed to any particular Churches or persons,
but to the whole Church of God. Others are more particular and local, as this
to the Corinthians, yet we see it is not so inscribed to them; but that also,
all the adjacent Saints are comprehended in it. Yea, though Paul and others
wrote their Epistles to certain Churches and persons, yet they are in some
sense Catholic; for they all were written as a perpetual Rule to the whole
Church of God, in all ages. So that this Epistle does concern even the Churches
of God in other Nations, as well as that of Corinth, when guilty of such
disorder.

So that in the Inscription, which is more general than the former clause, we
may take notice,

1. Of the Persons to whom Paul writes, and they are described by their
qualifications, Saints. 2. By a Note of Universality, All the Saints. There is
none so mean or inconsiderable, but the Apostle writes as well to such a poor
contemptible Saint, as well as to the greatest and most eminent. 3. There is
the place where, Which are in all Achaia.
I shall first consider the Qualification, Saints. He gives this title to all
that were of this Church; even as in the former Epistle, he says, They were
sanctified in Jesus Christ. Now the Question is, How the Apostle could give the
title How the Apostle could call the Corinthians Saints, when many of them were
so foully polluted.
of Saints to to all the Corinthians, with those in Achaia; for they both seem
guilty of the same sins; and therefore from this Epistle directed to them, when
yet they were so foully polluted. Was the incestuous person, before he
repented? Were those unclean persons, that had not humbled themselves for their
sins, and Paul was afraid he should find them such when he came? Were those
Saints? Were such, who denied the Resurrection, yea that had no knowledge of
God, as Paul said of some, to whose shame he spoke it, were these Saints?

To this Austin of old answered, and so some of late, That the Apostle speaks
this generally of the whole body, because some amongst them were Saints. The
denomination being from the most worthy part. So that they conclude of this as
a Rule to interpret Scripture by, To understand that of some parts, which yet
is attributed to to the whole. And for this reason (they say) it is, That the
Apostle writing to some Churches, as to this of Corinth, does sometimes speak
of them, as if they were all godly; and at another time, he reproves them so,
as if they were all blameworthy. Thus because some were Saints indeed,
therefore he writes to the whole Church, as if Saints; as we call a field of
corn by that name, though there may be many weeds and briars amongst it. This
has some truth, but yet this is not all.

Secondly, It may be thought that the Apostle calls them Saints, in the
judgment of charity, because they did outwardly profess their faith and
obedience in Christ, even as Paul says of Sylvanus, 1 Pet. 5. 12. A faithful
brother, as I suppose; but a judgment of charity must be according to truth,
and he knew that all in Corinth were not truly Saints. And as for that
expression of Paul's concerning Sylvanus; Calvin, Estius and others, do not
relate the phrase ((...)) to a faithful brother, but to the (...), the few
things, or briefly, as added for Modesty sake; and indeed if it were related to
Sylvanus, it would not commend his fidelity, but rather give occasion to doubt
of it. But if we attribute it to Sylvanus, the word (...) is not (...), or
(...), it signifies a firm and undoubted judgment upon good consideration,
therefore our English word (suppose) does not so well answer it.

Therefore in the third place, That distinction of a Saint by external
profession or dedication to God thereby, and by internal and spiritual
renovation is the most genuine to answer this doubt. Some were Saints by inward
regeneration; Others were Saints by external profession and outward submission;
so that they had not as yet renounced their Christianity; and this sense the
Apostle plainly makes, when he gives that opposition between Heathens and
Saints, as 1 Cor. 6. 1. Dare any of you go to law before the unjust, that is,
the Heathens, and not before Saints? where Saint is opposed to an Heathen. So
verse. 6. a brother, which is all one with a Saint, is opposed to an unbeliever.
All that came out of the world to profess Christ, are called Saints and
believers, though even amongst them all were not godly. Now you must know, that
there are degrees of godliness,

1. There is that which is supreme and infinite, and thus God is holy, holy,
holy.

2. There is created boliness, and that either perfect, such as the humane
Nature of Christ, the Angels and glorified Saints in Heaven have, or else
imperfect, subject to many imperfections and weaknesses. Hence says Salmeron,
We dare not call any man a Saint, while be lives on this earth, till he be
consummated; but that is absurd; for to be a Saint is no more than to be holy;
so that if we may call any holy, we may also call them Saints, as our
Translators do for the most part render the word. The Papists indeed they call
only those that are canonized Saints, who are already in Heaven; therefore
those that lived in the Old Testament, because of their opinion of their being
in Limbo Patrum, they are never in the Roman Church called Saints, they never
say Saint David, or Saint Isaiah. Salmeron also observes from this title of
Saints given to all believers, That in the Infancy of the Church (says he) all
were called Saints, in the Adolescentia, only the Bishops, and Officers in the
Church, but in Senectute, only those that are translated into Heaven. But we
must conform to Scripture, not humane speculations. The Greek word (...),
answering the Hebrew Kodesh; for the Septuagint seldom translate it by (...),
or (...), but generally by (...), is by some said to be as much as sine terra,
without earth, or any worldly pollution. But the best Grammarians derive it
from (...), to reverence and respect, as (...) from (...), to desire, because
all holy things are with much reverence to be regarded. Whereas then to be
holy, has a twofold principal signification:

1. To be dedicate and set apart to God. 2. To be inherently sanctified; and
both these applicable in the Text. We All that are of the Church are Saints by
profession, and ought to be so in their conversations.
may observe,
That all those who are of Gods Church are Saints by profession and dedication,
and ought to be Saints by their lives and conversations.

Hence Romans 1. 7. we have that expression, called Saints, that is, either
called to be Saints, holiness being the term to which of their vocation; or
Saints by calling, as Paul was by his calling an Apostle. Both these tend to
the same thing, and all oblige to holiness.

First, Let us consider, how much this Church-Saintship does comprehend, What
is comprehended under Church Saintship.
what degrees and steps it has. And

1. It does imply, Their being under the external dispensation of Gods Covenant
of Grace. All that are under the Covenant administration, are thereby Saints,
and holy, though all are not regenerated. Upon this account it is, that the
children of one, or more believing Parents are called holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. where
to be under the Covenant is enough to give this denomination of holy. And hence
it is, that all the people of the Jews among whom there were many profane and
unholy persons, in respect of inward Sanctity, are yet called all of them
Saints, because the Covenant-dispensation was toward them. Psalm. 77. 2. The
Psalmist complains, That the enemies had given the flesh of his Saints to the
beasts of the earth, where the Nation of the Jews, destroyed by their enemies,
are all called Saints. So Psalm. 89. 5, 7. the assembly of the Israelites,
wherein also David did meet to praise God, is called, the Assembly of the
Saints. Now we cannot think, that every Israelite who came to sacrifice and
serve God was truly holy. Yea Psalm. 50. God complains of such, Who came and
took his name into their mouth, and yet hated to be reformed. Therefore they
are called Saints, because they are all under the Covenant of Grace.

2. Church-Saintship consists in a dedication, and consecrating our selves unto
God. For our Baptism is the initial Sacrament, and by it we are externally
sanctified and set apart to God from the Devil, sin and the world. For as in
the Old Testament, there were by certain ceremonial Rites, dedicating of
persons and things to God, which thereby had a relative holiness, and so were
called holy, because dedicated; Thus though with some dissimilitude, by the
Sacrament of Baptism, we are baptized into the Name of the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost; which amongst other things, signifies this also, that we
are given up to God from the world and the Devil, to be no more theirs, not to
live according to their course and way. And for this reason it is that those
who are not of the Church, are said to be without, 1 Cor. 5. and the world is
distinct to the Church, when therefore of the Church, we are not of the world;
we are not without under the kingdom of Satan, but we are of the body of
Christ, of his house; and our Baptism does sacramentally denote our communion
with Christ. Now although all that are baptized do not in deed and in truth put
on Jesus Christ, yet as long as they do not renounce their Baptism, so long by
that there is an outward dedication of them to God. And thus that Apostate
spoken of, Heb. 10. 29. who never had true grace, yet is said to be sanctified
by the blood of the Covenant, whereof the Sacraments are seals. So that our
sacramental relation does give an outward denomination of a Saint, or an holy
person, though if there be no inward holiness, the condemnation of such will be
far more dreadful and intolerable, than of the vilest and worst of Heathens.

3. This Church-Saintship goes a further step, and that is, An external
profession of our faith in Christ, and submission unto his will. For a Church
being a visible Society, there must be some external and visible sign, whereby
we may demonstrate our selves to be of the Church. Hence Romans 10. it is said,
That with the mouth confession is made to salvation. There may be many secret
and hidden Atheists in the Church of God, yet because they do externally
profess the Christian Religion, therefore it is that they are of the Church, in
respect of the external and visible state of it. Thus Simon Magus, and others,
while they did profess their faith in Christ, they were under the name of a
Church, and believers, and so of Saints.

4. There is yet a further degree in this Church-Saintship, and that is, When
besides this sacramental and external holiness, there are some workings of Gods
Spirit upon their souls. So that the Christian Religion has some kind of
influence upon them. They are not only titular Saints, but they have some kind
of inchoate and imperfect workings of Gods Spirit upon their souls, which have
a tendency to godliness, or at least a resemblance and show of it. So that in
the opinion of others, and many times in their own persuasions likewise, they
are true Saints. Now these may well enough be styled Saints, because the
Scripture attributes to them such acts as have the name of holiness* So Mat.
13. the temporary believer likened to the thorny ground, is said to have faith,
and to receive the Word with joy. Some are said in 2 Pet. 2. To escape the
pollutions of the world. Yea Heb. 6. some are said to be enlightened, to have
tasted the good Word of God, to partake of the holy Ghost, etc. and yet for all
that, such were never true Saints. For such that are so, can no more finally
apostatize than true stars can fall from the Heavens. Comets and blazing
Stars may have a great luster for a while, but being composed of terrestrial
exhalations, at last they fall into the womb of that Earth from whence they
sprang. Thus those, who have only some imperfect, common works of Gods Spirit,
abounding in gifts, and many admirable abilities, these may seem in Saintship
to exceed many that are truly so; but because there was never true and deep
rooting, when the storms and tempests shall arise, this glorious building will
not have so much as a stone left upon a stone. Those uncomfortable Teachers,
injurious to the grace of God, that do so peremptorily dogmatize the Apostasy
of the Saints, do yet never bring such Texts of Scripture or instances, that do
necessarily prove those to be true Saints that are spoken of. Saul was never a
true Saint, Judas was never a true Saint, and so no wonder of hopeful
beginnings, degenerated into such tragical and horrid beginnings. Now whereas
the former mentioned, viz. those that are only baptized, that give an external
submission to Christ's Laws especially, if (as too many do) wallowing in all the
ways of the flesh, and carnal excess, if these (I say) may by all be
proclaimed to be no real, but nominal Saints, all the world sees they are
Christians in name, but beasts and devils in respect of real Saintship. Yet the
great difficulty, and the constant wisdom of a Christian is exercised about
the discerning this later holiness from that which is true. To know, when I am
gone further, than any hypocrite or reprobate can attain unto. This as we are
greatly to study and examine our selves in; so we are to know that it is better
to be deceived in any worldly matter than in this.

Lastly, The ultimate and most complete step of Church-Saintship in this life,
is, When we go beyond all the former, and are made partakers of the Spirit of
God, in the powerful renovation of us, so that from that holy, and new
creature within us, our lives and actions are made really and solidly holy. And
this is indeed the true and proper Saintship, to which only the promise of
Justification and Glorification is made. So that if thou did enjoy the
greatest Church Priviledges, yea, and the most admirable gifts therein; yet if
destitute of this Saintship, thou art but a tinkling cymbal, and the hottest
place in hell will be filled with such seeming Saints.

SERMON, XX.
External Holiness is not enough to bring us to Heaven, without the inward
renovation of the Heart.

2 COR. 1. 1. With all the Saints, that are in all Achaia.
WE have heard what is the last and ultimate step in Church-Saintship, without
which all the former, though they be in themselves great mercies, yet because
we take them in vain, do become in some respect in the number of those, whom
God will not hold guiltless. They are (I say) External holiness and Saintship
is not enough to bring us to Heaven, without the inward renovation of the whole
man.
in themselves great mercies. For when we are thus called by God, unto the
external means of holiness, there is some hope, and a possible way for
salvation, whereas without this, there is necessary destruction. It is here, as
in blind Bartimeus his case, Mark 10. 49. for when Christ commanded him to be
called to him, presently some said to the blind man, Be of good comfort, he
calls thee; that was a good encouragement, Christ called him: so whereas
there are many thousands in the world that are left alone in their state of
darkness, but he vouchsafes the means of grace to thee. We may say, Be of good
comfort, there is some hopes, Christ calls thee; yet because many are called,
and of those many called, few are chosen, therefore this external holiness and
Saintship is not enough, unless there be the inward renovation of the whole
man. Unless thou art holy inwardly, as well as outwardly, this will make to thy
greater condemnation. That therefore which is the essential form, and gives a
constrtutive being to Church-Saintship, is Regeneration, or the work of grace
upon a man's heart. Indeed to an external state, and visible condition of
Church-holiness, a profession of faith, with submission unto Christ's ways is
enough; but that which makes us indeed members of the body of Christ, and
invests us with right to all saving benefits, that is only this inward real
Saintship. And to clear this more, you must take notice;

First, That even in real Saintship there is a great latitude and difference.
Propositions clearing the assertion, 1. There are degrees even in real
Saintship.
All are not Saints alike. The Scripture speaks of babes, of young men, of old
men. It speaks of some that are spiritual and perfect; others are imperfect,
and even carnal, 1 Cor. 3. comparatively: so that we must always distinguish
between the truth of grace, and the degrees of it. A Saint is a Saint, though
but a bruised reed, and a smoking flax. This is good to be observed, that we
may not judge of Saintship by such degrees, and high seize, but by truth
and sincerity. No, there will be always difference both in Illumination and
Sanctification, and that amongst the Saints themselves. And this should teach a
mutual bearing and forbearing of one another. Let not him that is strong, who
does far surpass others, though true Saints, in gifts and graces, despise and
contemn such as are below them, to judge them no Saints, or not godly at all.
That there is such a disposition even in grown Saints, appears Romans 14. where
the Apostle gives several Rules to strong Christians, especially, That they
judge not, or despise him that is weak; and one reason amongst others is,
Because God has received him. If therefore he be one, whom God has received,
for whom Christ died, though subject to many weaknesses and infirmities take
heed of contemning him. Such a supercilious, censorious spirit, is far from
the Spirit of Christ, who when he saw one not far from the Kingdom of Heaven,
though not yet in it, yet it is said, He loved him, and encouraged him.

Hence in the second place, This real Saintship is always growing, and ought
2. Therefore is real Saintship always growing in this life.
to be more and more proficient continually. It is an high delusion to dream of
such a perfection, that they are above Ordinances, that they are of so full a
stature in grace, that one cubit cannot be added to them. This is to let the
Devil get thee up to the pinnacle of the Temple, and then to throw thee headlong
into hell; yet such sad delusions have been on some, that coming to the
Sacrament, they have said, They have had as perfect love as Christ himself. But
this is against the continual current of the Scripture, which presses to grow
in grace, to bring forth more fruit. And 1 Cor. 7. to perfect holiness in the
fear of God. Paul himself, though a Giant, to us Dwarfs, yet Phil. 3. Accounted
not himself to have apprehended, but forgot what was behind, and pressed
forward to the mark. Cloppenburge a learned man thinks, That even Christ
himself did feed and nourish his soul by meditating on Gods Word, and that in
the use of the Sacraments, his faith was more confirmed, for to go through that
work of redemption for us. This may seem hard to affirm of Christ, who had the
Spirit without measure. But it is very true of every Saint on Earth, though
never so exalted and enabled by grace, that he needs the Ordinances, that he
is to perfect and fill up that vacuity and emptiness, which is in him; so that
he may say with Ignatius, when going to be sacrificed for the truth, Nune
incipio esse Christianus; I do even now begin to be a Christian; to be a Saint,
I am but a babe yet, I am but a beginner yet.

Thirdly, This Church-Saintship therefore does consist with many imperfections
3. Church-Saintship though real consists with many imperfections.
and weaknesses, so that we need a constant and daily remission of sin
through the blood of Christ. This is greatly to be observed, because some have
dreamed of such a perfection in this life, that if not always, yet for some
time, we may be without any sin at all; and therefore they tell us of Saints
in the Church which need no pardon or forgiveness; as if to be a Saint in the
Church, and a Saint in Heaven were all one: but our Savior in directing all to
pray for the forgiveness of sin (I say all that are to pray, are to pray so)
does plainly confute this. And the Apostle John says, That if we say we have
no sin in us, we deceive our selves; and indeed we sin in saying so. And
this is the more to be observed, because the dear children of God think this
title of Saint too glorious and great to apply to themselves, who are compassed
about with such infirmities. How can I be called a Saint, and yet so dull, so
sluggish, so froward, earthly, and often disordered in heart? But you are to
know, that though Saints, yet we are not to be justified by our Saintship; we
need the imputed righteousness of Christ, to cover the imperfections of our
Saintship; yea some have not lost their Saintship, and yet have fallen into
foul sins for a season. David, Peter, and others, did not cease to be Saints in
those sad falls, though their holiness was drawn inward, and as the juice of
the Tree in the Winter, was hid in the root under ground; but these Suns were
not always in an eclipse, at last they did recover to their greater advantage
in holiness, and to be a pillar of salt to all other Saints, Nor to be
high-minded, but fear.

Fourthly, To be a Saint is a denomination from our conformity to the will of
God, as a rule of our lives. So that if you ask, What is it to be a Saint? It
is 4. Holiness or Saintship is the conformity of the will of man to the will of
God.
to be one born again by the Spirit of God, making the word of God to be the
rule of all his actions. So that Gods Word must try, whether thou art a Saint,
or no? not thy own thoughts, or the applause of others can make thee a Saint,
but thy life regulated by Gods Word. The Papists cry up their Saint Francis,
whom they equallize to Christ in many things; but his Saintship must be tried,
not by his voluntary poverty, or strict observance of humane traditions, but by
a consonancy to Gods Word. Thus who ever is cried up for a Saint, still we must
examine, How does the Word, and his life agree? Is he as it were a walking
Bible? Does he will what that wills, and nill what that nilleth? And this
further also may inform us, That we are not to make a man a Saint, because of a
particular opinion, in some way of Church Government; as if none could be
Saints, but of such an opinion. For the word Saint denotes, One made holy by
the Image of God restored in him; though he may differ from another Saint in a
Church Way. For although it be our duty to study out the mind and will of
Christ concerning Church Order, and with his Institutions only we may expect
his gracious presence, yet such is the corruption and weakness upon the
understandings of the best, that though Gods Spirit will lead them into all
necessary truth, yet they may fail in some accessories, and so one Saint may
differ from another, yea and write against another; though such things do
prove, as Calvin said of Melancihons difference from him, Pessimi exempli, of
very evil example, and confirm the adversaries of godliness in their dangerous
prejudices against it.

These things thus laid down, let us consider, Why all the forementioned steps
of a Church-Saint are nothing without the latter. To be a Saint by the outward
Covenant, by dedication to God, by outward profession and vocation: Yea, to be
a Saint, having some works of Gods Spirit on us, unless we be born of God, and
so have holy Natures, holy affections, and an holy conversation; it is to be
like the foolish Virgi^s, who have lamps, and those lighted, but want oil. Let
us therefore consider, What may provoke us to be Saints indeed. And

1. What matter of shame and reproach is it, to have the name of a Saint only,
It Is a great shame and reproach to have the name without the nature of a Saint.
and nothing else. Thy life, not the life of a Saint, thy words, thy actions,
not the expressions of a Saint. Is not this ridiculous, even as when they
called the Blackmoors (...), silver white? Thou art a Saint in that sense he
said, Auri sacri fames; indeed thou art most accursed, and art but a mockery in
respect of God and man. As it is a shame, so it is an horrible reproach; even
as Revel. 2. there is the blasphemy of some, who said they were Jews, and were
not. Thus it is a blasphemy in thee to be externally a Saint, and not really;
as the Apostle, Romans 2. 24. speaking of such, says, The Name of God is
blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. The mischief of the scandalous,
profane life's in the Church, has been the cause not only of Gods eminent
judgments upon it, even at last to unchurch them, but also has been like
winds in the bowels of the earth, making a dreadful earthquake. Heresies in
Doctrine have not more molested the Church, than profaneness in life. The
troubles of the Donatists made in the Church for many years together, was it
not because of the profaneness of Christians lives? In our days, What is the
great argument against our Churches, that they are no true Churches, that they
are the Synagogue of Satan? Does not this arise wholly from the ungodliness of
most men's lives? Call such Saints; you may as well name darkness, light. Yea,
what is the cause that the bringing in of any good Order in a Church, the
purging out of the old leaven, is such a grievous tormenting matter? Why do
generally people dislike and rage at it? Is not all this, because though men
are contented with the name of a Saint, yet they cannot endure the practical
power of it? So that we may say, the real ungodliness of such who are in the
Church, is the cause of all the evil that comes in the Church. Thou blamest
this, and that way of Government; thou say, Such or such a thing is the
cause of all our evil: No, it is the love to men's lust, men would be of the
Church, and yet live the life of beasts and Devils: And it is for this general
impiety, that even Heaven and Earth may be astonished. Thou cavillest, How can
this, or that Practice, or Order be proved Jure Divino? But where can thou
prove thy oaths, thy lusts, thy drunkenness, thy contempt of Godliness to be
Jure Divino?

2. Real Saintship is so acceptable unto God in his Church, that let men (...).
have (...) eminent places, and esteem therein, yet if they walk contrary to
this Rule of sanctity, and that obstinately, Christ has commanded such to be
cast out, as utterly unfit to be of such a Society. The incestuous person in
this Church of Corinth, is thought by Chrysostom to be a man of chiefest place
and note amongst them; yet for all that, till he repent and humble himself,
they are commanded to cast him out from amongst them: As the Apostle to this
Church says, What communion is there between light and darkness, Christ and
Belial? The Pythagoreans were so strict about the manners of those, who were in
their sect, that as Origin against Celsus relates, when any of their society
had fallen into a foul sin; they did cast him out of their company, and
commanded a Coffin to be placed by him, as being a dead man. But the Lord
Christ has commanded, That such who live in the Church obstinately against the
manners of a Saint, should be thrown out from his people, and so delivered up
to Satan, as being more properly of him, and his way. But because more may in
time be said of the nature of this Church-Saintship, I pass it by for the
present, concluding with a severe Reproof, even like thunder and lightning
against all such, who deride at sanctity and purity: Are there not too many
sons of Belial, who make a scoff at such glorious names of a Saint, of a
Christian, of a Brother, of a Believer? Wherein can thou demonstrate thy self
to be of the Devil more, than in this one thing? Thy heart rages, thy tongue
foameth at sanctity and purity. What is this but to blaspheme the Scripture,
yea God and Christ himself? Why do not such cast off their Christianity, and
live with Pagans and Heathens?

SERMON. XXI.
Wherefore it is a Christians Duty to join himself to Church-society; And in
what cases he may be excused? What are the false Grounds why some neglect this
Duty? The Soul of the poorest Saint is to be regarded, as well as of the
richest.

2 COR. 1. 1. With all the Saints that are in all Achaia.
IT is now full time to conclude this Text. There remain two things more which
deserve some consideration:

The first is occasioned by Calvin's Question upon the place, How is it (says
he) that he distinguished Saints from the Church? Did not these Saints imbody
themselves, that lived in the Province of Achais? Was it lawful for them to
live dispersed, and single lives, not entering into Churchcommunnion? To which
he answers, That the times might be then so turbulent, and persecution so hot,
that they could not gather into a Church, nor have any such public meetings.
Now this Interpretation is not necessary. For the Apostle writing to the Church
at Ephesus and Colosse, yet does not use that name, but speaks in the general,
To the Saints and faithful Brethren; when yet without question they were in a
Church State there. Yea in his Epistle to the Romans, he makes no mention of
them as a Church, but styleth them Saints; which puts Salmeron upon his
guesses, Why he does not give the name of a Church to them? As also, Why he
does not salute Peter their supposed Bishop? Neither may we think that when
James and Peter inscribe their Epistles, to the Believers scattered in several
Regions, but that they might have occasionally their public meetings to
worship God in. Yet though this Exposition be not necessary, we may well Saints
may sometimes have just reason not to join themselves to a Church, though it be
their duty always to endeavor it.
receive Calvin's conjecture as probable. For there have been times when the
Saints have been forced to hide themselves in Dens and Caves, not having
opportunity to meet together, though even that was an heavy burden, and trouble
to them. This being granted, we may observe,

That although it be a Duty for Saints to join themselves in a Church Way, yet
there may sometimes fall out such just reasons that may excuse them.

Indeed voluntarily to keep off from the Assemblies, and to think a private
worshipping of God is enough, and that he requires no more, is both against
Reasons convincing it to be each Christians duty, to be of a Church.
Scripture-command, and the example of primitive Christians, but when there is
some unavoidable necessity, than there is a lawful excuse, That it is a duty
for Saints to join themselves in a Church Way, may be made evident from these
Grounds briefly:

First, From the name Church ordinarily given to ^olievers. Now a Church is a
Society or Company met together; and therefore it is not lawful for thee to
live alone, or be a Minister of Sacraments, and all things to thy self. Even as
Aristotle said of him, that would live alone, not joining himself to any humane
Society, he must be aut Deus, aut Bestia; It is applicable here, he must be
made even like God; that needs no growth of grace; yea, that is above all
duty or homage to God; or else a very beast, one that has no sense or feeling
about a God, and his Worship. The syonymous names also to a Church, does
evidence this; They are called Christ's body; now it is necessary for the members
of the body to be joined together, else there cannot be that mutual help and
furthering of one another. They are also called an House, and a spiritual
Building, wherein they are to be as living stones; and such must be close, and
well compacted together.

Secondly, From the communion of Saints, which is a duty so often prescribed in
Scripture; such as to watch over one another, to provoke one another, to
comfort and rebuke, if need be. Now how can this be, if Saints be dispersed
from each other?

Thirdly, From the Officers and Ordinances which Christ has commanded, that do
necessarily infer Church Assemblies. For Pastors and Teachers are appointed
to preach the Word, to be constant therein: And how can that be, if there be
not public meetings?

Fourthly, The Sacraments likewise, do not they seal, not only a communion with
Christ, but also with one another. So that it would be a sacrilegious violation
of Christ's command, for a man to receive the Sacrament alone. The Protestants
do justly condemn those Private Masses in Popery, as ridiculous and contrary to
the Institution of that Sacrament.

Fifthly, The examples of Christians, who upon their conversion are recorded to
join themselves to the Church, and they continued together praying, and
breaking of bread. Yea, in the Old Testament, we see still, there was a
constant, public meeting to worship God: and David professes his joy in those
solemn meetings, as also his resolutions, To praise God in the great
Congregation. And certainly, as by these solemn meetings God is more honored;
therefore the glorified Saints in Heaven are said to be a Church, Heb. 12. 23.
so God has promised to such meetings an higher degree of his presence, He
delights to be in the Assembly of his Saints. So that these public meetings
are for our spiritual good, as well as Gods glory.

Though this be so, yet there may be some Cause that may justly excuse What are
the causes that may justly excuse us from joining our selves to public
meetings.
us. As

First, Public and violent persecutions, as have been many times in Gods
Church, then they have not been suffered to have either public or private
meetings. Heb. 12. The Apostle mentions such times, when he speaks of some,
Of whom the world was not worthy of, yet were not allowed a place in the world,
but were as so many beasts chased up and down, living in dens and holes of
Rocks. Thus it was also once with David, when banished out of Judea, though
this was a sad affliction, and he does in several Psalms bewail his exile from
the Ordinances, more than any temporal mercy whatsoever; neither his country
or outward accommodations do sit so upon his heart, as that I cannot enjoy God
in his Ordinances, as I have done. So then, though they were not actually in
any Church Communion, yet because of their desire and wish, they were to be as
accounted of it.

Secondly, It may so fall out, that there be such a malice and poison in the
hearts of those that do govern and rule in the Church, that they will
excommunicate and cast out those that are true believers from the Church, and
will not let them have any Church-society. Now in such cases, if the godly
cannot obtain any public Church-priviledge, which yet they desire, this will
lie on those that cast them out, Luke 6. 22. John 16. 2. Our Savior tells the
Disciples it shall be their portion, They shall be cast out of the Synagogues,
separated from company, even as they did a blind man healed, confessing Christ,
whom yet Christ met and encouraged. This then is no new thing. Yea Bernard
complained in his time, Heu Domine qui sunt in Ecclesia primi, sunt in
persecutione primi.

Thirdly, If there be such a general and universal pollution, that a Christian
at least for the present knows not what Church to join to, where he can have
communion without partaking of gross Idolatry. It Is a Rule avouched in the
Canon Law, Causa, non separatio facit, Shisma. Those that would not bow their
knee to Baal in Elijah's time, were not Schismatics; for there was a just
cause to refuse such Idolatry; if then it be truly with a man, as it was in
supposition with Elijah, that he is left alone, Idolatry has filled the whole
Church visibly; in such a case, though that be hardly to be seen, he is to
abstain from Church-societies, till God make way for it. For then it is, as if
a Christian, should by some accident be cast upon a Country of Infidels and
Pagans, as some Christians have been, there cannot be had any Church-society at
all.

Lastly, The Church of God in the primitive times, when many Heathens, and
Infidels were converted, had this custom, which I find commended by most; and
that was, before the Church would receive such converted Heathens into an
actual Communion with the Church, they took time to instruct them, and to try
whether they were fit for that Sacrament, or no; and when they were prepared,
then they received them. These were called Catechumenoi and Competentes. They
were truly members of the Church, as the Protestants maintain against
Bellarmine; only they had not as yet the actual admission into it. This custom
in Antiquity of admitting none to Baptism, but such as were instructed, does
hold by proportion for the Lords Supper likewise. Seeing now that all are
baptized in their Infancy; and whether Parents have done their duties, or that
they have sufficient knowledge to come to a Sacrament, may justly be
questioned, when we see so much gross ignorance in the Christian Religion
abounding every where. Therefore in Antiquity there was Ecclesiastical
Confirmation, which was to make search and trial about the knowledge and
sufficiency of such, who had been baptized; and if found duly qualified, then
they were confirmed. Such care did they use in Antiquity about those that were
admitted to Church-society, insomuch that Casaubon, a man of famous learning,
says, It had been well in the Church of God, if men had laid aside many
unnecessary disputes, and endeavored to bring in that holy and godly order,
the primitive Church had, especially about the Lords Supper. And Calvin
speaking of this custom of Confirmation, before it was so horribly depraved by
after ages, and made a Sacrament, wishes it were brought into the Church of
God again, as that which would make parents more diligent, who now think the
institution of their children does not belong to them; neither would there be
such ignorance and rudeness in people, as now thereis. Insti^. lib. 4. c. 19.
Sect. 13.

In these cases a Saint without Church Communion may be excused. But then there
are sinful and unjustifiable grounds of some persons, who do not 2. Unlawful
grounds upon which some do (...) themselves to any Church-society. 1. From
corrupt opinions.
join themselves to any Church-society, and that may be either from a Corrupt
Opinions, or a Corrupt Heart, though they seldom be separated from one another.

First, From a Corrupt Opinion: As, 1. Of those who call themselves Seekers,
confessing they cannot yet find a Church, to which they may joy^ For they
affirm, That since the Apostles days there are no Churches, and therefore till
they can see Apostles, Apostolical gifts and miracles, with the like effusion
of the holy Ghost upon persons, they cannot own any Church. But this is against
those Texts of Scripture, which speak of a perpetuity of the Ministry, and the
duty of receiving Sacraments, till the coming of Christ, which could not be, if
there were no Church.

2. Another corrupt opinion is, of those who call themselves high Attainers.
These make themselves above the Church-ordinances, they need them not; yea some
Anabaptists in Germany made themselves above the Bible, living wholly upon
spiritual revelations, and called those, who would leave to the Scripture as a
Rule, Creaturistae, as depending upon a creature. But the Scripture and
Ordinances are necessary to quicken grace in the most holy; and there are none
so spiritual, but they need them daily to comfort or instruct them; yet such
have their public Assemblies, wherein they deliver their opinions to be
received. But if people ought to be above all Ministry and teaching, then also
above theirs. And certainly, if those places of being taught of God, and having
an unction which teaches us all things, be against our Ministry, it is also
against theirs.

3. There may be a corrupt opinion, which though it be not against
Church Communion absolutely, yet they judge it Arbitrary, and not necessary. Of
this opinion Grotius seemed once to be; for he is thought to be the Author of
that Book, which asserts, Quod non semper communicandum per symbola; and Rivet
in his Dialysis against him, charge this upon him, that he was not a member
of any Church, acknowledging it a just hand of God upon him, that at his death,
when a Minister was brought to him, he was wholly senseless: So that he who in
his life time cared not for Church Communion, could not have any benefit by a
Minister of the Gospel at his death.

4. The last corrupt opinion, by which men may not join to a Church, may be
from a superstitious conceit, whereby men thinking it impossible to have
salvation in the world, have imprisoned themselves, as it were, in Cells, and
holes of Rocks, thereby to give themselves wholly to divine Contemplation. Thus
the Monks, Eremites and Anchorites of old. For though some of the most ancient
are excused, as being driven thereunto by persecution, yet the latter seemed to
be transported wholly with superstition; and therefore in that they lived
solely, not coming to the public Ordinances of God in a Church way, it was not
justifiable by Scripture. Indeed if they took their times, to come to public
Societies, and receive Sacraments, as Rivet affirms against Grotius, Dialys.
page 106. pleading their example for being of no Church, then they are to be
excused a tanto, though not a toto.

The second unlawful ground of keeping from Communion with Church Assemblies,
is, A profane Atheistical disposition, that look upon a Church, and 2. From
corrupt dispositions.
a Church-assembly, as humane devices, to keep men in awe; or if they be not so
eminently Atheistical, yet their love to their lusts and pleasures, to the
world and contents thereof, make them weary of the Sabbaths, and public
Ordinances; as those in Amos 8. 5. When will the Sabbath be over, that we may
set forth wheat to sell? How many are there that comes as seldom as ever they
can to these public Assemblies, and when they do come, it is but for custom and
fashion, not that they ever found any spiritual good, or expect and desire any?

Therefore let the Use be of Instruction, that as ye are not to rest in any
Church Use. Of Instruction
forms, or external Communion, to think that the very bodily doing of them will
save you. So on the other side, Take heed of voluntarily, and wilfully
neglecting the public Assemblies. How have the godly, when banished and driven
from them, bewailed their misery, whereas thou do voluntarily absent thy
self? Think how it may lie upon thee at thy death, when thou shall remember the
many Sabbaths, the many Ordinances thou have neglected; and now if God would
give thee but one day, or one hour to make thy peace with him, thou would
judge it a great mercy.

The second Observation is from the Universality, All the Saints. There are
none so mean, so inconsiderable, but this Epistle is directed to them, as well
as the most eminent. From whence observe,

That the soul of the poorest and meanest Saint, is not to be neglected. The
soul of the poorest Saint is as much to be regarded, as of the greatest.


That as the rain falls upon the least spire of grass, as well as the
choicest flowers; so ought all ministerial planting and watering to be to the
meanest plant in Christ's garden, as well as the chiefest. Though Christian
Religion does not abolish civil Polity, nor the distinctions and relations of
Magistrate and Subject, of Master and Servant, but strictly enjoyneth their
respective duties; yet in respect of religious considerations, all are but as
one. Thus the Apostle notably, Gal. 3. 28. There is neither bond or free, male
or female, but all are one (mark that) in Christ. Christ looks upon all as
one man. And certainly, if Christ in shedding his blood for his people, had an
equal respect to the meanest with the greatest, he died for the godly servant,
as well as the godly master; the godly poor man, as well as the godly rich man;
Then it behooves all Christians to imitate him in this. Whosoever is a Saint,
though he be never so contemptible, do thou own and embrace such; else we do
not love the brotherhood, we do not love a godly man, because he is godly, but
because he is great or rich, or may advantage thee in the world. Paul will not
except, or leave out one of the Saints in all Acbaia.

SERMON. XXII.
How Grace and Peace, and such like spiritual Mercies and Privileges, are to
be desired before any temporal Mercies whatsoever.

2 COR. 1. 2. Grace be to you, and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ.
HItherto we have considered the Inscription; we now come to the Salutation,
which is in these words, and it contains matter of prayer. It is not any
earthly or temporal mercy he prays for, but what is heavenly and spiritual.
The Apostle Paul does constantly use this Salutation; only in both those
Epistles to Timothy and Titus, which were Church Officers, he interposeth Mercy
between Grace and Peace. Calvin thinks he puts it in his Salutation to
Timothy, because of his dear affection and love to him; but why should he do it
to Titus also? Certainly it ought to be considered, that only to
Church Officers he uses this Salutation. Some think, because the work of the
Ministry meets with much malice and froward opposition from wicked men, which
made Paul pray, that God would deliver him from unreasonable, absurd men, who
are led only by humors and passions, not by Reason and Religion. Therefore
seeing those that do faithfully discharge their trust, meet with little favor
and love from men; hence it is that he does in a peculiar manner pray for mercy
to them. Others they think the word is inserted, because of the great
difficulty of the Ministry, it being a burden too heavy even for Angels
shoulders: Insomuch that Chrysostom thought, Few Church Officers could be
saved. Seeing then the work is so great, so much grace is required to manage
it, and the best have failings, therefore they need the mercy prayed for. But
this by the way.

Come we to the Text. In that we may consider, the Matter prayed for: And the
Efficient Cause from whom it is to come. The Matter and Benefit is set down in
two words, which though but two, yet comprehend all that a godly heart can
desire; the first is Grace, the second Peace. In the original there is a
defect; and therefore most do supply it by (...); as our Translators, Grace be
to you. Though the Apostle Peter in the salutations of both his Epistles,
expresses the word, and that is (...), Be multiplied; and so Estius would
supply it here: but there is no inconvenience to keep to the former
Interpretation.

2. There is the Cause of this, which is twofold, God our Father, and from the
Lord Jesus Christ. All these parts shall be opened, as we take them in order;
only let us first take notice of the Manner and End of this Salutation in the
general, That it is not for any earthly or worldly thing, but what is
spiritual. The Grecians they used commonly (...), and (...) in their
Salutations, as the Latins, Salve, and are relating only to temporal welfare.
And indeed the Heathens knew no better; but the Apostle would lift up our
hearts to higher things. The Apostle James Chap. 1. 1. writing to the dispersed
Tribes, uses the word only, Greeting; which made Cajetan, among other reasons
reject it, as not Canonical, as if such a Salutation savoured of an humane
spirit: But this is no Argument. For the Apostles gathered together in a
Council at Jerusalem, sending a Letter to the Churches abroad, use no more
Salutation than that, only in that we are to comprehend, whatsoever is more
expressly in Paul's Salutation. Seeing then its only spiritual things which Paul
here does wish to them. Observe,

That spiritual mercies and privileges are to be desired above all earthly and
worldly ones what soever. Spiritual mercies are to be desired before temporal.


The Grace of God, and Gospel peace is infinitely to be preferred before any
outward advantage. Psalm. 4. 6, 7. when David had represented the natural desire
of every man unregenerated, Who will show us any good? He presently
demonstrates the clean contrary disposition of those that are godly and
spiritual, Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us; and, Thou
have put more gladness into my heart, then they have had, when their wine or
oil increases. By David you may judge of all the faithful; they esteem more
of the love of God, and the sense or persuasion of this, more than the whole
world. Let the profane brutish men of the world say, as some did in
Chrysostomes time, whom he reproves, Give me that which is sweet, although it
choke me. So let me have my pleasures, my lusts, though they damn me. The godly
on the other side, if raised up to this heavenly transfiguration, as it were,
to have the spirit of Adoption, enabling them to call God Father, and to walk
under the light of his grace and favor, they will say, It is good to be here.
So that the desires and earnest longings of men's hearts do divide the world
into two parts; Some, and they are only few, who with David say, As the Heart
pants after the waterbrooks, so do their souls after God. Yea, Their souls
break for the longing they have to God at all times. But then others, they seek
the things of this world in the first place; Let them have their pleasures,
their wealth, their honors, then with the Reubenites they will sit down, and
go no further, because they see the Land is a good and pleasant Land, never
desiring to go into Canaan.

To open this Doctrine, consider,

First, That all the while a man is merely natural and dead in his sins, he is
not affected with, nor can he desire any spiritual mercy. Even as dead men are
not affected with pleasant sights, or melodious sounds. No wonder then, though
we do out of the Gospel show such all the glory of Heaven, yet they will not
fall down and worship Christ, because they are no ways sensible or
apprehensive of a better good. Can a Worm that crawleth upon the ground live
the life of an Angel, or a man? Alas, that knows nothing, but to crawl on the
ground, and feed on the dust of the earth. Thus it is with every carnal man,
speak to him of the savor of God, of the light of his countenance, he knows
no more what you mean, than the bruit beast does what reason is. Besides, sin
has so infected and polluted the heart and appetite of every natural man, that
he calls good, evil; and evil, good; he takes sweet for bitter, and bitter
for sweet. That as the Swine loves to wallow in its mire, and delights in
that, more than in the sweetest garden that is: Or, as they say of those blind
Beetles that live in muck and dung, but sweet things do presently kill them;
thus it is with every natural man, he is not only not affected, but he is
contrarily disposed to heavenly things, Romans 8. The wisdom of the flesh is
enmity against God. The wisdom, the best understanding, parts and knowledge
that he has, is as full of malice against holy things, as a Toad of poison.
The Greek word does not only signify his intellectual, but his practical
wisdom and affection; he does not say, He has savoury knowledge of heavenly
things (Sapientia est sapida scientia;) And as Bernard, Sapiens est cui res
sapiunt, prout sunt. Heavenly things savor as heavenly; earthly things as
earthly.) But in every natural man his appetite and taste is wholly disordered,
he finds no excellency, loveliness in heavenly things, which yet to a gracious
heart are matter of exceeding delight and ravishment.

Hence in the second place, Till a man be regenerated, till he be made a new
creature, and endowed with an heavenly heart, he is no suitable subject for
these heavenly things. Every one then as he is affected and disposed, so he
judges; if earthly, then all his affections move that way; if heavenly, then
they are turned the contrary way. As you see in mixed and compounded bodies,
what element does most predominate, accordingly is their motion, either upward
or downward; now in this regenerate person, his nature is now changed, and he
has a spiritual resurrection, that as the body, when that shall rise, will
lose its gravity and burdensomness; for we shall meet the Lord in the Air, even
with our bodies. So the soul in this life made partaker of a spiritual
resurrection, has cast off those burdens and clogs, that did press it down to
the creature, and ascends up to communion with God and Christ.

And besides this general Cause, there are some peculiar qualifications, which
What are those things that peculiarly move the godly to prefer spirituals
before temporals
provoke the godly man to esteem the Grace and Peace of God above all things As,

1. The sense of the sting of sin, and the bitter guilt thereof, is that which
makes a man go out of himself and all creatures, to have some supply and
comfort. Alas, the soul thus broken and contrite for sin, is like that
diseased woman, that had spent all she had upon Physicians, and yet she was as
bad as ever, till Christ cured her. So that the grace of God, and Gospel peace
is the only oil, that can be poured into this wound. Come to a David, who
complains, God had hid his face, yea his bones were broken, and all his
desirable things perish; and tell him, while thus affected, That he had a
glorious Kingdom, many outward mercies and delights he might rejoice in; What
good would this music do to his sad heart? Oh it is something else that must
cure him! No creature, no wealth can do it, but peace from God; and this made
him, while in those conflicts, but getting some victory, breathe out so
affectionately, Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no
sin; not blessed is he who has the good things and pleasures of the world,
who lives at his hearts ease, but whose sin is pardoned. Thus the guilt of
sin makes him esteem Grace and Peace.

2. Those spiritual desertions and temptations, which sometimes the dearest of
Gods children feel, do make them esteem of the favor of God, the possession of
that more than any thing. They sit as Rachel, refusing to be comforted, till
they have obtained this. How precious was the presence of Christ to the Church?
When she had lost him, then she will hold him, and not let him go; as the
night, or the eclipse makes the Sun more precious. Where there is nothing
but sense of unworthiness, what is more welcome than grace? Where there is a
desert of hell and damnation, where the soul has cause to expect nothing but
the frowns and vengeance of God, there to meet with grace and favor: Oh how
welcome is this! Thus the heart which has continual fears, tumult and war
within it self, to have peace, and that with God; such a peace as no outward
misery can take away; What unspeakable refreshments are these? It is these dark
and cloudy thoughts, that make the least beams of Gods face shining upon them
more than all the enjoyments of this world.

3. The experimental taste and sweetness, which they have of heavenly things,
makes them undervalue all things else. If the Prodigal after he had eaten of
the satted Calf, and been refreshed in his fathers house, had returned again to
his husks, how unsufferable had it been? This aggravated the Israelites
ingratitude, that after they had eaten Manna, they should desire the garlic of
Egypt. The Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3. exhorting them, to desire the sincere
milk of the Word, to be as much affected with it, and delight in, as children
with their milk, he adds, If so be ye have tasted how good God is; implying,
that this tasting, this experimental trial of the goodness and grace of God in
Christ, is that which will make them still long for more and more of God. It Is
no wonder, that natural men are never affected with these Gospel-promises, they
never knew better, they were never acquainted with better, and therefore they
cannot desire it; but thou have known how good God is, thou have had the
first fruits of Heaven and glory upon thy soul, and therefore thou do still
importune for more, and desire more of Gods presence, never saying, It is
enough.

In the next place, Let us consider the Reasons, why the gracious heart does
The Reasons of it.
thus desire heavenly things above all outward advantages whatsoever. And

First, Because these spiritual objects have only universal sufficiency and
fullness in them, to satisfy and content the heart. If God be reconciled, if he
be our God, what then can be wanting to our happiness? Thus David acknowledged,
when he said, Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and none in earth in comparison
of thee? And Psalm. ^3. how contented and happy is he, in having God his God?
The creatures they are but as a drop, they have only a limited goodness, but
God is the ocean, there is nothing wanting. Hence it is, that because the
glorified Saints have a beatifical vision of God, therefore they cannot sin,
they cannot immoderately desire any thing else.

Secondly, These spiritual mercies they are everlasting and eternal. If the
Apostle had wished honors, wealth, long life to them, yet all these would have
been but for a moment comparatively, they could not have continued with them
always; whereas the favor of God, and the effects thereof, they are to all
eternity: whom God takes into his favor, he never casts out. How many men
have been in grace and favor with the Potentates of the world, yet at last
cast off, and ended their days tragically? Haman may be a constant instance of
the inconstant grace and favor of men; but whom God receives into this
favor, he will never abhor again: Such gifts as these, are without
repentence. Oh then press hard for this, use an holy violence for this! This
will never leave thee, till it has made thee eternally happy. The Manna that
was gathered for any day of the week, would last but that night, but that which
was treasured up for the Sabbath Day, would continue longer. Thus the things
laid up for this life, they will quickly vanish, but what is in reference to
Heaven, and our Sabbath or rest there, that will continue always.

Use of Instruction, To teach us what we are most to desire for our selves or
others. What should Ministers most wish for the people, even that they might
have this grace, this peace in the Text? And you should above all things desire
it for your selves: Oh then take heed of such ways, such courses, as drive
away Gods grace, and his peace! What peace can there be (as Jehu said) as long
as whoredoms were in the Land? See that notable place, Isa. 57. 21. There is no
peace, says my God to the wicked. What can thou expect Gods grace to pardon,
while thou have no grace in thy own heart? This also teaches parents what they
should in the first place pray for their children, as also friends for their
acquaintance, even this grace of God. How zealous was Paul in desiring this for
the Jews? We read of a notable expression, Epist. 3. of John ver. 2. There he
wishes Gaius, as much health to his body, as he had in soul; How excellent was
his soul, that was in better condition than his body?

SERMON. XXIII.
Of the Name, Nature and Pre-eminence of the Grace of God above all other
things.

2 COR. 1. 2. Grace be to you, and Peace, etc.
THe next thing considerable in these words, are the particular mercies prayed
for in this Salutation. The first whereof, and that which is the efficient
cause of all other things, is Grace. The Commonplace in Divinity, De Gratia
Dei, of the grace of God, is of a very vast extent, and most of the Popish,
Arminian and Socinian errors, arise from the mistake of the use of this word
in the Scripture; but it would be impertinent to grasp that whole controversy.
I shall not treat any more of it, then what may relate to this Text.

We may therefore briefly take notice of the use of it to our purpose, That the
first and most principal signification of it, is the favor and mercy of God
toward us; for it answers the Hebrew word Chen, which comes of a root that
signifies to have mercy. So that when the Scripture faith, We are justified by
grace, we are called by grace, we are saved by grace. The Popish party does
grossly err, taking grace there for something in us wrought by the Spirit of
God, whereas it is indeed without us, even the Attribute of mercy and grace in
God. So that the meaning is, We obtain such glorious privileges, not because
of any thing in our selves, though never so holy, but because of the mere grace
and favor of God without us. Grace then in the most frequent and principal
signification of it, denotes the favor and goodness of God. But then

In the second place, It is used sometimes for the Effects of this Grace. For
as mercy is sometimes taken for the attribute in God, and sometimes for the
effects of it: So likewise is grace. Hence it is that Gods grace, is sometimes
put for the Gospel, and the preaching of the Word. This being merely from his
grace, that he vouchsafes such a mercy to his people, Act. 20. 24. Tit. 2. 11.
Sometimes it is taken for the good success and special assistance that God
gives unto the preachers of it, Act. 14. 26. 1 Cor. 15. 10. Yet not I, but the
grace of God, viz. assisting and giving success to my ministerial labors.

Again, It Is applied to those common gifts of Gods Spirit, which were so
wonderfully vouchsafed in those days, To speak with tongues, to work miracles,
these are called the grace of God; though some would distinguish between (...)
and (...), 1 Cor. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 4. 10. Yea the very function and offices in the
Church are called Gods Grace; as Paul did his Apostleship, Romans 1. 5. because
it is the mere grace of God, that has appointed such Offices in the Church.

Lastly, That which the Roman Church makes the more ordinary sense, that indeed
is sometimes, but seldom to be found in Scripture, viz. to signify those
habits and principles of holiness, which are with in us. There are some indeed,
who say, The Scripture never uses the word Grace in this sense, but some
places seem to be clear, Col. 3. 16. Col. 4. 6. Heb. 13. 9. 2 Pet. 3. 18. And
therefore we may truly call that work of God in us Grace, so that we do not
make it to justify or save, for that is the grace of God without us. Observe,

That the grace of God is to be desired by every one, in the chiefest and first
The grace of God is to be desired before all other things.
place.

This we should earnestly pray for, that whatsoever God would deny us, yet that
he would give us his grace and favor. We are (I say) to desire it, not only
above all temporal and earthly comforts above riches, honors and long life,
but even above the sanctification and holiness of our souls, which God works.
We are to desire his grace, more than grace in our own hearts; for this is the
effect of that, and this alone being imperfect in us, could not justify or
save us. Let us discover this rich treasure of Gods grace, though the Apostle
Ephesians. 2. 5. calls it, The exceeding riches of his grace; so that we can never
speak to the full of it, though we had the tongue of men and Angels, still
there is more in the grace of God, than we are able to fathom. We must
therefore speak and understand as children about it, till in Heaven this
imperfection be done away. And

First, We must know, that God has several attributes tending to the same
thing, Propositions discovering the nature of the grace of God.
yet do not ionally differ. There is his Goodness, whereby he is willing to
communicate of his fullness to the creature. Thus he was good to Adam, making
him so glorious a creature. There is his Mercy, and that is, whereby he pitieth
his creature, being cast into misery. There is also his Patience and
Long-suffering, which is extended to sinners that do for a long time rebel
against him, when he could, if he pleased, destroy them every moment in hell.
And lastly, here is this property of Grace, whereby he is called a gracious
God: And this the Scripture does speak of, as the most glorious and comfortable
attribute; and that does imply these things:

1. That whatsoever good God does bestow upon us, it comes solely and
originally What the grace of God implies.
from his mere bounty and good pleasure. So that there is nothing in us, that
may in the least manner, either merit with God, or move him to be thus
gracious. So that we can never hear of this word [Grace] but it should
presently humble and debase us, it should make us condemn our selves, and give
all to God. For if it be of grace, than there was no motive in us, God out of
his own bowels does this for us, Romans 1. 5, 6. The Apostle speaks very fully
to this, If of grace, than it is not of works, otherwise grace is no more
grace. So that to acknowledge the grace of God, as Pelagians were forced to do,
and so Papists and Arminians do, yet at last to divide between grace and our
selves, to make us co-workers with it, yea to make it effectual; this is to
take all away really, that we had given verbally before. So that if it be Gods
grace, we must not give so much as the least sigh and desire to our selves; all
comes merely from the good pleasure of his own will.

2. Grace does not only thus imply a pure and only original from God himself,
excluding us, but it supposes also a manifest unworthiness in us, and a
contrary desert to what God bestows upon us. Therefore grace in the Scripture
language supposes sinfulness in us, that we deserve to be abhorred, and cast
out of Gods presence. Hence justification and pardon of sin are attributed to
the grace of God, because we by our sins might justly have expected Gods
vengeance, and his condemnation. So that the word Grace is still to debase us
more and more in our own eyes. For it does not only proclaim, that all comes
merely from God, but also that we are wretched sinners, who have deserved the
anger and frowns of God, when now we have the light of his countenance. To Adam
God was very bountiful, and full of love; yet some Divines say, That we cannot
call that Gods grace to him, because Adam was not in a sinful and contrary
estate, deserving the wrath of God.

3. This grace of God is more especially demonstrated in those effects which
relate to the happiness and blessedness of the soul. Therefore it is the grace
of God in calling and justifying us, in sending his Son to redeem us, in
vouchsafing Gospel-mercies to us. In this the grace of God is made most
apparent; and this should teach us, what we should prize most, what we should
be affected most with, even these spiritual mercies. The Scripture does seldom
or never call it, the grace of God, to give us wealth, health and temporal
mercies; these are not worthy to be mentioned, when we speak of Justification,
Remission and Salvation; and yet how carnal and corrupt are we? We desire the
grace or favor of God, for our bodies, for outward happiness; but who is
sensible of the need of Gods grace in this spiritual manner? Thou can not
therefore argue Gods grace is to thee, because thou live in prosperity. and
have what thy soul can desire. For these may stand with Gods anger and wrath,
thou may be a firebrand of hell, and one prepared for destruction for all
this. Oh then be sensible of that which the Scripture attributes to Gods
grace, but none save an holy, heavenly heart can do this!

4. This grace is communicated to us in and through Christ. So that it is
called in Scripture, The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, in a twofold respect,
1. Efficiently, How grace is called the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
because he is able to bestow it upon us. You see in the Text Paul prays it
from him, as well as God the Father. And, 2. Meritoriously, because Christ by
his blood has made a way open and free for grace to manifest it self. Oh then,
let us know, that without Christ, God is a consuming fire, a condemning Judge;
that there was no more possibility without him, to have so much as a drop of
grace, as there was for Dives in hell, to obtain a drop of water! No, no, there
was too great a gulf between God and us. Indeed the Socinians they blaspheme
and say, If we hold the merits and satisfaction of Christ (they say) this
overthrows the grace of God, making it none at all. What grace is it (say
they) for God to forgive and pardon, when he receives full satisfaction for
it? But though it be of Justice to Christ, yet it is mere and only Grace in
respect of us, and that many ways, but especially in these two particulars; 1.
That God was not bound to take a Surety for us; he might have stood for
satisfaction in our own persons; that we who had sinned should also be
punished. And then, 2. Although this price be paid, yet the application of it,
is wholly of grace. For how many are damned? How many have no sin forgiven,
or pardoned to them, although Christ came as a Savior into the world. It is
therefore mere, and only grace to make thee partaker of this grace, which
comes by Christ. God is gracious, but Christ made way for it.

5. Gods grace therefore is the same, with that which the Scripture calls the
light of his countenance; Which is an allusion to men, who when they were
pleased, and delight in any, they look in a smiling and cheerful manner upon
such. Thus it is with God, when he is reconciled through Christ with those that
are his, he does presently cast away his anger, does no longer turn his face
from them, abhorring and loathing their persons and duties; but he accepts of
them, looks upon them with delight: Insomuch that the Scripture makes this to
be the utmost blessedness, that a godly man can desire to have, The light of
Gods countenance shining upon him, to be under his gracious favor, as you see
by David's earnest petition for it, and the sad troubles and distresses, which
were upon his soul when he hid his face from him. So that to partake of Gods
grace comprehends all the comfort, glory and blessedness we can desire.

6. This property of God, of being gracious, though it has always been to the
Church since Adam's fall, yet it has broken out by degrees: Insomuch that the
Gospel time is the time of grace in a more eminent manner. Abraham, and Noah,
and David, these were all justified by grace, as well as we, though in Christ's
time this glorious light break out into its full luster. God tells Moses,
Exodus 22. 27. He would hear the cry of the oppressed, for he was gracious. And
David often, Psalm. 86. 15. Psalm. 111. 4. does acknowledge this comfortable
property in God, that he is gracious. So that in the old administration, though
every thing was more covered and obscure, yet then it was the grace of God
alone, that they made their refuge; yet this was so dark comparatively, that
the Evangelist says, John 1. 17. The Law came by Moses, but grace and truth by
Jesus Christ; as if those former dispensations were not dispensations of grace.
Hence the expression is, Tit. 2. 11. The grace of God has appeared, viz. in a
most visible, irradiant manner, that our eyes are dazelled with it, as when the
Sun shines in its full strength at noonday. So that all those Doctrines,
which in these Gospel times do obscure the grace of God, are more intolerable,
than those who pleaded the Law, and the works of the Law in former times.

7. Let us consider, What are the opposites to this grace of God; or, What are
those sins that do keep off this grace of God from us. For though this Sun
shine never so gloriously; though this Ocean be never so full, yet if we shut
our eyes, or wilfully stop the streams of this fountain, we shall not receive
any good by it. And there are these remarkable sins, like so many opacous
bodies, that do interclude this grace from us. I shall not meddle with
Doctrinal opinions, but practical indispositions. And

1. He who seeks to be justified by the works of the Law, by his external
obedience thereunto, he will never come under the sweet benefit of Gods grace.
A man that is fully confident in his own righteousness, and the good of his own
heart, will always be neglective of the grace of God. You may see this largely
by those arguments the Apostle has in his Episties. A pharisaical spirit is
always an adversary to Free Grace; but oh the proneness in all to this sin,
especially men civillized, and merely moralized, that are kept from the gross
pollutions of the world! You may as soon remove the earth, as such, from their
supposed righteousness. The Apostle speaks it as the general sin of the
Jews, Romans 10. 2. That being ignorant of the righteousness of God, they went
about to establish their own righteousness. They would fain set up this Dagon.
This is the sweet poison, that is the death of so many; Intus existens prohibet
alienum. And when the sensible object is put upon the sensitive faculty, it
cannot perceive. And hence it is that there are very few, that do indeed admire
and set up this grace of God. If the Prodigal had fared as deliciously every
day, as Dives, he would never have desired his Fathers house.

2. Another indisposing thing, to esteem of the grace of God, is the consequent
of this, When men are not sensible of original corruption, in the efficacy of
it, when they do not see or feel how miserable they are. These two go always
together; he that makes nothing of original sin, has also as low and
slighty thoughts of grace. You see it in Paul, while ignorant of this, what
high and great thoughts he had of himself; but when once he came to be
anatomized, when once the dark corners of his soul were made known, then who
did more long for, and breathe after the grace of God than he?

3. A third indisposition, which is a natural consequent of the former, Where
there is not poverty of spirit, brokennesse of heart, and thereby an hungring
and thirsting after the grace of God. With such also this has no precious
acceptance, Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me ye that are heavy laden, and I will
ease you. Ho, every one that thirsts, Come, says Christ. But alas, where are
these tender, contrite, and hungring Christians? No marvel that you see so few
crying out, Oh, if we could have the light of Gods countenance, if we could but
feel the grace of God shining upon us, we would not matter any outward
condition whatsoever! Such flowers as these grow but in few places. Christ and
his grace are not importunately desired and wrestled for in prayer, because so
few are of a contrite hear.

SERMON. XXIV.
Who are fit Subjects to partake of the Grace of God. As likewise Rules and
Scripture-characters of the Grace of God, by which we may rightly understand,
and judge of it.

2 COR. 1. 1. Grace be to you, etc.
WE have heard, That the grace of God is the chiefest and most eminent Who are
fit subjects to partake of Gods grace without.
mercy that we can desire, either for our selves, or others. We have been
informed, who are those capable and fit Subjects, that may partake of this
grace of God. There remain some more Qualifications to be insisted upon. And

First, Such only partake of Gods grace without, who have true inward
sanctifying grace. For although it be true, that the grace of God without us,
is to be preferred and esteemed above all inherent grace, yet these are
inseparably conjoined together. None can claim Gods grace, and plead the
merciful effects thereof, but such who have this testimony, and evidence
within. It is true, this grace (as is to be showed) makes way for it self; and
begins the first stone in this spiritual foundation: but then the subsequent
effects of this grace, are only to those, who have the inward work of it upon
their own souls. And this must be diligently observed, that so wicked and
ungodly men may not think to taste of this tree of life: What have thou to do,
to speak of Gods grace, to hope in Gods grace, who have no grace in thy heart?
Think not, that God will extend it to such as thou art; for then it would be
such grace, as would encourage to sin, and imbolden in evil ways. Then we
might truly take up that resolution, which the Apostle with so much indignation
rejects, Let us sin that grace may abound. No, the whole word of God
speaks no grace, no peace to a wicked man. It Is not the grace of God, but the
anger, the fury, and the wrath of God to such persons. Hence Exodus 14. even at
that very time, when God is pronounced gracious and long-suffering, it is
added, Who will in no wise acquit the guilty; yet who can keep off these swine
from running into this sweet garden? Let them live graceless persons, yet for
all this, they prefume God will be gracious to them. But be not deceived, Gods
word is not a lie; thou will find the issue to be, as that speaks. And
although thou may for the present have much outward prosperity, many
temporal advantages, yet the curse and anger of God may be upon thee all the
day long for all this. Dives had great store of earthly benefits, but needed as
much a crum of Gods grace, as it were, as Lazarus did a crum of bread from his
Table. Therefore judge thy condition, though overflowing with many outward
comforts, no better than an hell, till the grace of God be dispensed toward
thee.

Secondly, Those only are preparrd to enjoy this grace of God, who do exercise
faith in the promises of the Gospel. For faith is like opening of the window,
that lets in this glorious light upon the soul. The grace of God is no
otherwise communicated unto us, but by believing, Joh. 1. 12. To them that did
believe, he gave them power to become the Sons of God. Romans 3. 24. Justified
freely by his grace, through faith in his blood. So that faith is the hand to
receive this precious pearl. And for this reason it is, that Gods children are
no more filled with this grace; it does not like oil run into all their
wounds, because by unbelief they shut up their souls, and make sad obstructions
unto this grace of God. Oh then, if thou who are truly godly walk in a
dejected manner, saying with David, Has God forgotten to be gracious? Know God
is as gracious as ever, yea and as willing his grace should overflow to thy
soul, but thou art unwise and froward; thou do not set upon this great work
of faith, which is the key, as it were, to open these treasures of Gods grace.
Know then, that so much faith as thou bring, so much of Gods grace thou
shall partake of. And therefore it is, That to be justified by faith, to be
saved by faith, and to be justified by grace, or saved by grace, is made all
one by the Apostle, and he argues from one to the other; and this way of Gods
grace, with the manner of receiving, it comes wholly by revelation. It Is alone
by the word of God, that we come to know God to be so gracious; and it is alone
by the same Word, that we come to know what faith is, and how by that only, and
not working, we do receive of this grace. No wonder then, if the troubled and
humbled sinner be so longere he comes to be replenished with this grace, that
he keeps constantly in fears and doubts; for till he put himself upon this
way of faith, there is not the least cranny in his soul, wherein the least
glimpse of Gods favor can approach unto him.

Thirdly, Such are capable subjects of Gods grace, that are affected
thankefully with the least discoveries and manifestations of it to the soul.
The Sun is not more welcome to the world, than the grace of God to a broken,
contrite heart. If then the soul come to taste of the sweetness of it, both
heart and mouth will overflow in the acknowledging of this grace. And indeed
therefore does the Lord do all out of grace to us, that as the Apostle says,
We might be to the praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. And that we
should show forth the praise of him, who has called us out of darkness into
his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. So that there is nothing so comely and
beautiful for a soul partaking of this grace, as to be calling upon his soul,
and all within him to praise God: Yea, because he cannot do it enough, to call
upon all other creatures, Angels and Saints, that they would join with him in
this work. And certainly the dullness and negligence of the godly is much to be
lamented in this very particular. David discovered this, when Psalm. 103. he
calls upon his soul to bless God; and in other places, Psalm. 18. 2. Awake
psaltery and harp, I my self will awake early. Why then is it thus with thee,
that in temporal mercies and deliverances thou art so cordially sensible of
them? If God of weak and sick, make thee healthful; if he recover thee from
the gates of death, if he bless thy outward estate, so that thou art freed from
the former streights and perplexities thou were in: If (I say) God do thus for
thee, thou love to take notice of it; thou can with tears and joy speak of
Gods goodness to thee herein; but for those great and unspeakable riches of his
grace, in calling of thee, and justifying of thee, in beginning of grace in thy
heart; these things thou do not meditate of so affectionately as thou oughest
to do. How far otheawise was it with Paul, whose heart, was like a fountain
never dry, but did always stream forth abundantly in blessing of God for those
spiritual mercies. Certainly were this grace of God rightly considered by us,
it would put us into holy ravishments, it would take us off from all worldly
comforts or discontents. The soul possessed with thankful thoughts about this
grace of God, will be even in Heaven it self. Indeed we should account this our
meat and drink, and our only blessedness. Oh then abhor thy self, for not
being ravished more with this grace of God to thee! Say, Lord, what a stone,
what frost and ice am I? yea worse than they; for David calls upon them to
glorify and praise God, and they do it in their kind; but I am forgetful and
dull in this blessed work, which is the only duty to be done to all eternity.
It may be then thou feel no more of this grace of God, because thou are no
more thankful for the present enjoyments of it; and it argues thy heart not
only too dull and sluggish, but too earthly and worldly, that thou do not
bless God in the first and chiefest place, for the workings of his grace
toward thee.

Lastly, Such only are capable of the benefits of this grace, who do not abuse
it, or turn it into occasion of sin. The Apostle Jude 4. complains of some,
who did turn the grace of God into wantonness. And the Apostle Paul, Romans 6.
1. speaks of some, who encouraged themselves to sin, because of Gods grace.
Oh take heed of falling into this Libertinism and licentiousness. As the swee^
and comfortable showrs of April breed frogs and other vermin, as well as
pleasant flowers: Thus the grace of God, when falling into a broken humbled
soul, makes him more godly and holy; but dropping on the wicked and carnal
heart, it pampereth him, and nourishes him the more in his sins. How many
spiders get poison out of these sweet flowers? How many do encourage themselves
in their profaneness, and go boldly on in their manifest impieties, hardening
themselves with the thoughts of Gods grace? Thus whereas bitter pills, the
judgments of God would have consumed their lusts; those sweet and comfortable
things of Gods grace, do more confirm them in their impieties. Oh take heed of
being wicked, because God is gracious! For thou will find, though he be
infinitely gracious, and that to great sinners, when repenting and humbling
themselves, yet to such as abuse and turn his grace into an occasion of sin,
the hottest flames of his anger will fall upon such.

In the next place, Consider some Rules, how rightly to understand and judge
Rules how we may rightly understand and judge of the grace of God.
of this grace of God. And

First, You must know that there are those who extremely err about the grace
of God, and yet are directly opposite to one another. The Pelagian, the Papist,
Arminian and Secinian; all these do more or less diminish, and nullify the
grace of God. For howsoever they have many plausible and specious distinctions,
by which they would evade to be thought enemies to Gods grace, yet unless we
give all to grace, we make it no grace at all. Austin's known assertion is very
true, Gratia non est gratia ullo modo, nisi sit gratuita omni modo. The
Pelagians of old did deceive the Eastern Church, by granting, That all those
were to be anathematized, who did not hold the grace of God necessary to every
good work: And the Papists with the Arminians, do carry it so speciously, as if
they indeed did set up grace more than their Adversaries. Let not therefore
every one that speaks of grace, be presently accounted Orthodox, and to
endure the Scripture Proof and trial. Again, on the other side, there are
Antinomians, who do err grievously, though they only would be thought to
admire free grace, condemning all as Legal Preachers, and of an Old Testament
spirit, that do not speak of grace, as they do. Now God is so gracious these
tell us to his people, That he sees no sin in them, that he does not afflict
for sin. They tell us of such a grace, That God looks upon us, as if we
were Christ himself, and that he does this from all eternity: That Paul before
his conversion, while a persecuter and blasphemer, was as much in the love and
grace of God, as after his conversion: That the vilest and most wicked of men,
even while they are so, are to receive Christ as a Savior: That neither sins
or good works do at all mar, or make our peace: That faith justifies only
declaratively, by manifesting unto us, That God did from all eternity justify
us. These and such like poisonous tenants they affirm, and this (they say) is
to preach free grace. Thus you see the grace of God may be opposed on the right
hand, and on the left.

Therefore in the second place, take this Rule, That we must not exalt grace
according to our own fancies and opinions, making such a grace as we would
have, and then go to the Scripture to confirm it; but the word of God must be
the alone Rule in this case. So that by the Scripture alone, we shall not give
too little, nor on the other side attribute too much to it, making Gods grace
to be such a thing not indeed as it is, but such as we would have. It is good
therefore to attend to the Scripture, and to lay all our own thoughts and all
humane Authorities aside, that so the Scripture grace of God may be found out.

Now these Characters we may have of that grace the Scripture commends The
Scripture characters of the grace of God.
in God:

1. That the Scripture-grace does begin all the good in us. We do not prevent
God, but he prevents us. Thus our Savior, You have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you: We love him, because he loved us first. So that the word of God
does still resolve the original of all we have into this grace of God, as Romans
9. and Romans 11. Ephesians. 1. Whosoever therefore makes something in us to begin,
and then Gods grace to be subsequent; he sets not up grace in a
Scripture-way. Therefore there are no antecedent merits or dispositions in us,
for which God does afterward bestow his grace upon us. The very first desire,
inspiration, and least unseigned groans after Christ is from this grace of God.
Therefore the beginnings of what is good; is attributed to God, as well as the
progressives, yea the initials most of all, because then we were dead in sin,
and in a state of enmity against God.

2. The grace of God which the Scripture commends, as to our Sanctification and
conversion is not merely suasory, and by moral arguments, or in an universal,
indeterminate and ineffectual manner, till we by our freewill content to it;
but it is a grace that takes away the heart of stone, and gives an heart of
flesh; it is a grace that gives a new birth, and makes us new creatures. Which
expressions do suppose, that we had not so much power, as to consent unto
grace, till grace does enable us. It is a grace that gives us both to will and
to do. It Is a grace that makes us to be what we are, and so to differ from
another, whereas if we did cooperate with grace, or make Gods grace effectual,
then it would be we our selves, and not Gods grace that should make this
difference.

3. The grace of God which the Scripture commends, as to our Justification is
imputed grace, not inherent, evangelical grace which justifies us, is
external, though by faith received into us, and made ours. And this is greatly
to be observed, for what godly man, when he goes for Justification and
consolation, does not more attend to inherent grace, than imputed? This truth
is the very heart and marrow of the Gospel. It is about this that there is so
much doctrinal and practical contending, Whether grace inherent in us, or
imputed to us, be that which we must rest upon, and lean upon, when God enters
into judgment with us? We say only imputed grace; others say, inherent; and
that because the Apostle excludes works; not only meritorious work, but godly
works, works of grace done by us. And here now the Adversaries seem to insult,
saying, The Apostle excludes works only of the Law, such as are done by our
natural strength, or perfect works, or works that merit; but this is to
distinguish where the Scripture does not; and whereas it is said, that the
works of grace cannot be opposed to grace, because they flow from it, they are
effects of it. It Is answered, that works of grace cannot indeed be opposed to
that principle of grace within us, from whence they are said to flow; but they
are opposed to that grace, which is said to be the effect of them, viz.
Justification and remission of sins. So that though works of grace do not
oppose internal renovation, yet they do justification, which they say is
produced by them. Again, whereas they say, That none extol grace more than
they do, because they make grace inherent to make us accepted of with God.
Whereas the Protestants debate it, denying it this noble work. For (say they)
will not grace be most advanced in Heaven, when we shall be justified by that
perfection of holiness which is within us? But to this also it is answered, That
it is imputed grace, which is Evangelical grace, and that we are to exalt in
this life. In Heaven indeed this Evangelical and imputed grace will cease,
though all glory will be given to that, because by it we are brought to perfect
inherent grace.

Lastly, The Scripture-grace, though it be not for good duties, yet does
always require the study of them, and diligent attending thereunto. So that as
we must not with the Papist make our duties thrust out grace; so neither must
we with the Antinomians make grace to thrust out duties, for both these do
consist together. Therefore as the Scripture speaks of Gods grace, so it does
also of those holy duties, which if we do not diligently perform, we cannot
have any portion in everlasting happiness.

Use of Admonition, To pray for that spiritual wisdom, that we may join Gods
grace and our holiness, to be conscionable in performing of the later, but to
rely only upon the former: Especially take heed of such ways and courses that
shall put thee out of this warm Sun, that shall make thee to walk in
darkness, not feeling the comfortable beams thereof. Oh remember, it is this
alone, that makes life and death comfortable. It is true, thou may be under
this grace of God, yet by some cloudy temptations upon thy soul thou not be
able to perceive. Oh but let thy earnest prayer be, That Gods grace may not
only be to thee, but this may be evidenced to thee. Thou can never have true
solid peace, and quiet contentation of soul, till this be all the food (as it
were) thou live upon; till this be all the clothes thou coverest thy
nakedness with.

SERMON. XXV.
Of the Nature of true Gospel peace, and wherein it chiefly consists.

2 COR. 1. 2. Grace be to you, and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ.
WE are now come to the second thing, which the Apostle does so cordially wish
these Corinthians, and that is Peace. Grace is the Cause, Peace is the Effect.
Grace is the fountain, Peace is the stream.

This word Peace among the Hebrews, comes from a root signifying, to be whole
and sound, because by Peace they did mean all good and prosperity, as by War,
the Hebrew word coming from a root, signifying to eat and devour, they meant
all misery and destruction. And among the Hebrews this was their ordinary
salutation and greeting, Peace be to you, intending thereby all prosperity and
happiness: And so some expound it here by Peace, understanding a prosperous and
successful proceeding of all their affairs: But though this is not to be
excluded; yet we take Peace in the same sphere with Grace; and as that did
relate chiefly to spiritual things, so also must this Peace in the Text.

By it therefore is meant, the fruit of Gods grace and favor, viz. a quiet,
serene, and calm, joyful frame of soul arising from the sense of Gods peace
through Christ, whereby we walk comfortably, boldly, and not daunted under
sin, afflictions, or death it self. A most blessed and choice mercy it is,
putting a believer into an Heaven, while he is on this earth, his heart keeping
(as it were) a perpetual Sabbath and rest within. So that whenever the godly
find diffidence, fears, disquietness, perplexities, troubles and dejections of
soul; all this arises because this peace does not prevail, and keep all under
in our hearts. This (...), this Peace and tranquillity of spirit, some
philosophers, especially the Stoics, did greatly aim at, and accounted it the
chiefest good; but being ignorant of Christ and faith in him, they took the
shadow of it for the substance. Observe,

That peace from God and Christ, is earnestly to be prayed for, as a special
and Peace from God and Christ is earnestly to be prayed for, as a very choice
mercy.
choice mercy.

To have an heart so evangelically affected through the apprehension of Gods
love, as a Father in Christ; that as the young child can sleep sweetly and
safely in its mothers arms: So can we as boldly and comfortably by faith throw
our selves into the bosom of our heavenly Father. Oh, why are there such
tormenting fears, such tumultuous conflicts, such wars and confusions in thy
soul, when such a privilege as this may be obtained at Gods hand?

But to direct you to this Peace, which is a spiritual Philosophers (...)
turning all into gold; if we have this peace, then they are afflictions of
peace, exercises of peace; yea death is peace then. This quiets and composeth
all.

Let us first take notice of the nature of it briefly. And

First, This peace lies in the favor and grace of God, so that his anger and
Wherein this peace consists.
wrath, because of sin, is wholly removed. For where Gods wrath is upon a
man, where his face is set against him, that man has no peace, Isa 57. 21.
There is no peace, says my God to the wicked. Therefore though wicked men are
for a while in carnal jollity, and in much security, crying, Peace, peace to
themselves, as 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. even then destruction shall suddenly surprise
them. The very Heathen could say of a wicked man, That though he might be
securus, yet he was never tutus: Though he might cast away all care and fear,
bidding his soul, as Dives, to take its ease, yet he is never safe; for in the
midst of this security, he hears that dreadful voice, Thou fool, this night
thy soul shall be taken away. Let then the wicked men tremble and quake like
Belshazzar, for they may see, not one, but many hand-writings, not in a wall,
but in the word of God, foretelling them without repentance of their certain
damnation. This peace therefore begins first in Heaven, and so descends into a
man's heart. God removes his anger, because of our sins; he is become a
gracious and reconciled Father, and hence we have peace. Therefore Romans 5. 1.
it is called, Peace with God; insomuch that if we had peace with all the
Potentates of the world; if we had peace with the world, which yet Christ's
Disciples shall never have, yet this is nothing to peace with God. For how many
have ventured to obtain outward peace, as Spira and others, by breaking this
peace; and thereupon have plunged themselves into a very Hell? What peace can
any in the world give thee, if God cause his anger to break out against thee?

Secondly, This peace, as it does consistin reconciliation with God; so also it
has the sense and persuasion of this, it brings a man to some comfortable
knowledge and evidence of this. For although Gods anger be removed, our sins be
forgiven, and on Gods part all controversies are removed against us, yet if we
do not know this, if we are not assured our hearts are us much troubled and
disquieted, as if God indeed were our adversary. Hence it is that the Spirit of
God is sent into our hearts, enabling us to call God Abba, Father. For if we
could not do so, it would be as the Sun, though it casts forth glorious beams
of light, yet a blind man, because he cannot see it, it is all one, as if it
were midnight: so unless the Spirit of God does make thee to discern those
gifts of the Spirit in thee, as by the light of the Sun we come to see the
^e: so also, though God be our Father, though we be his dear children, yet if
we are not assured of this, still this peace is not in our hearts; it must be
therefore in Gods favor, and our assurance of this faith.

Thirdly, This peace therefore is not procured or wrought by our own strength.
If we would give ten thousand worlds, when our hearts are seorched and burn
like hell through the sense of Gods displeasure, we are not able to refresh our
souls with one drop of it. That as all the men of the world are not able to
make the Sun arise, if God forbid it; Neither can the parched wilderness
water it self, till God prepare clouds to empty themselves upon it: Thus it is
with it ^umble contrite heart, praying, groaning, crying out for this blessed
peace in soul: Alas it cannot come, till God command it. Therefore he is so
often called, the God of peace, Romans 16 20. Heb. 13. 20. And peace is made the
fruit of Gods Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. Hence it is, that the Apostle in this Text
prays for it unto God, as knowing the Corinthians can never have it, unless
it be given them from above. This therefore should o^^ us of our selves; think
not to have it by any works thou do; think not outward advantages can help
then to it: No, it must be by a lowly humble dependence upon God, Descendendo,
in Coelum ascenditur.

Fourthly, As it is wrought by God, so it is purchased by Christ our Mediator.
For although he be also the efficient cause of peace, called therefore Isai. 9.
The Prince of peace, and The King of peace, Heb. 7. 2. yet he is chiefly called
our peace, because by him our peace is purchased, Ephesians. 2. 14. Colos. 1. 20.
Hence it was, that upon Christ's birth those Angels sang, Glory be to God on
High, and peace on Earth, good will toward men. So that had it not been for
Christ living and dying to remove the curse of the Law from us, there had been
no more hope of peace for us, than the Devils and damned in Hell. Though with
Dives we had called but for a drop of water, yet the gulf being not removed
between God and us, we could not have enjoyed it. It Is then a peace through
Christ's blood; we have it at a very dear price: Hence Isai. 53. The
chastisement of our peace is said, to be upon him, that chastisement and wounds
which brought peace to us. And truly this is much to be meditated on. For what
man considering his sinfulness, his unworthiness, can persuade himself, that
God will have any peace with such as he is? Do we not see what a laborious work
it is to bring the troubled and laden soul to Christ for ease? How many times
ready to despair? What constant qualms and swoons of soul? How often with the
Disciples crying out, I perish, I perish? And is not all this, because they
think their sins have so offended God, he is so provoked against them, that
they can never obtain reconciliation? Does not this proneness to unbelief and
despair, arise from not considering, that the chastisements of our peace are
upon Christ? Were we with our tears or graces, to work our peace, then our
estate would be incurable? But Christ is our peacemaker; and if peacemakers
among men are blessed, How blessed is our Lord and Savior Christ, who made
peace between man and God?

Fifthly, Faith is the hand to receive and embrace this peace; by believing we
come to have this heavenly tranquillity. Those that are strangers to this life
of faith, are also strangers to this life of peace. Romans 5. 1. Being justified
by faith, we have peace with God. It Is faith that prepares the way for peace,
Isai. 26. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee in perfect peace, peace; peace, as in the original,
full and universal peace. But how shall he thus be kept? By trusting and
staying his mind on God. So Isai. 27. 5. God there inviteth men to believe,
which is emphatically called, a laying hold upon God, Let him take hold on me,
that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. Take hold, as
we do upon a man that is turning away from us, and seems to be offended with
us; but we lay hold on him, entreating him to look upon us. This does faith;
and therefore by it we are said to have boldness. Oh then acquaint thy self
more with this life of faith! If you see a tree wither in all its branches and
boughs, it is because it dies at the root: So if you see a Christian abating
in his peace, in his joy, in his consolations, it is because faith is weak
within. This is the breast that gives suck (as it were) to all the serenity we
enjoy.

Sixthly, This peace, as it is thus wrought by God in us, and received by
faith; so it is conserved and preserved by an holy and diligent attending to
the exercise of all grace. For although a godly life be not a cause of this
peace, yet it is always conjoined with it; and our negligence and ungodliness
will be like an Eclipse to this Sun, it will darken and obnubilate the whole
soul. Hence this peace, and a wilful course of wickedness can no more stand
together, than the Sun and night. The Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 1. bids us,
Give all diligence to make our calling and election sure, which is, by adding
of one grace to another. Hence Romans 8. 6. To be spiritually minded, is said to
be life and peace. No wonder then if Gods own children do so seldom attain to a
calm and peaceable frame; they are doubting and discouraged often; they are
cast down and hopeless often; they are full of tormenting fears often; for
whence is this? but because Gods own people are subject to dullness,
slothfulness, they break their peace, they interrupt this communion, they do
not keep the oil always ready to keep the lamp burning. Oh then say to thy
soul, why am I a man of so little peace within me? Why do I find like Rehekkah
two struggling within me, faith against diffidence, joy against sadness, hope
against fear? Is not all this from my own folly and vanity? The way then to
keep this blessed peace, is to walk with all diligence in the whole course of
all godliness.

Seventhly, This peaceable calm, and joyful disposition of the soul, is the
proper effect and fruit of the Gospel. This is the fi^al and Evangelical temper
we under the Gospel, and the Spirit of Adoption, ought to walk in. We may stand
and wonder to see, what great expressions Paul uses, Romans 8. and in other
places, concerning the love of God in Christ; how consident and assured of it,
how triumphing over all difficulties, as if he were in Heaven already. For the
glorified Saints can scarce say more than he does. And this he speaks, not in
his own behalf, but in the name of all the children of God, they ought to have
such peace, assurance, and filial persuasions, as he has. Now alas, we are
like worms crawling on the ground in comparison of him! We spend our days in
tumults, fears and disquietness of heart: We are tossed from one temptation to
another, and have not this peace, this joy unspeakable, this Evangelical
persuasion, and why? but because the Gospel has not had its full work upon us.
Does not the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. and in other places, speak of the Ministration
of the Law, killing and condemning? Does he not speak of a spirit of bondage,
and of servants as opposite to children? And as the immediate contrary to this,
he tells us of the Ministration of the Gospel, and the Spirit of Adoption
accompanying it, which Spirit we are to pray for; and are to be transformed
more and more from glory to glory, by beholding of the glory of God revealed in
the Gospel. Therefore Ephesians. 6. 15. We are to have our feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace; We tread among thorns and briars. Now this
Gospel munition is the only defense against all hindrances in our way to
Heaven. Oh beloved, let us at last know, that the Gospel does not only consist
in an holy, exact, and humble walking, but in a cheerful, peaceful, and
gladsome conversation, arising from the sense of Gods grace to us in Christ.
The Apostle speaks fully to this, Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of God is not
meat or drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. You see
here the Kingdom of God is not only in righteousness, but in this peace and
joy. Did the children of God possess their souls with this truth, they would no
more let in unbelief and discouragements into their soul, then they would the
prince of darkness, and his Angels? Know therefore, that though thou have lived
so many years under the Gospel, yet till thou obtainest this peaceable calm
frame of soul, coming from the love of God in Christ, thou have not the
Gospel-work in its full upon thee. Do not live as if thou had only received
the Spirit of bondage to fear, but the Spirit of adoption and consolation also.
And know this assuredly, That the more any Christian grows under the Gospel,
the more this dispensation affects him, the nearer in communion, and lovely
imbracements by faith, he comes unto God as a Father, being able to say with
the Church, I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine. And Cant. 8. 10. I was in
his eyes, as one that found favor, or peace. being conducted from one room of
consolation unto another. As therefore thou desire to answer the Law of God
in holiness, and a godly walking; so conform thy self to the Gospel, by a
peaceable and joyful disposition. The Apostle says, Romans 10. 15. How welcome
are the feet of those who pre^ch the Gospel of peace? And certainly, there
cannot be any truth in the world more precious and welcome to this indebted
prisoner of sin, who groaneth under the burden of it; then this year of
Jubilee, this year of peace, and of a general releasment. Matthew. 10. 6. Our
Savior instructs his Disciples, as they did go from house to house, preaching
the Kingdom of Heaven, if they did meet with a Son of peace, Peace should
rest upon that house. Oh that in our Gospel-Sermons, we did meet with these
sons of peace, those hearers of peace, that so it might rest upon them! How
can you be under the hot beams of this Sun of righteousness displayed in the
Gospel, and yet be so chill and frozen with fear and unbelief? How can ye be in
the shop of this precious ointment, and you not be full of the sweet savor of
it? Though the Antinomian abuse this precious Doctrine, crying down the
preaching of the Law, and make all that do it to be legal Preachers: Shall we
therefore cry down a Gospeldisposition? Neither of these is to be preached to
the prejudice of the other.

SERMON. XXVI.
A further Discovery of the Nature of true Gospel-Peace, with the Effects of
it; and some Directions how to attain it.

2 COR. 1. 2. And Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
WE are treating upon this admirable and unspeakable privilege of Peace from
God. It is a Peace from God, and it is a Peace with God. You have heard several
particulars going to the constitution of it, there yet remain more.

In the next place therefore, This peace here prayed for, is a peace in
heavenly considerations, because our persons are justified, our sins are
forgiven, therefore we have peace. As Romans 5. 1. there is an external worldly
peace, which the natural men of the world only desire; let them live in peace
and security, let them have the good things of this world, with the peaceable
enjoying of them, this is the utmost of their desire, they think this is
enough. We see this notably, Ezekiel. 13. 10, 16. where the people desire such
Prophets only, that will prophecy of peace to them. Peace is so loved, that
therefore wicked men do so extremely hate the faithful Messengers of God,
because they proclaim no peace to them; they enform them of Gods wrath and
vengeance against such; now this cutteth them to the very heart: They delight
only in such peacemongers, that though they go on in all wickedness and
profaneness, yet you must tell them all is well, sow pillows under their
elbows, that they may lie down in security. Men that desire to sleep, love not
to hear any noise; but the Peace in the Text, is not bred from such base and
low materials. When the wicked man is deprived of his pleasure, his profits,
then all his peace is gone: but the godly does many times partake in the most
powerful manner of this peace, when they are in the most afflicted and
wretched estate, because this peace is within, and upon spiritual grounds. And
therefore when the godly many times have most of outward troubles; they do
richly abound with this spiritual inward peace. Hence it is that a gracious
spiritual heart does only prize it, and pray for it: The natural man not
perceiving these things, which must be spiritually discerned.

Secondly, Whereas a godly man's trouble may arise several ways, this peace
What are the principal causes of a godly man's fears, troubles and
disquietnesses.
has a proper antidote and cure in all these respects, from what causes a
godly man's disquietnesse and fears may arise, from the contrary will his peace.
As for example, a godly man is very frequently disturbed, because of the sense
of Gods anger for sin, because he is not reconciled, such and such iniquities
have provoked God to hide his face, and this fills him with all bitterness;
he will not be called Naomi, but Marah; but when this peace of God possesses
the soul, then all these dark thoughts do presently fly away, as when the
Sun arises, the night is dispelled. So that when thou think of God, and
art troubled; Thy meditation of him is not, as David's, sweet, but bitter; this
wholly arises from want of this peace, for that will confirm and settle the
soul in all references to God, that will represent him to be a gracious
reconciled Father.

Again, A man's trouble may arise in his soul, from the temptations and
oppositions of Satan, who when he cannot hinder Gods people in the exercise of
their graces, will in respect of their comforts. So that as the Spirit of God
is the Comforter, one great work of his being to assure, to enable to call God
Father: So the Devil he is the prince of darkness, and he counterworks Gods
Spirit. As that is an holy Spirit, sanctifying his people; so he is an unclean
spirit, provoking to all sin. Again, as Gods Spirit does comfort and convince
us of Christ's righteousness, being the Spirit of Adoption within us, to
deliver us from spiritual bondage and thraldom: So the Devil he works
oppositely to all this; he fills the heart with sad and unbelieving
suggestions; he endeavors to divide between God and us, to make us afraid of
him, as being that severe Judge, who will not in any wise be reconciled. Thus
he would persuade us, that it is with us, as it is with him, and that there is
no more hope for comfort and salvation for us, than for him. But this peace of
God does abundantly fortify against this temptation also; where this peace is,
the Devil does not find the house swept and garnished, but fortified and
secured against him, so that he cannot have any entrance. This is the blessed
effect of this spiritual peace, that it overcomes the Devil; he commonly
enters into the good tender heart by unbelief, by fears, by propounding
doubtful and anxious scruples, and then draws us into a wilderness far off
from God: But this peace from God does easily quench all his fiery-darts, does
presently stop his assaults, and makes him not care for coming to us to graple
with us, while we have this spiritual armoury on.

In the third place, Our disquietnesse does many times arise from the relics
of original corruption within us. The godly they find many sad discoveries and
workings of the root of corruption within them: They find that their hearts are
not in such an uniform and heavenly way, as they desire; they often come short
of what they endeavor after. And seeing themselves thus foiled often by their
lusts, they begin to be full of fears, and of all doubts; they question their
own sincerity, and what Rock they are built upon; hereupon they are pierced
through with many wounding apprehensions; and have no rest in their bones; but
when this peace from God, does begin to stir in their hearts, then all these
fears vanish: They see peace with God, and remainders of corruption may stand
together, so long as they do not make provision for the flesh, or give
themselves up to sin willingly, but are captivated therein, so long Gods
favor and love is not removed from them. This peace (they now see) is not
bottomed upon a pure and perfect heart, free from any evil at all; for then no
David, nor Paul, could have peace, but from the grace of God through Christ,
mercifully forgiving those failings and imperfections which we are burdened
with.

Lastly, The godly man's peace is many times greatly interrupted from without,
because of the hatred and malice of the world: But Christ's peace is an
excellent antidote against that also, John 14. 27. John 16. 33. Christ there
bequeaths his peace to them, and from this ground, Because in the world they
shall have trouble. Let the winds and clouds be never so impetuous, yet they
cannot molest the upper region, that is above their reach: So it is here, Let
men and Devils set themselves against the godly with all their rage and
madness; Let them revile them, imprison them, yea kill them, yet they cannot
take away their peace from them. So that unless they could as Black would have
done, get God to curse his children: All the curses and violent oppositions of
the world, are so far from weakening, that they rather increase and strengthen
their peace. Thus you see what large territories this peace of God has, that
it does extend it self into large dimensions. And oh how blessed and happy is
that man, who has this peace compassing him about in every respect! This is
not only Peace, peace, as Isa. 26. 3. but three or four times Peace, peace,
from every side, from within and without. Why then is not the true believer
more folicitous to possess himself of this crown of mercies?

Thirdly, This peace of God, arising from Gods favor in Christ, has admirable
and sovereign effects, which may move us to the attainment thereof. What are
the effects of this Gospel-peace.
As

1. Where this peace of God is, it will wonderfully compose and settle the
soul. This is the genuine, and immediate consequent of Gods peace in the soul;
it puts the whole soul into an excellent harmony. There are not those waves
and tumults, those divisions and distractions of soul, which many times do
greatly perplex the godly: Do we not see an universal want of this peace
generally amongst believers? Whence arise those troubles, those concussions of
soul? Why do thou need so often to chide and rebuke thy self, saying, Why
art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within thee? Do
not all these things arise, because thy heart is not at rest and quietness
within thee? The Heathens speak much of their Socrates, because he was noted to
be always; Eodem vultu, of the same countenance; if this were true, it did not
arise from this Christian peace, but from some Stoical, or other Philosophical
principles, which did speak much to this tranquillity of mind, but yet pleased
themselves with the shadow, never enjoying the substance. David does notably
express the effects of this peace, Psalm. 48. I will both lay me down in peace,
and sleep, because thou Lord alone make me dwell in safety. Likewise Psalm.
23. we have a large description of a serene and pacified mind without any
dividing cares of soul. As also Psalm. 112. 3. his Heart is fixed, trusting in
the Lord. Thus this peace of God keeps all quiet, and subdueth all troublesome
insurrections, and motions of soul. Hence Colos. 3. 15. Phil. 4. 17. this peace
of God is said to rule in our hearts, and to keep our hearts, as an Army,
Garrison, a Strong-hold, so that none dare make any opposition, or resistance.
Thus does the peace of God, it is of such sovereign dominion in our hearts,
that it keeps down unbelief, and all unruly passions of soul. Do not then be a
Magor-missabib to thy own self, when God calls thee to peace, do not thou
set all at variance, and discord within thy self.

2. This peace of God works as a consequent from the former, a gracious
contentation of soul under all conditions and estates. So that whatsoever
befall him, he is the Lapis quadratus, he is built on a Rock, nothing can
overwhelm his peace; grieved he may be, sadded he may be, because of some
passages even from God against him, yet his peace he is never to let go, for
that alone makes the soul contented. Though his conditions alter, and he is
tossed up and down several ways, yet because of peace with God, he can follow
the Apostle Paul, and though with disproportion say, I know how to abound, and
how to want; I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.
12. Whereas if this peace of God be taken from the soul, then is the heart of a
man like one burning in an hot fever, tossing from one place to another,
hoping to find some ease, but can obtain none.

3. This peace of God fills the heart with joy and boldness at the throne of
grace. For as when the Sun arises, the dark clouds they are scattered; Thus
when the peace of God does shine into our souls, then the heart is filled with
joy in the holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 1. 8. it is called unspeakable joy, and full of
glory: Insomuch that such who live in this manner, have Heaven and eternal life
already begun in their souls. It is not according to the Spirit of God, that
thou should be heaping up sad thoughts against thy self; Gods Spirit is a
comforting Spirit, as it does all in us for holiness, so also for consolation.
It is not Spiritus Calvinianus, but Papisticus, that may be truly called
Melancholicus; for the Calvinist Doctrine preaches and presses the assuring
work of Gods Spirit to the soul, the certainty of perseverance to such who have
been partakers of the least true grace; but Popish Doctrine and others commend
doubtings, deny certain perseverance of the true Saints; and therefore upon
this account, as well as for other reasons, they may be rejected, because they
tend to the utter overthrow of the consolation of Gods children. Oh then know,
that a spiritual life, is a life suitable to the Spirit of God, is a comfortable
glad walking, as well as an holy, and a sanctified one.

Lastly, Where this peace from God is, there is a greater incentive and
quickening to all holiness and godliness. There the soul is carried out with
more fervency and activity, scruples and dejected thoughts, they are like the
taking off the Chariot-wheels; there cannot be such improved godliness, such
zealous and laborious expressions of love and thankfulness to God, as when this
peace of God rules in our heart. The fire does not more easily dissolve the
frost and ice, then this peace of God in our souls does chase away all
slothfulness and negligence; if this grace and peace of God were shed abroad in
thy heart, thou would like a Giant run thy race of Christianity, whereas
now thou art but a Dwarf; feeble hands and weak knees will not go through much
work, especially if difficult and laborious. Now the way of Christianity is
compared to a race, to fighting and combating: there are thousands of
discouragements and oppositions in the way; it behooves thee therefore to have
this peace within, that so the work of grace begun in thee, may go on more
prosperously.

But you will say, This indeed is a mercy, like that Pearl in the Parable, we
may well fell all to have it: But how may we be directed to obtain it?

Take notice of these things briefly: Directions how to attain this peace.


First, Distinguish between carnal presumption, and this peace from God. Many
have been deluded by taking one for the other. The Jews and Pharisees did
confidently boast in God as their Father, and that they were Abraham's seed; the
Covenants of Grace did belong to them; yet who were further off from it than
they were? When the Pharisees said, Lord, I thank thee I am not like other men,
he might have boldness and confidence upon his soul; but yet here was no true
peace. And thus there are many hundreds who have quiet, still, and it may be
feared, stupefied consciences: Now these find no trouble, no aches, or pains of
heart, because of sin, but thank their good God, all is well with them, when
yet alas they are miserable, being upon the very borders of Hell, in which they
may fall every moment.

Secondly, Take heed of living in sin, or omitting of those Duties God
requires of thee. For although these be not the cause of this peace in thee,
yet without these no peace can either be obtained or preserved. This is to be
throwing water upon the fire, till it quite go out.

Thirdly, Persuade thy self of those Doctrinal Truths against the contrary
Errors, which help to establish this peace: Such as the Nature of Justifying
Faith, in the particular application of it; as also, not only the possibility,
but the duty of Assurance; the certain, and unchangeable love of God, to all
those who are his; as also the acceptablenesse of such a quiet and joyful
spirit unto God himself.

Fourthly, Regard Gods promises as well as precepts. Look upon the Gospel as
well as the Law; let not one destroy the other, but make them to be subservient
in thy whole life.

Lastly, Pray much for the Spirit of Adoption. For it is not thy own power, or
meditation upon all the Rules that Ministers may give, which will give this
peace of God, till the Spirit of Adoption do reign in thee.

SERMON. XXVII.
Of the Names of God; it is he alone who can give Grace and Peace to his People.
He is a Father to all Believers, even the weakest as well as the strongest.

2 COR. 1. 2. From God our Father.
WE have dispatched the choice and special mercies here prayed for; we now
come to the Original and Spring of them; The Efficient Cause, who alone can
vouchsafe this to us, and that is two-sold, God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Let us consider the first, and there we have a description of him, Of the
names attributed to God in Scripture.


1. Absolutely, God. 2. Relatively, a Father. 3. The Community of this to all
Believers, or the Extension of it, Our Father.
We shall dispatch all these particulars briefly.

The first head, is the absolute consideration of God, expressed in the word
(...), whether that word come from fear, or to run, or to behold, is doubted
of. In the Hebrew there are several Names given to God, insomuch that the
Rabbis call him Hashem, the Name. Whether God himself revealed his Name to
Adam, or Adam imposed a name upon him, it is hard to determine. This is
certain, that the Scripture names do very emphatically represent the Nature of
God, especially those two Jehovah and Elohim. The word Jehovah is commonly
rendered by the Septuagint (...), yet in the New Testament, Christ is commonly
called (...), and God the Father (...), especially when named together, as is
to be showed in the verses following.

Now of these two mentioned words, one in the singular, the other is in the
plural, which does denote (especially having light from other places of
Scripture) that there is One Divine Nature, and Three Persons. Hence sometimes
Jehovah Elohim is put together; although also the former word signifies the
fullness of Gods being, and giving being to other things. For which reason (say
some) he is not named Jehovah till the second Chapter in Genesis, when all
things were completed; and in another place, God is said, Not to be known by
the Name Jehovah, Exodus 6. 3. because they had not seen the great things
promised, accomplished; and Elohim denotes God, as governing and ruling the
world; in which sense, the fool is said to affirm, There is no God, no Elohim,
Psalm. 14. 1. Yet having light from other places of Scripture, especially from
the New Testament, we ought not to reject this consideration, that therefore
Jehovah is in the singular number; and Elohim in the plural, to signify the
One Nature, and Three Persons. For though from the plural number merely, we
cannot pitch upon the number three more than four, yet from other places joined
to this we may. So then, as God in making of man, spoke in the plural number;
so we shall find in the Scripture in other places speaking of God, as Makers,
in the plural number, Isa. 54. 5. Psalm. 149. 2. Job 35. 9. for this reason.
Though some Divines dare not say, Tres Jehovae, Three Jehovahs, yet they say,
Three Elohims, as Zanchy names a piece of his works. Indeed there are others,
who do wholly reject and dislike that expression. The word God is applied
sometimes properly, sometimes improperly. Improperly, so it is given to Angels
and Magistrates. The Apostle says, They are (...), called Gods in Heaven and
Earth. Though a learned man observes, That never any Angel or Magistrate is
called a god in the singular number; but they are said to be gods in the plural
number; now the Apostle sometimes lays an argument even upon the number.
Improperly also it is given to Magistrates; Moses is said to be made a god to
Pharaoh; here is the singular number, but the respective limitation is added;
because of his dominion God gave him over Pharaoh, to bring judgments upon
him: Yea, the Devil is called the god of this world, who is said to blind the
minds of disobedient persons. Although some expound that of the true and
eternal God, who does in just judgment harden the hearts of wicked men, Non
impertiendo malitiam, sed denegando gratiam. But properly and truly it is
attributed to the true God only, and he alone is here said with Christ, to be
the Author of that Grace and Peace we have. From whence observe,

That God alone can vouchsafe this grace and peace to his people. God alone can
give grace and peace to his people.


This is part of Gods Regalia, There are many things that the creatures can do
as second causes; but here God is the alone efficient. We remain, as it were,
in so many tormenting Hels, till God cause his face to shine upon us. Hence
(you heard) God is called the God of peace; and as it follows in the next
verse, The God of all consolation. As therefore God is the fountain of
holiness, so that there cannot be the least degree of holiness wrought in thee,
without it come from above, thou have no free will or power of thy own to
procure it: So it is in matter of consolation and peace. There is not the least
drop of comfort can fall into thy heart to refresh it, till God pour it into
thee.

I shall briefly mention some grounds of this, because it will be more largely
handled in the next verse.

First, God alone can give this grace and peace, Because he was at first the
Reasons.
maker of the heart, he is the Father of all flesh, and of all spirits. Having
therefore such an immediate dominion over the heart of man, to put into it what
he pleases, to raise up what affections he will; no wonder if he alone gives
comfort. Elihu speaks fully to this, Job 35. 10. None says, where is God my
maker, that gives songs in the night? In the night] when the soul may be most
possessed with sad and dejected thoughts, even then he can give songs, and that
because he is a maker: That as he who makes an instrument of Art, the Clock or
Watch, he can make it strike, when, and how he pleases; if there be any
hinderance in the motions of it, he can presently rectify it, because he made
it; thus it is with God, he knows all the workings, and turnings of thy
heart, he made every power and ability of thy soul, and so he alone can fill it
with joy or bitterness, as he pleases. Though our hearts be not in our power,
yet they are in Gods power, and what he bids it think, it thinks; whereas we
have not our own thoughts and motions in our own power. It is God therefore
that made the heart, who can make it peaceable and joyful.

Secondly, God alone must be the fountain of all grace and peace, Because he
alone is the person offended. When we sin, it is he that is provoked, it is his
honor, and his Law that is despised; and therefore seeing not the creatures,
but God himself is chiefly offended, till he be reconciled, we cannot have any
true and certain peace. That as it is with a Subject, who has offended the
Prince, it lies in the Prince his power only to be gracious, and to give a
pardon; though all men in the Nation should give it him, yet if not ratified
and confirmed by the Prince, whom he has offended, he looks upon his
condition as helpless: Thus the foul troubled for sin, though all the world
give him peace, yet that will not satisfy him; his thoughts are daily, What
does the Lord say? Besides these, as you see in David, though he greatly
offended, and injured man, being guilty of blood; yet he cries out to God,
Against thee, thee only have I sinned; and earnestly prays, God would not
hide his face from him, Psalm. 51.

Use of Direction, To all contrite broken hearts, who like that woman troubled
with the bloody flux, have spent all they had upon Physicians that could do no
good. Thou have thus many years been bowed down, a stranger to all joy and
peace, look up to God more, know he alone can give thee true joy. For this
reason we see David and others, still making their addresses to God, That he
would make the bones that were broken to rejoice, that he would make the
parched wilderness to be like a pleasant spring, for otherwise they are undone
and miserable, till he looks upon them. Now then, if God be the only cause of
thy peace; take heed how thou provokest him; better offend all the world than
God. For the world, though it rage and persecute thee, yet cannot deprive thee
of this peace; but God hides his face in a moment, and then thou must needs be
troubled. Therefore do not think to get this grace and peace from thy own works
and doings, but imitate David, who said, He would hear what the Lord will
speak, Psalm. 85. 8. for he will speak peace to his people. Thus we are to be
attending more to the voice of God in his Word, by his promises speaking to our
comfort, then to our own hearts; thou will hear what thy own perplexed heart
speaks, or what the Devil speaks, which always suggest matter of terror and
diffidence, and do not hearken to what God by his Spirit through his Word
speaks to thee. Only take the caution along with thee, the Psalmist gives,
If God have spoken peace, take heed of returning to folly. Sin may in that
particular be well called folly, for thereby we unsettle our souls; we that had
the quiet enjoyments of God, and his imbracements of grace, for some sin that
pleases or tickleth but for a moment, do cast our selves into darkness and
misery. So that then sin is especially folly, when we have once experimentally
tasted the good grace of God, and then afterward voluntarily chase it away by
our own carelessness. Oh how long may thou with tears and cries pray for
light and comfort again ere thou can enjoy it?

In the next place, God is here described relatively, a Father. The word Father
is sometimes taken absolutely, as it denotes God the Creator and Governor of
all things; sometimes relatively, as denoting the first Person in the Trinity.
Although the Socinian flight this distinction, denying the Son to be called
the Father, unless once, Isa. 9. which they would wrest to another sense, and
that the holy Ghost is never called Father; yea, that the Father is never
called Father in respect of the first creation of all things; but because of
his fatherly love and care to the things created; yet these things might be
cleared against them, were it in our way so much. Here indeed God the Father is
named relatively, and not so much from the first creation, and making of all
things; as from the Covenant of grace, whereby through Christ we are made his
sons, and what Christ has by nature, we have by grace. So that the paternal
relation here mentioned, is more peculiar and sweet, than that general one to
all the creatures, even wicked men, who yet are preserved by him, and like
Ishmael have many gifts, though they have not with Isaac the inheritance.
Observe,

That God is a Father in a more peculiar and special manner to those that do
God is a Father in a more peculiar manner to those that believe.
truly believe.

The Poet said, We were Gods offspring, who knew not the grace of Adoption, yet
the Apostle confirms that speech, because we are all his creatures, but the
good Angels, and good men, are the sons of God in a more endeared respect.

We shall not insist long neither upon this, though the Scripture make it the
treasury of all our consolation; only we may briefly consider, What it is what
it is for God to be our Father.
to be our Father. And

First, It implies his spiritual begetting us by the Word. For before
conversion the Devil is our Father, we may say, Our Father which art in Hell,
if we were to pray to him; as our Savior told the Pharisees, not Abraham, but
the Devil was their Father, and all, because we have his likeness upon us, and
his works we do. But when God by his Spirit does change us, and make us to
partake of his Divine Nature, then we are sons, Sons by Adoption, and sons
by Regeneration. It is not then every one, that God is thus a Father to, he
must have the Image of God, and his likeness. Therefore though many call him
Father, yet he is a Judge, and an enemy to them, because they are contrary to
him in nature and actions.

Secondly, As God is thus a Father in respect of a metaphorical generation; so
also in regard of all his paternal love and care to those that are his. No
bowels of father or mother are comparable to his. Therefore the Prophet Isaiah
makes his love to transcend the mothers love, and that to her sucking infant,
Isa. 49. 50. Insomuch that all our doubts and fears may presently be subdued,
if we consider he is a Father. Why art thou so disquieted, as if like
Melchizedech thou were without father and mother? Thou art afraid of hell and
condemnation, but will a Father do thus? Again, thou doubtest about many
earthly and sensible comforts, what thou shall eat or drink, and does not our
Savior say, Matthew. 6. 8. Your Father knows what ye have need of? Improve
then the relation of a Father; think what care, love and bowels God has put
into thy heart who art a father to thy children; thou never doubtest of thy
affections to them, but many times of their affections and dutifulness to thee;
And is not this fatherly affection much more in God?

Thirdly, He is not only our Father, but he sends his Spirit into our hearts,
to assure us of this, and to be more affected with it, Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 6.
For whereas in nature, there the child by a natural instinct is carried out to
his father, and to call upon him; It is not thus in grace, for when God is
become our Father, then we need the Spirit of God to assure us of this, to make
us believe it; of our selves we should rather conclude, he is our enemy, and
our Judge; but this Spirit of God puts a filial confidence into us. Again,
it does not only assure us, but inableth us against all those doubts and
jealousies we have to the contrary, to cry Father, that denotes the soul is in
a very great agony, many objections and oppositions it has; but yet we are
enabled against our hearts, and against the Devils temptations thus to do:

Lastly, He is a Father, and therefore does afflict us, and chastise us for our
good. Insomuch that it is from his fatherly love to afflict us, as well as to
give us of his mercies; and if as the Apostle urges, Heb. 12. 9. We reverenced
our fathers after the flesh, when they chastized us, how much rather our Father
after the Spirit? which cannot miscarry, or err in his afflictions upon us.

To this Doctrine let us add the Extension of it, Our Father. Paul says not
my Father, or the father of Abraham, and such eminent Saints, but our Father.
Observe,

God is a Father to the meanest and weakest believer, as well as the God is a
Father to the weakest believer as well as the strongest.
strongest.

Hence our Savior taught all the godly to say, Our Father. In this expression
is implied:

First, Appropriation and application. It is not enough to acknowledge God a
Father, but we must bring this relation home to our hearts, Our Father, my
Father, and thy Father.

Secondly, It implies, That God is so the Father of one believer, that he is
the Father of all the rest. Earthly parents have sometimes so many children,
that they cannot provide for all (at least) so liberally, but God can do as
much for any one child of his, as if he had no more; his riches and inheritance
is given to every one, All his children are heirs, and have as much as if there
had been but one child.

Thirdly, There is implied the unity and agreement of all believers
amongstthemselves. They have one Father. why then should there be such
divisions amongst them? The Apostle Ephesians. 4. 6. urges this one God, and
Father of all, one Lord, one Spirit, one God and Father. These are brought as
arguments of unity, not merely because they are one, but one ^o believers. All
believers have but one Lord, one Spirit, one God, and therefore are to manifest
this unity.

Use. From both the Doctrines joined together of Direction, with what
Evangelical, quiet, and joyful spirits we should live upon this divine truth;
Gods being our Father should be the Gospel harp to drive out every unbelieving
and troublesome thought. 1 John 1. 3. Truly our fellowship is with the Father,
and with his Son Jesus Christ. Our fellowship] it should be no new or strange
thing to us.

SERMON, XXVIII.
Of the Dominion and Lordship of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

2 COR. 1. 2. And from the Lord Jesus Christ.
WE are arrived now to the last particular in this verse, and that is the
second Principle or Cause of this Grace and Peace prayed for, which is Jesus
Christ. So that the Lord Christ is here conjoined with God the Father, in
bestowing of these spiritual mercies.

In the words therefore we have the Description of Christ, Christ to be prayed
to for grace and peace,


1. By his Name, Jesus. 2. By his Office, Christ.
Both which we have already considered in the former verse. There remains
therefore the Relation by which he is represented to us, and that is (...),
Lord. Paul here prays for Grace and Peace from Christ our Lord, as well as
from the Father, which is a sure and strong argument of the Divine Nature of
Christ; for it is God alone that can give these spiritual mercies, if Christ
were not truly God, he could not give these divine privileges. And hence also
it follows, That it is our duty to pray to Christ, seeing he is the Author of
such mercies. The blasphemous Heretics of late have differed among themselves,
Socinus and Franciscus Davidis about praying to Christ. The later denying it
lawful to call upon Christ in prayer. The other granting in the New Testament
examples of it; as when Stephen said, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, etc. So
that it is lawful; but yet he says, There is no precept to command it. But no
wonder at this, seeing he holds, That prayer in the general was never a duty
commanded in the Old Testament. We see by this Text, that if Christ be the
fountain of grace and peace, as God the Father is, then are we to pray to one,
as well as the other, or to the Father in the Name of Christ. The heretical
exception against this place is, That because the preposition (...) is not in
the original, therefore he would have the word Father relate to Christ, as well
as to (...) Our; as if the sense were, From God our Father, and the Father of
Jesus Christ. Indeed our Savior does say, I go to my Father, and your Father,
John 20. 17. But then he says, my Father in the first place, whereas here in
the Text, it is said, Our Father; and afterward in the heretical opinion should
follow, The Father of Christ; but that Christ in these salutations is meant as
a conjoined cause is very evident, John 2. 2. where the preposition (...) is
expressed from the Father, and from the Lord Christ, the Son of the Father.

A second cavil that needs a vindication, may be, in that Christ is said to
be Lord, as distinguished from God: Therefore it may be thought, that Christ is
not God. To this it is answered, That it is true, in the New Testament, though
Christ be sometimes called God, yet the more common title given to him, is
(...), especially when God the Father, and Christ are mentioned together, but
as when Christ is called Lord, it does not exclude God the Father from being
the Lord also: So neither when God the Father is called God, does it exclude
Christ from being God. But you may say, Why does the Scripture, if Christ be
God, and the fountain of grace, as well as God the Father, always put Christ
after God? The answer is, That though absolutely as God there be an equality,
yet when personally considered, so that divine order is attended unto, whereby
the Father is of himself alone, but the Son of the Father, especially if we
consider Christ as Mediator: so although God, yet because in that work he is
God-man, and in that office inferior to the Father; hence it is that the
Scripture speaks of him as the fountain, and Christ as the stream, or rather
second fountain; That of God are all things, and by Christ are all things. It
is good to understand these mysteries, so far as the Scripture is a guide to
us, that we be not involved in those damnable Socinian Doctrines which
overthrow these fundamentals.

That which I shall observe is from the relation attributed to Christ, Lord,
viz.

That Jesus Christ is a Lord. Jesus Christ is a Lord.


Thus he is often called in the Scripture; yea Revel. 19. 16. he is said to
have on his thigh this name, King of kings, and Lord of lords. So 1 Timothy 6. 15.
The blessed and only Potentate; the King of kings, and Lord of lords. It Is
observed, that these titles were given to the Persian Monarchs, because of
their transcendent dominion; but here it is applied to Christ transcendently,
even to them also, for he is said to be the only Potentate, as if none were
Lord but him. Hence it is noted of Augustus, as a providential thing, That the
year Christ was born in, he refused to be called Dominus; and so some Christian
great men, would not be called Domini, but Domini diminitively, out of
reverence to Christ; but the word (...), and so Lord may be attributed to men,
as well as King, and head, so that still it be acknowledged, he is Lord of
lords, and that none is Lord like him.

But let us briefly open this Doctrine, that thereby our hearts may be more
raised up with this greatness of Christ; for he is a Lord not only for his own
great dominion and glory; but for the believers good and benefit; it is matter
both of great comfort and encouragement, to know that Christ is Lord. And.

First, We are to consider, That Christ has a twofold Lordship, Kingdom or
Dominion; The one Divines call Natural and Essential; The other Dispensatory
and Mediatory. The former he has as God, and so is Lord in the same sense,
that the Father is Lord. The second he has as he is Mediator, God-man; and
therefore it is in some respects distinct from the former, God the Father is
not Lord in that peculiar and proper respect, as Christ is. For although that
be true, which Divines say, That Christ's natural or essential Kingdom, does
virtually and eminently contain all that his Mediatory does, yet there is some
formal respect to be made. Now as Christ's former Lordship and Dominion was
natural and necessary, so this may in some sense be said to be given him; or as
the Scripture says, Act. 2. 36. He was made by the Father both Lord and
Christ, appointed to be the Lord, and the Head of his Church: Not that this
does any ways evacuate his Divine Nature; as if because he were made Lord,
that therefore he was not so essentially, for nothing was given Christ to
perfect him; what he received of his Father in time, did only manifest that he
was God: for none can be Lord and Head of his Church, but he who is truly God.
If therefore as he is Mediator, it be said to be given him to be Lord, and to
have a Name above all Names, yet this does not deny but prove his Divine
Nature, because none but God can have such power, and do such things.

Secondly, This Official, or Mediatory Kingdom has its degrees; it is militant
and triumphant. Militant, and so the Lord Christ has not as yet subdued all
his enemies under his feet; it does not follow, that Christ is not Lord,
because every thing is not wholly conquered, because there is sin and the
Devil working still. For as David was King, although still there was a great
part to be conquered by him; he was King at Hebron, when he was not made King
over Israel, yet he had a right to all, before he was in actual possession: So
it is with our Lord Christ, he is made Lord over all, only there is time
required, to bring all things in subjection to him. And as for his Triumphant
and consummate Kingdom or Lordship, that will be at the Day of Judgment; when
having saved all his people, and overcome all their enemies, then he shall take
the triumph of all his victories. And here we may take notice how to understand
that difficult place, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. where Christ is said, After all
enemies are subdued, to deliver up his Kingdom to the Father. The Socinians
urge that, to show that his Dominion and Kingdom will be but for a season,
whereas the Scripture in many other places, makes his Kingdom to be without
end, Luke 1. 32, 33. To reconcile this therefore you must know, That the
Apostle does there speak of Christ's Kingdom as it is militant, and in respect
of that Dominion and Government, which now Christ uses in his Church, not in
respect of the Lordship and Dominion it self, Christ shall never cease to be
the King and Lord of his people; only that manner of Government, which now
Christ exercises shall cease, all Ordinances and administrations, the Ministry
and Sacraments, yea all Magistracy and Civil Power, that God might be all in
all; fot then we shall not mediately by Christ approach unto God, as we do
here, but immediately, yet so as all glory and honor will redound to Christ.

Thirdly, Christ was thus a Lord in the state of his humiliation, even in his
very Infancy; as well as after his exaltation and resurrection. And here again
the Socinians blaspheme, denying, That Christ was thus a Lord till his
resurrection. But although indeed the Scripture does often attribute this glory
and great name to him after his sufferings, and upon his resurrection; yet that
is not because he was not so before, but partly because then there was a
glorious manifestation of his Dominion. The Sun did not appear so admirable
in his eclipse: Christ in the state of his humiliation did not so fully and
palpably discover this his greatness, yet for all that he was endowed with it;
and Christ does acknowledge himself to have a Kingdom to Pilate, even before his
sufferings: Yea at his birth, the Wisemen came to worship him as Lord and King;
and when he rode in triumph into Jerusalem, that Prophecy was fulfilled, Behold
thy King comes to thee. And certainly if then he was a Savior, and the
Messiah, he must needs be also Lord and King. Yea, in the greatest expressions
of his humane weaknesses, as in his birth and death, there was also powerful
demonstrations of his Divine Majesty. Neither is Vorstius his Objection of any
value, That because Christ in his Infancy had not that wisdom required to
govern, which afterward he did grow up into, therefore he could not be Lord:
For in Christ, while an Infant, were hidden the treasures of all wisdom, though
these were not actually to be put forth, but when there was an occasion to do
so. There was no defect in Christ to be Head of his Church, while a child,
because even then he could put forth whatsoever was required at that time to
govern the Church with. And indeed to argue, that he was not Lordor King,
because he did not actually put forth himself in that way, is absurd; for
kingly or lordly actions did not make him to be a King or Lord, but because he
was Lord and King, therefore he did as he pleased put forth such actions.
Certainly the Apostle calls him the Lord of glory, even while they crucified
him, 1 Cor. 2. 8. And the Socinians themselves acknowledge him upon his
ascension to be Lord of glory, when yet the greatest instance of his lordly
power is still to be accomplished, which is the judging of all mankind, at that
dreadful Day of Judgment. Christ then was always Lord, both in his state of
humiliation, and also of his exaltation.

Fourthly, This lordly power which Christ has, extends to all things in the
world, he is Lord over the whole world. He is the universal Monarch; for God
has given him all the kingdoms of the world, Rev. 11. 15. The kingdoms of this
world are there said to become the Lords, and of his Christ: Yea in some sense
this great Dominion is given to every Saint, Revel. 2. 26. To have power over
all Nations, even as he has received of the Father. Hence it is said, John 5.
22. That the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the
Son; not that the Father has wholly abdicated himself from the government of
the world, as the Socinians say, but because Christ as Mediator is subordinate
unto him in this administration. Christ therefore has an universal power over
the whole world; And whereas learned men say, One man cannot be universal
Governor over the whole world, much less over the Church, because no man can
have those qualifications fit for to discharge that Government: yet in Christ
this does not hold, because he is God as well as man; but this Dominion of
Christ, in respect of his Church, is of another nature than that of the world,
for he rules the world with a rod of iron, breaking every thing to pieces that
shall prejudice his Church: So that this power over them is wholly coactive, as
they do not willingly own or submit to him as a Lord; so he does by his
omnipotent power keep them under, and makes them servants and vassals for his
work, and to bring about such glorious ends, which they never intended, or
shall have any benefit by, as those that built Noah's Ark, were not preserved
in it. But to his Church, there he holds out a Scepter of grace. For as they
do willingly own him as their King, submitting to his order and laws; so he
takes special care over them, and they may more safely lay themselves down
under his protection, than under the greatest Potentate in the world.

More might be said Doctrinally about this Dominion of Christ; but let us
consider what comfortable and useful improvement is to be made of it. And

1. Is Christ thus a Lord, and that above all Lords? Then what ground is here
for our faith under all discouragements and affections? How little do thou
posfess thy heart with this Lord of glory? Do thou doubt about the pardon of
sin, conquering of corruptions, preservation under temptations? Is not all
this, because thou do not remember Christ is Lord of Lords? Will not he bear
thee up? Does he want either knowledge or power? Especially this should
encourage us in any work for him. Thou fear the frowns of man, the
oppositions of man; thou doubtest thy cause will sink, and is not all this,
because thou look upon earthly power as greater than Christ's power? Was ever
any temporal lord able to do such things, as the Lord Christ? Never than saint
or be discouraged under his work.

Use. 2. If he be our Lord; then here is ground for duty, as well as for
comfort. Joh. 13. 13. Ye call me Master and Lord, ye do well, says Christ; but
from that consideration he puts them upon duty. And certainly, i^ Christ be our
Lord, where then is our honor, our obedience to him? May not he impose what
duties, enjoin the Church what Laws and order to walk by, he pleases? Shall we
be our own lords? Our tongues, our hearts are not our own, but our Lords. Take
heed of being in the number of those who shall deny the Lord that bought them,
2 Pet. 2. 1. for such as do so, bring upon themselves swift destruction. if he
be not thy Lord in grace and favor, he will be thy Lord in wrath, and in thy
confusion. They that said Psalm. 12. 4. Who is Lord over us? found that God
would be above them.

SERMON. XXIX.
Of the Duty of Thankefulness, Blessing and Praising God for all his Mercies.

2 COR. 1. 3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort.
THe Inscription has been fully considered; we proceed to the other parts of
the Chapter, which are,

1. An Exordium. 2. An Apologetical Narration against those calumnies that were
charged upon him by the false Apostles.
This Text is part of the Exordium, or his Introductory beginning to what
matter he was delivering to them, and it is by way of Doxclogie and
Thanksgiving. For the most part the Apostle begins his Epistles with cordial
affectionate blessing and praising of God, and that commonly for the gifts and
graces which God had bestowed on them he writes unto; but here he blesses God
chiefly for those consolations and supports, which he himself had from God; and
this he does partly to give all glory and honor to God, partly to animate and
encourage all to suffer for Christ, they would not be losers by it; and partly
to stop the mouths of his accusers, when they should see that all the
afflictions he underwent did turn to his, and the Churches good.

Now in this Thanksgiving passage, we may observe,

1. The praise it self, expressed in that word (...), Blessed. 2. The Object of
it, God, which is, 1. Illustrated from his relative title to Christ, The Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. From his Efficiency, which is twofold, The Father
of mercies. 2. The God of all comfort.

So that this Text does represent God in a most sweet, comfortable and
ravishing relation to us. The Apostle stands (as it were) here upon Mount
Gerizzim, to bless the people of God, we may here stand and see (as it were)
the glory of God pass by. It is not the God of all vengeance and fury; It Is
not the God terrible in his judgments, that will not in any wise acquit the
guilty, but the Father of mercies, and the God of all consolation. Let then the
troubled and grieved soul, who looks always upon God as angry, as ready to
destroy, bring with the widow its cruises, and fill them with the pleasant oil,
that will run out of this Text. Certainly, if David say of Gods word in
general, That it is sweeter than the honey or the honeycomb, much more is it
applicable to this verse.

I shall begin with the Praise it self, in those words, Blessed be God. Paul,
you heard, begins most of his Epistles in this manner, and some have thought
that all our prayers should begin with thanksgiving, because the heart is
hereby raised up sooner to Heaven. The consideration of Gods love being like
the fire that will put the soul into sweet distillations. But certainly the
method of prayer, whether with confession first, or thanksgiving, is not
commanded, but left arbitrary: Only this the soul must remember, to be as
diligent and careful in praising of God, as praying to God.

To open the word, the Scripture speaks of a threefold Blessing: Of a
threefold blessing spoken of in Scripture.


1. Of Gods blessing of us.

2. Of our blessing of God. And these differ exceedingly. For God blesses us
efficiently by exhibiting his mercies to us. We bless God, not by adding any
good to him, but declaratively only. Gods benedicere is benefacere, his words
are works: but our blessing (as Aquinas on the place) is only recognoscitium,
and expressivum, an acknowledgment only, and celebration of that goodness which
God has.

3. There is man's blessing of man; and that is twofold, either Charitative,
Matthew. 5. 44. which is to be done to our very enemies, Psalm. 129. 8. Thus Job
31. 20. speaks of it by way of comfort, that the poor whom he had refreshed,
blessed him. Or Potestative, and that is, when Parents and Ministers, such as
are in Office and Power, do bless their Inferiors; and this God does more
solemnly ratify and confirm. Thus the Priests, Numb. 6. 23, 24. were in a
solemn manner to bless the people; and in this sense the Apostle argues, The
less is blessed of the better, Heb. 7. 7. And because by blessing the greatness
of a thing is set forth; hence it is used sometimes for consecrating, 1 Samuel 9.
13. Samuel is said to bless the Sacrifice. So 1 Cor. 10. 15. The Cup of
blessing which we bless; Though we must not understand it of a Popish
consecration, although there (...) and (...), may seem to be one thing. And
because those who did bless others, did commonly come with presents and gifts;
hence it is that (...), is used for gifts, and the fruit of liberality, 2 Cor.
9. 5, 6. The Hebrew word to bless is observed by an Antiphrase, to curse; so
it is used three or four times in the beginning of Job; and 1 King. 21.
Eustathius (says Aretius) observes also that (...) is sometimes used for
(...). The Heathens indeed had a superstition, that they thought an ill omen in
words: hence was their (...), expressing terrible things by graceful names, as
(...), when they cursed, so they called it Morbus sacer^: But the Scripture
does not attend to that superstition. It is for gravities sake that it uses
such an expression. Though a learned man makes that phrase in Job, to be a
Metonymy of the consequent, because those do sometimes depart from others, to
whom they used to wish well, saying, valere. Afterward that word came to be
used for a renouncing of all former friendship; so he thinks the word to
bless might signify, that is, to renounce God, and not own his worship more.
But come we to the Observation, which is,

That to bless and praise God for all his mercies, is a duty that the people of
God It is a Christians duty to be much in praising God.
ought to be careful and diligent in.

This cordial, hearty blessing of God is greatly neglected; some are borne down
with the sense of their sins and unworthiness: Some are greatly bowed down
under the several afflictions God exercises them with: Others are devoured
with the worldly cares and discontents of their soul. So that it is a very rare
thing to meet with a Christian that walks with such a cheerful, humble and
thankful spirit, that he studieth all the mercies of God to him, and is not
willing any fragment should perish. As Flies stick always upon the rugged parts
of the glass, and fall from that which is smooth. Thus even Gods own children,
if they have any affliction, if they want but one mercy they would have, this
does more trouble and torture them, than the thousand mercies they have from
God, do refresh and revive them. That therefore we may make conscience of this
duty, and be much in, that we may, as the Apostle enjoyneth, Col. 3. 17. In all
things, whether in word or deed, be giving thanks to God.

Let us consider how much goes to make a thankful spirit; what will enable
What goes to the making up a thankful spirit.
us, that we shall not always lie among the tombs (as it were) affright our
selves with our own sad thoughts, but entertain comfortable and thankful
thoughts, which shall constantly lodge in our souls. And

First, To this duty of blessing of God, there is required, as the foundation
stone, A deep sense of our own unworthiness of the least mercy that God
bestows upon us. That is excellent of Jacob, Genesis 32. 10. I am less than all
thy mercies. A man that would shoot his arrow high, draws it backward first.
The lower we are in our own eyes, the more unworthy in our own thoughts; then a
very crum of bread, a very drop of water will be acknowledged a great mercy.
Arminian, Popish and Socinian Doctrins do all hinder a man in his thankfulness,
because they do not in a Scripture way, level the mountains of our hearts; they
leave something of our own still, that we must secretly uphold our selves with.
When God gave the people of Israel, Canaan, Deuteronomy. 9 4. How zealously does Moses
endeavor to take them off from their own righteousness? They must take heed,
that they have not the least thought in their hearts about their righteousness.
Oh then consider, what is that Locust and Caterpillar, which devoureth all the
sweet fruit of thy praise, and thy joy in God? Is it not want of a true
consideration, how unworthy thou art? Would thou not call thy self beast for
murmuring and grieving under any burden God lays upon thee, if thou had a
feeling of thy meanness and lowliness? Those therefore who are constantly in a
tender feeling and apprehension of their own unworthiness, if God give them the
least temporal mercy, but especially if they have a drop of any spiritual
mercy; that the light of Gods countenance, though but in glimpses shine upon
them, they cry out, Who am I Lord, and what am I that thou should visit so
unworthy a wretch?

Secondly, He must not only be sensible of his unworthiness, who would
affectionately bless God at all times, but he must also consider what wrath and
vengeance he does deserve. Oh this would be like fire in thy bosom! This would
quickly cast out all those troublesome and disquiet thoughts: What, Oh my soul,
art thou disquieted for want of this or that! What is thy own, but hell and
eternal torment? Are any soul-mercies, are any body-mercies thy own? Can thou
claim a right to them? No, the Law curses thee, because thou do not
continue in all things commanded; so that thou may be cursed in soul, in
body, at home and abroad. Nothing but temporal, spiritual and eternal curses
might compass thee about. Now then, if when God might thus curse, and damn
thee, he does bless and pardon thee; What joyful songs should this fill thy
heart, and mouth with? I have deserved death, but behold life: my merit is hell
and damnation, but the gift of God is grace and peace. As a malefactor, when
thou might justly expect punishment, behold God does to thee as to Joseph,
who under expectation of punishment is raised up to the highest honor in the
Kings Court. Oh then, awe thy soul, saying, Why am I so foolish and bru^^^sh? I
am not in hell, I am not howling in those eternal flames, which I might not be
kept a moment from; and yet how impatient and unquiet is my heart? A full
persuasion then of what we deserve, will provoke the soul to a cordial blessing
of God for every mercy.

Thirdly, There is required the regeneration and renovation of the whole man.
As a wicked man cannot pray to God, so neither can he praise God. Therefore
though natural men may have it often in their mouths; they bless their good
God, and I praise my God; yet to praise God requires a principle of grace
within, a supernatural root, as well as to pray to God. Indeed they may
externally sing Psalms, and give praise to God, even as they pray; but all this
while, there is nothing at the root, all is dead within, Psalm. 147. 1. Praise
is comely for the upright. It Is a comely suitable thing for a man of an upright
and gracious heart, to bless God; but for a carnal profane man, it is as
unseemly, as a pearl on the swines nose; God is dishonored, and not pleased:
Oh then, that this might awaken every natural man! Thou can neither pray to
God, or praise him: Thou can neither receive gifts from God aright, or return
praise to him aright. So that this must be looked to, as the principal and
chief of all. Has God put his own image into me? Has God bestowed the life of
grace upon me? Then praise is seemly and comely for me. Even amongst men the
Rule is, Laudari a laudat is laudabile est.

Fourthly, To bless God and praise him, there is required an heavenly raised
frame of soul. For though the principle of Regeneration be the foundation in
every one, whereby he is enabled to bless God; yet that is more remote, and
habitually only. Hence it is that many of Gods children, though in a state of
grace, yet are not in a praising, thankful temper; they are as so many clods
of earth; they are not affected with Gods goodness; their souls are not
enlarged, and therefore they mourn, because they are such blocks and lumps of
earth. Therefore besides the fundamental principle of Regeneration, there must
be proxim and immediate dispositions, which are as the whetting of the tool;
like the Cocks stirring of himself, and clapping of his wings before he
croweth: and of all dispositions an heavenly heart is the most excellent. Why
is it that in Heaven the glorified Saints do spend all eternity in blessing and
glorifying of God, and are never weary of it? Is it not because all is made
perfectly heavenly within them? If the earth, though a dull and heavy element
be at last transmuted into air or fire, it loses it is former gravity and
dullness, and ascends upwards. Thus the soul when freed from the clogs and
burdens of the earth, does with more ease and speed lift up it self to God. The
Lark all the while she sits on the ground, scarce sings, but when she rises
from the Earth, and the higher and higher still she flies, the more sweetly
and earnestly does she sing: Thus it is necessary, if thou will really and
daily bless and praise God, then raise thy self above the Earth. The nearer to
Heaven thy heart comes, the sweeter will thy meditations be, the more joyful
will thy thoughts be. Hence

Fifthly, Joy and gladness of heart is required to bless God. The Psalmist
often calls to sing with joy. And the Apostle; Is any man merry, let him sing
Psalms? Jam. 5. 13. (...), they say, comes of (...): That heart which is
filled with grief and sorrow, is in no disposition to bless God. As the strings
of musical Instruments, while wet and moist, are not prepared to make any
melodious sound. To bless God with an heavy heart; to praise God with a
troubled disquieted soul, is to contradict with our hearts, what we say with
our mouths. Consider then, that though it be thy duty to humble thy self for
sin, to confess and bewail thy iniquities, yet it is also a duty, To rejoice
in the Lord always; and till the heart be fitted by this joy, thou can nor
bless God with that hearty affection as thou oughtst to do, Psalm. 103. David
says, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all within thee praise his holy Name.
All within thee] You see, to praise God is heart-work, as well as lip-work, all
within us must move and be affected. Thy heart cannot boil over, as the
Psalmist sometimes expresses it, unless this fire of joy does inflame it. Oh
then know, that a grieving, disquieted soul cannot bless God, it hinders you
from that duty which the Apostle presses, Col. 3. 16. Admonishing one another
in Psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts.
What an Heaven is such an heart, where there are these spiritual hymns and
psalms? But alas how often is thy heart like an howling wilderness, where the
cries and doleful sounds of unbelieving and distrustful fears do torment thee?

Sixthly, To bless God there is required faith, and a resting of the soul upon
God, as a reconciled Father. Alas can the damned in hell bless God? Could Cain
or Judas bless God? By no means, because there is no faith, there is no resting
upon God as a Father. Hence you see, the Apostle adds, The Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Father of all mercies. To cursed and condemned sinners
God is not a Father of mercies, but of vengeance and fury, a God of dreadful
judgments, who is said to be angry with the wicked all the day long. Hence
David does so often in the Psalms exercise those appropriating, and applying
acts of faith, My God, and my Tower, my strong help and defense. It was his
faith that made him so thankful. For what is it to hear of Christ, and all
spiritual mercies by him, if faith does not apply them, and make them my own?
And then we are stirred up to give God thanks for them, insomuch that faith
has the greatest influence into our thankfulness.

Seventhly, Faith of adherence is not enough to make the heart so thoroughly and
affectionately thankful as it should be, unless also there be (as some call
it) faith of evidence, or a good and true persuasion that God is our God. It Is
the reflecting acts of the soul, whereby it knows, and is assured, that God
has pardoned my sin, and has forgiveth my iniquities, that are like oil to
the lamp of this duty. David in some Psalms depends upon God, and so many
times the choicest of Gods servants, they are supported to rest on him, to
build their hopes on Christ; but then wanting this assurance, not feeling this
love of God shed abroad in their souls; hence they are not fervent and zealous
in these duties of blessing and thanksgiving, as they ought to be. Do you not
see many of Gods people more forward to duties of humiliation and mourning,
more attending to self-debasement and self-abhorrency, then they are to faith,
joy and blessing of God; the one they are constantly in; the other, unless
provoked and forced (as it were) they seldom accomplish. Now this ought not to
be so; we are to rejoice as well as tremble; we are to put both together; we
are to bless God for pardon of sin, as well as confess sin; we are to
rejoice in giving of thanks, as well as to humble our souls in acknowledging of
our sinfulness. Thou often say, Lord pity me, Lord show mercy to me; but how
seldom do thou say, O Lord, I bless thee, For thy mercy endures for ever! My
heart has been full of sorrow for sin, and now it is full of joy for the
pardon of it. I have prayed that my corruptions may be subdued, and I bless God
that prayer is graciously answered. If you win a mercy by prayer, and do not
wear it by praise, you greatly offend God.

SERMON. XXX.
Of Praising God, and that for all, but especially for spiritual Mercies.

2 COR. 1. 3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
FRom the method that Paul uses here, and in the beginning of most of his
other Epistles, we have observed the Duty that lies upon all the people of
God, to be^ careful and conscientious in this duty of blessing and praising of
God, which is as the legal ointment for the High Priest, compounded of choice
and sweet ingredients. It Is an Angelical work to bless God. There remain
further particulars that are constituent of this comfortable and profitable
duty. As

First, The heart that is duly fitted to praise God, though it be thankful
for every mercy, even the least mercy, yet it keeps an order in its
thankesgiving according to the dignity of its objects; so that it praises God
chiefly and principally for spiritual mercies; and then secondarily, for
temporal mercies. And this argues the difficulty of this duty, and that also
only the regenerate and spiritual man can in a Scripture-way bless God, for he
only does prefer heavenly things above earthly. When the Psalmist had spoken
of outward mercies to a people, Psalm. 144. 12, 13, 15. great mercies in sons
and daughters, rich abundance and plenty, he corrects all at last, Happy is
that people that is in such a case, yea happy is that people, whose God is the
Lord. So that you see all the outward desirable mercies that are, are but in a
subordination to Gods favor. When thou art breaking forth after this manner, I
bless God for my children, for my health, for my outward contents. Oh but above
all, Lord, that I have any spiritual mercy, that thou have loved my soul,
converted me to thy self, saved me from the evil ways of the world, in this my
soul is overwhelmed! So then, as we see it is in matter of Petition, Seek ye
first the Kingdom of Heaven. Thus it is also in Thanksgiving, whatsoever
heavenly mercy God has bestowed on thee, bless God for that in the first
place. Thus the Apostle does praise God in a most divine manner, Ephesians. 1. 3.
Blessed be God, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ.
Insomuch that this may be a good Touchstone of the truth of grace in thee,
whether thy soul be most affected and enlarged toward God for soul-mercies,
that thou can truly say; O Lord in that thou have made me in a saving manner
to know thee, in that thou have revealed thy Son to me, I do more rejoice in
this, and bless thee for it, then if thou had given me all the glory of the
world! Do thou see a natural worldly man boast in his riches, in his birth,
in his greatness above others, and knows nothing at all of Gods favor and
spiritual mercy to his soul? This is like a beast that is crowned with
Garlands, but yet prepared for the slaughter. Can thou say, O Lord, I judge
all the outward mercies I have to be but husks, and empty shells, in comparison
of that Manna, that spiritual favor I am made partaker of. As therefore the
spiritual man, when in outward miseries and straights is not so much grieved
under those outward calamities, as because he has sinned, and God is offended:
So neither in outward mercies is the same gracious soul, so much affected with
the comforts it enjoys, as that the light of Gods countenance does shine upon
him, that he has an evidence of propriety and interest in Christ, this he
would not lose for all the Kingdoms of the world. Let us press this the more,
because even the most holy are apt to be affected more with sensible mercies
than spiritual; Nature teaches them the one, but Grace the other. For as we
are apt to desire temporal things above spiritual, so also to be affected with,
and bless God for one more than another.

But take these few Motives to provoke thee to bless God for spiritual mercies,
Motives to be more affected with spiritnal mercies than temporal.
which are of two sorts, External, as the means of grace, and the Ordinances;
or Internal, the inward sanctification and justification of our persons. As

1. That if thou had more mercies than Solomon, if thou had all thy soul
can desire in these outward things, yet if without spiritual mercies thou
judge thy condition is cursed, and to be lamented. Therefore Psalm. 4. when
the natural persons of the world cried out, Who will show us any good? David,
as knowing a better and more solid good, prays, God would lift up the light
of his countenance upon him: And therefore he that has the least drop of
grace, is more bound to bless God, then he that may have all the glory and
plenty in the world: Oh then, why art thou not more sollicitous, saying, what
is this wealth without Gods favor? What is it to say, this house is mine, this
estate is mine, but am not able to say, God is mine? but if God does evidence
himself to thee, then overlook all thy outward comforts, put the Ecce, the
Selah, upon what is spiritual. This is like the Sun, which is far above all
the Stars. It is this that makes all outward mercies, mercies; they are no
ways good to thee, but snares and temptations to draw out thy sins. So that
thy condemnation in hell will be the hotter, if thou do not enjoy spiritual
mercies with them.

2. Be in the first place affected with spiritual mercies, Because Christ
showed his love to thee most in these, it was for these he died. The Scripture
does exceedingly commend to us the love of Christ in his death. Now what are
the effects of Christ's death? Are they chiefly to make us rich, great or
honored in this world? No, it is for remission of sin, it is for holiness and
power over the Devil. Certainly, if Christ died to purchase these for thee,
thou art very unthankful, if thy heart be not most enlarged to bless God for
them.

3. Spiritual mercies are the chiefest object of our praises, Because these
only can truly satisfy the soul, these only are a sound cause of rejoicing.
The heart of a man is never satisfied with temporal mercies; but the more he
drinks of them, the more thirsty still he is. When Solomon has made an
experience of all, his Motto is, That they are vexation of spirit, as well as
vanity; whereas the pardon of sin, and the Spirit of Christ working in us,
these afford uninterrupted causes of joy.

4. The soul-mercies will abide for ever, thou can not lose thy title and
interest in them; but all these earthly comforts are as the flower which
presently withers; thou have them to day, and they may be removed to morrow.
Be sure then, that thy blessing of God, keeps that method which the nature of
mercies does require above all things. Let thy soul melt with joy in blessing
of God, for what he has done to thy soul.

Lastly, Consideration, remembering, and fixed meditation upon the mercies of
God, is that which will greatly inflame the soul to give all glory and honor
to him. The heart is not easily and quickly put into a blessing frame; there
must be polishing and fashioning of it; and there is no such way for this, as
true consideration. When David calls upon himself so much to glorify God, this
implies, that he found his soul dull, heavy and unfit for that duty. The heart
will not boil over in meditation, unless it be long upon this fire. Psalm. 45.
1. David there calls his inditing, the boiling or bubling of his heart; we are
apt to forget Gods mercies, or when we do think of them, they are but
transistory and ambulatory, It is Gods goodness, or I bless God, and there is
all; whereas when we bless God, our souls should be raised up into divine
inflammations; we should be as Elijah, who was carried up to Heaven in a
Chariot of fire; whereas the soul is at other times abridged or epitomized, but
in short characters, in the praises of God it should be voluminous, as you see
David in Psalms 103, 104, 105, 106, and 107. very large in the enumeration of
all Gods benefits, which intimates, That the soul ought to be extended in all
its dimensions, while it sets upon this work. And certainly, meditation is like
the birds sitting on the egg, not leaving it, till it has produced a live
young one. This will so often work upon the soul, that at last there will be
heavenly and supernatural life; for several aggravations will the meditating
heart find in every blessing it does possess. As

1. It will admire the power and strength of God in every mercy, especially in
soul-mercies; That God should change such a stubborn heart as thine was; That
God should give thee eyes to see, that have been blind so long; That God should
give thee life, who wast dead and putrefying in the grave of sin. This will
make thee wonder at the glorious power of God.

Again, The Wisdom of God, if that be considered in every mercy, this will
also greatly enlarge to thankfulness. Gods mercies are not only mercies in
themselves, but they come in such fit seasons, they are at such times and
opportunities, that this makes them double mercies; and so some have observed
this difference between blessing and praising of God; Blessing of God is,
because of the goodness of the mercy; Praising is for the wisdom and curious
workmanship of God, as it were in that mercy. As if a friend, who also was
himself the maker of a curious Watch, should bestow it upon you as a gift, you
would not only thank him for his love, but praise his skill and art likewise.
Thus we are not only to consider the mercies God gives us, but the wisdom
that God demonstrateth at that very time, making every mercy to be with an
aggravation.

Again, Meditation will inflame, by apprehending of Gods freeness in every
mercy, and our unworthiness. We could do nothing, that may provoke God;
especially this we are to aggravate in our spiritual mercies, as Paul does
often, excluding our works, and giving all to the grace of God, who works
according to his own purpose and will. Oh what coals of fire will this be in
thy bosom! To think, why does God do this to me? What moves him? Is God
necessitated to it? Can he not do otherwise? Would he be unjust, if he did it
not? And this further will be aggravated, when we consider the mercy
comparatively with others that want such; if for spiritual mercies, we compare
them with the damned Angels, that are utterly cut off from the least crum of
any spiritual mercy, though so noble and excellent creatures, may not this
astonish thee? And if thou say, These are not of the same nature with thee;
How many are there of the same flesh and blood, in the same vicinity where thou
live, of the fame calling and profession, yea of the same parentage, and yet
they are forsaken by God, and left to their natural deserts, whereas he has
pitched his favor upon thee, to justify, sanctify, and at last to glorify
thee? Certainly, thou art a stock and a stone, if such discriminating mercy as
this does not affectionately possess thee.

In the last place, The universality of the mercies thou enjoyest, will much
heighten in the consideration of them. All that thou see, thou hear, thou
eatest, thou feel, yea thou think and apprehendest, is a mercy. There is
nothing within thee, without thee, or about thee, but it is a mercy. To hear is
a mercy, to see is a mercy, to think without madness and distraction, is a
mercy. Every thing that is not hell, is a mercy to thee. All the creatures, as
Psalm. 8. the Sun, the Sturres, the beasts of the field are wholly mercies; if
then a man set himself to meditation after this manner will he not find the
goodness of God, like Ezekiels waters, To ascend higher and higher, till they
come over his head.

But to finish at last this Subject, take notice of the encouragements to this
duty of a thankful, blessing and praising soul, that so if thy heart at last be
thoroughly raised up to this duty, thou may praise God, for this truth that
provokes thee to praise him. And

First, The more thou blessest God, the more will thou have cause to bless
him. Motives to bless God for all his mercies
For to the thankful heart, God multiplieth his mercies, as many times,
because thou do not take notice of his goodness to thee, or look upon his
mercies as a debt to thee, or thou take the mercies God has given thee; and
usest them as weapons against him, therefore he takes away thy mercies from
thee, to make thee prize them the more; whereas to the soul that takes every
mercy, as the hen, every drop of water, and immediately looks up to Heaven,
that will take up every fragment, that nothing be lost: As thou blessest God
declaratively, God will bless thee really: Christ will bless thee, as he did
those few loaves by multiplying of them.

Secondly, Consider this is all thou can do to God, for all his several
mercies. What does God require of thee, after all that he has done for thy
soul and body? Is it any thing else, but to magnify his name, to give him the
glory of it? And this does not at all add unto the greatness of God, he is not
made the more perfect and blessed in himself by all the glory thou give to
him. So that indeed it is the greatest glory that thou art capable of, that God
will accept of blessing from thee, that he will own praises out of thy mouth,
that he does not rebuke thee, as Christ did the Devils, when they confessed, He
was the Son of the living God.

Thirdly, This blessing and praising of God, will keep thee in a joyful,
active, and fruitful way. Those that sing at their work, dispatch it with
greater facility: And thus it is, the soul filled with cordial thankfulness to
God, does more for God then many others, who are clogged with dejecting and
discouraging thoughts: See whether the cause of all thy heaviness, yea the
prevailing of lusts and passions upon thee be not want of cheerful blessing of
God, The joy of the Lord is our strength.

Lastly, Consider the example of David, how unwearied he is in this work, never
thinking that his soul does enough herein; and therefore because he cannot
discharge this duty to his desire, he calls upon all the creatures of the world
almost to help him therein, yea the very Ice and Snow, and such inanimate
creatures; how much more Angels and men, must join with him to praise God. In
Austin's time, some were named Deo gratias, certainly we should so abound in
this duty, that it may be truly said unto God, as Psalm. 22. Thou inhabitest the
praises of Israel.

SERMON. XXXI.
How Christ is the Son of God: And how the consideration thereof is the
foundation of all a Christians comfort.

2 COR. 1. 3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
THe Duty of Blessing, with the Object of it being dispatched, let us now come
to that Amplification and Illustration, which the Apostle ufeth in describing
of it. And

The first is, From a personal and relative respect, The Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ; Even the Father] (...). That particle is by way of interpretation
and explication. What he means by God, viz. That he does not take the word,
as it is often, absolutely for the essence of the Divine Nature, as common to
the three Persons; but relatively, and in the distinct personality of the first
Person, and therefore said to be, The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. For the
particle (...), as Stephanus observes, may be rendered by Et, sed, tunc, etiam,
etc. as the subject matter requires. The Apostle does in other places delight
to use this expression, Romans 15. 6. 2 Cor. 11. 31. Ephesians. 3. 14. In which
places the Apostle seems with much affection and cordial enlargement to make
mention of this relative Title in God the Father; for this is the treasure of
our comfort; herein are all our mercies contained, that we and Christ have the
same Father, he by Nature, and we by Grace. So that we are not to consider of
Gods paternal relation to Christ, as a speculative doctrinal truth, but as
practical, and the ground of all consolation to us. Hence John 20. 17. Christ
by way of comfort tells them, He ascends to his Father, and their Father. And
indeed without Christ we cannot behold him as a Father, but as a severe and
dreadful Judge. Only when we say, this Doctrine of the Fathers relation to
Christ a Son, is so full of comfort, you must not understand it absolutely
and nakedly, as the second Person in the Trinity, but as assuming the humane
Nature into a Personal Subsistency; Therefore he says, The Father of Jesus
Christ, which is the description of his Person in both his Natures. So that we
must not look upon the Son as the second Person alone in the Trinity, but as
assuming our Nature; for otherwise the truth would be no ways comfortable to
us, if the Son of God had not also been made man. The Observation shall be
the words in the Text, viz.

That God is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ.


Which truth shall be first explicated, and confirmed Doctrinally, and then
illustrated Practically. As for the Doctrinal part, the Socinians they have
raised up much dust, and have obscured the point, with their subtle heretical
depravations. For whereas the Church of God formerly did believe Christ to be
the Son of the Father by eternal generation: They deny this reason, and assert
some new ones of their own invention. Yea, and the Remonstrants also, though
they assert Christ's Sonship from the Father by eternal generation, yet they
affirm also a second way of communication of this Sonship, and that is, By a
gracious vouchsafing of supreme power and glory to him. So that they must
acknowledge two filiations in Christ, the one Eternal, by that secret and
ineffable generation; the other Temporal, or in time, viz. A gracious
communication of supreme power and glory to him. But this is false, as is to be
showed. But to explain this, Consider,

First, In the Scripture we read of four ways, whereby a person may be
entitled Propositions explaining, how Christ is the Son of God.
to be the Son of God, and to have God his Father. (For as for that more common
and general notion, whereby God is said to be a Father in respect of Creation,
and so to all men, Isa. 54. 8. And the Apostle sanctifies that expression of
the Poet, For we are his off spring, we do not here meddle with.) And

1. There is a Son of God by Creation after the Image of God. Thus Adam, Luke
3. ult. is called, The Son of God, and the Angels also, Job 1. 6. These are
the Sons of God, and have him for a Father, because they they were at first
created after his Image in holiness.

2. God is a Father by gracious Adoption. Thus all believers have received The
Spirit of Adoption, being thereby enabled to call God, Abba Father.

3. A Person is said to be the Son of God, by communication of some power and
office. Thus our Savior argued from the less to the greater, That if they
were gods, to whom the word of God came, viz. who were appointed by God to be
Magistrates, how much more was he God?

Lastly, There is the Son of God by eternal generation, and thus Christ is
only. Hence he is called, His only Son.

Secondly, Take notice, That Christ is called the Son of God, only from one
respect, and that is because of eternal generation from the Father. It is not
my purpose to enter into a Dispute about this secret and unspeakable mystery.
This is enough for us to know, That Christ is never called the Son of God, or
God said to be his Father, but because of that eternal generation, as the
Apostle proves, Heb. 1. from Psalm. 27. Thou art my Son, This day have I
begotten thee, which is so attributed to Christ, that thereby he has a
supereminency to all the Angels, who yet are called the Sons of God, upon a
gracious foundation. Hence

1. Christ is not called, The Son of God, because he is predestined to be
the Mediator of his people, 1 Pet. 1. 20. For he is not therefore the Son of
God, because foreordained to be Head of his Church; but this latter does
presuppose, and is grounded upon the former, because he was the second Person
in Trinity, and Son of the Father, therefore was he ordained thus to be a
Mediator for his people.

2. Christ is not called the Son of God, because of his Incarnation, or that
wonderful manner of the production of his Humane Nature in the womb. Indeed
some orthodox Divines, and so Maldonate the Papist do grant, That Christ was
called the Son of God, because of that extraordinary conception, Luke 1. 32,
35. for the Evangelist seems to favor such an interpretation, because when
the Angel had said, The holy Ghost should overshadow the Virgin Mary, he
presently adds, Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee,
shall be called the Son of God. Now though these men hold Christ was called
thus, the Son of God, because of that extraordinary and peculiar way of the
production of his Humane Nature, yet they acknowledge his Sonship by eternal
generation also. But it is well observed by other learned men, That it is an
impudent concession to the adversaries of Christ's Divine Nature, to grant
Christ is ever called the Son of God, but because of eternal generation. And
therefore that expression, Therefore also, etc.] is not an argument from the
Cause, but the Sign: That extraordinary conception was not a Cause, but a true
and sure Sign, that he was the Son of God, and therefore it is said, He shall
be called, not be the Son of God, which relates to the manifestation and
notification of it. And no doubt the Angel does allude the ninth of Isaiah,
where a Virgins bringing forth a Son, is made a Sign of his being Emmanuel,
God with us. For if this extraordinary conception had been a cause of this
filiation, he would rather he called, The Son of the holy Ghost, then of God
the Father, because immediately conceived by him. Neither is that of Maldonate
true, excepting against this interpretation, That a pure man might have been so
conceived by the holy Ghost, and it would not follow that he was God properly.
For besides that, it is a bold assertion to say so, we must take this
extraordinary conception in its circumstances, as it was fo promised by the
Prophet, and thus it could not agree to any but to God.

3. Neither is Christ called the Son of God, because of his sanctification and
mission into the word, as John 10. 35. Nor

4. Because of his Resurrection from the dead. His eduction from the earth, as
it were a womb to life, being like a new birth. Nor

5. Because of his being placed at the right hand of God, Heb. 1. 4. For
although in those Texts, Christ is proved to be the Son of God by his
Sanctification and Mission into the world, by his Resurrection, and by his
Exaltation, yet not so as if these did make him to be a Son. So that he was
not a Son before, but by way of declaration and manifestation. When these
things were done, there was a plain discovery that he was the true and proper
Son of God, he was the Son of God from all eternity; but none could so
rise, and be exalted, but he who was so. And therefore the Socinians, who make
Christ the Son of God by degrees, by his Incarnation, and first, and
afterward more perfectly a Son in his Exaltation, do most palpably wrest the
Scripture.

The Sum therefore of this Discourse is, That as Christ was called the Son
of man, only because born of a woman; so the Son of God only, because by
eternal generation he was of the Father. Therefore the Apostle asks this
Question, To which of the Angels (then much less men) said he, Thou art my
Son, etc? which must be in a peculiar transcendent sense; for in a common
general one, Angels are called the Sons of God. And indeed to be a Son by
eternal generation, and then afterward by gracious communication does imply a
contradiction. For amongst men, he that is truly such a man's son by natural
generation, can never for any adventitious reason, be properly called his son
afterward. If then God be the Father of Christ by generation, then he is not
by any other supposed ways of gracious communication. And that Christ is a
Son in a transcendent way to Angels and men, appears fully by the
expression of the Apostle, Heb. 5. 8. Although he was a Son, (...), yet learned
obedience by those things in which he suffered. From whence we say, Christ was
a Son, not according to his Humane Nature, for so he was to show obedience,
Mal. 1. 6. but in that sense wherein he could not obey, viz, in his Divine
Nature: Therefore it is a discreet Axiom or Proposition, Although he was a Son.

This being laid as a foundation, let us come to consider this as a ground of
our How Christ's being the Son of God is the foundation of a Christians comfort.
comfort. For you may say, Why is God to besa blessed by us? Because he is the
Father of Jesus Christ. For what does that appertain to us? Indeed to wicked
and ungodly men, who perish in their sins, this makes no more for their
comfort, then for apostate Angels, whose nature Christ took not upon him: But
as for the godly, the true believer, this is the foundation of all their
comfort. For

First, In that he is the Father of Christ, by this means he comes to be the
Father in him. For seeing Christ is ours, then he who is the Father of Christ
must be our Father also, as will appear in the second place. But the first
consideration of comfort is, That Gods paternal relation to us, is grounded
upon the Fathers relation to Christ; Christ merited at Gods hands, that he
should be a reconciled Father with us; for without Christ, God is not the
Father of mercies, but a dreadful and terrible Judge, He is a consuming fire,
and we cannot with any confidence draw nigh to him, but through Christ; God
assumeth a new relation to us, of a Judge he becomes a Father. So that we see,
this is the fountain of all our comfort: Therefore is God a Father to us,
because he is to Christ; and this is the reason, why the Apostle mentions (as
you heard) this Title so often with Doxologie, because without Christ, God is
not a Father; We cannot expect a drop of mercy, or the least glimpse of favor
from him.

Secondly, This relation of God the Father to Christ, is of great comfort to
us, because of our union with Christ. When we by faith are made one with
Christ, then we have the same Father as he has; and this is a second ground of
our comfort. The Apostle calls him, The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
because our Lord, our Jesus, therefore God is our Father, The Devils and wicked
men, because they cannot truly say, Our Christ, therefore they cannot call God,
Our Father. It Is then our union with Christ, that does entitle us to God a
Father, as well as Christ himself. As it is with the wise, when married to an
husband, then the husbands father is her father, and what relations he has,
she is also received into. Thus it is here, when the soul by faith receives
Christ, he is thereby made the Son of God, and a coheir with Christ: They
have now the same Father; Christ is become their brother to them: Oh what an
unspeakable and glorious privilege is this, that Christ should not disdain us,
or be ashamed of us, but call us brethren, and make us to have the same Father
with him I Did faith improve this by lively meditation, what joy and quietness
would it produce in our hearts?

Thirdly, This is greatly for our comfort, Because though there be some
distance and inequality, yet we may upon the same general grounds plead the
bowels of a Father, and all the effects of fatherly love, as Christ himself
may. Will not the Father deny Christ? neither will he us. Will not the Father
reject Christ? neither will he us; he is become a Father to us, as well as to
him. Indeed there is a great disproportion between Christ and us in this
paternal relation; he is by Nature, we by Grace; he is the only begotten Son,
we adopted sons; he is perfectly holy, and the meritorious cause of this
relation for us. Therefore the Socinian doctrine is to be abhorred, who makes
Christ's Sonship, and that of believers, to differ only in degrees, not in kind.
Yet in the general, because by him, God is made a Father, we may improve it, in
what we have his promise for, as Christ himself did. Hence 2 Samuel 7. 14. what
is spoken of Solomon, as a type of Christ, and in the general is true of all
believers, the Apostle Heb. 1. applies to Christ, as in such particulars:

1. The fatherly love and bowels which Christ found from God in all his
exercises and agonies, the like may we expect to find. Did Christ say, when his
Disciples left him, That he should not be alone, because the Father was always
with him? The same may every true believer affirm, when he may be left alone;
if in persecutions, thy friends, thy acquaintances forsake thee: If father and
mother (as David said) should leave thee, yet this Father is always with thee.
So that although thou art not comparable to Christ, either in thy natures,
persons or graces, yet remember the same fatherly love is common to both. Hence
Job. 17. 23. That they may know that the love wherewith thou love me, is in
them. In them] by way of sense and experience, by way of knowledge and
certainty.

2. As God is a Father to Christ thus in love, so also he was in hearing of his
prayers, which he put up as man, or as Mediator. Father (says Christ) I know
thou hear me always, John 10. And therefore in that wonderful prayer of
his, that his soul poured out before his death, his compellation unto God is,
Father. And thus also God being a Father to us, he will hear all our requests
that are according to his will. It is true, God the Father hears his only
begotten Son Christ, because of the full and absolute Image of himself in
him. There is no sin, no blemish, nothing blameworthy in Christ; but in us
there are many imperfections: There is just cause to reject our prayers; but
yet because we are in Christ, therefore for Christ's sake, and in his Name they
are accepted, his incense perfumes their prayers. It is through Christ's
obedience, that God smells a sweet savor in our holy performances. So that
Christ indeed he was heard for his own sake, and in his own Name; but we are in
Christ's Name. So that you see the redundancy of that paternal relation to
Christ in his benefits even to us also. Other properties we might enlarge in,
but it is easy to the good heart to suggest them to its self, as the eternity,
and the unchangeablenesse of this relation to them, as it was also to Christ.
Hence 1 Pet. 1. Christ being from all eternity and unchangeably foreordained
to be their Head; they were also then comprehended in that gracious Decree of
God. Only this difference you must always observe, That God becomes our
Father otherwise than Christ; for the Father begat him from eternity, not by
grace, and from his mere free will, as if he might have (...) begotten him: No,
for he was the Son of his Father, by a necessity o^ immutability (though some
add, we may say his generation was both by nature and free will, as not being
inconsistent with one another:) but as for us, God makes us his sons from his
mere good pleasure; he might have refused to adopt any one to his Son; he
took infinite delight in his only Son, which was from all eternity: So that
it was the riches of his grace, and the freeness of his bounty to adopt us for
his sons, with Christ his natural Son.

Use of Instruction. Is God our Father, by being the Father of Christ? Does our
union with Christ, entitle us to that Father, and other unspeakable benefits,
which he has? Then let the Christian soul meditate on this more. Adam and
Angels were the sons of God, but that was by creation; God is thy Father upon a
more certain and enduring ground, which is union with Christ. What enemies are
you to your own peace and grace, while you look upon your selves as divided
from Christ? If the wife make her self a distinct person from her husband, she
has no benefit by the Law, she cannot recover any advantages, but all must be
done in her husbands name, and in his title. Thus it should be with thee; pray
in Christ's name, comfort thy self in Christ, meditate upon God in Christ. The
time is coming, when Christ only will be in request, when at the day of
Judgment, the voice shall be, Go ye cursed, because not in Christ; Depart into
everlasting fire, because not in Christ. This then speaks nothing but terror
to the ungodly, who are not branches in him; they cannot have the least
comfortable or hopeful thought of God; being not in Christ, they have none of
Christ's righteousness.

SERMON. XXXII.
How God is a merciful Father, the Father of all mercies to his children.

2 COR. 1. 3. Blessed be God, -- the Father of mercies?
THe next considerable motive in God, who is thus to be blessed, is from his
relative Attribute to us, The Father of mercies; if every mercy be a stream
issuing from him the fountain; if every favor be a ray, which has its
emanation from that Sun; then no wonder if always, and in all things we are to
bless and praise him. Its Bernards observation, he does not say, Pater
ultionum, etc. the Father of revenge and of judgments, which yet he is to all
wicked men, but of mercies, that is to such as fear him. So that the Apostle
does here represent God, in the most sweet and lovely relation that may be to
the truly godly; They must not think fury and vengeance is in him toward them,
though sinners, but that through Christ all enmity is taken away, and they may
with boldness come to him as to a Father; even as the child does securely rest
in his Fathers bosom.

The words have no difficulty, they are a fountain opened, no stone is to be
removed, that the wearied soul may drink thereof. Observe,

That God is a Father of mercies, or a merciful Father to those that are his.
God is a merciful Father to all his children.


So that our work will be to treat of that Attribute of God, which renders the
meditation and thoughts of him comfortable to us. For if he be holy, but not
merciful, if infinite but not merciful, if omnipotent but not merciful, he
would be a consuming fire to us. It is good therefore for the contrite sinner
to hear of this Attribute, ineffabili desiderio teneor cum audio, bonus Dominus.

To open this rich treasure, that is able to enrich all, who will come and take
of it. Consider,

First, That God has such an Attribute of mercy. The Scripture does not only
represent him Wise, Just and Almighty, but Merciful also, Jam. 5. 11. God is
(...), He is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. The former word is from the
bowels that use to move, when we are affected compassionately with any
miserable object. So that Gods mercies they are bowel-mercies, he does not only
do good to us; but to speak after the manner of men, he is compassionately
affected unto us, while he does so. Hence Luke 1. 78. they are called (...),
The bowls of mercy: But whether mercy may be attributed to God properly, is
disputed, The Socinians they deny mercy to be an essential property to God,
even as they do vindicative Justice. The Stoics they denied mercy to their
wise man. Seneca grants clementia and benignitas, but not misericordia, for
they defined mercy to be egritudo animi, a sickness and grief of the mind,
which arises from another misery: And why is it called misericordia, Yarch
Austin, but because it does make miserum cor. Therefore if we stick to these
definitions of mercy, as it is in man, who has compassion, because he has
passion, we are not to attribute it to God, but seclude all humane
imperfections, and look upon it as an Attribute in God, whereby he does will to
help and relieve such as are in misery, so it is ^^ivently in him; and as there
is none good but God, so we may say, there is none merciful but God. The mercy
then of God is infinite, as his own nature, and do has rarre transcend all our
sins and miseries, as the Heavens do a molehill, only there is not
perturbation in the holy Nature of God, which we find in our compassions.
Anselme expresses it well, Thou art merciful, O God, Secundum nos, non
secundum te, secundum sensum nostrum non tuum, cum tu respicis nos miseros, nos
sentimus miserationis effectum, tu non miseriae affectum. God then is
merciful, as well as just, and thousands of places in the Scripture speak of
this mercy of God very largely.

2. It is good to know, that the mercy of God is taken in Scripture sometimes
Actively, for that essential Attribute in him, as Exodus 34. 6, 7. where the
Lord himself proclaimed his own Name, Merciful, Grucious. Long-suffering, etc.
Though Divines do give notional differences between his Goodness, Mercy, Grace,
and Long-suffering, yet I shall not attend to that. Or Passively, for the
effects of his mercy, as here in the Text, The Father of mercies; so when God
does threaten to take away his mercies, that is, the effects of his mercy, not
the attribute of mercy. This you must diligently attend to, because the effects
of Gods mercy are more and less, but the attribute in God cannot be so, God is
not more or less merciful; neither does Mercy as an attribute oppose Justice,
as an attribute, but the effects of Gods Mercy may be, and are contrary to the
effects of his Justice.

3. We must distinguish between Gods general mercy, and his special; His
general mercy is extended to all the creatures, The whole world is full of his
mercies, Psalm. 33. 5. So his mercy is said to be over all his works. Would the
world subsist for a moment, when the Inhabitants thereof are so full of
rebellion against God, were it not for his mercy? All that we see, we hear, we
taste, we feel, is nothing but mercy. His special mercy is to rational
creatures, men and Angels; and that again is twofold, More special, and most
special. More special, is the vouchsafing of the Gospel, and means of grace,
both to the wicked and the good. This Kingdom of Heaven is set open for both.
But then there is the most special mercy, and that is vouchsafed only to the
elect, by which means they are converted, justified, and shall be glorified;
and of this it is the Apostle speaks, Romans 9. 15. I will have mercy on whom I
will have mercy.

Thus much may suffice for the Doctrinal information about this truth: Let us
What is implied in Gods being called the Father of mercies.
in the next place take notice, what is comprehended in this expression, Father
of mercies. For this is a box of ointment to be opened and bestowed upon poor
souls; and while this glory of God does pass by, we can see but the back parts
of it.

First, When he is said to be the Father of mercies, this implies, That he
only gives mercies, and receives none. So that as the father gives being to
the child, but receives nothing of the child: Thus God he is the Father of
mercies, because he is absolutely sufficient in himself; he needs nothing
from any, because then there would be a superior to God. And this
consideration may greatly aggravate the glorious Nature of God in being
merciful, in that he himself is like the Sun giving light, but receiving none
at all. We cannot say of Angels, they are the Fathers of mercies, because
though they be ministering spirits to serve us. An Angel was sent to comfort
Christ, yet they need mercy as well as we. The river needs the spring, but the
spring is the last, and needs not the river; and so Angels and men they need
mercy every way, but God he needs none, only he is the giver of all, It being
more blessed to give than to receive, even in this sense.

Secondly, When he is called the Father of mercies, it implies, The
voluntariness and readiness in God to it. Psalm. 103. Like as a father pitieth
his children, etc. We do not entreat or hire a father to pity a miserable
child, his own bowels persuade him to it. Now this is much more in God. For as
the Psalmist argues, He that made the eye, shall not he see? So he that gives
bowels and pity to parents, shall not he much rather be merciful? So that as
it is for holiness; if all the holiness of men and Angels were put together, it
would be but a drop to what is in God: So if all the mercy, and all the
compassions of all the fathers and mothers in the world were joined together,
it would be nothing to God. Oh what dishonor does thy unbelieving fearful
heart do to this merciful Father! Thou think he has but the mercy of a
man; thou judge of his bowels according to thy own; no Gods mercy is as much
above thy sins and miseries, as his Essence is above thy being. O nomen
(misericordia) sub quo nemini desperandum: But of that more presently. Only
when he is called a Father of mercies, that denotes the readiness in God, and
willingness in him; and this is remarkable in Gods mercies, over what is in
man's; our mercy is many times, because the object miserable, is of our own
flesh, and nature with us. It moves the heart to see one of the same nature
with us to be thus miserable, but God he is infinitely above man, he has no
communion in nature with us, and yet he is merciful. Again, Mercy amongst men
is often, because we have been under such miseries ourselves. They that have
the pain of the stone, commiserate those that are in the like manner troubled,
because they know what it is. Thus many eminent Ministers of the Gospel, are
exercised with soul-temptations and desertions, that they may know how to mourn
with bleeding bowels over those that are so tempted. Thus the mercy of Christ
as Mediator, differs from the mercy of God, as absolutely considered. For he
was tempted like us in all things, sin only excepted, Heb. 4. 15. and the
reason of this the Apostle gives, That he might be touched with a feeling of
our infirmities. Christ knows what the meaning is of every groan, and every
sigh that comes from a child in darkness, crying out, Why has my God forsaken
me? Thus Christ as Mediator is merciful in another way, then God is; yet this
advances still the mercy of God, that whereas his blessed and perfect Nature
cannot know experimentally what it is to be miserable, what it is to need
mercy, yet for all that his breasts are full. and no womon is in greater pain
to be eased of her burden, then God to bestow his mercies.

Thirdly, In that he is a Father of mercies, a Father, there is implied, That
he does lay our misery to heart. For although he cannot be passionately
affected, as man, nor is sensible of our infirmities, as Christ was, yet this
does not hinder, but that our misery is taken notice of, as really so, as to be
succored by him, as if it were in the most compassionate Father that is. That
expression of God concerning the Israelites miseries under bondage is
remarkable, Exodus 2. 24, 25. He heard their groaning, he remembered his
Covenant, he looked upon his children, he had respect or knew them. See here
ears, eyes, memory and mind, all are affected with their trouble. So Isa. 63.
9. it is said, In all their afflictions, he was afflicted. As then anger
against wicked men, though in God it be not the ebulsition of blood about the
heart, or accompanied with a pale countenance, yet it is more really, and
dreadful in God than in man. Therefore better have all the men of the world
angry with thee than God. So it is in his mercy, in him mercy, though it have
not humane concomitants, yet it is more real, operative and efficacious, than
all the merciful fathers in the world is; and thou had better have God show
mercy to thee, than all the men of the world. For

In the fourth place, when he is said to be the Father of mercies, there is
implied, The real and lively working of it. The father though he pity his
child, yet cannot give him the mercy of health, much less the mercy of grace.
Ministers, though they be spiritual Fathers, they can only pray for mercy,
preach of mercy, but to give you pardon of sin, to give you comfort of
conscience, and assurance that they cannot do; but God is the Father of these
mercies, he can give joy to the soul, and neither Devil or sin can
discomfort. As the whole creation came out of the womb of nothing at first;
when God said, Let there be light, immediately there was light; and as God is
called, The Father of rain, Job 38. 28. because he can open the bottles of
Heaven, and refresh the parched earth when he pleases; so also he is the
Father of mercies, because he can turn thy darkness into light, thy hell into
Heaven; yea he does it, that so what many Sermons, many Ordinances could not
do, that God suddenly and insuperably does, he comforts irresistibly, as well
as converts irresistibly. But of this more in the next property, viz. A God of
all consolation.

Fifthly, In that he is the Father of mercies, there is implied, That it is
only from himself that he pitieth us, that he has something within him to
provoke to compassion, when we have enough to provoke him. And this is
represented in that precious Parable of the Prodigal son returning to his
Father; Though there was cause enough from the son, to alienate the Father to
upbraid him with his prodigality and rebellion, saying, Whence come you? Where
are all the goods I gave you? Yet for all that, The Father runs to meet him,
kisseth and imbraceth him, who might have chastized him, receiving him with as
much readiness, as if he had never been such a prodigal son; but what moved
him all this while? The affection of a Father. It Is not then for the godly soul
to be poring and puzling it self always; what is there in me, that may make
God show mercy to me? What have I? What find I in me, that may prevail with
God? Oh foolish and unwise Christian! Think rather what is in God to love thee,
to pity thee. I will go to my Father, says the Prodigal; Though I have lost
the obedience of a son, yet he has not the bowels of a Father; the bowels of a
Father are ready to beget him again. Think what a fountain his goodness is, to
issue forth rivers of mercies. So that it is with thee, as some parched dry
wilderness, it has no springs, no streams to refresh it self with, till clouds
from above fall upon it. Thus thy heart is scorched, and even burning like
hell, till God give thee not a drop of water, but Christ's blood to cool thy
afflicted soul. Thus you see, what is in this a Father of mercies, a Father.

In the second place, what briefly is in the object, a Father of mercies, in
the plural number, and that implies,

1. That there is no mercy, but it comes from God. Every good and perfect gift
is from him, Jam. 1. For if so be any creature were the original of mercy,
though it be but the least; as to that particular, it would be the Father of
mercy; if the Sun of it self were the highest cause of giving light to thee,
if it were not God that did cause this Sun to shine on thee, that Sun would
be the father of the mercy of light. Although therefore God has appointed
natural causes, moral causes, yea and supernatural means of mercy and comfort
to thee, yet take heed of calling these Father. Thy food would not be a mercy
to thee, thy house a mercy; no thy senses, thy understanding would not be a
mercy to thee, were it not for this Father of mercies. So that wheresoever, and
whenever thou meetest with any mercy, look higher than the creature, see an
hand from Heaven giving it thee. As Gerson a devout Papist speaks of his
Parents, how that they to teach him, while a child, That every mercy was from
God; had a devise, that from the roof of the chamber should be conveyed to him
every apple or nut, or such childish refreshments, he desired; but Christ
himself, Matthew. 5. when he pressed against careful, distrustful thoughts, he
says, Your heavenly Father knows what you want. So that it is not thy own
natural father, that is a mercy to thee, but thy Father in Heaven: As that good
man in Ecclesiastical History, when they brought him news his father was dead,
Define blasphemias loqui, pater eminens immortalis est. Thus are we to call
nothing a Father of mercy to us, but God himself. So that what our Savior
says, Mat. 23. 9. Call no man father on earth, in respect of faith and
obedience; neither are we in respect of our mercies. Oh but how difficult is it
not to have other fathers of mercies besides him!

SERMON. XXXIII.
Of the Multitude, Variety, Properties and Objects of Gods Mercies.

2 COR. 1. 3. The Father of mercies.
WE are further to explicate, what is comprehended in this sweet and
comfortable Attribute, The Father of mercies. We have already declared, what is
in the word Father, and gave one instance, what is in the word mercies.

The second thing comprised in it, is the multitude of them; he does not say,
The Father of mercy, but of mercies; it is not one or two, but mercies, many Of
the multitude of Gods mercies.
mercies, innumerable mercies, that he is Father of. Even as David does
sometimes call God, The God of his salvations, in the plural number, because of
the frequent and many deliverances God vouchsafed to him. The Lord therefore is
not straightened in mercy, no more than in power; but as nothing is impossible to
him, so every kind of mercy is easily producible by him. The multitude of Gods
mercies, is that which David does often mention, Psalm. 106. 7, 45. Psalm. 51. 1.
And indeed were not these mercies many, our sins would be more than they, and
exceed them in number. David complains, That his iniquities were more than
the hairs of his head; and yet at another time acknowledges, that such were
the benefits of God toward him, that he is never able to reckon them up. We
cannot then come and say to God about mercies, as Esau did to his father about
blessings, Have thou but one blessing, O my father? Have thou but one mercy?
Woe would be to us, if God had not multitude of mercies, for we have multitude
of sins and miseries. Oh then, let the broken, humble heart, who groaneth under
this, that he has many sins, they are not one or two, but many, yea the
multitudes of them, are like so many locusts and caterpillars in Egypt, he
cannot look this way, or that way, but sin does compass him about! Let such
remember, that there are more mercies for them, then sins against them. If thou
have multitude of sins, God has multitude of mercies to cover them, so as thou
do not cover them, but confess and bewail them.

Secondly, In this expression of Father of mercies, is not only comprehended Of
the variety of Gods mercies.
the multitude of them, but the diversity also, he is the Father of all kind of
mercies, God has an unexhausted treasure of mercy. Therefore the Scripture
calls God rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. Though God be rich in wisdom, in power,
yet the Scripture calls him only rich in mercy, as if herein he did most
excel. Now from this treasury arise all kinds of mercies. Do not say, God may
by his mercy help me in this particular, and in that respect, he can give me
bodily mercies, but can he give soul mercies? He can give private mercies, but
can he give public mercies? Yes, we have too low and narrow thoughts of God,
if we limit him to any kind of mercy, he can do the greatest as well as the
least. Let us instance in some kind of mercies. As

1. There are common mercies, and there are special mercies. Common mercies are
those the whole world is full of; He makes the Sun to shine upon the good
and the bad. Therefore our Savior presses us, To love our enemies, because
God is thus merciful even to his enemies; Is not the whole earth, every
Village, every Town full of the common mercies of God? How come so many to
live, to subsist upon his cost and charges? Whence is it that all the people in
the world are provided for? Is it not from the mercy of God? Lam. 3. 22. It Is
the Lords mercies that we are not consumed; That famine, war, plague and
other judgments, do not sweep away all the inhabitants of the earth; That the
whole world does not fall into ruins; This is from Gods mere mercy. That all
are not roaring in hell, it is the mercy of God. Now this common mercy is the
more admirable, if ye consider what kind of persons they are to whom he is thus
merciful, even to his very enemies, that hate God; and if it lay in their
power, would destroy him, that he should not have a being. Oh the mercy of God
that is continued to many a profane beast, and many a malicious Devil, to what
is good! Why is it that every liar is not stricken dead with Ananias? Why is it
that every drunkard quaffing in his pots, does not see a terrible handwriting
in the wall against him? Why is it that the earth does not open to swallow thee
up, while thy mouth is full of cursing and swearing? Is not all this from the
mercy of God? Oh how little does this mercy of God lead you to repentance,
whereas it is vouchsafed to you for that end! Let it not be despised, because
it is common. For though God be thus often merciful, yet sometimes his
judgments are terrible to profane men: They are suddenly destroyed, while
they are in their drunken fits, and it is Gods mercy that what has befallen
others does not also come upon thee; but after thy impenitent heart, Thou
treasurest up wrath against the day of wrath; Now is the day of mercy, but then
will be a day of wrath. There are special mercies, such as the godly are only
partakers of, To be called, to be justified, to be sanctified, etc. Oh what
heart or tongue can express the happiness of those, who have these mercies! How
sacrilegious are those Doctrines, that do not make God wholly and solely the
father of these mercies, but they make themselves, and their own free will, to
be yoynt-fathers with God in these mercies? But as Austin of old urged, If I
cannot make my self a man, which is the lesser, can I make my self an holy man,
which is the greater? If there is not the least temporal mercy that thou can
procure by thy own power, not a morsel of bread, not a drop of water, can
thou by thy own strength obtain the greatest of all? Though it be said, The
sword of the Lord, and of Gideon; yet it cannot be said, the vocation, the
justification by Paul, and by Christ; but Christ alone does these things in us
and for us, though by his grace we are also sanctified and enabled to do that
which is holy.

Again, There are soul-mercies, and there are bodily-mercies; There are
spiritual, and there are temporal mercies, now God is the Author of both. We
may sin by unthankfulness for either of them; if thou take thy
bodily-mercies as due, thy health, thy sleep, thy preservation from daily
dangers, in this thou wrongest the goodness of God; for if he take away his
hand but for a moment, thou can not subsist. And as for soul-mercies, whether
the natural ones of it, as thy wit, thy understanding, thy fancy, thy senses,
God is the Father of them: Or the spiritual ones, there he is much more; if
thou have repentance, faith, assurance, a gracious contented heart in every
condition, these are mercies of mercies, but God alone is the Father of them.

Furthermore, There are preventing, or privative mercies, and there are
positive mercies. Now the Rule is, Plures sunt gratiae privativae quam
positivae, more privative favors than positive. Did not God prevent, what
innumerable evils might arise every day to destroy thee? When we pray for daily
bread, in that we comprehend all kind of outward bodily mercies; so that if the
Lords hand were not always giving, we could not abide a day. Now seeing that
by sin we are made obnoxious to all the curses in the Law, To be cursed at
home, and cursed abroad. How manifold are Gods preventing mercies to us? What
evil might every day bring forth to thee? What a sad night might every night be
to thee, if Gods preventing mercies did not compass thee about?

Lastly, We might instance in private mercies, and public mercies. But what
has already been spoken, may abundantly confirm us, That God is the Father of
mercies.

In the next place, Let us consider the Property of Gods mercy. And Of the
Properties of Gods mercies.


1. He is infinite in mercy, as well as in other attributes. So that this
fountain can never be drawn dry, he has mercy enough for thee and me, and for
all the humbled sinners in the world: If all the Nations of the world are but
as a drop to him, so neither are all the sins of the world, but as a drop to
his mercy. No sins are too many, or too great for Gods mercy. And truly this
consideration alone, is that which does revive and establish the drooping soul;
for if it were but the mercy of a creature, if it were finite mercy that thou
had to do with, woe and again woe would be unto thee. The Prophet Isaiah
speaks fully to this, Chap. 55. 7, 8, 9. where there is an encouragement given
to the wicked, To forsake his evil ways, because God will have mercy, yea he
will abundantly pardon, or multiply to pardon; and whereas the sinner might
think, Surely God will never do so, to such an heinous and wretched sinner as I
am; the Prophet tells us, Gods thoughts are not as our thoughts, but as the
Heavens are higher than the earth, so are his ways, viz. of mercy to our ways.
As then the earth is but like a pins head, in respect of the vast dimensions of
the Heavens; so are all our sins comparatively to Gods mercy. If then thou have
great thoughts about thy sins, saying, They are greater than thou can bear,
yet have as great thoughts of Gods mercy, and know they are not greater than
mercy can take away.

2. As it is infinite mercy, so they are tender mercies, bowels of mercies.
Psalm. 40. 11. David prays, God would not take away his tender mercies from
him. Hence he is compared both to a Father and a Mother. Oh take heed then of
dishonouring God, by hard distrustful and unbelieving thoughts about him!
Think not of him as an austeer Judge, who reapeth where he does not sow. The
Devil, and our guilty consciences are apt to represent God otherwise than he
is. Indeed while thou art secure and stupid in thy sins, thou think of God
as an Idol-god, having no eyes to see; or thou presents him only a merciful
God to thy self, as if he were not also holy and just; but when once sin
burns in thy heart like fire; when God makes thee a terror to thy self,
because of thy wickedness, then all is turned; Thou think of the justice and
vengeance of God only, as if he had no mercy; but when thy sins are a burden to
thee, and thou do in the sincerity of thy heart forsake them; then think of
God only, as the Scripture represents him; then hearken what mercy, comfort and
peace he speaks to such a contrite soul as thou art.

3. They are sure mercies to all the godly. Isa. 55. 3. They are called, The
sure mercies of David. For all necessary mercies, either for soul or body, they
are bound up in Gods promise; and therefore they may well be called sure
mercies; even those thou have not yet, are as sure mercies, as if thou wast
already possessed of them. Glorification and salvation are the sure mercies of
God to thee, though for the present thou art in a valley of tears, sighing
under thy miseries.

4. They are free mercies, such as God does only for his Names sake, when we
have nothing but sin in us, that may justly provoke God to turn his mercies
into judgments, yet for his own sake he will be merciful. Though we have lost
our grace, yet he has not that attribute of mercy. Thus Psalm. 6. 4. Psalm. 31.
16. David still prays, Save me for thy mercies sake; So that this may greatly
encourage thee, when thou think, Oh what a barren and dry wilderness am I!
Oh what matter do I find in me, to displease God for ever! In the midst of
these thoughts remember Gods mercies are free; They have no other original or
rise, but from himself. Think though I have degenerated from my holiness, yet
God can never lay aside his mercy.

But you will say; Is this truth to be indifferently published to all? May we
tell every one, that God is the Father of mercies to him? Will not this be to
make the heart of the wicked glad, whom yet God would have made sad?

To answer it therefore first, It cannot be denied, but that God is very
merciful even to wicked men, and that while they continue in their obstinacy.
Does not experience confirm this? And this mercy of God is not only seen in
temporal things, he gives them health, life and wealth, so that they can never
plead against God; but also he is merciful to many ungodly wretches, and that
in spiritual mercies, he gives them the kingdom of grace, he gives them the
Ministry of the Gospel, he allows them the day of grace, whenas they might
have been always kept up in darkness. Hence it is that the Scripture does so
often complain of the unprofitableness, of the unthankfulness and forgetfulness
toward him, even worse than of the bruit creatures.

But in the next place, There are the most special mercies of his complacency
and delight, and these are vouchsafed only to true believers. So that we cannot
properly say, God is a Father of mercies to any but to the upright in heart.
For though wicked men do taste of many mercies from God, yet he is not a
reconciled Father to them; They come not from him as a Father in Christ; and
therefore though in themselves they may be called mercies, yet if you consider
the event of them, how the wicked abuse all mercies, and increase their sins by
them, it will be at last confessed they were not mercies, but judgments to
them. The mercies then which arise from Gods favor none have but those that
are godly; and we may in brief take these Characters of such who are Objects of
his mercy.

First, Such as are of a broken contrite heart for sin, such who forsake and
cast Who are the fit objects of Gods mercies.
it away in their lives. To these only God is a Father of mercies: For as for
the wicked, it is said, God is angry with the wicked every day. To whom does the
justice of God, the curse of the Law belong, but to those that are thus guilty
of sin? The doubt then is not, Whether God be merciful? but whether thou art
the fit subject of mercy, whether thou art the man God will honor.

Secondly, Such only are the Objects of his mercy that have faith in him, that
hope in his mercy. Hence David does so often profess his trust in Gods mercy.
For there is either a pharisaical self-righteousness in us, whereby we are apt
to trust in our righteousness, and in the works we do. We see by the Jews of
old, and most Christians at this day, that they are so full of themselves, that
they never trust alone in Gods mercy, or else if sin be set home upon the
conscience, then many prove Cains and Judasses, they fly from the mercies of
God in Christ, and damn themselves for fear of damnation; so that presumption
makes most, and despair some few, the unfitted objects of Gods mercy; misery
alone does not prepare thee for mercy: The Devils and damned in hell are
miserable enough, yet cannot obtain one drop of mercy; but there must be a
debasing of thy self, because of sin, and then raising up of thy self to catch
hold on mercy.

SERMON. XXXIV.
How God is the God of comfort, yea of all comfort and consolations to all
those that are his.

2 COR. 1. 3. And the God of all comfort.
THe next ground, why God is to be blessed, is, because he is a God of all
comfort. Now although this might seem to be the same with the former, when he
is styled the Father of mercies. Yet we may make that distinction, which
Aquinas upon the place gives, viz. That he is a Father of mercies, because he
does either prevent, or remove those miseries, that our sins do deserve; but he
is the God of all conselation, in that, though our afflictions and tribulations
be not taken away, yet while we are in them, he does give many consolations,
and causes much joy in the heart. God therefore is called the God of comfort,
in this respect, that though for just and wise ends, he will not deliver his
people from sad exercises, yet he will in those exercses give them such strong
cordials, and sweet revivings, that they shall not only have patience to bear
them, but even joy in them.

So that in the words we may take notice of what he is said to be, a God; and
then the Extent, or Universality of it, a God of comfort, and a God of all
comfort. The Greek word (...), is used sometimes for exhortation; and sometimes
for comfort; for exhortation, Act. 13. 15. Romans 12. 8. and for comfort in many
places. In 1 Cor. 14. 3. there is (...) and (...), Exhortation and comfort put
together. Some say, therefore is the same word put for exhortation and comfort,
because spiritual consolation is hardly received by the afflicted humbled
sinner; and therefore he must again and again be pressed and exhorted to
entertain it; for the Devil is the prince of darkness, and father of terrors
and fears, and so immediately opposite to this glorious Attribute in God, The
God of all comfort. The holy Ghost from this word is called (...), the
Comforter. So that although by way of economy it is attributed to him in an
appropriated manner, yet that does not exclude the Father. For opera ad extra
sunt indivisa, but (as was formerly said) this fountain does not need any stone
to be removed from it, and therefore we may immediately drink of it. Observe,

That God is a God of all comfort to such as are his. God is a God of all
comfort to all his children.


The Apostle is not content to call him only the Father of mercies; but as a
further aggravation of his goodness, represents him to us, as a God of all
consolation. For though he be a Father of mercies, yet because a Father, he
does chasten and correct us; it is necessary therefore that under those
corrections, we should be supported by heavenly consolations from him, Romans 15.
5. Paul does in that place also style him, The God of patience and consolation;
the God that gives us to be patient and lowly under his hand. For who is not
furious and fretting against God under chastisements, if God give not a meek
and patient spirit? But that is not all, he is also a God of consolation, that
is more than patience; he gives songs in the night; he turns our water into
wine; Though tears may be for a night, yet joy comes in the morning.

But let us consider, how much is comprehended in this expression, The God What
is comprehended in that expression, God is the God of comfort.
of all consolation, wherein every word has some emphasis. As

First, In that he is said to be a God of comfort, a God, that intimates these
things to us:

1. That he has a supreme power, and independent Dominion and Sovereignty over
us, whereby he distributeth comfort, when, where, and to whom he pleases. For
in being a God of it, that supposes all comfort is at his command; he makes it
go where he goes, and he takes it away where he pleases. Hence we read in
Scripture a cup of consolation, Jer. 16. 7. and a cup of salvation, Psalm. 116.
3. and Psalm. 23. 5. David speaks of his cup running over, that is, a cup of
gladness and joy. Now why is it called a Cup? Expositors say, It Is an allusion
to the master of a feast amongst the Jews, whose custom was to assign the Cup
of praise, and thanks to those who were to drink of it. In that then it is
called the Cup of gladness, that supposes it to be a cup in Gods hand, who is
the chief governor of the world, and that he gives those to drink, whom he
approves of. Even as the Scripture speaks also of a Cup of astonishment, a cup
of anger and fury in his hand, which he will make nations to drink off whether
they will or no, Jer. 25. 28. God then has a cup of joy in his hand, and he
gives his people to drink of it, when he pleases; we cannot have joy and
comfort when we please. The godly afflicted soul would give a world for comfort
in his heart, but he cannot procure a drop to his own soul by his own power.

2. He is a God of consolation, and that supposes him to be alone the
efficient cause of it. That if we would have our sad and darkened hearts filled
with joy, it is God alone that can do it: So that as he is called, The God of
all grace, because there is no grace, whether outward or inherent that we are
made partakers of; but it comes alone, and freely from God the fountain: So is
he also the God of all comfort, because it is he alone that works this comfort
in us. The least affliction, the least sin in its guilt, would be enough to
overwhelm us, did not God come in with comfort. David under the sense of Gods
wrath for his sins, and complaining of his broken bones, Psalm. 51. does
earnestly pray to God, To restore joy to him again. Alas he was never able to
bring joy more into his soul: But as when the Sun is set, all the men in the
world cannot make it rise again, it would be perpetual night, if God did not
make the Sun to arise. So the godly heart humbled for sin, would find
continual blackness and horror, would be in a perpetual hell, if God did not
create light in that soul. Hence Gal. 5. Joy is made the fruit of the Spirit,
because it is the Spirit of God that can only comfort the heart truly. Indeed
there is much carnal and worldly joy, that men may for a while sport themselves
with, but this is no true enduring comfort; It is but a vapor, a dream, a
blaze, like the tickling upon a scratch, that leaves more smart afterward. He
is therefore a God of consolation, because God only can vouchsafe it.

3. He is the God of comfort, because whom he will comfort, shall be comforted.
As he makes men drink the cup of his anger, whether they will or no, so even
those humbled souls, who with frowardness and unbelief set themselves against
comfort; they do with Rachel refuse all comfort, yet God does wonderfully bring
comfort into their hearts. How subtle and resolute are sometimes Gods own
servants, while in darkness, to argue against, and resuse the comfort, that the
Ministers of the Gospel bring to them; They will not let the good Samaritans
pour oil into their wounds. But when God comes with comfort, then these
boisterous winds and waves will presently be silent. Hence David, Psalm. 4.
acknowledges, God had put more comfort in his heart, then they had in the
abundance of all earthly joy. God did put it into his heart, even with a kind
of holy irresistibleness; when he comforts, neither sin, or the Law, or the
Devil can discomfort. Insomuch that it is great matter of praise to God, when
the soul has been at the very borders of hell, and has been ready to be
swallowed up with overmuch grief, that then, even then God has caused joy to
arise in the soul, so that all his doubts, all his darkness, they are
dispelled; and as the Church said, When their captivity was turned as the
streams in the South, they were like men in a dream. Thus are they even
astonished to see what a wonderful alteration God has made upon them, turning
a barren wilderness into a pleasant pool. Thus God comforts, as he teaches;
none teaches like him; for he does not only reveal the object to be known, but
prepares and fitteth the subject to understand: whereas man teaches only by
propounding Truths, but cannot give a mind to understand. Thus God also
comfort, as no friend can, no Minister can, because God does persuade the
heart; he can take away the fears and the doubts, and so make all comfort to
have an immediate illapse into the soul: whereas even the Ministers of the
Gospel, though they bring the glad tidings of peace; Though they have the
tongue of the learned to speak a word in season to the afflicted soul, yet they
can bring this no further than into the ear, they cannot make it at all descend
into the heart; insomuch that Ministers comfort in vain, and the Sacraments
they seal comfort in vain, till God do alter and change the heart. And thus
much is considerable, because it is said, The God of consolation.

Secondly, What is implied in the word Consolation: And

1. We are to know, this is one of the sweetest mercies in all Gods
storehouse, comfort What is implied in the word consolation.
and consolation; and that in this valley of tears, where we meet with so much
discomfort, where there are so many grieving and tormenting passages. This
makes the mercy to be of greater moment. For what if a man had the abundance
his heart can desire, yet if he have no comfort in any thing, a dead man, yea a
dead dog is better than such an one. Insomuch that a man's whole life is almost
for nothing but a comfortable life. Comfort and delight is so great a matter,
that some Philosophers placed utmost happiness therein. Look over the whole
world, and you will see, not every man that is most wise, or most great, not
every one that lives in most abundance and most honor, but he that lives
most comfortably, lives the life most to be desired. Yea many time a Crown of
gold is a crown of thorns; and a cottage has more comfort than a Palace. So
that the mercy here spoken of, is the salt that seasons all conditions; without
this a man is no better than a Cain, or a Judas; without this every house and
field is an hell. When therefore it is said, The God of comfort, here is
insinuated the most desirable thing that can be. Yea, it is no wonder to hear,
that if a man has wealth and honors, but without comfort, that his life is a
torment. For although a man have true grace, and be an eminent servant of God,
and therefore will be certainly blessed hereafter, yet because he has no
comfort in his soul, his condition is very terrible and sad: As you see it was
with Job, yea with Christ himself, though the only Son of God, yet because
without comfort, when at the same time he was full of grace and holiness, what
grief and agonies did he conflict with. So that your comfort is like oil (it is
called the oil of gladness) for it will be always uppermost in the soul.

2. Comfort is such a rare mercy, that unless God give it, it is not to be
found in the heart of a man. For how can comfort and sin be together? Every
man has by nature forfeited all his comforts. There is not the least drop of
comfort, but every man has outed himself of it; so that man and the Devils are
all alike in respect of deserts. As the Devil cannot any where gather up so
much as a crum of a comfort, so neither might any man living. The whole world
might justly become an hell, and not one drop of comfort to be found in it.
Therefore that God is a God of comfort to a believer, it is an unspeakable
mercy, for of himself cannot come any comfort, nothing but briars and thorns,
nothing but hellish torments and despair, will naturally arise in our hearts.
So that comfort is the more to be prized, because we have lost all, and might
justly be as full of horror and fears, as we are of sin. As sin has abounded,
so not grace, but vengeance might abound much more. Hence

In the third place, Therefore is God a God of consolation, because Christ has
made a full atonement for us by his blood. Such a glorious expression as this,
could not have been true in the world, but for Christ; if no Christ, then no
comfort. Hence in the Text it is said, The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
then follows, The God of comfort. So that as we are to pray in the name of
Christ, so we are also in his name to offer up praise and thanksgiving. It Is
then through Christ alone, that he is a God of comfort; and indeed without
Christ, he is the God of all wrath and vengeance, of all anger and judgments;
his holiness and justice is such, that were it not through him, he would be a
consuming fire, and the most holy man would not be able to stand in his sight.
So that it cost Christ dear to make a way and passage of comfort for us.

Lastly, God through Christ being thus the fountain of all consolation, hence
it is that he does most genuinely and properly of himself, show mercy and
vouchsafe comfort. Even as the Be of it self makes honey, but never stings,
except when provoked. Thus if we walk not always comfortably, if we live not
in holy joy and gladness of heart, this arises from our selves. The vapors
that turn into storms and thunder come from our own bowels, otherwise God would
always be communicating consolations to us; we shut out the light from us, we
turn sweetness into bitterness. Thus the Psalmist says, That God does not
afflict willingly. The works of justice are commonly called alienum opus; but
Gods works of justice are his proper works, as well as of mercy; only our sins
stir him up, and provoke him to the one, but his mere goodness and mercy
inclines to the other, so that now God would always fill the hearts of his
children with rejoicing, did not they obstruct it themselves.

In the third and last place, he is said to be the God of all consolation.
There is How he is a God of all consolations.
the extent of it, All consolation, which implies,

1. That there is no consolation but comes from him; no true and solid
comfort, but God bestows it. As for that profane and wicked mirth, which the
Devil stirs up ungodly men unto, that is not worth the name of joy, it is a
madness, for they descend quick as it were to hell from these jollities; all
true comfort is from God.

2. There is implied, That God has a storehouse of all kind of comforts,
whatsoever thy necessity and wants are, he can comfort thee. It is not every
comfort that will heal every wound, but God has a treasury of all; if thy soul
need comfort, he can comfort that; if thy body need comfort, he can do that. Oh
then, let not these consolations of God seem a small thing to you! Job 15. 11.

SERMON. XXXV.
Some Propositions clearing the Doctrine of Gods Mercy, from both Doctrinal and
Practical Objections.

2 COR. 1. 3. The God of all comfort.
WE shall now put both these descriptions of God jointly together, having
already considered them severally. For seeing in the mercy of God is all our
hope, Christ has this Rainbow about his Throne. And although it may affect us
to hear, that God is Wise, Omnipotent, of glorious Majesty, yet nothing is so
suitable and proper for poor sinners, as to hear of Gods mercy. Therefore I
shall at this time enlarge further about it, and so conclude. And that which I
shall deliver, shall be laid down in so many Propositions, which will be to
obviate either Practical or Doctrinal Objections. And

First, The mercy and comforts of God, this glorious Nature of his, whereby
Propositions obviating practical and doctrical objections about the mercy or
comforts of God.
he is ready to pity those that are miserable, is so to be managed in the
public preaching thereof, that it be a sovereign Antidote against all despair,
and yet a curb against all presumption. For so it falls out, that we can
hardly open the treasures of Gods mercy, and discover the glory of his grace
and goodness to the humbled sinner, but presently the carnal profane heart is
ready to encourage himself thereby. It is therefore the part of a wise
Dispenser of this glad tidings, to consider the subjects with whom he has to
do, and accordingly to publish terror to whom terror is due, wrath to whom
wrath is due. And then on the other side, peace to whom peace belongs, mercy to
whom mercy belongs. Though therefore God style himself, The God of the
fatherless, and the widow, that he is pitiful to such as are miserable: Though
very wicked (it may be) and profane, yet this is with a general mercy only;
his peculiar and special mercies are only to those that fear him. If then a
man go on wilfully in his ungodly ways, if he will still retain his
transgressions, he must not think to find God merciful to him, he will find
David's prayer fulfilled, Psalm. 59. 5. Be not merciful to any wicked
transgressour. This bread is for children, not for dogs; yet how difficultly
can we keep such off from applying this mercy to themselves? Those are commonly
most confident of it, to whom it does not belong; therefore beastly men are
barred off from coming near this Mount; This pearl is kept from Swine. When we
meet with broken contrite hearts, here we display the mercy of God with all our
might; To such we say, Gods mercies are infinitely more than their sins; That
although they had the sins of all the men in the world, yet they were but as
a drop to the Sunbeams of his mercy, which will quickly dry them up: To such
we say, God does as easily pardon great sins, as little; as the Sun does
enlighten one place with as much ease as another: To such we say, That it is
their duty to hope in Gods mercy; that they cannot dishonor God more than by
looking upon him, as one who is hardly brought to remit offenses: That it is
Gods will we should come to this fountain, and drink abundantly of it. We tell
them, that they cannot think so much of sin to condemn them, as they may of
the multitude of Gods mercies to save them: To such we say, That when they have
thought all they can, yet there is more in Gods mercy, than they can go to the
bottom of. God is said to forget sins, but he cannot forget his property of
mercy. Thus you see that mercy is so to be held out, as the cloud was in the
wilderness, it was light to the people of Israel to guide them, but darkness to
the Egyptian. The Doctrine of mercy is indeed matter of terror to every
presumptuous sinner, for he has nothing to do with it, but it is full of
beauty and reviving to the wounded heart. Hence the whole drift of the
Scripture is to represent this grace and mercy of God to an humbled sinner.
This is the main scope of it. For who could or dare think of God any otherwise,
but a consuming fire, till the Scripture has revealed him otherwise? And
indeed the Parable of a Shepherd fetching home his lost sheep, is comfortable;
yet Christ exceeds that Shepherd, for he sought for his sheep, as goods that
he needed, that he wanted; but Christ does for us, whom he does not want, he is
well enough without us. Again that also is a refreshing Parable of the Father
entertaining so mercifully his prodigal Son; but yet Christ exceeds that
Father also; for there the Son came first and humbled himself, and entreated
for favor; but God he does first seek us out by his mercy; We do not choose
him, but he chooses us. Though Vorstius does distinguish of special grace to
believers, calling one ordinary, which God vouchsafes to those who seek him in
the use of means; and another extraordinary, which God (he says) sometimes but
rarely vouchsafes, and that is, while men never think of God, yea in ways of
opposition to God, as the Gentiles and Paul; yet indeed we may say of all that
are converted, That God thinks of them before they think of God. It is he
that prevents them; his grace finds them out, and prepares them for mercy.
Again, Christ compares himself to the Physician; but what Physician heals as
he does? Other Physicians they make their Patients sick and bleed, to help them
to health; but Christ, he himself is wounded, and his blood is shed for to save
us. All this is to show, That we cannot imbolden and encourage the sincere
converts enough; but the more hopeful and confident thoughts he has of Gods
mercy, the more pleasing it is to God.

Secondly, We must not judge of Gods mercy without Scripture Light and
guidance, for if we do, we sholl thereby encourage our selves in wicked ways,
and yet say, God is merciful. And truly this is the poison that many suck
down, they judge of Gods mercy according to their own humane pity and
compassion; and thereupon never consider his Justice, his Wisdom, his
Holiness, as well as Mercy. So that this is diligently to be considered that we
must not apprehend of God as full of mercy and comfort any otherwise than the
Scripture does manifest him, and that will be salt to season you against the
abuse of Gods mercy, so as to turn his grace into wantonness. How many are
there undo themselves for want of a Scripture consideration of Gods mercy, both
Doctrinally and Practically. As

In the first place. What is the reason, that some have embraced that old and
unsavory Doctrine of Origin, That all both men and Devils after so many years
in hell, shall be released from those torments? Why is this? But because these
misericordists conceive of Gods mercy without Scripture-grounds. They think it
does not stand with the pity and compassion of God, to let so many thousands of
his creatures lie roaring in hell, and he never deliver them. But is not this
against Scripture, which calls it everlasting fire, and that there shall never
be any coming out of that prison, That of their torments there shall be no end?

Again in the second place, There are those that do with open mouth cry Of the
Calvinists Doctrine concerning Gods absolute Decrees, and how they stand with
the mercy of God.
down the Calvinists as blasphemous against Gods mercy, and making God to be
more unmercifull and cruel, then any Tyrant that ever lived: Because (say they)
such do hold, God did by absolute, and irrespective fatal Decrees, appoint the
greater part of mankind to sin, and then for their sin to damn them. As
Tiberius, desiroes to put a vestal Virgin to death, caused her violently to be
defloured, and then because she was defloured, he put her to death. But

First, Here is a false and an odious representation of the Calvinists
Doctrine; and if their opinion, as they truly state it out of the Scripture, be
thought to be against the nature of Gods mercy, it is because they do not
consider Gods supreme dominion, his Justice and Holiness, as well as his Mercy.
But that the Calvinists do not any ways diminish the gracious and merciful
Nature of God, by their opinions in the Doctrine of Election, efficacious
Conversion, etc. will easily appear to those that are candid and ingenuous. I
suppose Election to be an Act of mercy, relating to our misery in Adam's fall,
though the learned Doctor Twiss disputes much against it, Lib. 1. contra
Armin. digr. 9. For

1. They hold, That there is no man is damned, but for his sin; Their
destruction is of themselves. Neither do they say, That God by any Decree
compelled Adam to sin at first, but Adam sinned as voluntarily, and as
freely, as if God had made no permissive Decree about his fall. It is true
indeed we say, That God has predetermining Decrees efficacious about what is
good permissive, about what is evil; but yet we say, These Decrees do not alter
the nature of second causes, but according to the nature of them, so is Gods
providence attempered thereunto. Therefore we acknowledge that of Austin's,
Malevola est illa misericordia, quae facit esse miserum, ut misereatur, That is
cruel mercy, which makes miserable, that it may show mercy; Adam did
voluntarily sin, so that God was not to be blamed.

Neither do we call those Decrees of God Absolute and Irrespective, as if
hereby all means were excluded from accomplishing the end we are elected to.
When God elects a man to salvation, we say, in this Election is comprehended
holiness, as the way to happiness. And therefore to impose such an Irrespective
Decree upon the Calvinists, as if their meaning was, God had decreed to save
some men, whether wicked, or not wicked: That it was all one, whether profane
or godly. This is an horrible calumny. It is true, we say, it is Absolute,
because God did not look to any thing in us, as a cause, or a merit,
antecedently to his Election, yet we say, God elects to faith and holiness, as
well as to salvation. Therefore we do not injure the merciful Nature of God;
but they do his holy, just and wise Nature; yea they diminish his grace and
mercy in our Election, and attributing too much to man. For whereas the Apostle
says Romans 9. It is not of him that wills or runs, but of God that shows
mercy; They will make it to be as well of him that runs, as of God that
shows mercy: And though in words they seem to give the priority to Gods grace
and mercy, yet in reality they do not. If then that of Austin be true, Gratia
non est gratia ullo modo, nisi sit gratuita omni modo, then all those are
enemies to the grace and mercy of God, who take in the least measure from it.

3. We do not enervate the mercy of God, in holding, the Election of some only
to eternal life, because God might justly, if he had pleased, damned all, and
none could have accused him for want of mercy. For has not God bound up in
chains of darkness all the apostate Angels? Are not every one of them condemned
to eternal torments? Yet they are more noble and excellent creatures, than man
is. Oh then the mercy of God that any is saved, seeing that all might justly be
damned!

Lastly, Not to enlarge on this, God is merciful in this Absolute Election,
duly explained, because hereby a very great number are sure to be saved. God by
this Decree of his, will so work in time, that they shall be called, justified,
and at last glorified; for Election will obtain. Now does not this Doctrine
more commend the mercy of God, than the Arminians Conditional Decrees?
Notwithstanding which, no man in the world may be saved. For notwithstanding
Gods Decrees and Will, to save all men, notwithstanding Christ's dying for all
men, yet they acknowledge it possible, not any one man be saved. For God (they
say) leaves a man to the good use of his Free Will, he does not alter or
change by his efficacious and wonderful grace any man's heart; and if God do no
more, who then can be saved? They cannot instance in one Heathen, that ever yet
used his naturals well, thereby to partake of supernaturals. So that if all be
left to man, and God should not show mercy, no one man would be saved.
Therefore our Doctrine is a merciful one, and theirs is cruel.

In the third general place, The Socinians, they blame all the Orthodox, as
evacuating the mercy of God, because, we say, that the Justice of God being
satisfied through the blood of Christ as a ransom, we thereby obtain remission
of sins. Now (they say) how absurd and contradictory is this, God is
satisfied by a just payment to pardon sin, and yet it is the mere mercy of God
to forgive it?

But to this we answer, That though the pardon of sin be of Justice to
Christ, yet it is wholly of mercy to us. It is not any thing we could do, that
might procure pardon; if we could merit or satisfy the Justice of God by the
works we do, then indeed it would not be of grace and mercy to us; but this
Justice is only between Christ and the Father: So that it is wholly of mercy to
us, both in respect that he has found out a Savior for us, as also in
applying the benefits of Christ's death. For though Christ become into the
world, yet how many eternally perish? It is therefore unspeakable mercy to
thee, that thy sins are pardoned, that thou art converted, and so many
thousands abide under the power of Satan and sin. Therefore when Gods mercy
is spoken of in pardoning of sin, it is perpetually in respect of us, not of
Christ. Thus you see, judging of Gods mercy without Scripture Light, into how
many Doctrinal errors it may plunge us.

4. For want of Scripture-direction, the Papist and Antinomian oppose the mercy
of God, but in extreme contrary ways. Though God be merciful, yet he has so
ordained, that none shall partake of his mercies in time, but those who by his
grace are enabled to believe and repent, as the way to salvation. Now the
Papist injureth the mercy of God, for he will have his Faith, Repentance, with
other holy works, the merit and cause of his salvation, disdaining to have
eternal life, as mere alms from God. But the Antinomian to avoid this Scilla
falls into Charybdis, he affirms, a mercy, and that of Justification, even
while we are sinners, before we do either believe or repent. But the
Scripture-mercy lies between both.

In the next place, Let us consider, What Practical Danger we are in, by
conceiving of God as a merciful God, without Scripture-information. And

First, We are apt to flatter our selves with Gods mercy, though we allow our
selves in our sins and iniquities, whereas the Scripture speaks not a drop of
mercy to such Have you not many dreadful examples of Gods anger and terror as
well as mercy? What was the casting of all the Angels into eternal blackness
for one sinful thought, and that the first which they were guilty of, giving
them no space to repent, no day of grace, affording no means for their
recovery? Is not this an instance of Gods severity? But you will say, This was
to Angels, he is more merciful to man. But consider that example of Gods
Justice in drowning the whole world, save eight persons; Does not that proclaim
God is just and angry against sin, as well as merciful; not to spare the
whole world, because it had corrupted its ways, but to drown such an
innumerable company of men, women and children, yea to destroy the whole earth,
as it were? Oh, who can stand before the anger of God! Have we not also a
formidable demonstration of Gods anger against Sodom and Gomorrah, when fire
and brimstone was rained from Heaven, to destroy those Cities, and all that did
belong to them? What had the little children done? They could not be guilty of
those unclean vices, but God cutteth off all. Many other instances of Gods
wrath we have in Scripture, especially the day of Judgment, will be a
dreadful manifestation of it to the wicked, and therefore the Scripture will
inform us in that, as well as of Gods mercy.

A second Practical Error (I shall conclude with) that necessarily
accompanies the thoughts of Gods mercy without Scripture-direction, is to
encourage a man's self in his sins, because God is merciful. Every wicked
person turns this honey into gall. Paul speaks of some, who made those
wretched inferences, Let us sin that grace may abound. Take heed then of
having any such wicked thought arising in thy heart, God is merciful,
therefore I will go to my lusts again: Oh no; the Scripture represents Gods
mercies for another end, to repent and be converted from thy evil ways, Romans
2, Know thou not the goodness of God would lead thee to repentance. Oh then
do not abuse the mercy of God! for there is a time coming when there will be no
more mercy. It Is called the day of wrath; thou shall meet with nothing but
terror, Ezekiel. 8. 18. The Scripture speaks of vessels of mercy, and vessels of
wrath, and there is no greater sign of a vessel of wrath, one fitted and
prepared for destruction, then to grow wanton by the mercies of God, to be
evil, because he is good; so much mercy abused will one day be turned into so
much vengeance.

SERMON. XXXVI.
That God not only can, but does actually comfort his People, and how he does
it.

2 COR. 1. 4. Who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves
are comforted of God.
IN the former verse we had the Reasons of our blessing of God set down, by the
description of that glorious attribute of his, The Father of mercies, etc.

In this verse the Apostle does further amplify the cause of this duty of
Thanksgiving, viz. from the effect, and fruit of this property of his, He is
not only a God of consolation, habitually and potentially, as it were. He is
not a fountain sealed up; but this Sun does always irradiate its beams; As
he is a God of consolation, so he does comfort.

So that in the words we have the Effect or Causality attributed to God, (...),
who is comforting, that does never cease to do it, that never withdraws his
consolations; It Is his nature to be always comforting. As the Devil is called
(...), because he is always tempting. The word in humane Authors is used
frequently of him, who calls another to him; but in the New Testament either
of him that entreats and prays, or of him that exhorts, or as in the
Text, of him that comfort.

2. The Subject of this consolation, us] That is either generally all
believers, or us Apostles and Officers in the Church. For the Apostle might
speak this to obviate that scandal, which many were ready to take at the
afflictions and persecutions of the Apostles, as if they were hated of God, and
were nothing but impostors. Therefore some part of this Chapter is a narrative
of his pressures and apologetical, in declaring the great goodness of God
thereby to the Church.

3. The particular wherein, in tribulation] Light can come into this dark
dungeon.

4. The Extent of this, All our tribulation] God can turn the hardest stones
into bread: All] either of mind or body.

5. The consequent Effect of this, That we may be able to comfort them, etc.]
God many times does in an exemplary manner exercise the Ministers of the
Gospel, that they may experimentally be able to instruct such who are tempted.

We begin with that efficiency given to God, who comfort, is comforting, and
observe,

That as God is the God of all comfort, so he does actually put forth this
comfort God not only can, but does comfort his children.
to those that are his.

Gods attributes may be truly affirmed of him, though they never be put forth
into act, God would have been Omnipotent, Merciful, Wise, though he had not
created the world, only the creation of the world did demonstrate those
Attributes. Thus God may be called, The God of comfort, or a merciful Father,
in respect of his Nature and Inclination, though actually he does not comfort
any; but God is a fountain communicating himself into streams of comfort, he
will make his people taste and feel what he is by Nature. Now when it is said,
That God comfort, you must understand this both in temporal and spiritual
comforts. That spiritual comfort comes alone from God is plain, because the
Spirit of God is called the Comforter. We cannot have one drop of heavenly
consolation, till Gods Spirit infuse it into us. If the children of God could
have comfort when they will, would they walk so disconsolately, and cry out of
their dark troubled souls as they do, but then even earthly comfort, to take
delight in the lawful contentments God does allow us, to take delight and joy
in these corporal mercies, this is also from God, Eccles. 2. 24, 26. Eccles. 3.
13. Eccles. 5. 18. You see the Wiseman affirms it often, That a man cannot
take any joy or delight even in those lawful things, unless it be given him of
God. All comfort then of all sorts arises from him.

But let us consider the way or manner of Gods comforting. For as it is a great
How God comfort his people.
and profitable Question to examine, How God does convert and sanctify, so
also, how he does comfort? And

First, You must lay this foundation, That God does comfort two ways, either
immediately, when he does by himself work upon the soul: Or mediately, when he
comfort by such means as he has appointed thereunto.

Let us then in the next place consider, What are those immediate workings of
God upon the soul, whereby he makes the heart joyful? For David, Psalm. 4.
says, God had put more joy into his heart, then any man can have in the
abundance of all temporal mercies. And

First, Therefore God does comfort by illuminating and opening the
understanding and opening the understanding, to know and see the grounds and
reasons of comfort. And certainly, this is of great conducement to have the
heart comforted, when the understanding is rightly convinced of the grounds of
comfort. For as the dark night is apt to beget fears and terrors, so darkness
in the understanding is a great cause of all that terror and disconsolateness,
which Gods own children may many times lie under. So that as God in conversion
and humiliation for sin, begins with conviction upon the heart, so also in
consolation and comfort. The great impediment to a godly man's comfort, is want
of spiritual knowledge, and conviction about the causes of comfort. As it was
with Hagar in the wilderness, she sat weeping for her child, and gave over all
as desperate, till God opened her eyes, and made her see a fountain. Thus the
broken heart, judges it self in a wilderness destitute of all comfort, sees
nothing but matter of despair and damnation, till God enlighten the
understanding about comfortgrounds in the Gospel. As for example, when the
Spirit of God enlightens us to receive comfort, it gives us the eye salve:

1. To look upon Christ revealed in the Gospel, as the full cause and ground of
all our comfort, as well as on sin. Generally the people of God in the first
workings of the soul, look upon nothing but their sins, behold nothing but
sin; but God will not let them alone in this agony; he enlightens them
further, that they shall see Christ as well as sin, the Gospel as well as the
Law, he gives them eyes to behold the brazen Serpent when stung. Hence the
Spirit of God, John 16. 9, 10. does not only convince of sin, but of
righteousness also. The Devil he indeed moves in those troubled waters of thy
soul, and would keep thee off from Christ, as the Disciples did the blind man,
but the Spirit of God will not leave the soul in these wounds, in these
straits, but does carry him up from the mount of cursing to the mount of
blessing. And certainly the wise men could not more rejoice to see the star,
than the godly heart does to behold Christ after the storms and tempests in his
soul. Hence the Apostle Gal. 1. calls it, The revealing of the Son in him.
This then we are enabled to do by God, not only to know sin in the terror
and sting of it, but also Christ in his fullness and excellency. How was Paul
affected with this, 2 Cor. 2. 1. I desire to know nothing but Christ crucified?
This therefore is a special work of God to make us look with both eyes, to make
thee see sin as well as Christ, and Christ as well as sin.

2. As God does convince the soul of Christ, what a full and glorious Savior
he is; so also in the second place, Of our duty to receive him, and to lay hold
on him. And this is a further step to comfort, when God does so far open the
eyes, as to see not only a full and sufficient Christ, but also that it is a
duty in particular to apply this Christ, and to rest upon him for comfort and
salvation. This is a further discovery still. Paul said, Gal. 2. Who gave
himself for me, and loved me: And Thomas said, My God, and my Lord. It is one
of the blessed truths discovered in the Reformation out of Popery, That it is
not our duty to believe in the general only, that Christ is a Savior, but to
rest on him also for the pardon of my sins: That this is the Faith that
justifies: That this is most acceptable and precious unto God: That unbelief
not only in the general, but as it fails in this particular, in not applying,
in not appropriating Christ to the soul, is that which will damn a man. Oh then
what blessed and comfortable light is that, which God brings into the soul,
when he shall make thee see, that though a sinner, though burdened, though
unworthy, yet it is thy duty to go to Christ to be eased? That he commands thee
with that woman, not only to touch the hem of his garments, but to lay hold on
Christ himself. This particular faith is that, which the soul is hardly
convinced of. Though others may draw nigh to Christ, yet may I? But he comes
at last to be persuaded of this truth.

3. God comforts by enlightening the mind, that a comfortable, joyful life,
arising from peace with God, is a most acceptable thing to God; that it brings
honor and glory to God; and that on the other side, to walk heavily, and in a
dejected manner is to dishonor and reproach God. That God does not only look
to our gracious walking, but also to our comfortable walking, and that we
demonstrate the Kingdom of Heaven to be begun in us in joy, as well as in
mortification, Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of God is righteousness, and joy in
the holy Ghost. You see Joy as well as Righteousness; The children of God they
are not quickly persuaded of this, they think such as they are, may not walk
comfortably: It Is not for them to rejoice, but at last they come to see, that
they were sinfully kept up by slavish fears, and servile dejections, that the
Kingdom of God requires Consolation as well as Sanctification. Thus you see
the first general way, how God comfort, viz. by enlightening the mind.

Secondly, and principally God comfort, By preparing and fashioning the
heart, by making it fit and ready to receive comfort. For all the while thou
art enlightened only, and have not an heart fitted to receive it, thou art like
Moses that saw the good Land of promise, but he could not enter into it. And
thus indeed it falls out sometimes, that when the mind is enlightened enough,
yet the heart is heavy. They cannot delight and rejoice in the promise; they
would gladly do it, they heartily pray for it; but their heart sinketh down
like a stone within them. Therefore God has a further degree in comforting,
and that is by raising up the heart; by making it ready to receive consolation.
For as God can humble the proud heart, and soften the hard heart, so he can
easily comfort and revive the grieved heart. Thus as it is in sanctification;
it is not enough for God to illuminate the mind, unless he also change the
heart, and make us to will and to do: So it is not enough for God to teach us
our duty about comfort, but actually to work the heart for it. Hence 2 Cor. 7.
6. you have a notable Attribute given to God, God that comfort those that
are cast down, Isa. 51. 11, 12. See there with what command God speaks, That
they shall have comfort; They shall obtain gladness and joy. So that as God is
above the heart in conversion, thus he is also in consolation: He will comfort,
and what man or Devil can hinder it? As in matter of grace God declares, as
Omnipotency and Sovereignty, when he says, I will take away the heart of
stone, and give an heart of flesh: so in matter of consolation, I will take
away the grieved, the troubled, the despairing heart, and give an heart of joy,
peace, and heavenly rest of soul.

In the third place, God does comfort removendo prohibens, by removing
whatsoever is obstructive and destructive of comfort. As

1. By chaining up the Devil, who is not only an enemy to the graces, but also
the comforts of Gods people. As the holy Ghost is a Comforter, so the Devil is
the prince of darkness, a Tempter to unbelief, to sad, and soul, yea and
bodymurdering thoughts. God therefore does restrain him in his temptations, in
his sad suggestions. For we see by Job's instance, the Devil cannot go any
further, than he is licensed by God himself.

2. God does subdue not only the Devil without, but also that corruption
within, which does vehemently incline to unbelieving, vexing and tormenting
thoughts. For although a man naturally be in security, in self-ease and carnal
presumption, yet when once awakened for sin, and feeling the terror of the
Lord thereby, then we are as peevish, as froward against the promises, as ever
formerly we were against the precepts; Adam endeavors to hide himself from God
upon his sin. We see in Cain and Judas, what sad and dreadful effects the
guilt of conscience would work in every one, did not God command those winds
and tempests to be still. Therefore God does repress these, and thereby we are
more ready for comfort.

3. God does by his grace prevent and keep us from sin, he daily preserves
us from many sad falls, which if plunged into, we should presently chase away
all our comfort. When David was left, and fell into those gross sins, all his
joy was immediately lost; therefore he complains of his broken bones, and
prays for joy to be restored to him; what horror, what hell would quickly be
raised in thy soul every day, every night, upon every temptation? Did not the
grace of God preserve thee? Spira lost all comfort by Apostasy? And thus many
Christians did in times of persecution, in a great measure by their revolt,
though they recovered again. Therefore little do thou know, how much God
works for thy comfort by preventing such sins, which would make horrible
wounds and gashes in thy soul.

Lastly, God comforts thee by delivering thee from all such Doctrines, though
taught by many of great and eminent learning, which yet in their own nature
tend to make the heart uncomfortable. How wonderfully did God work for the
comfort of Luther, who professed the unspeakable tremblings and fears of soul
he was in, and being in captivity by the Doctrine of works, as then tought in
Popery, he could have no comfort, but often wished he had never been a man,
till God comforted him by delivering him from those false Doctrines? Thus the
Doctrine of the Apostasy of true Saints does utterly dash all comfort from the
believer; he must necessarily be in miserable tormenting fears all the day
long. And so have we done with that immediate way of Gods comforting.

The Mediate way, is by those means which he has appointed to be as Conduits
running wine for us. And they are

1. The Scriptures. David professes much quickening and comfort he had by them.
So Romans 15. 4. The comfort of the Scriptures. They are a cordial, a tree of
life; They direct to comfort, exhort to comfort all such as are poor in spirit.

2. The Ministers, They are sons of consolation and comfort. The Word they
preach is (...), the joyful noise. Even the very feet of such who bring the
glad tidings, are said to be blessed; They have a tongue of the learned, to
speak a seasonable word for such as are contrite in spirit. They are not to
quench the broken reed. Though to the obstinate sinner, we bring the hammer and
fire of the Word; yet to the broken heart, we bring balm and oil.

Lastly, God comforts by the Sacraments. In them he does peculiarly seal peace
and comfort. Therefore is the Lords Supper called (...), a giving of thanks.
Thus does the Lord by these means abundantly provide for our consolation.

SERMON. XXXVII.
That Believers only are the Subjects of the Comforts and Consolations of God.

2 COR. 1. 4. Who comfort us in all our tribulation.
THe next particular, which follows in order, as the Text stands divided, is
the Subject whom God does thus comfort, and that is said to be Us, who
comfort us; that is, both us believers, in a general sense, and us Apostles,
in a particular manner. For they being like Uriah in the forefront of the
battle; and more assaulted by the Devil within, and enemies without, they do
need the greater comfort. But we shall handle it in the most large sense, and
observe,

That God is a God of all comfort unto believers only. God is a God of comfort
only to believers.


For this [Us] in the Text, is not only determinative, to show who they are
into whose wounds God does thus pour oil, but also restrictive to such and such
only. Indeed the wicked ones of the world, may have comfort in outward mercies;
They may rejoice in the good things of this life; and this is acknowledged by
Solomon, To be a gift of God, but these worldly joys do become a sin, and a
curse to them. The Poet said well,

O miseri quorum gaudia crimen habet!
Their very joys do become like wine to men in a feavor, though refreshing a
little, yet inflaming and increasing the disease more. So that these worldly
joys, being not universal, nor pure and unmixed; yea being the seed of eternal
grief and torment, therefore they may be well excluded from the name of joy,
and the Doctrine be truly asserted, That God is a God of consolation only to
believers.

Let us explicate this truth. And

First, We are to know, That God does not only vouchsafe grace, but comfort
also and delight to his people, in the exercise of those graces. He does not
only give bread that strengthens, but wine that makes the heart glad. Grace,
that carries us out to honor God, to love him, and live to him; but comfort,
that is for our encouragement, that is to sweeten and facilitate the heart in
doing so. So that if a man have never so much grace and holiness, yet if he
want this conlation, as you see it was with Job, with Jeremiah, with David,
when Psalm. 51. he prayed so earnestly for the restoring of it again to him, all
his desirable things perish. Christ himself under those agonies he conflicted
with, had an Angel to comfort him. So that you see they are two distinct gifts
of God; to give Grace, and to give comfort; therefore the holy Ghost has a
twofold work, both to sanctify, and also to comfort; yet though distinct, God
does many times join them together; yea there is some unusual impediment, if
joy does not always follow grace, and that like Castor and Pollux, they do not
always appear together. Therefore Godliness is comprehended under the name of
gladness in that expression, Ps. l. 45. 7. applied to Christ, Heb. 1. 9. Thou
have anointed him with the oil of gladness, as Christ was; so also are his
members thus anointed with the oil of gladness. God then does not only
sanctify and make his people holy, but he also does fill their hearts with joy
and gladness. Thus Acts 9. 31. They in the Churches walked in the fear of the
Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost: Only when we say, That God gives
his people comfort as well as grace. You must know the comforts are of two
sorts; Sometimes they are concomitant, so that even in the very exercises of
grace, they find unspeakable joy and sweetness. The very Heathens had some
glimmering of this, when they said Virtus was sibi ipsi praemium, Virtue it
self was a reward, as well as duty, because of the great tranquillity and
contentation of mind that it brought to the soul. Even as wicked actions have
an immediate horror and remorse of conscience accompanying them. And then

2. There are consequent joys, which follow after the work is done, as Paul
found at the 12th verse, This is our rejoicing, the testimony of a good
conscience. So that a man of an ill conscience, who has stings from that,
though all the world applaud him, yet he cannot have any true solid joy. Quid
proderit tibi non habere conscium, habenti conscientiam. The Martyrs they found
concomitant joys in their most dreadful sufferings, Act. 5. 41. The Apostles
went away rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer for Christ's Name.
They minded not their stripes, nor their reproach and disgrace, but they went
away rejoicing, not from hearing the Word, from prayer, from such holy
Ordinances, but even from scourges and stripes. But in many other duties and
services for God, though for the present we may feel no joy, yet there are
subsequent joys that may arise long after. For as sin may not sting for a
while, as we see in Joseph's brethren, the guilt of their conscience awakened
them many years after: So the comfort of holy duties, though for the present
thou may not apprehend them, yet sometimes or other God will revive them.

Secondly, Although God gives not only grace, but comfort to his people, yet
we are not to serve him only for comforts sake, but for his own sake, and that
while he denies us the breasts of consolation to suck on, yet we are as
fervently and zealously to obey him, as ever. It is many times the sad
complaint of Gods children, that they want comfort, and thereupon are dejected
and discouraged; they care not for praying, for hearing; they have no heart for
the Ordinances, and all because they find their hearts like a barren
wilderness full of howling beasts. Oh, when they have comfort, then they can
run the way of Gods Commandments, then they have fire in their bosom! But
when this is gone, they become like a stone, or a lump of earth. But although
it be true, That the joy of the Lord is our strength, Nehem. 8. 10. yet for all
that it is too low and mercenary to serve him only for comfort. This is Amor
concupiscentiae, not amicitiae toward God. The grace of love carries us to
God so, that we choose him, and delight in him above all things; that though he
should not give us Heaven and everlasting glory, yet we were to love him,
because he is the supreme and most excellent good: How much more than are we to
serve God, to be diligent in his work, though we find not those experimental
suavities upon our souls for the present? Therefore thou art to deny thy self in
this matter of joy, when God dispenses it to thee, walk thankfully, humbly,
and fruitfully under it: And when in darkness, in desolateness of soul, yet let
not thy soul abate in love and service to God. The Stoic was so severe, that
he thought he could not be virtuous, who did any virtuous action for the
delight and sweetness that follows it: They would not have Virtus propter
voluptatem, but voluptas propter virtutem. How much more should our
Christianity teach us to prefer Gods will, and his honor, above all
consolations. If Job said, Though he kill me, yet I will trust in him; then do
thou, though when thou ask for bread, he give thee a stone, when thou ask
for fish he give thee a serpent. yet still say, I will own him as a Father,
honor him as a Father. Christ when he was in those agonies, and destitute of
all comfort, yet he did not refuse to accomplish the will of God.

Thirdly, As God gives comfort to believers, so he does it proportionably and
sutably to their trials, necessities and wants. Greater trials need greater
comforts; greater temptations need greater consolations. Thus the Apostle at
the next verse, As our sufferings abound, so our consolation also abounds
through Christ. One drop of honey is not enough to sweeten the salt waters of
the sea; neither can small consolations equal great afflictions. Hence the
wisdom and goodness of God is most remarkable, that he reserveth his comforts
for such times and seasons, when the soul does most want them. Now if ever, the
Lord must comfort; else they shall be overwhelmed, as in the time of our first
conversion to God, when our sins lie with all their weight upon our backs; when
we see nothing but terror; which way soever we look; we are in strong pangs
and agonies of soul. The Devil also takes his opportunity then to cast in all
his fiery darts. Thus when the soul of a man is filled with fear, doubts,
seeing no way but hell and damnation, at such a time God comes in with his best
wine; then God delights to speak to the heart of such, Psalm. 94. 19. In the
multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. The Hebrew
word signifies perplexed thoughts, like boughs on a tree entangled one with
another, that a man cannot part them; such were his thoughts, so intricate, so
enfolded one within another, that he knew not what to resolve on, what to
determine, yet the comforts of God did refresh his soul. Thus new converts have
many times more comfort then ever they shall have all their life time, they
needed them most then.

Again, When the people of God have any great props and supports of comfort and
joy taken away from them, then commonly God comes in with more than ordinary
comfort. This makes him to be styled, The Father of the fatherless, and Judge
of widows; such who need help and comfort most. When David was in danger of
losing his life and Kingdom, and that by his unnatural rebellious son
Absalom, when Shimei reviled him, when he fled up and down with his Army, with
ashes on his head, weeping and wailing, as he went up the hill, yet even at
that time, Psalm. 4. 6. he says, God had put more gladness into his heart,
then they could have in their harvest joy. So the Disciples, when they were to
be parted from Christ, he was not to be corporally present with them; upon
this, how greatly did sorrow fill their hearts? What should the sheep do
without their Shepherd, the Chickens without their Hen? Yet says our Savior,
I will not leave you comfortless, John 16. Christ would send his Spirit a
Comforter in his room. Thus you see Gods way, when he takes away the comfort
of an Husband, a Father, a Friend, he will be in stead of all these to us.
Those conditions which we thought would have broken our hearts, he made even
joyful to us.

Lastly, When God calls his people to any high degrees of self-denial, even
to Martyrdom it felf, then as their grief and fears would superabound; so also
their joys and comforts will be above them. The Martyrs never felt such joy
and delight in all their lives time, as they did in a dark dungeon, and in the
flames of fire. Therefore Gods children should not sinfully torture their souls
with thoughts: what if God should call them out to suffer, to be imprisoned, to
be burnt at the stake? Oh they should deny Christ over and over again, prove
wretched Apostates! They must not judge thus according to their present
disposition; but remember that God will proportion strength and comfort to
their exercises, and give them Giants strength, if he lay a Giants burden on
them.

Fourthly, God does not only do good to his people in giving them joy, but to
show how ready and willing he is, the Scripture says, That it is a joy to God
to do any good for us, he rejoices to bestow his mercy upon us. This is spoken
after the manner of men, to denote with what willingness he vouchsafes his
favors to us. See what a wonderful expression the Prophet uses, Zephan. 3.
17. while God is said to be in the midst of his people, saving of them, even
because he does thus; he is said, To rejoice over them with joy, to rest in his
love, and to joy over them with singing. By this we see, that while God gives
us grace, and other mercies, whereof joy is a chief one, he himself rejoices
therein. Even as Aristotle observes of a liberal man, That he takes more joy
in giving, than he that receives the benefit, can do in receiving of it. God
then gives thee grace and joy not unwillingly, not difficultly, but he himself
rejoices in making thy heart joyful. See a sweet place to confirm this also,
Isai. 61. 5. At the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy God
rejoice over thee.

Fifthly, This joy, God gives believers, is a spiritual joy. Worldly joy is
like the culinary fire which goes out, if it have not daily fuel; but this is
like the elementary, that needs no pabulum, but continues of it self without
such additaments. Though friends die, though the creatures break under us, yet
this joy abides the same still. It is a spiritual joy, because seated in the
spiritual part of a man most. So that we do not speak here so much of a
sensible bodily joy, but of that which is rational and seated in the soul. It
is true, when the soul is greatly affected by way of sympathy and redundancy,
it does overflow even to the bodily part of a man also; but the Subject,
wherein this joy is immediately and properly seated, is in the soul and heart
of a man. Hence it is that the heart is so often said in the Scripture, To
rejoice in the Lord, which is the mind and the will. Therefore as a godly soul
may truly repent, when yet it cannot shed bodily tears; so it may truly
rejoice, when it has not a bodily gladness upon it. So that as the Wiseman
says of carnal laughter, that even in that, the heart may be sad; So also,
though in bodily sadness, yet the conscience of a man may have great
tranquillity and joy. It is also a spiritual joy, because the motives of it are
chiefly from spiritual objects; It Is joy in the Lord, and joy in the holy
Ghost. Luke 10. 10. Our Savior commanded his Disciples, Not to rejoice in that
they could work miracles, and cast out Devils, but because their name was
written in Heaven. It Is spiritual also in its operations. For whereas worldly
joy enters into men, as the Devils did into the Swine, hurling them headlong
into Hell. This makes the heart more active, more fruitful; It Is like the
Spirit to Ezekiel's wings, like the wind that made the dry bones gather
together and live. It Is like Elisha's fiery chariot, mounting him up into
Heaven; whereas grief and sorrow are like the worms that eat into the wood,
and devour the strength of it.

Lastly, This joy is given by God to believers, though formerly great and
grievous sinners. For we might think, such as have been the chiefest of many
thousands in sinning and blaspheming against God, though God should have pity
and mercy upon them, yet he should never give them any comfort in this life.
You would think their former lusts, pride, uncleanness, and excess of riot,
should be like a millstone always about their neck; They should go mourning
to the grave, never able to remove their sins out of their sight; but
thinking they pursue them as close every moment, as Asahel did Joab to damn us:
Yet even to such, after God becomes reconciled with them, God it may be gives
more comfort, than to others. Great sins when repented of, cannot bar off
great consolations; and indeed, such need strong consolations, for their great
conflicts and agonies. If Christ put not both arms under them, they hardly
keep from fainting away. Mary Magdalen and Peter were in a special manner owned
and comforted by Christ, though they had deeply wounded their souls with sin.
We see Paul, though so notorious a wretch against Christ, yet when converted,
God does not upbraid him with former rebellions; but in the number of those who
have peace and joy, he reckons himself; and the truth is, such are most humble,
tender and melting under comforts. What (Lord) such a beast, such a Devil as I
have comfort? What (Lord) I that might have been a Cain, a Judas, crying out,
My sins are greater than I can bear? That like Dives might have begged for one
drop of water to cool my scorching heat, but have been denied? Shall such an
one have comfort and consolation?

SERMON. XXXVIII.
How God will comfort his People in all both their spiritual and temporal
Afflictions, which all the Art of Philosophy can never do.

2 COR. 1. 4. Who comfort us in all our tribulation.
THe second particular in this Text has been dispatched, viz. the Subject whom
God comfort [Us] Apostles and believers, in the general; such only have a
right and interest comforts. Why such only have a right, will be treated on
more opportunely in the procedure of the verse.

We therefore go forward to the third part of the Text, as it stands divided,
and that is the Object matter wherein this comfort is communicated to us, and
that is for the nature of it said to be (...), Tribulation; and for the
extension of it, all tribulation. Tribulation] The Greek word signifies, Such
an affliction as does even oppress and squeeze a man, as it were: Hence it is
translated sometimes persecution, Act. 11. 19. The Churches afflictions are
called persecutions, to show the voluntary, malicious endeavors of her
enemies, who run up and down to seize on such as belong to Christ; which
implies also, that the godly did not rashly and sinfully put themselves into
their enemies hands; but that according to Christ's command they did flee, when
their adversaries sought for them. And this may be done in faith, not in
sinful fear, as appears, Heb. 11. where some are said to hide themselves in
caves and holes, yet by faith. But the word is commonly rendered tribulation,
having sometimes the epithete (...) added to it, as Mat. 24. 21. And the Latin
word tribulation answers the Greek well, which (say some) comes from the flail
of the thresher, that bruiseth the corn: Or (as others) from thistles that are
sharp and vexing. Well, the word signifies such a tribulation, as is bruising,
pricking, sadly molesting: Yet as out of the same root comes the sweet Rose,
as well as the sharp prickles, so from the same condition shall arise joy as
well as grief. Observe,

That there is no tribulation, or affliction Gods people can fall into, but God
will comfort them therein. God will comfort his children in all their
affliction whatsoever.


The Text says, all tribulation, let it be what it will be. Do not say, Every
tribulation but mine; Take heed of thinking thy dungeon is so dark, that no ray
or beam of this Sun can come unto thee. For as Paul argues in another case,
Heb. 2. 8. In that all things are put under subjection to Christ, it is
manifest he left nothing that is not put under him. So in that God comfort
in all tribulation, it is manifest, that there is no tribulation exempted, or
left out. Take heed of that profane Question, Is God the God of the hills, as
well as of the valleys? Think not that God is limited, so as if there were some
kind of water that he cannot turn into wine; some stones that he cannot convert
into bread. But let us explain this. And

First, God does comfort his people in all tribulations, for the several kinds
of Propositions explaining the Observation.
them. The tribulations that may fall upon the people of God are of such
different sorts, that it is very difficult to number them, as it is the sand
upon the Seashore; yet we may divide them into these two sorts, The
soul-troubles in the general, or spiritual ones; and the external, or temporal
ones, In both these God will not leave his people comfortless. Their spiritual
troubles, they may empty themselves into several channels. As

1. There is a soul-trouble arising in the heart, because of Gods displeasure
for Several sorts of soul or spiritual troubles, in all which God comforts his
children.
sin. This trouble David does sadly groan under many times, and this is the
greatest evil that the godly can grapple with. When God hides his face from
David, it is neither his Kingdom, or success, or any great prosperity he has,
that can be so much as a drop of water to cool his thirsty scorched soul. Job
also was in this troubled condition, when he complains, That the arrows of
the Almighty did stick in him. What comfort or joy could Job find in any thing
in the world, while God was thus frowning on him? So that the soul in this case
is most remote from comfort. Bring him riches, honors, you do but as they that
gave vinegar and gall to Christ for to drink, you increase sorrow more: yet at
last we find both David and Job were comforted; God could and did of that chaos
and dark confusion they felt within them, work much light and joy. And
certainly, if there be any of Gods children that live and die without comfort,
having no evidence or assurance of Gods favor; this is not because God cannot
comfort, or because God is not gracious and pitiful to such, but because God
sees it best not to give comfort to such. Seeing therefore it is God that
breaks the heart, it is he that makes the soul tremble, it is he that
convinces of sin, and humbles the soul under it: So it is the same God only
that can command comforts; when he speaks the word, all sorrow and tormenting
fears shall fly away, as dark mists before the glorious light of the Sun. Oh
then, let such dejected and overwhelmed souls remember the Omnipotency of God
in comforting, as well as in other things! Say, O Lord, my heart would break
and break again, if I had nothing but men or Angels to comfort; but I have to
do with thee who art the Father of spirits, and so can put into the soul
gladness of heart, as well as grace.

A second spiritual trouble is, The want of that sanctifying and mortifying
power they desire against their lusts. They find the relics of corruption too
prevalent; their hearts are not in their own power; They complain and say, I
command my hands, and they move as I would have them; I stir my feet, and
they obey presently; but when I charge my soul to be heavenly, believing, to be
cheerful, patient, it does not at all yield to me. Paul, Romans 7. did in a most
pathetical manner complain of this conflict and agony with him, The evil he
would not do, that he did. As these impetuous lusts are a burden, so the
deadness, barrenness and hardness of his heart: Oh often does he cry out of his
soul, as like the mountains of Gilboa, on whom no dew does fall, like a parched
and dried wilderness, and he knows not how to come out of it, yet even in
these sad, perplexed thoughts God comes in with comfort, when his heart affords
none, when all within rises up against him; yet as it was with Paul, his
complaints shall be turned into praises, I thank God in Jesus Christ.

A third Soul-tribulation may be from Satan's temptations: He is called the
tempter, he is said to have his fiery darts, he has his buffetings. We see how
fiercely he assaulted Christ himself; and as for the incestuous person by
Satan's devices, he was almost swallowed up with sorrow. And indeed, what horrid
suggestions of blasphemy, self-murder, and whatsoever is most terrible and
amazing, will not he assault the godly soul with, if God bind him not up. Well
does the Scripture compare him to a a roaring Lion; what can a poor Lamb do, if
he fall upon it? And truly no more could the poor humbled sinner stand before
all the temptations and oppositions of Satan, if Gods grace did not interpose;
yet even in this hellish darkness, when the soul is apt to judge its condition,
like those that are damned in hell; when he is ready to conclude, God has
forsaken him for ever, that the express signs and characters of a castaway are
upon him, as he thinks, yet of this Whales-belly, from the mouth of hell, God
does raise him, and give him comfort; yea many times those have the greatest
comforts, that have the greatest exercises of this kind; and therefore the Lord
did leave them in this black night, that the day might be the sweeter and more
welcome.

Lastly, The Souls-trouble may arise from the breaches it has made by
Apostasy, and falling into great sins after it has known God. And these
commonly do give a mortal blow to all our former comfort. You see it in David,
Psalm. 51. when he complains of his broken bones, praying to have joy restored
to him. Some have thought that David never had such comfort again as formerly.
Certainly the godly in such falls sin hainously, because of the experience
they have of Gods favor, and the bitterness of sin, therefore for them to
revolt from God is an high aggravation: As if the Prodigal son, after he had
been entertained in his Fathers house, and feasted with the fatted calf, should
have gone to his husks again, how intolerable would that have been? Well, but
for all this, this sad condition of a gradual Apostate, and revolter, is not
without ground of comfort, when truly humbled and debased before God. Does not
God speak graciously, Jer. 3. 22. Return ye backsliding children, and I will
heal your backslidings? And see how this merciful offer is embraced, Behold we
come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. She pleads her interest and
right to God howsoever. Thus also God promises, Hos. 14. 4. I Will heal their
backsliding. So that although when the conscience has been the second time
bruised; when thou have been twice as it were in the new birth, thou must look
for greater pains and agonies, yet God can, and does comfort such also. Peter
speaks of joy unspeakable, and full of glory, which the people of God have,
though he had greatly revolted from Christ his master. So that manna may be had
in this wilderness also.

The second kind of troubles are outward, and these are also innumerable, Act.
14. 22. We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of Heaven. We
How God comfort his people in outward tribulations.
must expect like Christ to be men of sorrows: for we are to suffer with him,
if we will reign with him. Now two sorts of troubles there are in which God
will give comfort, and in them all troubles are comprehended.

1. There are troubles, such as we bring upon our selves by our own folly and
sins. We have provoked God to be angry, and to take away many outward mercies
from us. Now because our sins, and our iniquities have done all this, therefore
it is that we may justly expect that God will deny all comfort. We might think
it is true, when we suffer for Gods sake, when we are persecuted for
righteousness sake, then Christ will take us into his wine-sellar, and bid us,
Drink abundantly. But it is my vile heart, my proud heart, my loose and
negligent walking that has brought all this evil upon me, and what comfort
then can I expect from God? But even in this condition, such is the grace and
mercy of God, that although our sins have brought evil upon us, yet if humbled
under them, and bewailing of them, we shall find God for to comfort us. When
David, Psalm. 4. had that overflowing joy which he says, God put into his
heart, more than all harvest joy, yet he was at that time in very sad
exigencies, pursued by his son, and driven out of Jerusalem, and this God
threatened as the fruit of his sin; but behold all this, God gives him
comfort: And the truth is, when humbled for our sins, then the nature of
these afflictions are altered, they become paternal and medicinal
chastisements, they are arguments of Gods love to us; we may rejoice in them as
testimonies thereof; for so Heb. 12. and Rev. 3. it is said, Whom God loves he
chasteneth. God makes as the Physician an excellent antidote of that which is
poison, and so the fruit of thy sins becomes great matter of thankfulness, as
David acknowledged, when he said, Out of very thankefulness thou have afflicted
me. And as for the second kind of afflictions, which are only for the exercise
of graces, when we are persecuted not for the evil in us, but the good
appearing, as the case of the Martyrs was; then God gives us comfort with full
measure, pressed down, and yet flowing over; witness the Apostles, who went
away rejoicing, because they were accounted worthy to suffer all things for
Christ's sake. The Martyrs also had more joy in their troubles then ever they
had in their prosperity, and it is of those tribulations the Scripture speaks
of. Indeed some Philosophers have essayed upon such a comfort, as Epicurus
said, If a wise man were burnt in Phalaris his Bull, he would say, Dulce est,
and ad me nihil pertinet, This is a sweet thing, and does not at all hurt me.
But these were Book sayings. No Philosophers ever endured misery for their
Sects, as Christians have done for the truth of Christ. But you may say, What
is that by which God comforts his people in all their tribulations? Has the
Scripture any higher grounds than Philosophy? Philosophy is called animi
medicina; and as there were several Sects of them, so they had different
principles to comfort; for there was no theme treated on more by them than
this; only some principles were contrary to others; for some persuaded this as
a special help to premeditate on evils before they came. Others they refused
this, as making a man miserable before he was so. Others supported themselves
with the thoughts of necessity, and that it could not be otherwise. But of all
these we may say, as Job to his friends, Ye are miserable comforters, and are
of no more advantage then the rending of garments, or pulling off the hair in
grief, which Bion derided in one, as if a bald head would take away grief. We
therefore conclude, That no Philosophers had the true art No Philosopher ever
had the true grounds of comfort.
or grounds of comfort, and that

1. Because they were wholly ignorant of Jesus Christ, in whom alone is all the
cause of comfort. Therefore he is called our Peace, and he is said to be the
Prince of peace. Foelicissimum est cui non est opus foelicitate, and such an
one is the man in Christ, for he will never thirst more than has drunk of that
fountain. No sin, no guilt, no curse can be removed, but by the blood of
Christ. Insomuch that all their Philosophical precepts about comfort were as
the influence of the Moon, which does rather rotten than ripen in respect of
the Suns influence.

2. They were without the Spirit of Christ the efficient cause of comfort.
Christ is the subject matter in whom alone we can have comfort; and the Spirit
of God is the efficient cause that does alone give a comfortable and glad heart.

3. They were altogether unbelieving of a Resurrection to leternal glory, which
is an admirable ground of all true joy. This the Apostle presses against
immoderate sorrow about those that are dead, Not to grieve as those that are
without hope.

Lastly, They were wholly unacquainted with the life of faith, that is only
instrumental to receive joy.

Use of Exhortation, in all thy tribulations to look up to God in Christ for
comfort. Thou runnest to this creature to comfort, and thou think this and
that condition would comfort thee; but how can the chanel have any thing in it,
if the fountain does not give it? Say not, it is thy affliction, so greatly to
be aggravated, that makes thee disconsolate: No, it is for want of Gods
presence in it.

SERMON. XXXIX.
What are these Apples which Christ refreshes his Spouse with? Or what are
those Scripture-grounds of comfort, which support the hearts of Gods children
under all their afflictions?

2 COR. 1. 4. Who comfort us in all our tribulation.
THere is no tribulation either for the kind or degree of it, but God can and
does comfort his people therein. It is therefore requisite to know what are
those cordial comforts, what is that balm and oil by which he heals the
wounds of his afflicted ones. For seeing Gods comforts do far exceed all
Philosophical remedies, as much as the Sun does a Gloworm: And Paul's
admirable temperament, I know how to abound, and how to want, does infinitely
transcend that so much celebrated carriage of Socrates, who was noted to be
always Eodem vultu, let whatsoever befall him. It is very useful to know,
Gods children deficient in a twofold respect concerning Gods comforts.
what are these Apples of comfort, as the Church calls for, Cant. 2. 5. And
the rather this is to be done, because many of Gods children are deficient in a
threefold respect about Gods consolations. For either

1. They are in a great manner ignorant of what foundations and sure grounds
they have of comfort. They do not know what fountains of living water they may
abundantly bathe themselves in. They are as Elisha's servant, who though there
was a great host of Angels to help him, yet he did not see them. So that the
Spirit of God does not only illuminate us in the matter of duty, but also in
matter of comfort; hence he is called, The Comforter. Or

2. Though they know many arguments of comfort, yet their memory fails them,
that in the very hour of their temptations, in the midst of their furious
assaults, they forget what comfortable supports they might make use of. So that
it is good to preach of these principles of consolation, that thereby we may be
remembrancers to you, and put you in mind of that joy, which in the midst of
your afflictions, your corruptions, and the Devils temptations are so apt to
strike out. As the Disciples were sometimes blamed for their forgetfulness,
they did not remember the miracle of loaves. Thus also the children of God, may
often rebuke themselves, and with David say, Why wast thou cast down, O my
soul? And why wast thou so troubled within thee? Had thou thought on such a
promise, such a place of Scripture? Had thou remembered such a precious and
sweet truth, the temptation had not prevailed so much upon thee. What are these
good things that God has prepared for those that love him to comfort them.


Come we then to lead you up into the Mount of transfiguration, let us see even
in this life, as far as our narrow hearts can comprehend, What are the good
things God has prepared for those that love him? And

First, Take this for a foundation, That God comforts only through and by the
Scriptures. He must enter into this pool, that will feel these consolations
descending upon him, he must buy this field of the Scriptures, that will have
this pearl hidden there. The Spirit of God is that indeed which does
efficiently reach to the soul, and make it to receive comfort; but the means by
which, or the harp (as it were) whereby the evil spirit of sorrow and dejection
is removed, is by the word of God: So that as the Spirit of God does powerfully
change and alter the heart yet the word is organically and instrumentally used
for that end. So though the Spirit of God be the Comforter, yet it is through
the Word. Hence the Apostle Romans 15. 4. That we through comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. And David does not only admire the word of God,
because it fore-warneth of sin, quickens up to duty, but also because it
was a reviving, comforting Word, whereby he was kept from fainting, and being
utterly overwhelmed in his troubles. And this is the more to be considered by
the godly, that so they may not be deluded by false joys. When the Devil is
said to transform himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. that is, into
light of comfort, as well as of truth, There are false joys, there are
comforts from the Devil, as well as doctrines of the Devil. The Papist has his
comforts. The Socinian, the Antinomian, all these have a spirit of delusion in
their joys, as well as in their opinion. The Spirit of God does first lead
into truth, before it vouchsafes comfort. But we detain you too long.

The first ground therefore of Scripture, that may be had out of the treasury
What grounds of comfort the Scriptures afford unto us.
thereof, is this, viz. That all the tribulations we fall into, they are
precisely determined by God as a Father out of much love, both in regard of the
beginning of them, the degree of them, as also the continuance of them. And if
this truth be well rumiated and digested, here is matter of comfort enough;
here is more oil then we have vessels to receive. This the Scripture does
frequently insinuate, Matthew. 5. Your heavenly Father knows what you have need
of. But especially Heb. 12. 9, 10. the Apostle declares at large, That because
we are sons, because God loves us, and is a Father, therefore he does chasten
us; and so if we give reverence to earthly parents, because they correct us, as
the Apostle implies, How much more ought we to bless God for his fatherly love
to us in correcting of us? Out of very faithfulness, says David, thou have
afflicted me, for before that came, he went astray. So then, he who is taught
by Scripture, he sees as much of love, as much of a Father in these
tribulations, as in any outward mercies. Whereas therefore they said, If thou
art the Son of God come down from the cross: the godly man says on the
contrary, because he is the Son of God, he will ascend up to the Cross, when
his Father commands him: hence afflictions are spoken of by way of gift, To you
it is given to suffer; and they are called, The precious trial of our faith.
Say then as Christ, Shall I not drink of the Cup which my Father has given me?
And because he is a Father, and he makes his afflictions medicinal, therefore
they are stinted and measured by him, both for the time, when they shall begin,
thy tribulations fall not out when the Devil and thy enemies would bring them
upon thee; but when Gods time is come, as you see they could never touch
Christ, till he said, His time was come. So that as God is said to determine
the bounds of men's habitations, so he has also of the afflictions of his
children; they come not sooner or later than thy Father in wisdom had
appointed. Now as winter and cold is necessary in its season, as well as Summer
in its season, and the night has its use as well as the day: Thus a time of
tribulation is as necessary, as a time of rest and quietness. There is a great
deal of mercy to thee in the very time of thy trouble; unless the grain of Corn
fall in the earth and die, it cannot be fruitful; this Christ applied to
himself, and is also true of every Christian. As the time is thus prefixed, so
the kind of it, with the measure and degree of it. Revel. 2. 10. The Devil
shall cast some of you into prison. The Apostle also Heb. 11. speaks of the
several sorts of tribulations the Saints were exercised with; and if Gods
providence reaches to the Sparrows fall on the ground, yea to the hair falling
from the head, how much more to the head it self, to man himself? Is not this
then a true solid ground of comfort, to think that thy heavenly Father knowing
thy temptations, and what will do thee most good, has appointed thee to drink
of this cup of an affliction, rather than another? Know, that that very trial
upon thee, how contrary soever to thy flesh and blood, yet is the best and most
profitable affliction of any in the world to thee: other afflictions would be
like contrary physic to a disease, do more hurt than good.

Lastly, This heaveuly Father has not only appointed the time, the kind, the
degree of thy tribulation, but also the time of deliverance from it. And this
is also a great comfort to know, that the tribulation shall not stay an hour
longer, then while it may do good to thee; he will not take one drop of blood
more from thee then is necessary to prevent thy disease, or abate it. So Rev.
2. 10. Some should be cast into prison for ten days. You see here God had
determined the time. Even as the Artificer knows how long the gold must be in
the fire, to take away the dross, and will not suffer it to abide any longer.
This the Psalmist made use of in his Prayer for the Church, The time to favor
her, yea the set time is come. Psalm. 102. 13.
So thou art to know, that the time of favor, the time of deliverance, yea the
set time will come. So that this may add much comfort to the godly, that their
afflictions shall be as the horsleeches set to the body, to stick no longer
then the corrupt blood is taken away. Thus Job though he had many gloomy and
sad temptations, yet sometimes again he was refreshed with this, That he should
come out of that affliction, like gold out of the fire, Chap. 23. 10. How
wonderfully was Habakkuk comforted in his exercises? for being informed, Chap.
2. 3. That the vision was for an appointed time, that God though he did tarry
would surely come, see how he breaks forth, Chap. 3. 17, 18. Although the
fig tree does not blossom, etc. yet I will rejoice in God, I will joy in the
God of my salvation. Well may God be called the God of consolation, who can
make Habakkuk so greatly rejoice, when all earthly props are taken away.

A second Scripture-cordial, by which God comforts his people in all
tribulations, is from Christ, with all the fullness that is in him. Certainly
Christ received by faith, and improved Evangelically, is able to make us gather
grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles: He that has this Sun cannot be in
the dark night: What makes Paul, Romans 8. so triumph and boast in all manner of
tribulations, challenging (as it were) every one of them to do their worse? Is
not the foundation of all this, Christ dead, and Christ risen again? And if he
has given us Christ, how shall he not with him give us all things? Thus the
presence of Christ, the spiritual influence of Christ into the soul, takes
away the bitterness of all troubles. Thus it was with the Martyrs: Thus it is
with Gods children, while by faith they lay hold on Christ. As the light of the
Sun puts out the light of the fire: Thus the presence of Christ, puts out
all other comforts, yea and all troubles also. Hence Isa. 9. Christ is promised
to the godly by way of comfort to them, when the outward condition of the
Nation was like to be very miserable. Micah also Chap. 5. 5. promises, that
Christ should be the peace, when the Assyrian should come into the Land. But
what Peace was Christ, he did not bring temporal peace, neither was he to have
a temporal Kingdom? But to the godly, who looked for a spiritual Messiah, this
was the comfort of comforts, to have a Christ as a spiritual Savior. If then
thy tribulations be heavy, and irksome; Oh desire more knowledge and enjoyment
of Christ, for he will be in stead of all things to thee; he is Wisdom, he is
Righteousness, he is wealth, he is honors, he is husband, friend: So that he
who has fellowship and communion with Christ, finds him to be, as those three
Worthies cast into the fiery furnace, having the company of one, who is said to
be in form like the Son of God; a defense against the rage of the fire, so
that the very garments did not so much as smell of any burning. Thus the
presence of Christ hach so wonderfully ravished and refreshed the heart of an
afficted afflicted Saint, that he has almost forgot his affliction, and
discovers not the least soil from it.

3. Another Scripture discovery for comfort, is to press and command the life
of faith upon Gods promise. So that whatsoever the principles of the world and
sense do suggest, yet faith rectifieth all: That finds honey to come out of a
dead Lion; that can suck honey from a bitter herb, when fleshly wisdom, and
humane reason can go no further, yet even then faith can gather sure and firm
arguments of comfort. David in that great distress at Ziklag, yet is said to
encourage himself in his God. Paul makes this the ground of a Christians
magnanimity, support and joy uuder all tribulations, Heb. 11. 1. Because faith
is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. Gods
thoughts and our thoughts are wholly different, only faith inableth us to know
the mind of God; and where flesh is ready to say, God is casting off, and
utterly forsaking, there faith sees him drawing near. The Disciples in a
tempest thought they had seen a Spirit, and were affrighted, but it was Christ.
The promise of God and faith applying it, do bear up the soul, and make it
rejoice in troubles. Heb. 6. 18. we have there Gods promise, and Gods oath also
to confirm it, and therefore says the Apostle, We have those two immutable
things, that we might have strong consolation. See there, because of Gods
promise, and that confirmed by an Oath: We have a consolation, and a strong
consolation; Strong, because the ground of it is strong, Gods Word, so that it
is stronger than mountains, it is stronger than Heaven and earth: Every
creature shall fall to the ground rather than the promise not be made good to
thee. Again, it is a strong consolation, because neither the Devils nor his
instruments shall be able to overcome it. Though therefore thy enemies be
strong enemies: though thy troubles are strong troubles, yet remember here is a
strong consolation; death it self cannot deprive thee of it: if then we walk by
faith, and not by sense; if we live upon these breasts of consolation, as the
Infant does, surely we may then swallow down even deadly and poisonous things,
yet they shall not do any hurt: Because the promise is the same, thy heart
would always be the fame, as the Law is written in thy heart in respect of
obedience; so let the promise in respect of faith: Faith from the Word does
show carnal reason, all the mistakes and false principles it proceeds upon,
discovering light in darkness, love in afflictions, and life even in death it
self.

Lastly, (For these bunches of grapes may serve to acquaint you what the Land
is) eternal glory to be possessed after the troubles, vexations and exercises
here, is able to make the heart to be exceeding glad under all our troubles.
Thus the Apostle 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17. We faint not, for this light affliction
works for us a more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; and this is by
looking not on the things that are seen, but the things that are not seen. At
another time the godly are commanded to lift up their heads when the day of
judgment draws nigh, because their redemption is at hand. And 1 Thessalonians. 4. 18.
after a discourse of our Lords coming, and that the godly shall be ever with
him, they are enjoined, To comfort one another with these things; that
incomprehensible glory which is provided for us to receive after our sufferings
here, makes the heart rejoice, while it is in the valley of tears; this Haven
after our storms; this rest after our troubles; this Crown after our warfare,
is that which reviveth the soul, and makes it a Naomi, while it is a Marah.

SERMON. XL.
How God may be said to comfort his children in all their Tribulations, though
many of them may live very disconsolate.

2 COR. 1. 4. Who comfort us in all our tribulation.
WE were discussing this third particular in the Text, but that one main doubt
may present it self, the discussing whereof is very useful in a practical way.
It is this, Seeing Paul speaks thus generally, God comfort us in all our
tribulations, does not this necessarily infer, that all the children of God in
all straits are full of comfort? And if this be so, either we must condemn
many, who in all appearance are the dear children of God, for hypocrites and
unsound, because they have no comfort: Yea all divine means have been used, and
yet they cannot be comforted, or else we must question the truth of this
Scripture. This Text says, God comfort his in all their tribulations:
Experience tells us, That many of Gods children are sadly disconsolate, or
else if their want of comfort be an argument, they do not belong to God, we
shall then pass an uncharitable censure upon those who are every way to be
accounted of as precious Saints, and that of the first magnitude.

Let us therefore remove this stumbling block out of the way. And

First, It cannot be denied, but that it may be the case, not only of a godly
person, but even an whole Church, to be without all comfort, that nothing but
sorrow and How God comforreth his children in all their tribulations, though
they often may be disconsolate.
trouble do even devour them all the day long. See this true in Jeremiahs
Lamentations, Chap. 1. 2. Chap. 2. 20, 21. The Church there sits in mourning,
with tears on her cheeks, and she has none to comfort her, neither God or man.
And for a particular person, what is clearer than Job, whose soul was as full
of spiritual botches and sores by sad thoughts, as his body was of corporal
ones, Job 17. 13. When I said my bed shall comfort, thou skarest me with
dreams, etc. Job not in his bed a place of rest, nor in the night a time of
rest, can be freed from terrors and fears: yea Chap. 9. 27. when he said, I
will leave off my heaviness, I will comfort my self; when he set himself with
all holy endeavors to cast off this viper of sorrow, yet they did rather
increase upon him: Yea, when he himself cannot remove those mountains of his
heart, it may be his godly friends may, and indeed such spiritual Physicians
God does sometimes bless for that end: But Chap. 21. 34. he tells them, They
comfort him in vain; none then can deny, but there was a time at least, when
God did not comfort Job in his tribulations. We read also of Heman, Psalm. 88.
15. who complains, That he was distracted with the terrors of the Lord from
his youth up; he complains, Gods wrath lay hard upon him; that God did
afflict him with all his ways; yea he prayed, he cried, and God did hide his
face from him. So that in all the Psalms there is not a word of comfort, no nor
of hope or of confidence, which yet David in every Psalm almost, though never
so cast down, does in some degrees and sparks (as it were) discover, but here
is nothing but disconsolateness; yet this Heman was a godly man, a Penman of
some Psalms; yea he was accounted one of the most eminent wise men that lived
in that age; for 1 King. 4. 30, 31. Solomon's wisdom is said to exceed all
others; yea four wise men are instanced, whom Solomon did surpass, and this
Heman was one. Whereas then, we are apt to judge such as want the sense of Gods
comfort, and go in a disconsolate manner, fools and melancholy, such as will
go out of their wits: You see here a godly man, and one of the wisest men in
Solomon's times, yet afflicted with the terrors of the Lord, and can obtain no
comfort. This then being laid down as a foundation, let us consider what is to
be said to the doubt. To answer the Objection, you must know in what sense this
is a doctrinal truth, That God comfort his in all their troubles, and to
that purpose observe these particulars:

1. That comfort, especially when we are sensibly affected and enlarged
therewith, Comfort not absolutely necessary to salvation.
is not of the essence of grace, nor is it absolutely necessary to salvation.
It is indeed for the been esse, and is like oil to the wheels, it does
wonderfully quicken and expedite the soul in ways of holiness; but yet a man
may be in the state of grace, and may have an unquestionable claim to Heaven,
yet for all that be destitute of such sensible comfort, for these consolations
do commonly flow from assurance of Gods grace, and the sense of his love shed
abroad in their hearts. Now it is not this assurance that does justify us, but
it supposes us justified already; we may rest on Christ, we may believe on
him, and yet want this faith of evidence, as some call it, while we have the
faith of adherence and dependence. Seeing therefore that this comfort is not an
inseparable quality from a godly man, we must then understand the promises of
God for comfort, as we do of other things which are separable from true grace.
God promises health, outward peace, long life, yea of all outward mercies,
godliness has a promise, but yet the godly do not always partake of these;
there are many of them sick, weak, poor and distressed, though under such
promises: And the reason is, because these are not necessary to salvation: They
are not required as Christ and grace is, for then no godly man should be
without them; yea they may be an impediment, an hinderance, and therefore it is
a mercy sometimes when God denies them. Thus it is in regard of our comforts,
it is for our good to be sometimes without them, God in much mercy suffers
his people to be in darkness, and to have no light. So that you may no more
wonder to see them sometimes without joy, then to see them sometimes without
the outward mercies of the world: Yet you must understand, when I thus compare
these soul-consolations to bodily ones, that I make them not of the same nature
with temporal outward mercies, as if they were no more spiritual than wealth,
or health are: No, I do not compare them in their nature, but in their property
of separability; they neither are of the essence of grace, nor of absolute
necessity to salvation, and herein they are alike: otherwise these consolations
they are spiritual mercies seated in the soul, and have intimate connection with
the graces of Gods Spirit. Gerson calls them Gratiae gratis datae, and indeed
they are the gifts of Gods Spirit, and are highly to be prized, yet as degrees
in grace are of Gods Spirit, but not necessary to salvation; the truth of grace
is, but not every degree of grace, for then no godly man could be saved that is
weak in faith, and in other graces. Thus it is with this comfort in some
respect, They are gifts of God, they are wrought by his Spirit, yet so as that
they do not necessarily accompany our salvation, and in this sense you must
understand the Doctrine.

2. There is a twofold joy, which I may call a direct and reflex one: The one
is There is a twofold joy, direct and reflex.
when we are carried with delight to that which is holy and good. The other is,
when we know and feel that we are thus carried out, joy is a fruit of faith, 1
Pet. 1. 8. In whom believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable. Now as faith
acts two ways, so also does joy. Faith acts directly by going directly to
Christ; and then faith acts reflexly, by looking upon this, that I do rest on
Christ. Thus there is a joy that does directly go to God and Christ by way of
delight and enlargement, being thus apprehended by faith. Of such a joy in holy
things Solomon speaks Prove. 21. 15. The Prophet Isaiah also Chap. 64. 5. And
then there is a joy flowing from the apprehension of this, that we do delight
in holy things. For a man may rejoice to find he can rejoice in what is good; a
man may be comforted in finding that Christ and heavenly objects, are matter of
delight to him. Now as it is with those two acts of faith, the former, which is
the direct one, that is absolutely necessary, by that we are justified, by that
Christ is made ours, by that we are in him, and he in us; but the latter is not
of the same necessity. It is no where said, If ye know that ye do believe, and
if ye be assured that ye do believe, but if ye do believe, then ye shall be
saved. It would be sad with many of Gods children, if none were justified, but
he that knows he believes. Thus it is also for joy, joy in its direct acts,
it is a necessary grace. It is our duty to rejoice in God and heavenly things,
as well as love them. And indeed there cannot be any grace of love, but there
is also the grace of joy. Hence Gal. 5. joy is made the fruit of the Spirit,
with other graces. And Romans 14. The Kingdom of Heaven is said to consist in
righteousness, and in joy in the holy Ghost. So that there is a joy, which
being a grace, is part of the new creature, and there cannot be godliness
without it; as is our love, so is our joy. But then there is joy as a
privilege, which (as you heard) arises from the knowledge of our being in the
state of grace, and this is communicable at Gods pleasure. Those that have the
most of Gods grace, may for a time have the least of it in sense, as we see in
Christ himself. So that we are to distinguish between joy as a grace, and joy
as a privilege. It Is of the latter the Doctrine is to be understood.

3. Yet further, The joy that Gods people partake of, may be considered either
as Joy is either spiritual, or sensitive and corporeal.
seated in the soul, or as in the sensitive part. The one is rational and
spiritual: The other is sensitive and corporeal. For the Scotists they say,
That as there are affections seated in the sensitive part, which are called
fear, joy, grief, etc. so they make some things answerable to these in the
ministerial substances. For, it may seem, the soul when separated from the body
does love joy, yea and Angels themselves, not that they are to be called
passions in them, because not corporeal, but they are so in us. Now this
distinction is made great use of by Casuists. There is (say they) a rational
love, and a sensible love. A godly man may sometimes feel a more sensible love
of his children, then he does of God, yet he is not to be discouraged, or to
think he does not love God better than his children. For according to his
rational love, which consists in the esteeming and prizing of Christ; so he
would part with all these when God calls, rather than deny his cause. Indeed
a learned Writer rejects this distinction of love intensive and appretiative,
(Cocceius de foedere) because we are bound to love God (says he) with all
sensible affection, as well as rational esteem; but no doubt the distinction
well explained is of great use. It is made use of also in regard of sorrow for
sin: Some tender hearts complain, they can shed tears, they can sensibly weep
and mourn for the loss of a father or a child, but they cannot do thus about
their sins. Here again we succor them, saying, There is the passion of sorrow
which stirs bodily, and the grace of sorrow which affects the mind and the
will. Thou do detest and hate sin, thou judge any evil to be suffered
rather than that committed; thou have an unspeakable displicency and dislike of
what thou have done, here is godly sorrow, though it be not passionately
expressed in thee; therefore repentance is called (...), because of the great
change upon the mind. Thus it is also of great use in the matter of joy. There
may be a rational solid joy, arising through faith, whereby the soul will
enjoy a peaceable tranquillity and serenity, when yet no bodily affectionate
joy may much be perceived. The Heathen could say, Gaudium est res severa.

Lastly, We are to distinguish in this Objection concerning the matter of thy
joy. Although God has denied thee outward arguments of joy; thou have no
health no friends, no outward supports to rejoice in, yet thou have the favor
of God, and his precious promises that are heavenly ravishment to thee. When
Paul and the other Apostles, were in dangers often, in troubles often, yet at
that time their hearts were replenished with spiritual consolation. Have thou
therefore no comfort, because thou want such outward ones as thy heart
desires? Let not soul-consolations seem small to thee, though with Lazarus thy
condition be so straightened, that thou can not get so much as a crum of bread.
Again, distinguish of the degrees of thy comfort: There is less comfort and
more comfort, yet comfort; there is a greater and lesser flame of fire, yet
both fire still. Thus though comfort, even the least, be like fire in the
bosom warming of the heart, yet it is capable of intension: Sometimes comfort
overfloweth, and like the Sun dispelleth every cloud away. Sometimes, again
comfort is there but in a combat, in an agony, conflicting with fears and
sorrows. Now will thou call that only comfort, which dries up every tear,
which removes every sigh. No, you must not expect perfect comfort any more
than perfect faith, perfect love. The Devil and sin does not only oppose thy
graces, but thy comforts: Therefore bless God, and be thankful for a drop of
comfort, though thou have not as much as thou desire. Oh consider, how justly
God might make thee a Cain, fearing every thing should kill and damn thee! How
justly may he make thee a Magor Missabib, fear round about thee, and all fear
within thee? Thus God might make thee a terror to thy self, should he deal
with thee according to thy sins. So that you must not only account great
comfort, comfort, but even be thankful for more sparing dispensations of it.

Lastly, Distinguish about the time of comfort. What though sometimes thy soul
seems to be like a wilderness full of howling beasts; what though in some
tribulations, thou criest out with David, Has the Lord forgotten to be
gracious? Yet this Sun afterward breaks through the clouds, so that thou
can say with David, Sorrow may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning. And Psalm. 126. 5. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. You must
know that God has seasons of joy. As there is a time to reap, and a time to
sow, so says Solomon. There is a time to laugh, and a time to mourn. Job had
indeed been a long while without the comforts of God, but at last you read all
was abundantly made up again. We must not therefore judge of comfort by one
time, or by one tribulation, but compare all together: as in matter of grace,
the godly are not to judge of their estate absolutely by some particular
temptation, for then they might pass false judgment upon their selves.

5. To clear this truth yet more, Consider of Gods tender and offer of comfort.
But it may be thy heart is froward and unbelieving, rejecting the consolations
of God. For although we say, God comfort his in all tribulation, yet that
must be understood so as that his people do their duty. God comfort the
godly afflicted, but it is the godly believing, the godly preparing and setting
himself to receive comfort; he must not be as Rachel that refused to be
comforted, as God speaks once or twice to us in his Word, for such or such a
duty; but if we refuse to hear, if we attend not, we go on in rebellion, yet
God offers sanctifying grace to us: Thus it is also for comfort; God comforts
again and again by his Word; by his Ordinances he often suggests, precious and
sweet arguments of joy to thy soul, but thou art peevish, dejected, and so they
are not received: as we cannot write on wet paper, neither will the moistened
strings of the instrument make any melodious sound: If therefore thou have not
comfort in thy troubles, may not thou blame thy self? If every Israelite had
not manna in the wilderness he may condemn himself; God did rain enough, but
his negligence slighted the getting of it.

SERMON. XLI.
The Works of Gods Spirit upon his People, are not only for their good, but
likewise for the Advantage of others.

2 COR. 1. 4. That we may be able to comfort them who are in any trouble, etc.
THe next particular to be considered of in his text, as it stands divided, is
the final Cause of Gods comforting his people, especially those that are in any
office in the Church; which is, That we may be able to comfort others.

So that in this latter part, we are to consider the final Cause it self, which
is, To be able to comfort others. Nihil dat quod not habet, is the old Rule.
They have no skill or ability to comfort others, who have not the experience
and feeling of this upon their own souls. It is not enough for the Ministers of
the Gospel to have devoured many Books of learning, to be able to decide
Polemical questions in Divinity, to convince gainsayers, to be Doctors
Angelical, subtle or profound; to be Mallei Hereticorum, The hammers of
Heretics; unless also they have the experimental works of Gods Spirit upon
their own souls. They are not able to apply themselves to the hearts of others.
Paul had not been able to comfort others, if the Lord had not practically
acquainted him with heavenly consolations.

2. There is the Subject, to whom, or the Persons, whose wounds Paul (like a
good Samaritan) is desirous to pour oil into; and that is, Them which are in
any trouble.

3. There is the manner how, which is, by that very comfort Paul himself found.
And

Lastly, There is the fontal and original Cause of this, Whereby we our selves
are comforted of God.

The final Cause will afford two Observations;

First, That the heavenly and spiritual works which God vouchsafes to his Gods
spiritual works upon his people, are not only for their own, but for others
spiritual advantage.
people, are not for themselves only, but for the advantage and edification of
others.

Who would not think that the inward comforts, and soul-consolations, should
not be wholly enclosed within our own breasts, that these should not be
communicated to others? Who would not say of these, as Solomon in another case,
Prove. 5. Let these fountains be only thine own, and not strangers with thee?
Yet God gives us these soul-comforts, that we may be able to revive and
comfort many sad troubled hearts, which lie languishing for want of them.

The second Observation is, That those have the greatest ability and fitness
to help the souls of others, who have had the experience and work of God upon
their own souls.

First, Let us consider the former Doctrine, viz. That those great and
spiriritual works which God vouchsafes to his children, are not for their own
god only, but for the good of others. If he said in a political sense, Nemo
sibi vivit sed patriae, it is much more true of a Christian, Non sibi vivit sed
Ecclesiae. He lives not to himself, but to the Church of God. Hence is that
frequent comparison in the Scripture, of the Church of God, and a body
together; making all Christians so many several Members, that if one rejoice,
all must rejoice with it.

To be thoroughly possessed of this truth, we are first to know, That there are
Of the distinction of the Schoolmen of spiritual Gifts. 1. Gratiae gratis datae.
two kinds of Gifts of Gods Spirit unto those of the Church. The Ancient
Schoolmen, which distinction is still retained with the Papists, is, that there
are Gratiae gratis datae, Favors freely given; which are bestowed, not so much
for the good of them that have them, as of the good of others. Such were those
extraordinary gifts of Gods Spirit in the primitive times, to work Miracles, to
speak with tongues, etc. And such are also those common gifts of Prayer and
Preaching, which many may have, and yet they be never the more holy. But as
water-pots, that conveighs water to the Garden, making it fruitful, while it
self bears no flowers at all; so are they. And truly, this is sadly to be
considered by all the Ministers of the Gospel, whether the gifts God gives
them, be not for the good of others more then their own. As the Nurses of young
Princes live upon excellent food, not for their own sake, but to give more
excellent nourishment to their young ones.

The other sort of gifts they call Gratiae, gratum facientes, such gifts, as he
2. Gratti^ gratum facientes.
that has them, must needs be accepted of with God. And these they make faith
and love, with the like graces. Now this distinction is absurd, for the Members
are confounded: The graces making acceptable, are graces freely given. It is
solely and wholly of the grace of God, to make thee differ from others in the
special work of sanctification, as it was in the primitive times, to make one
who had miraculous gifts to differ from another. And then it is false, for no
grace we have, does of it self make us gratos accepted of to God, but it is in
and through Christ, that their imperfections are pardoned, and so received.

Therefore our Divines do distinguish better: That there are Dona Ministrantia,
The Gifts of Gods Spirit are better distinguished into Dona Ministrantia, and
Sanctificantia.
and Dona sanctificantia; Gifts of service, and Gifts of sanctification. Gifts
of service are such which God gives for the use of the Church, Gifts
sanctifying, are such as are for the good of those that have them.

Now though this be true, yet in the second place, you must not limit this so
straightly, as that sanctifying gifts may not be serviceable gifts also. For,
it is plain, that in all the people of God, their very graces as well as their
gifts, are to be exercised for the good of others. Thy repentance, thy faith,
thy joy, may be put forth to quicken and edify others. Therefore we say in the
Doctrine, All the spiritual works of God upon the souls of his people, are not
only for themselves, but for others. All, not only gifts, but graces: Not only
their parts and their duties, but their holiness also. Hence (Prove. 15. 4.) an
wholesome tongue, which is the gift only that a godly man has, is said to be a
tree of life, because it does so much spiritual good to others. Think then,
that God has not given thee grace and comfort for thy self only, but for
others who may stand in need of thee. As it was with Christ the Head, so it
should be with his Members proportionably. Isa. 50. 4. To have the tongue of
the learned given them from God, to be able to speak a word in season to him
that is weary. As therefore God has given thee fulness temporally, to feed
the hungry, and to cloathe the naked, when such due objects of charity are
presented to thee. Thus also God gives thee faith, to help him that
complains he cannot believe: He gives thee comfort, to succor those that
can find no joy. This is to be considered, that thou be not a fountain
sealed up, but opened, whereat many may occasionally refresh themselves.

Thirdly, The godly man's improving his gifts and graces, does not at all hinder
Gifts are increased by being improved.
and diminish his own, but thereby increases and multiplyeth them. It is like
the widows giving of oil to the Prophet, which was so far from impoverishing,
that it did enrich her. We may not then refuse those who shall desire help for
their souls; as the wise Virgins did the foolish, saying, It might be there
would not be enough for themselves. No: the more thou art willing to season
others with thy own salt, to quicken and comfort others, by thy own quicknings
and comforts, herein thou will find thy self more edified, and the good will
rebound upon thy own self. For these improvings of thy gifts and graces
serviceably to others souls, will multiply thy own two ways.

First, God has promised, that to him which has, that is, which uses and
exercises his talent, more shall be given. The more these breasts give suck,
the more will milk abound. Thou may therefore look upon Gods promise, and
expect that while thou art warming others, spiritual heat will be increased in
thy own self: And

Secondly, The exercising of graces, does inwardly corroberate and strengthen
the principle of grace. The moro thou put forth thy graces to stir up
others, the more delight and joy will thou find in using of them. Therefore be
as the Olive Tree, and the Fig Tree of thy fatness and sweetness, enlivening
and cherishing of others who stand in need of thee.

These things promised, let us consider some of the choice Particulars, wherein
What are those ^ice things, wherein more particularly we are to be serviceable
to others. 1. Humiliation.
we may not only bring good to our own souls, but to others also.

First, That spiritual humiliation and brokennesse of heart which thou have
found, may be very powerful to persuade others of the bitterness of sin.
Say with meltings of thy soul to them, Oh, if thou had known, if thou had
ever felt what God has made me feel, what wonderful changes would be in thee
immediately! Those sins which are honey, would presently be as gall. Thus it
was with David, Psalm. 51. when he could recover from his broken bones, when he
could enjoy the face of God, which was hid from him; Then I will teach
transgressors thy ways. Then his heart could not hold any longer. He that had
sound how bitter a thing it was to provoke God by sin, would persuade others
also of it. Thus Christ he bids Peter, when he was converted, to confirm his
Brother: To use his own experience to help him. So that you see, even the very
sorrow and grief God has put thee into, let it be a real Sermon to others.
Our Savior made it an aggravation of the Jews wickedness, that if one should
rise from the dead; they would not believe. And certainly, if others will not
believe thee, who art (as it were) come out of hell, who have been in the
depths of Gods displeasure, their hearts must needs be much hardened. Oh then,
make use of what God has made thee feel, to be a furtherance to others! As
Paul, Knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. 11. He knew
the terror of the Lord experimentally, when he was stricken to the ground in a
Vision, and found the power of God so wonderfully upon him, in making of him
another man.

Secondly, The knowledge and true faith which God has given thee, do thou make
use of it to direct and preserve others. This knowledge and sound mind in 2.
The Knowledge of God, and true says.
Religion, is not indeed essentially accompanied with holiness: A man may be
very Orthodox, be sound in the Faith, as Hymeneus and Philetus were a while,
yet afterward made shipwreck of all. But yet it is a special gift of Gods
Spirit to be led into the truth; and although to have a sound mind only be not
enough to godliness; yet godliness cannot be without a sound mind, in some
measure or other. Every godly man is built upon the true foundation, though
there may be some hay and stubble, which, though it shall not damn him, because
not fundamental heresies, yet shall make his salvation the more difficult: He
shall be saved, so as by fire. If then God has preserved thee in the truth,
and that in times when many fall on thy righthand, and on thy left hand, having
this soul plague and infection upon them, let it be thy greater care to reduce
such: Let them have thy light, thy helps, and knowledge: Put thy light upon the
candlestick, and not under a bushel. Consider that place, James 5. 19, 20. If
any do err from the truth, and one convert him, let him know he shall save a
soul from death. So that you see the salvation or damnation of another, is
interested in thy improving of sounds knowledge to inform such. Howsoever the
Apostle Romans 14. in a particular case about things indifferent, advises,
saying, Have thou faith? have it to thy self: Yet take heed of doing so in
fundamental and essential truths of God: Do not there have faith to thy self,
but endeavor that all may be seasoned with the same sound knowledge. Even a
private Christian, though he is not to usurp the Office of a Teacher, yet he
has his proper sphere, wherein he may move to propagate the true knowledge of
Christ. This knowledge then is a talent, and expect that God will have an
account of the improving of it. Say, as of comfort in the text, so of sound
knowledge and truth, The Spirit of God has directed us into the truth, that we
may also be able to guide others.

Thirdly, Those temptations and assaults which the children of God have, are 3.
Temptations.
not only for themselves, but for others also: That they may be able to direct
and guide others, groaning under the like temptations. It is true, God works
a great good for his own people by these fiery darts of Satan. 2 Cor. 12. Paul
had those buffettings of Satan, that he might not be puffed up with those
wonderful revelations he enjoyed. There is no such way to keep the gracious
soul humble and lowly in its own self, as these affrights from the devil: Even
as vizors and such horrid representations (...) are children, and make them
run home to their Parents; so also do these buffettings of Satan and tumults
raised by him, drive us out of our selves; make us highly to prize Christ and
his righteousness: Yea, though these temptations be very irksome and into
^^rable in themselves, yet commonly none are such choice, spiritual, and
eminent Christians as those who have been in these combats. As dung, though
noisome in it self, yet it makes the field fruitful, and full of beauty; thus
do these temptations of Satan to a godly heart. But yet this is not all; By
these the Lord intends them to be admirably useful to others. Alas, how many
poor afflicted souls, especially new beginners, new Converts, have their
trembling hearts suggest to them, Who was ever tempted as thou art? Can any be
the Son of God, and have such horrid and vile injections in his soul as thou
have? What is this but the beginning of hell in thee? Is not damnation already
begun upon thee? Now for a troubled soul in these whirlepooles, to meet with
such who are able to say, They have been thus, and thus; these are no new
temptations, but what has usually befallen the godly: Is not such an one
called out by God, to pour oil into such wounds? Does not God plainly speak,
Therefore have thou been buffetted, tempted, and exercised, that such bruised
and wounded souls may receive comfort from thee? Hence it is that Christ
himself would be tempted, that he might be able to succor those that are
tempted, Heb. 2. 18. Thus by our temptations we are not only to learn many
things, but also to teach others. (But of this more in the second Doctrine.)

Lastly, Here are Consolations: And although these are of greater concernment
4. Consolations.
in the particular to every Believer, because the joy of the Lord is his
strength, hereby also he walks thankfully and fruitfully; yet let him take
heed of being narrow and sparing in using them for others comforts. For if thou
art a Minister of the Gospel, then thy work is not only to convert, but to
comfort; not only to bring out of sins, but out of fears and dejections. Thus
the Apostle at the last verse in this Chapter, We are helpers of your joy.
Consider that not only what is acquired by study, but what also is inspired by
God into thy soul, may be of admirable efficacy to others. Though Christ's
Sermons and Parables were like a two-edged sword, mightily dividing between
true grace and hypocrisy, yet (Isa. 50. 4.) he expresses his Ministry by
this, to speak a word in season to the weary: and this he calls the tongue of
the learned. We call it Learning, to allege the Ancients, to be full of Greek
and Hebrew, to empty out the bowels of School-learning: yea, some are so
simple, as to account studied words, and composed language, rare Learning;
whereas speech is like the Arrow, that is not commended for studs of gold, or
Jewels on it, but if it hit the mark. Thus that is Oratory which is most proper
to effect the end of our speech: To make the sinners weep, the hard heart to
tremble, and the sad to be comforted. You see it is the tongue of the learned to
do this. Does then God give thee comfort? be not thou wanting then to support
and comfort the feeble-minded. It may be thou art a kind of a spiritual Dives,
full of consolations, and think thou have store enough laid up for thee,
both to live and die with, take heed lest some poor Lazarus would be glad of
thy crumbs, and thou do not give to him.

SERMON. XLII.
That those only can make fit applications of Spiritual things to others, who
have an Experimental knowledge of them in their own souls.

2 COR. 1. 4. That we may be able to comfort those that are in any trouble.
THere remains a second Doctrine contained in the final cause, why God
comforts his people, viz. That they may be able to comfort others. From whence
there is this Observation obvious:

That those only are able to make fit applications to the souls of others, who
have Those only can make fit applications to others, who have the work of Gods
Spirit upon their own souls. A twofold knowledge of spiritual things 1.
Speculative and Theoretical.
had the experimental working of Gods grace upon their own souls.

That we might be able, implying, otherwise there would not be that sufficiency
and fitness in us which ought to be.

To discover this, consider,

First, That there is a twofold knowledge of divine and spiritual things: The
one is speculative, and merely Theoretical, when we know them, yea and it may
be give a sound and firm assent to them: And such are all those learned men who
are very Orthodox, and wonderfully able to maintain the truths of Christ
against all opposers whatsoever. Such as these are, God raises up many times
as eminent Pillars in the Church. But because this is not enough to
salvavation; therefore in the second place, there is a saving, affectionate,
practical 2. Practical and experimental.
and experimental knowing of truth, whereby we do not only believe such things,
but by believing we do love and embrace the truths we know: We do credendo
amare, we have a faith which works by love. Now it must be confessed, that
the condition of those who are only Orthodox, and no more, is much to be
pitied and lamented: To write against Arminians and others, about the work of
Gods grace in Conversion, and yet never experimentally to have this upon their
own souls: So to treat of Justification, and Christ, yet not at all to have the
saving and sweet operations of these things upon their souls, is greatly to be
bewailed: To be like the builders of Noah's Ark, that proved a place of rest
and refuge in the time of the deluge for others, when they themselves had no
advantage by it. But it is no wonder that such excellent knowledge, and of such
admirable lovely use in the Church, be not saving, while it goes no further;
because practice and doing is the end of all Theological knowledge. If ye know
these things, happy are ye if ye do them, Joh. 13. 17. So that this
experimental and practical knowledge of divine things, is that which
compleateth the former. To know Christ, so as to have him; to know
regeneration, so as to be born again; this is the glory of all knowledge. Hence
is that Commandment, (2 Cor. 13. 5.) To examine our selves, to try our selves,
whether we be in the faith, and in Christ or no. The latter word signifies, to
make an experience, or an experimental trial of grace in us. So that if you had
a man who could speak like an Oracle in all the points of Divinity, who was a
very Miracle in respect of learning, yet he is but a tinckling cymbal, and
speaks in the matters of Religion like a Parrot, not rightly or fully
apprehending of them, till he has inwardly tasted of the sweetness of them.

Secondly, This saving experimental knowledge does differ in its whole kind,
This speculative and practical knowledge of spiritual things differ in the
whole kind.
and is of another nature in a moral consideration, from a mere Orthodox, or
bare speculative knowledge. I shall not enter into a large dispute concerning
the difference between illumination in a temporary believer, (although now we
are not so much speaking of the habitus fidei, as Theologiae, which may be in
learned knowing men) and that which is in a true convert: We shall suppose it
for a truth from Heb. 6. That those who were enlightened, yea and had some
experimental workings, (of which a non) yet they had not (...), they had not
the things that hold fast salvation; and therefore the Apostle hoped for better
things. They therefore so differ, that take a man who does only know divine
things by Books, by Sermons, by reading of Authors, and was not at all
acquainted wih the Spirits effectual teaching by the Word; and let him at last
come to have these things set home upon him by an effectual demonstration of
Gods Spirit; let him know these things as the truth is in Jesus, which the
Apostle mentions Ephesians. 4. and he will then cry out, acknowledging that he
never knew any thing till then: That he was in the dark; that he had but a
learned kind of folly; that he spoke of these things, as men do of Countries
which they see in Maps, only by a general knowledge, having never traveled to
see the Countries themselves. There is such a fuller power accompanying this
practical knowledge, that the former was but a shadow to this substance.
Observe many men, Do they not read the Scripture? Do not they go from Chapter
to Chapter? But till it be the ingrafted Word in them, they have the images and
pictures of things, not the things themselves. All knowledge that is
accompanied with some kind of affections, is not an experimental knowledge.


In the third place, That is not to be called experimental knowledge, which may
be accompanied with some kind of sensible affections. Mat. 13. the temporary
believer received the word with joy. You see then, that some may have joy, and
that from the Word, yet this not be the true saving knowledge or faith. Heb. 6.
some are there also said, not only to be enlightened, but to have tasted the
good word of God. Here you may observe, that some may taste, may have joy; all
which do infer some affectionate inward experimental workings on the soul,
and yet not attain to have the true and honest heart: And the reason is,
because these affectionate workings, they are but transitory, they quickly
vanish away: There is no settled constancy or permanency in them. So that we are
not to give credit to all the affections, nor to all inlargements that we may
find in our selves, even about holy things, but we are to be sure that there be
deep rooting enough. Hence

Fourthly, All experimental workings of the soul, are to be judged and tried by
All experimental workings upon the soul, are to be tried by the Scriptures.
the Scripture. Our hearts being full of guile and imposture, the devil also
transforming himself into an Angel of light, hence it may come about that we
may have the experience of much joy, of many inlargements, and yet all the
while be in the devils ways. Hence it is that all Sectaries almost, will tell
us of the great support and comfort they have had, and that ever since they
embraced those new ways; yea, some make themselves to be the only spiritual
men, that all other are in the flesh: as Tertullian wrote a Book against the
Orthodox, stiling it Contra Psachicos, as those that were merely natural, in
the mean time he pretended to private revelations. The experiences therefore
which we find in our souls, we must examine and try, lest we make that to be of
God, which is indeed of the devil. No doubt many deluded souls, in dangerous
and damnable ways, comfort others of the same way with them, by that comfort
wherewith they are comforted, not of God, but of the devil. Therefore let our
experiences, especially of comfort, be judged by the Word, in these
Particulars. How our experiences are to be judged by the Word. 1. Are they from
Scripture rightly understood?


First, In the manner and way how thou come by them, Are they by the
Scriptures truly understood? (I say, truly understood:) For, if thou abusest
Scripture, putting thy own sense upon it, and thereby receiving comfort, it is
no longer then Verbum Dei, but verbum tuum; thou wrestest it, and make it thy
own, or the devils, and not Gods. If therefore thy experience of comfort be
grounded on the Word, if thy consolation flow from hence, then this will abide,
That we through comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15. 4. The
Spirit of God does first lead into all truth, and then into all comfort.

Secondly, In the original, and the efficient cause; is it from God, from the
2. Are they from the Spirit of God?
Spirit of God? Or from the devil, who may harden thy heart, and make thee have
such joy as mad men have, not feeling their own misery? The comfort and the joy
that is truly so, is still attributed to God and the Holy Ghost, as the
fountains thereof.

Thirdly, Does thy experience of Consolation make thee more humble and empty?
3. Do they make thee more holy and humble?
Does it drive thee out of all thy vain carnal confidences? This argues it
comes from God, if with the Centurian, when Christ comes to thy soul, thou
say, Lord, I am unworthy this joy, this consolation should enter into me.
And therefore the more comfort, the more lowly and debased in thy own eyes: And
never more, then when the most joy. This is a good experience of comfort, as
coming from God. So also, if this comfort be conducing to holiness, if by this
thou art more quickened to mortify sin, to subdue the corruptions that
remain; if this be like oil to the wheels, thou art more fervent, more Reasons
confirming the Doctrine. 1. They that have not this experimental knowledge,
they have no skill to cure others.
zealous in all holy duties, then make much of this comfort, for it comes from
Heaven. If then we have the experience of Gods working upon our souls, both in
the way of grace, and the way of comfort, then, and never till then, are we
fitted to deal with the souls of others. And there are these Reasons:

First, None can wisely be a Physician to heal a disease in another, unless he
have skill and understanding in the nature of it, and the fit remedy for it.
Now while a man has no experimental knowledge of Gods workings upon his own
soul, he has no skill, no heavenly heart about the diseases in others souls.
Bring a poor wounded soul that is burdned with sin, that would be directed
into Evangelical comforts, to a Pharisaical, self-righteous Doctor, and alas,
he will, as Ely thought the poor weeping woman, bitter in soul, and praying to
God, to be drunk; so will these think such an one mad and foolish. Hence (you
heard) Christ would be tempted as we are, that he might succor those that are
tempted; that he might have the tongue of the learned, to speak to such who are
weary. Those that have not been thus humbled, thus exercised, thus comforted,
they are no ways able to be any helpful comforters, but like the Priest and
the Levite, will pass by those who are thus wounded.

Secondly, As such can have no skill or understanding, so they cannot have any
sutablenesse of pity and compassion to those that are so afflicted in spirit,
2. They can have any sutablenesse of of pity and compassion.
and needed comfort. She said, Non ignara mali miseris, etc. The experience she
had of miseries, made her pity those that were in the like. God would have the
Jews be kind to strangers, because they had once been strangers themselves.
Thou that have been in the deep waters of Gods wrath, thou that know how
insupportable it is, to feel the frowns and wrath of God for sin, with what
melting bowels, with what pitiful affections will thou be, like the good
Samaritan? Hence it is, that as the Lord Christ himself did conflict with the
wrath of God, being in unspeakable agonies, so also many of the choicest
servants of God, especially Ministers, have been under the harrow and hammer of
these desertions, that they may be more polished for Gods building. Luther does
manifest in several places, what the great works of God were that he felt on
himself, so that though of a stout and undaunted spirit, yet the anger of God
did beat him to powder; and finding no help for his afflicted soul in any
Popish Principles, no more then the Dove could place of abode, while the waters
did overflow, at last, when it pleased God to comfort him by Evangelical
comforts, through a right understanding of Christ and righteousness, what a
tree of life did his tongue become to others? How many did he comfort, by those
comforts God had comforted him? Calvin also, it is noted of him, that he was a
man of deep and retired thoughts within, yet did retain them much in his own
breast; and no doubt, by this he was the more prepared to be an excellent
Instrument in the Church of God. We see then, he only, that has the
experimentals, either of the bitterness of sin, or the sweetness of the
Gospel, is only able, with a tender heart and hand, to cure a wounded soul. And
certainly, if the Apostle make this an Argument, Gal. 6. 1. to rejoynt (as it
were) one that is overtaken in a fault, because the most spiritual may be
tempted, how much rather when thou have been tempted? So that this experimental
way in holy things, works much commiseration, and sympathizing with those who
groan under the hand of God upon them. When Judas was in that perplexed agony,
crying out, I have sinned, in betraying the innocent blood; with what stony and
seared hearts did the Pharisees reject him, saying, What is that to us, look
thou to that? It Is a mercy for brokenhearted sinners, to fall into the hands
of a tender experienced Believer, who has felt what they feel, and so is able
to conceive of their sad estate. And indeed, even as for instruction of the
ignorant, there needs much patience, so there does also pity, which will put
thee upon unwearied diligence to comfort the dejected. For, it is not a work
soon done, they must bear with many infirmities; they are full of subtle
objections; and when they are for a while comforted, they loose all presently
again: insomuch that he must have tender bowels, who is not wearied out with
their weaknesses.

Thirdly, Such experienced ones are only able to deal with tempted souls, 3.
Because such only are found real and in earnest.
to instruct and comfort them, because the afflicted find such only real. Such
are in earnest: He that has experimentally felt the bitterness of sin,
makes it manifest to others, that it is not mere Oratory or Eloquence, that
sets him against sin, but something within, that he feels burning like fire
within. The very Heathen could say, Si vis me flere dolendum est primo tibi, A
man that has not inwardly felt the power of truth upon his heart, he is so
cold, so formal, so lazy, that you cannot tell whether he believes the things
he preaches to be true, or no. And so also for comfort, must it not much
satisfy the dejected soul to meet with one under the same temptations, under
the same fears, and yet now prays with joy, hears with joy? Thou can find
all thy heart (as it were) in him, and yet he is delivered, he is comforted,
who thought it as impossible as I do: Whereas if a man be a stranger to these
workings of God, the tempted soul flies off, saying, He knows not how to
judge of these things; I can give no credit to him.

Fourthly, Such are only able, because they alone are faithful. They dare not
flatter them; they dare not sooth them: They will give them no comfort, 4.
Because such alone are faithful.
if there be no cause for it. Now the truly broken soul, loves this faithful
dealing better then flattery. There is a woe to those that made the heart of
those merry, whom God would have made sad. And there are many in the
ministerial Office, that are unworthy, and flattering in this case, comforting
every one that lies a dying, though never so profane. Now he that is truly
humbled, cares not for such a man's comfort, he knows he will not deal
faithfully; he will send me to hell with comfort. And whereas it is one rule,
that experienced Divines give to tempted souls, That under their fears and
doubts, they must believe the judgment of the Ministers of God about their
condition, rather then themselves; this must be understood of sound, faithful,
and experienced Ministers; otherwise, it is a most dreadful thing to fall into
the hands of fawning, flattering Ministers, who will encourage them, and send
them to Heaven, when they themselves know not either what true sorrow for
sin, or true Evangelical comfort means.

Use 1. Of Exhortation to the Ministers of Gods Word, not to think learning,
study, reading of Books, enough to qualify thee for a Ministerial employment,
but implore much the work of Gods Spirit herein. A good heart, a gracious
heart, will help as well as good Books. Do not rest only upon studied and
acquired gifts, but pray also for infused and inspired.

Use 2. Of Instruction to the people of God, How useful it is to communicate
their gracious experiences one to another; much edification, much consolation
may come hereby. Whose sadness have thou comforted? Whose deadness have thou
quickened? It may be thou have learned a precious receipt how to cure such a
sin, such a temptation, and why do thou not help others?

SERMON. XLIII.
It is a special Duty incumbent upon every one both Minister and Christian, to
apply comforts to the Afflicted in a right manner.

2 COR. 1. 4. That we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble.
IN this final cause, we considered the Subject, who are fit for this comfort,
and they are said to be such who are in any trouble. Those that abound in
mercies need no comfort; we are not to give honey to such full stomachs. But
the troubled, the afflicted, these are they, whose condition we are to
commiserate. From whence observe,

That it is a special duty, in a right manner, to comfort those that are in It
is a special duty, in a right manner, to comfort the afflicted.
trouble.

We are not only to seek the conversion of such who go astray, but also to
regard the consolation of those that lack it. Hence Lam. 1. the Church
complains, That she had none to comfort her. The Apostle speaks of this
duty often, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 18. Comfort one another with these things. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
11, 14. Comfort the feeble minded. You see by this pressing this duty so often,
that we are seriously and diligently to practice it, lest as God will judge for
neglect of corporal alms to fit objects of charity, so also he will call to
account for the not dispencing of these spiritual alms. Thou have not visited
those, who were spiritually imprisoned by the guilt of their sins; neither fed
those with the bread from Heaven who were hungry. Hence it is that the Apostle
speaking concerning the incestuous person, who was now deeply humbled for his
sin, 2 Cor. 2. 7. exhorts them to comfort him, lest he be swallowed up with
too much sorrow. We have a notable instance for this in Jobs friends, Job 2.
11. who when they heard of all the evil that was come upon him, they made an
appointment together to come and mourn with him, and to comfort him. Thus you
see that it is a special duty, we are carefully to discharge, to refresh the
souls of others who are cast down; That as the custom was among the Jews, and
Solomon he gives a precept about it, Prove. 31. 6, 7. Give wine unto those that
are of an heavy heart, that he may drink, and remember his misery no more. So
we are in a spiritual consideration to give the wine of the Gospel to such as
mourn for Propositions clearing the truth. 1. There are two sorts of troubles.
1. Spiritual and inward.
their sins.

To discover this truth, Consider

First, The troubled (as you heard formerly) are of two sorts; Those who are
afflicted in soul, as the incestuous person, whom sorrow had almost swallowed
up as a whirlpool. These that call for a drop of water (as it were) to cool
their scorching souls, and cannot have it. To such as these we are to apply our
selves with all tenderness to comfort them, as the Apostle exhorted the
Corinthians. For seeing that a wounded spirit is more hardly born, than any
outward misery whatsoever; no wonder that in this case if ever, we come with
all comforting medicines to heal them and revive them. We read the Lord Christ,
when he was in those agonies, conflicting with the sense of Gods wrath, that
even he himself had an Angel to comfort him. Must Christ the Son of God have
an Angel sent to comfort him? How much more then a poor wretched sinner, ready
to fall into hell with the burden of his sins? This is fully represented by
Elihu; Job 33. 28. where speaking of a man chastened by the Lord, and consuming
away, so that he does even abhor to eat his bread, If there come an
Interpreter, a Messenger, one amongst a thousand, that can show to such his
uprightness, that make it evident to him that he is no hypocrite, but the
truth of grace abides in him, then his flesh shall be fresh as a child's, he
shall pray to God, and he will be favorable, and he shall see his face with
joy. See what a wonderful change such a messenger may make, he does even raise
him from the dead, he that was pininig away is returned to his youth, and this
is for spiritual troubles.

Again, in the second place, There are outward troubles; and it is our duty to
2. Outward.
comfort such also, and endeavor to turn their water into wine; and of such
troubles happily the Apostle speaks chiefly in this Text. For although God be
ready to fill their hearts with joy, yet he will have this done many times by
the help of others, because we being members in the same body, are to be
accordingly serviceable to one another.

Hence in the second place, Every one in trouble does greatly need the
assistance and help of others to comfort them. Take the most godly Minister, or
the most 2. The afflicted need the help of others to comfort them, though
themselves be never so skillful in the comsorting others.
able Christian, who have been most eminent and successful to comfort others,
yet when they have been tempted and cast down themselves, they have not bin
able to make use of those directions they have given to others. As Physicians,
though never so able to help others, yet in their own diseases, they need the
advice of others: Insomuch that there is no Christian in any trouble can say, I
need not the comfort of any, the help of any, I can support and comfort my self
well enough. Thus Paul, Romans 1. 12. though so eminent an Apostle caught up into
the third Heaven, yet he did long to see the Romans, That he might be comforted
with them, though that might be in respect of their graces, to see this
flourish, as in other places, Ye are my Crown and my Joy, if you stand fast in
the Lord. But howsoever we see job, though so eminent, yet not able to pour oil
into his own wounds, he is without comfort, and cannot help himself.

Now there are these Reasons, Why those who are afflicted, though never so able
and gracious, yea excellently skillful to comfort others, yet they themselves
need help from others in their temptations:

First, Because their temptations do darken and obnubilate their own
judgments, Reasons. 1. Because remptations darken the judgment.
and so they are not able to see that ground, and those arguments of comfort,
which others may. It is with them, as those who would behold their face in a
broken glass, or in muddied streams; like those that look through a green
glass, they judge every thing green; while judgment is kept clear, though
faith be weak, yet still there is some support; but then is the soul wholly
cast down, when the eye is become darkness, when in stead of a Father it
apprehends God a Judge; when instead of beholding the gracious works of Gods
Spirit in themselves, they think they see nothing but hypocrisy and rottenness
in themselves. Oh now how welcome is such an one of a thousand, who show to
that man his uprightness! 2. Because the sense of their grief does wholly
possess them.


Secondly, The most eminent in their troubles need comfort from others, Because
the sense and feeling of their grief does wholly possess them, so that they
mind nothing else. Whatsoever it be that is a burden upon them, with this they
rise, and go to bed, and groan under it; now another Christian is very fit to
put them in mind of such promises, to remember them of such passages in
Scripture, which their immoderate sorrow had wholly driven out of their mind.
The soul of a man cannot be intent to many things at once; therefore the sense
and feeling of its particular exercise takes up the whole heart, as if there
were no Scripture, no promise, no balm in Gilead; for any then to be a
Remembrancer, a Monitor; you forget such a place, you remember not what the
Scripture delivers concerning your condition, or you do not think of what you
have formerly. Say with David, I will remember the works of the Lord of old.
Thus (I say) even the most eminent are so apt to be sensible of what is upon
them, that they remember not such things as may do them good.

Thirdly, Even the most eminent, who are in any trouble, they cannot so bear 3.
Because the most eminent, when in troubles, are subject to much unbelief and
frowardness.
it, but they are subject to unbelief, to discontent, to frowardness, to many
sad exercises of soul. And therefore no wonder, if they need the help of others
to allay that evil spirit in them, as Martha said, Lord, if thou had been
here, my brother had not died: So may thou say, Oh if such a Christian, such
a Minister had been with me, I had not been so impatient, I had not been so
dejected! We cannot be in exercises, especially in spiritual desertions, and
the sense of Gods wrath; but withal there will arise much sin, there will be
froth and mud that our hearts will send forth. In this boiling of the soul
there will arise some scumme. It is true in Christ, although he was under those
disconsolate desertions destitute of comfort, yet all the while there was no
sin in him, no grace was weakened, though his comfort was abated, his soul was
like a glass with pure water in it, all the moving and tossing of it up and
down, could not cause any filth or mud in it; but it is otherwise with us, our
souls have mud, a sinful sediment in the bottom, and no sooner are we tossed
and moved up and down, but this comes to the top, our corruption shows it
self presently; and therefore we need the prayers, the advice of others, yea
rebuke sometimes, because like Rachel, We refuse to be comforted.

Fourthly, Every one needs comfort from others in trouble, Because 4. Because
the Devil is then most busy.
the Devil is then most forward and busy; He is ready to accuse God to thee,
and to accuse thee to God; He moves in job's wife, that he should curse God
and die. He is the Prince of darkness; and a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour; and those that are afflicted they are almost in his jaws: The room is
almost ready swept and garnished for him: How many in their troubles has he
prevailed upon to despair, to self-murder, to destroy themselves? Thus he is
watching at his advantage, to provoke thee in thy troubles, to impatience, to
discontent, and from these to rage and fretting against God, and from these to
final despair: Shall then the Devil be thus busy to assault a poor soul? and
will thou not be as diligent to recover him?

Lastly, Though God be the God of all comfort, and so he can if he please
Lastly, God has appointed Ministers and Christians as a means to comfort
others.
comfort without any Paul' s, any Ministers, or Christians, yet he has
appointed their service as a means by which he will comfort us. It might be
thought a vain thing, to send for Minister or Christians to comfort, seeing it
is God only that can do this; but you must know, God will do it by his
instituted means. Whereas therefore it is the Devils great temptation to keep
off such afflicted ones from coming to the public Ordinances, from Prayer,
from revealing and manifesting their temptations, to those that are holy and
wise: Let such troubled souls know, that this is the way to throw themselves
irrecoverably into the Devils mouth; and therefore though God will comfort; yet
it must be in the use of the means appointed by the Ministry, by Prayer, by
Conference: Therefore though thou complainest, thou dare not pray, thou
dare not come to the Ordinances, for then thy temptations are most violent
and fiery, yet give not them over, for in and through these God will at last
communicate comfort to thee; God is the God of comfort through the instituted
and appointed means of comfort. Indeed if by an absolute necessity thou art
deprived of all means of comfort from others, as many of the Martyrs have been,
then thou may expect immediate consolations from God, and that he will be in
stead of all Ministers, and godly friends to thee. And so much for the second
general head.

In the third place, The dispensation of comfort to those that are in trouble,
3. The dispensation of comfort to the afflicted, is either Charitative or
Potestative.
is of two sorts, Charitative and Potestative. Charitative is that which every
Christian in the way of love is bound to do to another. When the Apostle
commanded the Th^ssal^nians, to comfort one another, he speaks to them as
private Christians. Potestative is that whereby the Ministers of the Gospel,
who are in Power and Office, do administer consolation to others. And as the
Minister in Office has a peculiar promise from God in the discharge of his
Office; so may the private Christian expect a greater success in his labors,
when faithfully discharged: For the Office is not enough, unless it be
dispensed in Gods way. Hence to them is given the Keys or Power to bind and
loose, with this addition, that what they do shall be ratified, that is, as
they say, Clave non errante, provided that they bind or loose in a
Scripture-way. The Minister then of the Gospel is by his Office to comfort as
well as to terrify, to loose as well as to bind; not that he does these things
authoritatively, but ministerially and declaratively only, yet so that in the
declaration of this, a specia: success may be expected from God. Hence James 5.
14, 15. Those who are sick, are commanded to call for the Elders to pray for
them; and in that is included all other duties requisite to the saving of that
sick man's soul. Yea some have been so greatly disconsolate, and tempted by
Satan, that learned and pious Divines have though is convenient, to give a
particular absolution, and private application of the Gospel to such an humbled
sinner, and that in a ministerial way, as in the name of Christ.

Fourthly, We say in the Doctrine, That it is a duty in a right manner to 4.
What is required to the comforting others in a right manner: 1. Knowledge of
the temptation and disposition of the person.
administer comfort to such as are in trouble. Now that right manner
comprehends very much, for an unseasonable and unwise, or unfaithful comfort,
does destroy rather than do good; even as Physic unseason by given. To a right
manner, there is required:

1. A skill and knowledge of the temptation, as also the disposition of him who
is thus exercised. To be a Physician of souls requires admirable prudence and
wisdom above what is in the master of the body. Every temptation is not cured
by every comfort, neither is every exercised man the same he appears to be;
he may be an hypocrite, he may live in known sins to himself, yet secret to
others; and if comfort be given to every one that complains, this will be to
give pearl to swine. Job's friends, though wise and godly, did mistake in the
nature of Job's affliction, thinking it was for some extraordinary sin, or
his hypocrisy in the ways of God, whereas it was for the trial of his graces:
They also mistook about his person, condemning him for an hypocrite, when yet
he was full of integrity. Thus you see we may mistake on the right hand, and on
the left.

2. The right way of comforting lies in taking the Scripture-way, and that 2.
The discovery of sin, and then the application of comfort.
is by discovering sin, and searching to the very bottom, and then to give
comfort; as you do in wounds, go to the bottom before you heal. The Scriptures
do sadly complain of those Priests that daubed with untempered mortar, that
cried Peace when there was none; and no doubt many Ministers shall answer for
their applying of false comforts, as well as teaching false Doctrines. Every
sick man looks that the Minister should only comfort him; if he speak of
sins and damnations, he is counted cruel, and one that will drive men to
despair. But content your selves, we must not, we dare not comfort, but in the
Scripture-way; and that is to such only as do mourn for their sins; and that
upon true grounds. For every Pharaoh and Ahab can humble themselves, while the
hand of God is upon them, and they think they shall die; but these are not the
mourners that God would have comforted; thou must bewail thy sins from
spiritual principles and heavenly motives, such as will hold in thy health, as
well as in thy sickness. This then is the soul of this Doctrine, It Is a duty to
comfort those who are in a trouble, but in a wise, faithful Scripture-way.
Otherwise those damned souls thrown into hell, will to all eternity curse those
Ministers that cried Peace, peace to them: Oh that ye had cried hell, hell,
damnation, damnation to us; that might have done us more good!

SERMON. XLIV.
That the same Grounds of Comfort, which revive the Hearts of one Godly man,
may do the same likewise to another.

2 COR. 1. 4. By the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.
WE shall at this time finish the Text. For whereas two things remain in the
Division, The Manner, how the Apostles do comfort others, and that is, By the
comfort wherewith they themselves are comforted. And the Fontal Cause of all,
who is said to be God. Of this later, we have said enough already. We shall
therefore at this time dispatch the former. That comfort by which the Apostles
themselves were refreshed, by that did they revive others, even those that were
far inferior to them both in gifts and graces. So that as by the same Sun
both the rich and the poor do see; one finds the sweetness of the light as well
as the other. Thus also by the same grounds of comfort, that any godly man may
be supported, all may be. Observe,

That those grounds of comfort which revive the heart of one godly man may The
same grounds of comfort that revive the heart of one godly man, may do so to
another too.
also do another.

That which is wine to make glad the heart of Paul, will also exhilarate the
hearts of others, who believe in Christ. That which is honey to one cannot be
gall to another.

This truth has its great practical use. And

First, Let us consider, That there are general grounds of comfort for all the
1. There are both general and particular grounds of comfort.
godly in all their tribulations, and there are special particular ones. The
general grounds of comfort are such, that all the godly may make use of at all
times, be they Jew or Gentile, bond or free, eye or foot in the body of Christ,
there is no difference, no exemption, this fountain is set open. Neither is it
like the pool of Bethesda, wherein the first only that stepped in could be
healed, for here all are invited to drink, first and last, and that abundantly.
There are Catholicon comforts, that let our diseases be what they will be,
these are proper to cure us. There are some promises so full of general comfort
for every condition, that they are made for the meridian of every godly man.

Let us give you some summary draught of them: As

1. That all afflictions do come from the love of a Father to such as believe.
What are the general grounds of comfort. 1. All afflictions come from a Father.
So that although they be grievous to flesh and blood, and have a bitter taste,
yet they come from a sweet root. These thorns do grow upon a vine. These bitter
streams come from a sweet fountain. Now this ground of comfort belongs to all
that have an unfeigned love to God. Can thou make out thy evidence of being
in Christ? Is thy name to be found in the book of life? Then this comfort thou
may apply to thy self; be thy condition or quality what it can be, thou
may boldly take this cordial, and it is as proper for thee, as a David or
Paul, any of those who are pillars in godliness. Heb. 12. 6. For whom he
loves, he chasteneth. So that you see here is such an argument of comfort,
that every member of the body of Christ may use.

2. Another general ground of comfort, is, The end and fruit of afflictions. As
they come from Gods love, so they are to subdue sin, to bring us nearer 2.
The end is good.
to God. Hence afflictions are compared to the fire that purges away the
dross, to winnowing that drives away the chaff; to pruning that cuts off the
luxuriant branches, and makes the other branches more fruitful. They are given
by Christ the wise Physician of our souls as heavenly physic, and admirable
remedies to crucify to sin, and to quicken to righteousness. If God denies
thee such outward comforts thou desire, know that this very denial is for thy
good; and dare thou say, Lord, let me have them, though they damn me; Let me
not be afflicted, though it will do me good, Quid ^sit v^l prosit, novit
medicus, non egrotus. Thus the Apostle Romans 8. All things shall work together
for the good of those who love God. The Apostle also speaks notably of these
afflictions in respect of the issue of them, as well as of the original whence
they flow, Heb. 12. 9, 10, 11. where a threefold advantage is said to come by
them:

1. By yielding to the Father of Spirits chastising us, we live. Tribulations
therefore are the way to make us live spiritually here, and eternally
hereafter. If it were not for afflictions thou might die and be damned; They
have prevented much sin; They have been like a file to the iron to get off
the rust; They have been like the plowing and harrowing of the ground to fit
thee to bring forth fruit. And

2. God is said to chastise us for our profit, which is expressed to be, That
we might be partakers of holiness. Tribulations then are very profitable and
advantageous things, though flesh and blood can hardly say so. It may be thy
afflictions have done thee more good, than all the mercies thou ever had. And
therefore under every exercise, examine, What profit have I got? Wherein am I
made more holy? And then

3. At the 11th verse, after the grievous and burdensome way of them for the
present, afterward they will yield a peaceable fruit of righteousness. The
chastening does but seem grievous, and that for the present, but afterward it
makes more holy, which is said to be the peaceable fruit of it. The soul that
raged and fretted, finding the benefit, begins then in a peaceable quiet manner
to bless and praise God for it. This is a General comfort. Every godly man may
say, this belongs to me in my afflictions, as well as to any other.

3. Not to be too large here, The benefits and heavenly advantages, 3. The
advantages that come from Christ.
which come from Christ, being ours, these also are comforts in common. There
is no fiery sword to keep out of this Paradise. Romans 8. Does not the Apostle
conclude those great privileges of Justification, of Perseverance in that
state, of conquest over all spiritual enemies, and that from such general
grounds, as all the people of God may claim to it, Because Christ died, and
because Christ is risen; because he has given us Christ, and how then not with
him all things else? Is there any believer so weak, so contemptible, that
Christ did not die for, and rise for? Is there any to whom the Father has not
given Christ? If so, you see, that what comforted Paul may comfort you. It is a
vain Position of Papists, that Paul speaks so assuredly in that condition,
because of an extraordinary revelation that he had, that Christ was his; for he
grounds his persuasion upon those general arguments which belong to every godly
man. Christ then, and his presence, with all his benefits, is a cordial to
every believer. This Sun of Righteousness arises with healing in his wings
to the least believer; as well as the greatest: The The Dwarf as well as the
Giant may hold this pearl in his hand. But

In the second place, besides such general comforts, which are (as some Of the
special and particular grounds of comfort.
say of Manna) answering all dainties, and was to every man's palate, that which
he most delighted in: There are special and particular comforts for special and
particular temptations. So that as every disease needs a peculiar remedy, so
every temptation a proper comfort: And therefore that special comfort will not
serve one in his temptation, which does another in a different one. And hence
it is, that it is an art of arts, and much heavenly wisdom is required, to
administer the proper comfort for such a grief. This makes Casuistical
Divinity, which is applied wholly to rectify and comfort a wounded conscience,
more difficult than Polemical is. The afflicted soul has its (...), its deeps;
and Satan also in their temptations has his deeps likewise: Insomuch that it
is choice prudence to give the proper cordial, and to find out the true way of
comforting such, yet though there be special comforts in special cases, yet all
the godly that are in like temptations, may, and ought to take the like
comforts. That which has done any godly man good under such an exercise, may
do thee also good, if thou art not froward and unbelieving.

In the next place, let us consider, Why those arguments which some godly The
grounds of the point.
men have found powerful to comfort them, should also be very conducible to
others. And

First, Because all the Godly they are (as I may so say) Ejusdem speciei. 1.
Because all godly men are of the same nature.
They have all the same substantial sundamentall work of grace in their
hearts. That as you see all men have the same specifical humane Nature, though
there be many individual properties, and differences. Thus all the godly do
partake of the same Divine Nature; They are all borne of God; they are all
become new creatures. Although indeed for the manner of conversion, and the
degrees of grace; as also experiences of Gods favor and love in these things,
there may be much variation, yet in the main, as they all have the image of
God, and so are like him: So they are also like one another. It Is the common
faith; it is the common love; it is the common Image of God, which they all do
partake of. So that godly men, though they may differ in their gifts, in
degrees of graces, in their judgments and opinions, yet because the Image of
God is stamped on them all, there is a likeness and similitude between one
another: What one feels, the other feels: How one is affected, the other is
affected; they understand one another; they do (as it were) see themselves in
one another. We have an expression, Prove. 27. 19. As face answers face in
water, so the heart of man to man. There is a twofold exposition of this
place, and that contrary. Some say, it is brought to show the falsehood and
deceitfulness of man's heart. That as in water, there is not a true
representation of the face, so one man's heart is not truly known to another.
Others they go on the contrary, As (say they) the face of a man, and the
reflection of it in the water are alike; so is the heart of man to man, that is
of one friend to another. Therefore a friend is Alter Ego: They have all things
common, one soul (as it were) and one heart. Now if this be true of moral
friendship, that their hearts are fo alike, how much more of the people of God,
who are all made one in the Lord, cis, not (...), Gal. 3. 21. They are all but
one Person; their hearts must needs answer one another. Let a godly man read
David's Psalms, wherein he does experimentally declare what the workings of
his soul were: will not a godly man say, he speaks his heart, his doubts, his
complaints? Seeing then there is the same fundamental work of grace in all, no
wonder if what is suitable to one, is also to another.

Secondly, Another ground of the Doctrine is, From the samenesse and 2. Because
all have the same spirit.
identity of that Spirit of God, which enliveneth all, and works in all. For
as it is with the body, though it has different parts, yet all those are
informed and animated by the same soul. It is not one soul that informs the
arms, another the feet, but it is one and the same soul that informs all. Thus
it is also with all the people of God, they may differ much in externals, their
condition, their estate; yea in internals also, in illumination and
sanctification, yet it is the same Spirit of God, that lives and works in
them all. If therefore the same root give nourishment to all of them, they all
grow upon the same stock; if the same spirit diffuse it self through all, no
wonder if what comforts one may also comfort another; no wonder if the same
promises revive one that does another. He said, Homo sum, and nihil humani
alienum, etc. He was a man; and so nothing of a man was strange to him. Thus
thou art a believer, a new creature, and so nothing that is proper to such,
should be strange to thee.

If you say, Seeing they are all animated by the same Spirit, which is a
Comforter, then it would follow, they are all comforted alike, all have joy
alike, but experience confuteth that: Two have the Spirit of God, and one is
comforted, the other is dejected, walking in darkness; so that you would say,
certainly the same Spirit is not in both.

The answer is, Though the Spirit of God, which is a Comforter be in all the
godly, yet it is a free agent, he dispenceth this voluntarily as he pleases.
And again, Though the Spirit of God in the godly incline to comfort, yet it is
in an ordered and appointed way. If thou art unbelieving, froward, then thou
resistest the Spirit of God within thee. The Jews have a Proverb, Super
maestum non cadit Spiritus Sanctus, which in a good sense may be true. As it is
in matter of Doctrine, so it is also in respect of Consolation. All the godly
have the same Spirit, whose work it is to lead into truth; yet what wonderful
differences in judgment may be amongst them that have the same Spirit, yet
they all hold the foundation, because the Spirit of God does communicate it
self by degrees, and in measure, to one more, to another less. Thus it is also
in respect of Consolation; though they have the same Spirit of comfort, yet the
outgoings of this, are in one more than the other. And why should it seem a
strange thing, for all the godly under the Gospel to have the same Spirit,
seeing the holy ones under the Old Testament, and those under the New are led
by the same Spirit? Whatsoever Marcionites of old, and Socinians of late say to
the contrary, as appears notably, 2 Cor. 4. 13. We having the same Spirit of
faith, as it is written, I believe, and therefore have spoken, we also believe,
and therefore speak, so we also believe, and therefore rejoice.

Thirdly, Another ground of the Doctrine is, Because the main arguments 3.
Because promises are made alike to all.
of comfort promised in the Word, are not upon personal considerations, neither
are particular privileges, but from that common reason which belongs to every
believer. Paul is comforted, not because Paul, not because an Apostle. So David
finds God putting gladness into his heart, not because a King, not because a
Prophet, but because godly. If therefore comforts (Fundamental, I mean) are
given upon a public interest, which belongs to all the godly, then it
follows, what comforts one, may, and should comfort another. The Scripture
which was spoken peculiarly to Joshua, Paul applies, (Heb. 13.) to every true
believer: Christ is a Christ equally to one believer, as well as another. The
godly cannot strive about Christ, as those women before Solomon about a child,
one said, It was mine; and the other, It is mine; one cannot say, It is my
Christ, and not thine; but Christ is every believers, and yet not divided.

Let the Use be of Direction to the godly, In their application of comforts,
not to observe personal considerations so much. To say a Paul may take comfort,
a David may, but shall such an one as I? This is to impropriate where God has
made common.

SERMON. XLV.
The true and unfeigned owning of Christ, is always accompanied with some,
sometimes with great Afflictions.

2 COR. 1. 5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation
abounds by Christ.
THe Apostle does still amplify that necessary and special truth, viz. of Gods
comforting those who are in trouble. For the troubles which do constantly
follow the ways of Christ, are a great stumbling block and offense to many. If
therefore this be received as a fundamental maxim, Christ's Consolations are
more then our sufferings, then we shall no longer be afraid, but see that the
Lion is killed, and we may find honey in him.

In the text therefore, the Apostle is illustrating this precious Doctrine,
showing, that God does not only comfort, but he comfort proportionably. If
great afflictions, if overflowing afflictions, then great comforts, and
overflowing comforts. So that in the words we may observe two Propositions,
first absolutely considered, and then secondly comparatively.

The first Proposition absolute, is, That the sufferings of Christ abound in us.

The second, That our Consolation abounds by Christ. Christ is the cause of
our afflictions, and Christ is the cause of our joy.

Thirdly, The Comparison lies in the terms of similitude and proportion, As
our sufferings abound, so our consolation also abounds.

Let us consider the first Proposition absolutely, The sufferings of Christ
abound in us. The sufferings of Christ, (...). The word (...), The sufferings
of Christ abound in us.
is sometimes used for the affections of sin, as Romans 7. 5. Gal. 5. 24. And
indeed these were (...) to Paul in another sense, for he suffered and groaned
under them: But here in the text, and in many other places, it is applied to
afflictions and sufferings. This is of various acception, for sometimes it may
be taken subjectively, for those sufferings which Christ himself endured. For
though he was without sin, yet being our Surety, he suffered for that; yea,
he suffered every way, God and man: so that his sufferings were more dreadful
then the sufferings of all men put together. In these sufferings is contained
the treasure of all our peace and joy, of which the Scripture speaks
abundantly and fully: But with this our text does not meddle.

Therefore in the next place, The sufferings of Christ may be understood What
is meant by the sufferings of Christ.
indeed of those he is affected with: but yet it is in his Members, not in his
own Person. This is a very comfortable truth, that the sufferings of a godly
man for Christ's Cause, Christ accounts them as his sufferings; he takes it as
done to himself. Thus Christ, though glorified in Heaven, says, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? Act. 9. 4, 5. Christ is imprisoned, Christ is
buffetted, Christ is reproached, and mocked in them. As it is comfortable to
the godly, so it is as terrible to all those who trouble and revile the godly
for Christ's sake, as too many do, though they think with Pilate, to wash their
hands, and say, they are innocent. I mean the carnal and profane ones of the
world, whose rage, if God did not restrain, would be as that Haman to the whole
Nation of the Jews, not leave one alive. But this is not chiefly meant here,
though this be not to be excluded.

2. The sufferings of Christ may be understood exemplarily, by way of
conformity to Christ; That we suffer as he suffered. In which particular, Romans
8. we are said to be conform unto his Image. 1 Pet. 4. 13. we are commanded to
rejoice, when we are partakers of Christ's sufferings: That is, when we have a
communion and fellowship with him. For if we suffer with him, we shall also be
glorified with him. This is part of the meaning. But then

3. That which is the principal and chiefest meaning of the phrase, is, to
understand it causally, those sufferings we endure because of Christ: For
owning his way, for continuance in his Discipleship. For the way of Christ
being contrary to the course of the world, hence it is, that they are stirred
up as so many hornets: They are the Serpents seed, and are of their Father the
devil, who was a murderer from the beginning; and therefore if the godly will
cleave to Christ, they must expect no mercy from the world.

The second thing in the Proposition, is the attribute (...), abounds: It What
is meant by the sufferings of Christ abounding.
is not only (...) in the plural number, but also (...). Chrysostom
understands it comparatively to Christ, as if the meaning were, We suffer more
then Christ. Christ indeed, said of his Disciples, they should do greater works
and miracles then he did, but it is impossible they should suffer more then he
did. For, his death was not only a Martyrdom, but a Propitiation, being a
Sacrifice offered up for the sins of many. The word then only shows, That
the Sons of God may not only suffer, but their sufferings may abound, may
overflow; so that both in number and weight, they may greatly exceed.

Lastly, In the Proposition, it is (...), not (...), as in the reddition it
follows, What be these sufferings abounding in us.
which may be thought emphatical; although it is usual so to change
Prepositions and Cases, (...) for (...)

The words thus explained, Observe,

That a true and faithful owning of Christ and his way, is accompanied with
The true and faithful owing of Christ, is sometimes accompanied with great
sufferings.
sufferings; yea, sometimes overflowing and excessive sufferings.

The Apostle takes it here for granted; supposes it as a received truth, that
Christ's way, and sufferings, are always together: As the Sun and shadow; as
the Rose and pricks. So that what was said of Christ, is true also of every
Member; It behoved him to suffer, and so enter into glory. Christianus is
Crucianus, said Luther of old. I only add in the Doctrine, A true and
unfeigned receiving of Christ: For, if so be we take only some truths, and some
parts of Christ's way, and leave those which most enrage and trouble the world;
if we take his Doctrine, and not his Discipline, his truth, and not his godly
order, the world is less moved. So if of his truths, we take some that are
more speculative, and leave the rest which are more practical and searching; if
we go no further, we may have some good entertainment in the world. Si di^idio
Christoessemus contenti facile transigeremus omnia, said Calvin on a particular
occasion. Or, again, If men take up the whole profession of Christ, but upon
politic and carnal ends, to hold Christ and his advantages, to be not (...),
but (...), as Nazia^zen said, such will not be put to suffering. As the great
heathenish Pleader Sy^ for Romans Idolatry, to the Emperors, when pressed to
be a Christian, said, Fac me Episcopum Romanum and ero Christianus; Make me
Bishop of Rome, and I will be a Christian. Thus when men think to serve Christ
and Mammon, all this while they will not suffer: Yea, therefore they take up
the profession of Christ (it may be) that they may not suffer. As in
Mordechai's time, when the Jews had power given to slay their enemies, many
became Jews for fear; so they may Christians also. And lastly, If they have not
gross carnal ends, and so be dissembling hypocrites, as Simon Magus was, and
Julian for a while, as some think of him, that he was never conscientiously,
but politiquely a Christian, to please his Uncle, and so obtain the Empire at
last; yet if they do own Christ in a formal customary general way only, they
may escape sufferings: But to follow Christ exactly, powerfully, precisely and
singularly, against the fashion of the world; to get the Kingdom of Heaven by
violence; to put out his right eye, and to cut off his right hand: he that will
be thus a Christian indeed, he shall have sufferings enough; and that not only
from the world, but even from such who profess Christ in Name, but deny him in
Power. What is more ordinary, then to see a titular and nominal Christian, to
hate and abhor a real, lively and powerful Christian? and only because he is
more strict and forward in the ways of Christ then he is. Thus then you must
understand the Doctrine of one; Who is a Christian in Power, as well as in
Name; of one who does not divide Christ, but takes all of him; of one who is
not a flatterer, but a Friend to him: That says to Christ, as Ruth to Naomi, I
will not leave thee, but where thou live, I will live. One that accounts
Christ a Pearl, and sells all, parts with all his lusts, his pleasures and
advantages, to have Christ. Such an one as this, can no more be free from
sufferings in this world, then a Dove be quiet among Hawks, or a Lamb among
Wolves.

To understand this, consider, Propositions declaring the truth of the
Doctrine. 1. A Saints sufferings may be as extensive as his comforts.


First, That the sufferings for Christ's sake, are as various and as extensive
as any comforts we have, that we may be deprived off. So that it is a
fundamental qualification in every Disciple of Christ, to love him before
Father or Mother, yea life it self: For if Christ be not preferred before the
dearest comforts we have, one time or other, we shall be endangered to betray
Christ, and rather deny him then suffer for him, which is a most dreadful
condition. I mean, it is very terrible to be in the number of those, whose
hearts are so glewed to these earthly things, that they cannot suffer for
Christ; they cannot part with all, when he calls for it: But the Disciple of
Christ, must be prepared to suffer in any thing, and at any time. Sometimes the
sufferings are more extreme and grievous, sometimes less, and more easy. The
former is called (...), Heb. 10. 32. and 1 Pet. 4. 13. (...). The greater are,
imprisonment, or banishments, or death it self: And commonly, death for Christ,
has not been a mere ordinary death, but accompanied with those torments and
exquisite pains, that could be invented. Insomuch, that if you look over all
Histories, you cannot find any such terrible and barbarous sufferings, as the
people of God have been put upon. And truly, there is no godly man, but he is
to have a fundamental qualification for this. There are also lesser sufferings,
which though called so comparatively to greater, yet in themselves are very
bitter and grievous: Such are reproaches, scoffs, and derisions. Heb. 11. they
are called cruel mockings. 1 Pet. 4. 14. when he had spoken before of a fiery
trial, then he mentions reproaching for Christ's sake. Ismael is said to
persecute Isaac, yet the Scripture called that playing with him. It was in
scoffs and mocks, that this persecution was; therefore thou art a persecutor by
the tongue, as well as the hand, though thou do not cast in prison: Though
thou do not bring wood, and kindle the fire at the stake, yet thy flouts, thy
derisions, thy mockings, these are a persecution, and the godly in these suffer
for Christ. I shall instance in one thing more, and that is their Names and
Repute; in this Christians have wonderfully suffered. Christ was traduced for
an Impostor, for one that had a Devil, and doing the Miracles he did by
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; Paul was calumniated for a seditious and
turbulent person; Athanasius for an Adulterer. These false calumnies put the
Ancients upon their Apologeticals, as Tertullian and Athenagorus. Wicked men do
first impose lies and slanders upon those who fear God, and when they have thus
made them odious, then they think they do deserve any punishment. What
abominable lies have the Papists forged and broached about Luther and Calvin?
Yea still experience confirms it, that whosoever will live godly, profane
and ungodly persons will divulge a thousand false reports concerning them. And
herein they must look to suffer, and not be troubled for it. The Stars are
never the less glorious, though Astronomers have given ugly names to them; the
Bear, and the Draggons tail, etc. Thus we see, that he who will be Christ's
Disciple, must be above riches, honors, liberty, a good Name, yea above life
it self; saying to Christ, as they to David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us.

Secondly, Although it is the portion of all the Members of Christ to be
sufferers 2. At some time their sufferings abound more then others.
for him, yet at sometime the storm is more terrible then at others. Sometimes
we hear the Church complaining, that they were as sheep for the slaughter,
killed all the day long: but at other times God gave more respite. Who has not
heard of the ten persecutions? not that there were not far more then ten, but
because they were most general, and commanded by the will of those who then had
power. So that suffering times are various, according to Gods dispensation: He
makes the most bitter storm many times to be but short. As in Queen Mary's
days; after which came a long calm, and Halcyon days. Nubecula est, said
Athanasius of his troubles, It is a little storm, it will quickly be over. But
although those public times of suffering be not always, yet it is very hard,
if ever, to see one that lives godly, not to suffer from those that are evil,
one way or other. Every Abel will have a Cain, every Isaac, an Ismael. What
though you do not suffer from the Pagans or heretics without, yet how greatly
do ye suffer from the profane and ungodly within? Every profane man, though
he shroud himself under the name of Christ, yet he is of an Antichristian
spirit, if not doctrinally, yet practically, and in deed. Bernard speaking of
the bitter times by Paganish persecution, and then of more bitter by
heretical, makes the third and most bitter of all, to be in the evil and
ungodly manners of those who are within the Church. Heu domine (says he) qui
sunt in Ecclesia primi, sunt in persecutione primi. There is then a suffering
for Christ, though not to blood; and if every godly man do not thus suffer, let
him fear whether he be not a man pleaser; whether he fear not man more then
God; whether therefore he be not applauded as a wise man, as a moderate man,
because he is not indeed a zealous godly man against sin in his place. The
very Heathen could say, How is he a good man, who is not trouble some to, and
hated by an evil man? Therefore says our Savior, Woe be to you, when all men
speak well of you, Luke 6. 26. Some observe the connection the Apostle uses, 1
Pet. 4. 11, 12. for having in the 11 verse exhorted to a faithful and diligent
discharge of those Offices we are betrusted with, presently exhorts to patience
about afflictions, because one will necessarily cause the other. So Mat. 10.
when Christ gives his Apostles Commission to preach, he does withal admonish
3. To suffer for Christ is very grievous to flesh and blood.
them of the hatred they shall meet with. Light will be offensive to sore eyes,
and salt will make wounds to smart.

Thirdly, To suffer for Christ's sake, is very tedious and grievous to flesh and
blood. It Is because of those reproaches, and many times dangers, which
accompany the way of Christ, that it is such a stumbling block to many: They
like the Crown of Glory well, but they like not the Crown of Thorns. If
Christ's way was a broad way; they might have Christ and their honors, Christ
and their lusts, Christ and their advantages; then they would be as forward to
run out and meet Christ, as they did from Jerusalem, crying Hos^nna to him.
Therefore howsoever men have thousands of pretenses to keep off from the way of
godliness, and the faithful owning of Christ, they have many wide gates of
distinction to go out at, when danger is at hand, yet it is fear of suffering
that keeps most off their duty. They like Christ well, till it comes to be
said, as she did to Moses, Thou art a bloody husband to me: So Christ will have
thy good name, thy estate, thy life; this makes thee prove an Apostate, and
turn hypocrite. Oh the gulf of misery, yea sometimes of despair, that this fear
of suffering has put men upon! Therefore afflictions for Christ's sake, are so
often called temptations, because they will discover whether a man be ^ound for
God, or not; whether they love Christ more then the creatures. Oh then, pray to
God, that he leave thee not to this snare, to be afraid to suffer for doing
what is good! This will prove bitter at the latter end. Do you not see among
Officers, how fearful to punish the drunkard, the Sabbath-breaker? they shall
loose their good word; they will do them despite and malice afterward: Art not
thou all this while afraid to suffer for Christ? He that suffers for doing that
which is righteous, for punishing offenders, he suffers for Christ; (as is to
be showed.) Remember then, it is better suffering for Christ, which is our Crown
and Glory, then suffering in Hell for ever, because thou would not do the
will of God.

SERMON. XLVI.
The same Doctrine prosecuted, showing the Object for which Christians are to
suffer, if they would suffer for Christ.

2 COR. 1. 5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, etc.
THe Doctrine that has in part been treated on, is, That a true and faithful
owning of Christ, is accompanied with sufferings and persecutions. Some
Particulars have been given in to clear this. We proceed to add more; and the
first in order shall be, That although it is very difficult to flesh and blood,
to own Christ so far as to suffer for him, yet the Scripture represents It Is
a glorious and blessed thing to own Christ in the midst of sufferings.
it as a most blessed and glorious thing, howsoever the world judge it
reproachful. I shall not here enlarge my self about the encouragements to
suffer, when Christ calls for it; it is enough at this time, in the general, to
inform, That God will not honor every one with persecutions for himself; It is
a great expression of his grace and favor. Hence some Confessors, have desired
to be Martyrs, but God by his providence preserved them, they have been greatly
humbled, and dejected under this, as if it were for some special sin and
unworthiness in them, that God would not in that manner dignify them. These
are not words, and mere oratory, the Scripture is clear in proclaiming this for
a title of favor, to be a sufferer for Christ. Act. 5. 41. The Apostles
rejoiced that they were accounted worthy to suffer shame for his Name. That
they might have shame and reproach for Christ, this they rejoiced in, as a
great matter of honor. Who were they that the Lord should so exhalt them? So
Phil. 1. 29. To you it is given, not only to believe, but to suffer. By this you
see, that every one to whom God does give to believe, he does not also give to
suffer for him. It Is a gift then, and where this is bestowed, they ought to
rejoice, and to be exceeding glad. Yea, 1 Pet. 3. 14. They are happy. And, 1
Pet. 4. 16. Thy are to goorifie God in that behalf. If we could believe these
Scripture truths, so much sinful fear and pusillanimity in the cause of
Christ, might not be charged upon us, as too often it may be, we would not run
from a duty accompanied with sufferings, as Moses did from the rod turned into
a Serpent; neither should we with Simon the Cyrenean, be compelled to bear the
cross. That is observeable, 1 Pet. 2. 19. If a man suffer for conscience
toward God: (...); We translate it, this is thankworthy. But happily that is
not so proper; for, if a man should suffer all the Martyrdomes that have been
in his own body, yet God is not to thank him; he has not suffered more then he
ought to do. Neither do I know that the word (...) is used in such a sense.
Therefore it is better translated, This is a favor; this is grace, if God bring
us to suffer for a good conscience toward him. If then thou art to suffer,
either verbally, by mocks and slanders, or really, by miseries and
persecutions; set the Crown of Glory, to the Crown of Thorns; set the honey,
to the gall; set the honor with God, to the reproach amongst men. That which
the carnal heart is so afraid of, the Scripture makes matter of joy, and of
glorifying God for it.

Secondly, It being therefore so glorious a thing, it is good to inform you,
What it is to suffer for Christ. For we may be the devils Martyrs, suffer as
offenders, or as busybodies; suffer for heresies, and the works of the flesh,
yet persuade and flatter our selves that we suffer for Christ.

Now to clear this, we must consider what is required ex part objecti, on the
What it is to suffer for Christ. 1. Ex part Objecti.
behalf of the matter we suffer for. And

2. What is required ex part subjecti; what qualifications ought to be in him
who does suffer for Christ.

And for the Object matter, the Scripture describes it in these Particulars:

First, That what a man suffers for, it must not be for any sin, that is 1.
It must not be for any sin.
justly punishable by the Law: It must not be for our folly and busy meddling in
such things wherein we have no call. The Apostle Peter (1 Pet. cap. 3. 15, 16.)
speaks notably to this; for giving the people of God in that Chapter, great
encouragements to suffer, he comes in with a caution, They must take heed for
what they suffer: which is laid down positively, and then oppositly.
Positively, as a Christian; it must be for professing and doing such things as
Christ requires: Let it not be strange fire, but the fire from the Altar. If
thou would have comfort, it must be for doing that which as a Christian thou
art bound to do. And the opposite to this, is to suffer as a murderer, as a
thief, or which is more general, as a busybody in other men's matters: (...);
that is, one who busily spyeth into, and medleth with those things that he has
no call to; it is not his Office to deal in. Now this must not be understood, as
the world will judge a man a busybody. If a Minister, a Magistrate, or any in
Office be zealous against sin, and see to the punishing of it, the profane
ones of the world call this an an hot busy meddling. So if private Christians
cannot bear the impieties they see committed in the places where they live, but
do faithfully and boldly admonish and reprove such offenders; and if this does
no good, then they will proceed further, to the Magistrate and Officers to
complain of such, that sin may be punished, God honored, and public
judgments prevented. If (I say) private Christians be thus stirring (as they
ought to be, unless they will have other men's sins lie at their doors, and
they become thereby very guilty;) then what an outcry is made? these are
factious, troublesome, disquieting follows. So that to judge who is a
busy-body, and when a man is guilty of it, you must have recourse to the
Scripture, and to sound casuistical Divinity, applying the general rules of
Scripture to particulars, and not to the common voice and noise of people in
the world. That good zealous Prophet for God Elisah, who because he burned with
fire for God, had a wonderful reward thereof, to be carried up in a fiery
Chariot to Heaven, yet because he would not endure the ungodliness of Ahab
and Jezebell, what is said to him? Then art the troubler of Israel. They
condemn him for a busy-body, whereas indeed Ahab by his wickedness (as the
Prophet said) was the troubler of the Land. In suffering then for Christ, we
see much prudence as well as zeal is required; yet so, as not to regard the
censure of the world: For, who ever suffered for Christ, and their persecutors
did not represent them so odiously, as that they might seem to deserve it? This
is the first thing.

Secondly, For the object matter, The Scripture expresses it another time, 2.
It must be for the name of Christ.
for the Name of Christ. Mat. 19. 29. Whosoever shall for sake houses, lands,
etc. for my Names sake. Job. 15. 21. All these things will they do to you for
my Names sake. What is Christ's name? not only the Person of Christ himself; but
as the Name of God, is that whereby God is known, so is the Name of Christ.
Yea, under this, is comprehended those Doctrines, and that Faith which Christ
had delivered to us. The truths of Christ are to be dearer to us then ourlives.
Hence it was, that Christianity has amazed the world, with those millions and
millions of Martyrs, that have been for the faith of Christ. It was a wicked
opinion of the Priscillianists of old, That a man migh lie, dissemble, and
forswear the truths of Christ, bow to Idols, and communicate with heathens in
any bodily worship, so as they kept the true faith in their hearts. But this is
directly opposite to Scripture. Romans 10. 16. With the heart man believes, and
with the month confession is made to salvation. To salvation: So that a man
cannot be saved, though he does in his heart believe, if he do not, when it is
casus confessionis, a case of confession, confess also with his mouth the same
faith. And Romans 11. 4. The true worshippers of God in Eliahs time, are
described not only by their inward grace, but externally also, that they did
not bow their knee to Baal. It is true, there is a difference between
profession and confession strictly taken: As Cyprian, Maluit nos Dous confiteri
fidem, non profiteri. To profess, is to do it ultroneously of our own accord,
when we are not called to it; as some of the Martyrs would do, crying out,
Christianus sum, I am a Christian; for which they were put to death. And this
could not be excused in them, unless we say, an extraordinary heroical frame
of spirit was at that time infused into them by the Holy Ghost. This voluntary
profession, when danger is, is not required: Yea, in lesser truths, we are not
to profess them so, as to disturb the faith of others. So the Apostle, Romans
14. 22. Have thou faith? have it to thy self. But then, in case of confession,
when the glory of God, the good of the Church, and our own salvation requires
it, then we are to confess the truths of Christ, though we loose all. It is
the great glory attributed by Paul to Christ, that (1 Timothy 6. 13.) before
Pontius Pilate, he witnessed a good confession. To suffer then for Christ, it
is to loose all for his Truth, for his Faith, when he requires. Therefore
though Heretics may glory in their sufferings, and they be canonized as
Saints amongst their Disciples, yet they will be sound to have lost their blood
in vain, and that they were not the Lord Christ's, but the devils Martyrs. The
Donatists of old, yea those Circumcelliones, that would kill themselves, and
like mad men, would make others kill them, did triumph in the name of Martyrs.
The Messaliani also, because they were punished for their Idols, called
themselves Martyriani, the Martyrians; as if they only were the Martyrs. How
greatly are the Popish Calenders filled with their saints, when yet some of
them dyed of desperate and high rebellions and treasons? So that this always
falls out, as men are persuaded of their way, so they judge it true
persecution or false. Hastia did truly call the Donatists persecutions,
Persecutiones steriles, ^barren and fruitless; as losing the crown of glory,
though they boasted of them. On the other side, the rigid Lutherans did condemn
our Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, (because they dyed against that error, That
Christ was bodily present in the Sacrament;) yea, and called them Martyrs
Diaboli, The Devils Martyrs. This (I confess) is more grievous many times,
then all the persecutions of the adversaries, when those who are of the same
general profession, yet for some particular differences, shall so uncharitably
censure one another: But this is no new thing in the Church of God. The
Socinians, though they blaspheme the Deity of Christ, and their doctrine is not
simply heresy, but blasphemy also, yet they will admire their sufferings, as
if for Christ also. The Polonian Gentleman, that writ Socinus his life, would
prefer him above Luther and Ignatius As for Ignatius, the Father of Jesuits,
we have nothing to do with him; but that he should prefer him above Luther
for the greatness of his faith, Because (says he) Luthers Doctrine at the
first had many to applaud it, but Soci^ius had few or none to encourage him:
Though we might say, Luthers was universally hated, the whole world being then
subject to the Pope, yet that can be nothing with that writer, who confesses
that pride and vainglory, may make all a man's sufferings to be fuel to it.
Thus you see, how that all suffering parties in Religion, will pretend to
Christ, and plead they suffer for him; but as Christ is Christ, though there
have risen many false Christ's, so suffering and persecution for Christ is truly
so; and some there are, and they only, who can claim this honor, though others
do gloriously pretend to it. It is a true rule of Austins, Causa non paena
facit Martyrem, Not the punishment, but the cause makes a Martyr. Even as
Causa, non separatio, facit schismaticum: It must be indeed the Doctrine of
Christ, not our opinions and presumptions we suffer with.

Thirdly, The Scripture expresses this, Suffering for righteousness sake. He
3. For righteousness sake.
that suffers for doing that which is righteous, suffers for Christ. Mat.
5. 10. If ye be persecuted for righteousness sake, blessed are ye. This is
made the same with suffering for Christ's sake. This is good to observe, lest we
should think, that then we only suffer for Christ, when the matter we are
troubled for, is either Christ himself, or his truth and ordinances; something
that is immediately terminated upon Christ. No: this is to be extended farther.
For, when a Magistrate is zealous to rebuke sin, and put it to shame, if he
be maligned for this, he suffers for Christ. So, if a private Christian set
himself, in a lawful way, against all the impieties that abound where he
lives, and thereupon all his neighbors hate and oppose him, he suffers for
Christ: And all because it is for righteousness. Insomuch that thou may take
much comfort herein, as one Martyr did, That it is not for any wickedness of
thine, any wrong or injury thou have done them; only because thou have had a
zeal for God and his glory: therefore it is that they rise up with such malice
against thee. And let this encourage all such, who desire to have all
ungodliness and dishonor to God by sin, be wholly rooted out; though in
this labor they have many oppositions, and much hatred, yet remember it is for
Christ. It is true indeed, that besides mere righteousness, there must be also
a knowledge of Christ: For without faith, it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11. 3. And therefore, though Aristides the just, was banished for
righteousness, and Socrates put to death, for maintaining there was but one
God; yet these cannot be said to suffer for Christ, because they had no
knowledge of him: Seeing Christ is only in the Church, therefore there cannot
be any true suffering for him, but in the Church.

Lastly, In respect of the object matter, Then we suffer for Christ, when we
are persecuted for keeping a good conscience, and will not break the peace
thereof 4. For a good conscience.
for all the advantages in the world. Thus the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 16.
makes the having of a good conscience, to be equivalent to suffering for
righteousness sake, and also for the Name of Christ. This good conscience
consists in this, That whereas the enemies and persecutors speak all evil of us
as evil doers, they may at last be ashamed for such false accusations. Here you
see, none ever persecuted the Church of God, but they laid foul things to their
charge: That as they did put the Christians sometimes in Bear-skins, to make
the dogs tear them with the greater rage, so also they have turned their names
into Heretics, Schismatics, and every odious title, that so they might be
the more justified in their cruel ways. Now then, to suffer with, and for a
good conscience, is to be innocent from all these calumnies; that we dare
appeal to God, as Christ said, For which of the good works do ye stone me? So,
for what good is it that I have done, you reproach, you revile and persecute
me? But when we say a good conscience, we mean, that which is truly so, and
informed out of Gods Word; otherwise, as Paul said, he had a good conscience,
while he was a Pharisee, and thought he was bound to do against Christ what he
did. So, many deluded consciences may endure much misery, yea death it self,
with a good conscience thus far, that they do not go against any light
thereof: They are not as some Heretics, (...), self-condemned, as it is
commonly expounded; No, they may think they are bound to suffer as they do:
Yea, if they should recant their errors, though never so damnable, while their
conscience is persuaded to the contrary, they would sin against God, (not
because they renounce an error materially, but because they do that which
formally appears a truth to them) and it may be bring much horror and teror
upon their own consciences. It is not enough therefore to make a man a sufferer
for Christ, if in a false way, because he is persuaded so; his conscience does
not tell him to the contrary; he has much comfort doing as he does; whereas,
if he should do otherwise, he should have no peace: For, conscience is but an
inferior Judge, and is no further to command, then guided by the Word of God;
and when it is so, then whosoever will not please men, but endure all hardship,
rather then wound this conscience, this man suffers for Christ. Thus you see
what it is to suffer for Christ, in the Scripture expression, and let it be thy
earnest prayer to God, to have a preparedness of heart thus to suffer. Oh,
consider how much Christ suffered for thee, both from God and man! He suffered
in his Name in all reproach and ignominy, dying a most accursed death, and
shall thou be so tender and delicate, as not to endure the mocks and rages of
men for him? Shall Christ be in cruce, and thou in luce? Christ in convitiis,
and thou in conviviis? Christ in patibulo, and thou in Paradiso? (as Gerhard
expresses it.) Oh fear left this prove dreadful at the latter end!

SERMON. XLVII.
What Qualifications they must be endowed with, who suffer in a right manner
for Christ?

2 COR. 1. 5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation
also abounds by Christ.
WHat it is to suffer for Christ ex part objects, in respect of the matter for
which, has already been dispatched. We now proceed to show, What is required
ex part subjecti; What are the qualifications necessary in him, who does truly
suffer for Christ. When we read of so many glorious privileges promised to
such as are troubled for Christ's sake, you must know, that their bare
suffering, no not for that which is righteous, is enough to entitle them to
this blessedness; but there must be the Adverb as well as the Nown: it must not
only be pro bono; but been, for that which is good; but also in a good manner
for suffering and martyrdom it self; as all other duties is not integrated of
all its causes; as it is not enough to pray, to hear, though these for the
matter be commanded, but they must be done in an holy and spiritual manner.
Thus it is not enough to suffer, or to be persecuted, and that for Christ's
sake, unless also we have that holy frame of heart in suffering, which Gods
word does require.

Let us then examine this truth, viz. What are the requisites to qualify a
true sufferer for Christ? When his cause is good, his heart, his ends also must
be good. Therefore that ordinary saying, Causa non poena facit Martyrem, The
cause not the punishment does make a Martyr, must be further limited; for the
cause does not, unless there be also those concomitant graces in the subject,
as well as there is truth in the object; and we shall find this suffering
temper to have as curious ingredients into it, as there was into that precious
ointment, made for the high Priest alone, and no wonder, for it is the highest
pitch of love we can arrive at, to suffer for him, and it is the most contrary
to flesh and blood: So that ^one can do this for Christ, but such who are
wonderfully enabled by him.

First, Therefore in a sufferer for Christ, there is required Faith in the
eminent and What are the qualifications of those who suffer truly for Christ.
1. Faith.
powerful actings thereof. It is as impossible to suffer without faith, as a
bird to fly without wings. It Is faith alone that can remove these mountains in
the Sea, Heb. 11. Those great exploits the Saints did, yea and those wonderful
sufferings they underwent, is attributed by the Apostle, wholly to their faith.
Now this faith requisite to true suffering for Christ, emptieth it self into
two channels; there must be a Dogmatical Faith, and a Fiducial Faith. A
Dogmatical Faith is that whereby a man is assured of the truths be suffers
for as divine, and because of Divine Authority. Faith must be, as Heb. 11. 1.
an (...) and (...), The substance and evidence of things. For if a man have not
this faith, it is obstinacy and pertinacy, not faith that makes him suffer, as
we see in Heretics. Hence also it is that a mere Opinionist or Sceptick in
Religion, will never suffer for Christ, because he has no faith, but opinion
in Religion. So likewise those who are of a Religion merely for humane
Authority sake, because of the custom and Laws where they live, commanding
such a Religion; as those amongst the Graecians, that were called Melchitae,
because they followed the Religion the King was of (though indeed the Orthodox
were so branded by the Heretical party, Vide Hornbeck. de Graecis.) These
cannot suffer truly for Christ. Indeed they may suffer for their Religion, as
it is local and traditional to them, as Turks and Jews do; but yet this is not
from faith, which does necessarily relate to divine testimony. This then cuts
off the glory which Heretics and erroneous persons may boast of; if they
suffer truly, they suffer with a true Faith; if they have a true Faith that can
be proved and demonstrated out of Gods Word. And when we say a Dogmatical
Faith, that must be understood in respect of its compleatnesse and integrity,
as to Fundamentals. No man can suffer truly for Christ, that peremptorily
denies any I undamental; if he hold the foundation, though he build hay and
stubble, superstructive errors, yet if he do not demolish any of the
foundation stones, he may be saved, but so as by fire. And truly is this
charity be not allowed, we shall scarce find any person or Church truly
suffering for Christ. For where has there been such a sound faith in
Fundamentals, circa-fundamentals, and praeter-fundamentals, as that there has
not been any spot or wrinkle in the face of the Church. This prerogative
belongs to the Church in Heaven. They therefore suffer for Christ, who are
persecuted for his truths, though happily they err in many things not
necessary to salvation. But if they deny any Fundamentals (I do not say doubt,
and that for a season, as the Apostles did about the nature of Christ's
Kingdom, and his Resurrection) and that with persevering obstinacy, then
though he suffer for one Fundamental, yet because he denies another, he does
in effect destroy the whole building of Christ. Thus when a Macedonian suffered
for holding the Deity of Christ, being put to death by an Arian, the primitive
Church never judged him a Martyr, because he denied the Deity of the Holy
Ghost. There is therefore required a sound Dogmatical. Faith; for which cause
some have doubted, Whether the Church did well in making all those infants,
which were killed by Herod, because of Christ, in reckoning them among Martyrs.
For they did not know any thing of Christ, neither it may be many of their
parents had any true faith about him. Certainly ly they cannot be called
Martyrs or Sufferers for Christ in an active fense, but passively only.

The second act of faith, is a fiducial dependence on the promise of God, and
his Power, which is able to raise up the heart above all fears and
discouragements, yea to represent prisons, palaces, and coals of fire, beds of
roses, such a transubstantiating nature is faith of. It was faith, Heb. 11.
which made Moses esteem the reproaches of Christ more than all the glory and
honor which was in Pharaoh's court; especially faith as it is the substance of
things hoped for. As it makes Heaven and glory present, so it is admirably
quickening and enlivening the heart of him that suffers. It is therefore
called The shield of faith, which above all, or to all (as some expound) we are
to take, as if no other part of the spiritual armoury would do any good,
unless we had faith, Ephesians. 6. 16. Hence when Peter was to undergo Satan's
winnowings, which were chiefly by persecutions, Christ says, He prayed that
his faith might not fail him, Luke 22. 32. not his fortitude, patience or zeal,
but his faith, because this is the root; the tree can never fail as long as the
root is good. It was want of faith made many in times of persecution sacrifice
to Idols, and deliver the Bible to be burnt. It was want of faith made Spira
fall into so great an Apostasy. Thus faith is the chief grace that inableth to
suffer for Christ. This makes weak, strong, and Lambs, Lions.

Secondly, Another qualification to suffer for Christ, is Love, a grace not
indeed to be exalted above says, but yet as necessary in its sphere, where it
has to do, as that is; and as faith, so this love required in every sufferer
does discover it self two ways: There must be hearty love to God and Christ,
for whom we suffer; and there must be love to man, yea to our enemies and
persecutors, or else we shall lose the advantage of all our sufferings. The
Apostle speaks fully to this, 1 Cor. 13. 3. Though I give my body to be
burned, and have not charity, it profits me nothing: And what charity is
this? Even twofold, First, A love of God and Christ. If thou suffer because
of force and necessity, thou can not avoid it; this is not to suffer rightly.
It must be true love to Christ and his glory, that thou preferrest his glory
above all thy comforts, even life it self. And indeed this is the greatest
expression of thy love to Christ, when thou can die for him, as Christ
discovered his great love in dying for us. A man that does not love Christ,
cannot suffer for Christ. The second act of charity is, To love our enemies,
our persecutours. While they are railing, we are to pray; while they are
persecuting, we are to bless: and truly by this we are known to be Christ's
Disciples, more than by enlargements, or any miracles. When one met with a
Christian, and falling upon him in a great rage, beating and buffeting of him,
saying, What great thing did Christ ever do? The Christian replied, Even this,
that though you beat and abuse me, yet Christ has taught me to pray for you.
If therefore malice, and a revengefull spirit be predominant in thee, while
thou suffer, Oh consider, this is not to suffer as Christ did.

Thirdly, There is required in him that suffers for Christ, Spiritual
fortitude 3. Spiritual ^ortitude and heavenly courage.
and courage. No such enemy to this duty of suffering, as worldly fears and
pusillanimity of spirit. Indeed there is a godly fear, whereby we have an holy
jealousy of our strength, and therefore rest alone upon Gods power: and this
is an excellent preservative against Apostasy in the hour of temptation. Many
that have been exceeding fearful, have yet been more faithful and stout in
the hour of danger, then those who have been more confident, as many instances
in the History of the Martyrs will evidence. When Peter was so presumptuous, as
to say, Though all men should forsake thee, yet I will not: He proved more
cowardly than any. So that there is a good humble fear, whereby we renounce our
own strength, and this we are to preserve. But then there is a carnal, worldly,
natural and excessive fear, this is to be mortified. Now against this,
Christian courage is the proper help; but this is the gift of Gods Spirit.
Therefore none can suffer for Christ, but such who have the Spirit of God
inabling them. It Is a gift to suffer not only by way of honor, but also by way
of power. Hence when Stephen and others were enabled to be bold against their
adversaries, they are said to be filled with the holy Ghost. And thus Timothy
is exhorted to be strong in the grace of God, 2 Timothy 2. 1. and to endure
hardness as a good soldier of Christ. So Ephesians. 6. 10. Be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might. It is true, Aristotle speaks of fortitude a
moral virtue, despising deaths and dangers; but he was ignorant of God, and so
gives us a Gloworm in stead of a Star. Pray therefore for this holy courage in
the way of God.

Fourthly, To suffer for Christ there is required, An holy Wisdom and
prudence. 4. Holy wisdom and prudence.
For it is not Christian fortitude, unless regulated by Christian prudence.
Discretion is the salt to season all our Sacrifices: for to Sacrifices there
was salt required, as well as fire. When our Savior gave that admirable
counsel, Be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves, Matthew. 10. 16. he shows
what an excellent temper even ad pondus a Christian should be of. The Serpent
must not eat up the Dove, yet a Dove-like temper must be accompanied with
wisdom. Courage to suffer without wisdom, is like Samson without eyes, and
many times did more dishonor God, then all sufferings did honor him. Austin
disliked the zeal of some, who demolished the Heathenish Idols, of their own
private accord, having no Authority thereunto. The indiscretion of one Andas a
Bishop, setting fire on a Persian Temple, where they worshipped fire as a god,
brought a sad and sore persecution; and when the Bishop was commanded to build
it up again at his own charges, for his resusal he was put to death. Now says
an Ecclesiastical Primitive Writer, I discommend him for his imprudence in
demolishing the Temple, but I admire his zeal that he would die rather than
rebuild it. He then suffers for Christ, that has prudence and wisdom to
order his zeal, so that he suffer not for his own folly, but merely for Christ.
Only this is a very nice point, to distinguish prudence from carnal policy; but
that is not my work now.

Fifthly, We are always to remember Patience, as that which is a special 5.
Patience.
qualifier of every one to suffer. You have need of patience, says the
Apostle, Heb. 10. 36. Therefore Heb. 6. 12. Faith and Patience are put
together, as those two which made the godly inherit the promises, Romans 12. 12.
Patient in tribulation. This holy patience is that which does quiet and compose
all the waves and storms of the soul; it commands all diffident and unbelieving
thoughts, all murmurings and repinings to be gone. Therefore it is said, In
patience possess your souls. And Jam. 13. Let patience have its perfect work.
If therefore thou art called any ways to suffer for Christ, take heed of
fretting, of repinings, of unrulinesse of heart; for impatience argues a want
both of faith in, and love of Christ. The Martyrs were admirable in the
patience they discovered under the most provoking torments; they suffered as if
it had been in another body, and not their own.

Sixthly, To suffer there is required a mortified heavenly heart, as to all
earthly 6. An heart mortified to all earthly comforts.
comforts and relations; not to know father, or mother, or life it self
comparatively to the cause and glory of Christ. And this makes it so difficult
to suffer. This has made the Apostates, that have many times been in the
Church. This has filled the hearts of many with woe and wounds implacably: For
their childrens sake, for their lives sake, they deny Christ and a good
conscience; and how can it be otherwise, while Earth is dearer than Heaven,
when we esteem the favor of men, more than the favor of God? This has proved
bitter wormwood to many at last.

Lastly, To suffer for Christ, there is required pure and holy motives. To lose
7. Pure and holy motives.
all for Christ's sake, out of mere conscience; that this is the only cause why
we are in any trouble. We may read both in sacred and profane Histories, how
men have suffered even death it self, only for vainglory. All Aristotle's
virtuous men, they were ambitious and vainglorious men. The very Heathen could
make it Laudum immensa cupido, as well as Amorpatriae. We would think it a
madness to lose comforts and life for an airy bubble of windy glory, yet many
have been thus transported: not only Philosophus, but Haereticus est animal
gloriae, vanissimum. If then it is not Scripture-grounds, but ambitious
vainglorious principles that make thee to suffer, Christ does not, will not
provide sugar for thy bitter pills. Thus have we seen, what is required to
suffer for Christ. Oh the difficulty of this duty! No wonder so much seed has
withered away, when the scorching Sun of persecution did arise! No wonder
Christ has many Swallow-friends that endure with him the Summer time only! No
wonder few are lovers of Christ for Christ's sake. As Alexander had more (...),
then (...). These are the Bees that follow for the honey-pot only. Now to all
these we must add this Caution, A Christian that suffers for Christ, though
he have not those qualifications in a perfect degree, but find corruption
opposing every one of them: He must not therefore cast away his confidence: for
we can no more suffer perfectly for Christ, then do perfectly for him; and if
our gracious works cannot justify us, no more can our gracious sufferings,
Martyrdom is not meritorious. Though we shed our blood for Christ, yet the
blood of Christ must cleanse that duty also. The Martyrs died only in resting
upon Christ for salvation; and no wonder the godly heart finds more
imperfections in his sufferings, more carnal fear and impatience then in other
duties, because this is the hardest service Christ does ever put his upon. What
else is to be said in this point, will come in in the next particulars.

SERMON. XLVIII.
How many ways, and by what means Christ comfort those who suffer for him.

2 COR. 1. 5. So our consolation abounds by Christ.
THe second absolute Proposition in the Text is, That our comfort abounds by
Christ. The Greek word (...), is rendered by some Exhortation, but more
generally and fitly Consolation. Though this be spoken in the singular number,
and afflictions in the plural, yet this is to be understood collectively, as a
treasure that has all kind of comforts in it, not one or two, but all.
Therefore the word (...), is here repeated again, abounds, which is to be
understood, partly repletively, it fills the hearts of those that do suffer
for Christ; and partly diffusively, it extends also to the comfort of others.
And then you have the cause of all this, By Christ. Christ who is the cause of
their sufferings, is also the cause of their comfort. As from the same root
proceeds both the Rose and its pricks: Thus from Christ, the same Fountain
comes both bitter and sweet. Were not this added, who would suffer for Christ,
who would lose all for him; but Christ has so ordained it, that these
sufferings are advantageous to us; and though we lose in the retail, yet we
gain in the bulk and whole. Observe,

That as our sufferings are for Christ, so by the same Christ are our comforts.
As our sufferings are for Christ, so are our comforts by him.


Though he strike with one hand, yet he supporteth with the other. If David
said to the Priest who fled to him, many of them being slain at No^, by the
bloody cruelty of Saul, Stay with me, I am the occasion of your deaths, thou
shall fare as I fare. How much more will Christ own such, who suffer for him,
saying, Depend upon me, for I am the cause of all the reproaches and cruel
usages you meet with in the world.

But to explain this, Let us consider, In what respects comforts may be said to
How our comforts abound by Christ. 1. Efficiently.
abound by Christ. And

First, Efficiently; He being the same with God, is therefore a God of all
consolation. Yea Christ as a Mediator he is sensible of our temptations,
knows our need and wants, and therefore the more ready to comfort. Christ
that wanted comfort himself; and therefore had an Angel sent to comfort him, is
thereby the more compassionate and willing to comfort us Thus you may read
Christ and God put together in this very act, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16, 17. Our Lord
Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, who has given us everlasting
consolation, comfort your hearts. Paul here prays, that both Jesus Christ,
and God the Father would comfort them. Christ therefore not only absolutely as
God, but relatively as Mediator, is qualified with all fitness and fullness to
communicate consolation; he is the fountain and head, as of grace, so of
comfort.

Secondly, We are comforted by Christ Meritoriously; he has merited at the 2.
Meritoriously.
hands of God, our comfort; for without Christ's death and atonement, we were no
more subjects prepared for comfort, then the damned Angels. Had all mankind
with Dives begged but for a drop of comfort, such was the gulf between God and
us, that it could not be obtained: So that by Christ a way is made for our
consolation: Christ did not only obtain the communication of the holy Ghost in
the gifts and graces thereof. So that as by Christ the Spirit of God is given
to the Church, as a guide to teach and lead into all truth, as the sanctifying
Spirit, and use of all holiness: So he is also as the Comforter, who gives
every drop of consolation, that any believer does enjoy. Though therefore joy
and comfort be in Scripture attributed to the holy Ghost, as the appropriated
and applying cause thereof; yet this is wholly because of the merits of Christ:
And therefore we may pray for comfort upon the same grounds, as we do for
holiness; They are both the fruits of Christ's death.

Lastly, We are comforted by Christ Objectively, that is in him, and from him
we take our comfort. As Christ is called Our righteousness, because in 3.
Objectively.
and through his righteousness we are accepted of in him, we are complete: So
Christ is our comfort, because in him we find matter of all joy, though there
be troubles and vexations from the creatures, though the Sun and Moon be
turned into blood, all powers threaten persecution, yet from and in Christ he
can abundantly rejoice. And indeed this is the wine the carnal man never
drinks of, the honey he never tasted of. The world is a stranger to this joy
in Christ; They rejoice in riches, in honors, in worldly advantages, but they
know not what it is to rejoice in Christ, as our Mediator, and treasure of all
fullness. Phil. 3. 3. They are said to be the circumcision, who rejoice in
Jesus Christ, and have no confidence in the flesh. As therefore in the day time
we see the Sun only and no Stars: Thus the people of God in their sufferings
behold Christ the Sun of Righteousness; and as for the Stars of the
creatures, they do not afford any light. What made the Martyrs leap for joy?
Could they take any comfort from the world? No, that was an Egypt to them, a
valley of tears; so that it was in Christ only that they did rejoice. For want
of the knowledge and experience of this, it is that the unsound professor, will
deny Christ, and his truth rather then suffer the loss of any thing, because
he feels more sweetness, more pleasure, in his goods, in his pleasures, in
this world, then he can do in How many ways Christ makes his comforts to
abound to those that suffer for him? 1. By persuading them of the goodness of
the cause, why they suffer.
Christ. It is the gracious heart that can thus rejoice in Christ.

In the next place, Let us consider, How many ways Christ does make our
consolations in sufferings for his sake to abound. And

First, Christ does it by assuring and persuading of our hearts concerning
those truths and righteous actions, we do suffer for. If comfort arise from
suffering for Christ, then the more assured we are, that we do suffer for him,
the greater is our consolation. If a man have great doubts in his heart,
whether he suffers for Christ or not? Whether it be a truth or an error that
he is troubled for? Whether he was a busie-body, or not? Whether he did keep
within his calling and bounds, or not? If (I say) there be these hesitances and
disceptations in his mind, How can he have any comfort? Therefore that our
comfort may be full, Christ gives us the riches of assurance in our
understanding; Faith becomes the evidence, and strong conviction, Heb. 11. upon
their souls, insomuch that they know they are in the truth; They know it is
righteousness they suffer for. Thus you may observe the Apostles in all the
oppositions they met with from the world, and all the malice of Satan, yet
never questioning or doubting, whether they were deluded or no, but were fully
assured of those things they did preach. Now this consideration is the more to
be taken notice of, because the sufferings for Christ, in the latter age of the
Church, have differed wonderfully from the former. For in the primitive
persecutions, their sufferings did arise from Heathens and Pagans, it was for
professing of Christ, and opposing of Idolatry. Now these things were plain,
here was no disputing. But then in the after-ages of the Church, when Heretics
got power, especially when Antichrist was exalted, and the Papacy lifted up
with all strength, then those that did persecute, pretended Christ, that what
they did, they did for the honor and glory of Christ; and those who did
suffer, though indeed for Christ, yet were reputed enemies to Christ: And this
is that which makes suffering for Christ to be a more difficult thing in these
later days. The Papists that have put to death so many Protestants, defend
themselves with these glorious Titles, That they are only the Church of
Christ; That Christ is only amongst them; That all who withdraw obedience from
the Pope, are out of the Ark, out of hope of Salvation: That it is service to
Christ to root them out; and therefore the Doctrines suffered for, were not
about the Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ, the Resurrection; for which of
old believers suffered from Pagans, but about Transubstantiation, the Universal
Jurisdiction of the Pope, the Infallibility of the Church, the worshipping of
Images, and praying to Saints: The Popish party pleading for these, as allowed
of by Christ; The Protestant abhorring of them, as Idolatry, and also injurious
to Christ. Now on the Papists side was the whole Christien world, almost all
the learned men, all the great men, all the devout religious men, they were
zealous this way; and the Martyrs they were but few comparatively, many of them
private men and women. What a temptation was here to those that suffered? How
easily might they think, what am I wiser than all? Is it likely God would
reveal that to me, which he denies to others more learned? Besides, they
dispute, they bring Scripture and Fathers: May not I be deluded? May not the
Devil transform himself into an Angel of light, and so deceive me? Truly such
temptations would quickly have blown down the house, had it been built only
upon sand; but the Martyrs were established upon a Rock, Christ gave them full
assurance of those truths they lost all for; and this made way for their great
comfort. This conviction then, and assurance of faith wrought by the Spirit of
God, is that which is the root of our comfort, whereas doubtings and fears
would disquiet all. It is true, Luther speaks of himself, That he had many
times such thoughts, Tune solus sapis, Art thou only wise? What if thou art
damned, and drawest others to Hell with thee? And when a grave Divine came to
him, complaining of this temptation, That of the Evangelical Doctrine, which he
preached, he could not find that Faith and Assurance upon his soul he desired,
which was a bitter trouble to him. Luther upon the disclosing of this, brake
out, saying, I think God I have met with one tempted, as I am tempted. There
were it may be some temptations and doubts sometimes upon the spirits of those
who did suffer, for there was flesh still remaining in them, and the Devil was
desirous to winnow them: but yet the power of Faith, and the evidence of Divine
Authority in the truths they suffered for, would at last like the Sun break
forth and dissipate those mists. Therefore pray much for the guidance of Gods
Spirit herein through the Word, that thy comfort may be sure. The Heretic that
suffers, because he has a false and erroneous persuasion; therefore he has a
false and a deceitful comfort, and therefore is but like one in a dream,
pleasing himself with great imaginations, when he awakeneth poor and hungry:
but the true sufferer, he has joy, and he knows his joy is good, and upon
^ound grounds, which never can be taken away.

Secondly, Christ does comfort, by informing of us aforehand of all the 2. By
sorewarning of their sufferings.
troubles and sufferings which will necessarily accompany the true profession
of faith in his Name. Is not our Savior often upon this subject? Does he not
frequently foretell his Disciples, what reproach and hatred they shall meet
with? Does not the Scripture also in several places insist upon this point,
That all who will live godly must suffer many tribulations; That the Disciple
must not be above his Master. Yea, that we are appointed and set by God to
afflictions, they are the effect of our predestination, as well as grace and
glory is. Now in this we may be comforted, Christ has done is no wrong; he
has told us what we must look for, it is no more then we expected, The fiery
trial is not a strange thing. Surely this makes way for much comfort, that we
looked for afflictions aforehand; we prepared an Ark against the deluge should
come. The Devil he being a deceiver deals contrary to Christ, for he tempts
with pleasant baits hiding the hook; he shows thee pleasure and profit, but
not a word of that hell and torments which will necessarily follow thereupon.
But Christ tells thee of the worst at first, and keeps his best wine to the
last.

Thirdly, Christ comfort us, by informing of us of his Sovereignty and 3. By
informing us of his Sovereignty and conquest over the world.
conquest over the world. So that both Devils, and his Instruments are but
Lions in his hand, and so he lets them loose, and pulls them off, as he
pleases. If our enemies were equal, or superior to Christ in power, then we
might justly be left without comfort; but what Christ spoke to his Disciples,
belongs to all, I will not leave you, John 14. 18. I will not leave you
comfortless, Orphans, in the original: your condition is as good, as if Christ
were here corporally upon the earth, and should speak to thee to be comforted.
Would not this rejoice thee in thy afflictions, if Christ himself should come
to thee and say, Be of good comfort, I am with thee, I will support thee? Now
Christ gives his Spirit to be a Comforter in his room. That as Tertullian
calls the Spirit, Vicariam vim, (Lib. de praescript.) in respect of Doctrine;
so also it is in regard of comfort; and wherein can it more be manifested then
in teaching of us, that the world is conquered by Christ? John 16. 33. In the
world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world. Faith makes us behold this conquest over principalities and powers, as
also over all adversaries: so that thou art to receive comfort, because there
is no argument of discouragement; but it may be answered from Christ; and if
thou art dejected, it is because thou have low thoughts of Christ; Thou do
not judge of him, as he is.

Fourthly, Christ comfort, by virtue of his prayer put up in that very
behalf. In that solemn valedictory prayer of Christ, John 17. 13. one end 4. By
virtue of his prayer put up in that very behalf.
why he poured out that so affectionately before his death, was, that believers
might have Christ's joy fulfilled in themselves. It Is Christ's joy, and their
joy; Christ's efficiently, theirs subjectively. So that as there is fullness of
grace in Christ to subdue every corruption; thus there is fullness of joy in
him for every tribulation: and that this may be applied to thee, Christ, who
cannot be denied by his Father, for he hears him in all things, has thus
prayed to God for it. And therefore (...) by virtue not only of his death, but
also of his prayer and intercession; that thou art made to rejoice.

Lastly, Christ comforts in sufferings, by instructing thee of the good use, 5.
By instructing them of the spiritual advantages which come from such sufferings.
and heavenly advantage all these tribulations shall turn unto, which is
twofold, they shall,

1. Turn to thy own spiritual and eternal good. Thou shall hereby be more
purified from thy filth and corruption; this will winnow away thy chaff; this
fire will purge out thy dross; this will be a School, wherein thou will learn
more spiritual and divine knowledge in heavenly things, then ever before.
Sufferings have taught more than vast libraries, or the best books can teach.

Again, They will conduce to thy eternal Glory. God takes up every tear in his
bottle; how much more every drop of blood? For indeed by suffering in the work
of the Lord, thou art more than Angelical; though the Angels do the will of God
purely, cheerfully and constantly, yet they meet with no troubles nor
persecutions for it, as believers do. No wonder therefore if God at last take
his Joseph's out of prison, and sets them on thrones of glory. Besides,
believers are comforted, because they know all their sufferings will turn to
the advantage of the Church. Others are comforted and encouraged by this; what
rejoicing does this create in the heart of a believer? as we may show more
largely in the next verse.

Use. Of Instruction to all such, who take upon them the profession of Christ,
let them not be in jest; do not fall upon it by custom and education only; but
remember when thou profferest to follow him, that he will ask, whether thou
can be baptized with his Baptism or no; he will tell thee of the troubles
that follow his way; his advice is, to sit down and consider with thy self,
whether thou can build this house or no, fight this warfare or no: For it had
been better for thee, never to have owned Christ, than by carnal fears to
apostatize, saying, I did not look for these reproaches, these troubles; I
thought not the way would have been so difficult. Luke 9. 57. We have some come
voluntarily to Christ, proffering to follow him whithersoever he did go; but
Christ accepted them not, because they understood not how much they must suffer
in his way, and therefore when they had put hand to the plough, they would look
back. Oh then again and again look upon what terms you profess Christ! If thou
can not be a Martyr in thy soul, how will thou be in thy body? If thou can
not leave thy sins, thy lusts for his sake; how can thou thy life?

SERMON. XLIX.
How and why God always proportions a Saints Comforts to his Sufferings, and
often makes them to overflow? And why he often denies Comforts to his People in
their troubles.

2 COR. 1. 5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolations
also abounds by Christ.
WE shall now put a period to our discourse about this text; there remains
the last Observation to be improved, which is from the habitude or proportion,
that is between our sufferings and our comforts, as the one abounds, so the
other abounds. Should we have great sufferings, and small comforts, this
would be to put some few drops of honey into a fountain of gall: The
bitterness would still abide. The Lord therefore does commensurate his
comforts according to our afflictions; he lays a Giants burden upon Giants
shoulders, and Childrens burden upon a Child.

Doct. That God does proportion our comforts to our sufferings. God does
proportion our comforts to our sufferings.


If our sufferings increase, our consolations increase. So that if thy
afflictions are greater, and more multiplied then ever, thou have no cause to
fear, for thy supports and cordials shall also be more increased. As thou art a
man of sorrows, so thou shall be also a man of joys, if thou call upon all
that pass by, as the Church did, Lam. 1. 12. Behold and see, if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me! So thou shall
call to others, to come and see the wonderful mercies which God has
vouchsafed unto thee.

But to pour this oil into the wounds of those that are afflicted, consider,

First, That the Lord Christ in all his dispensations, still accommodateth
himself Christ always accommodates himself to the capacities of his people.
to the capacity of his people. He regards what they can bear; like the wise
Physician, does not give the strongest Physic that may be, to expel the
disease, but looks to the infirmity of his Patient. We see Christ did this in
the promulgation of the truths of the Gospel; if that Sun of righteousness
had appeared at first in his noonday light, weak eyes would have been offended
thereat; he did not enjoin them those high observances of fasting, etc. at
first. To which purpose also, (Luke 5. 27.) he uses that notable similitude,
how no man puts new wine into old bottles, but the bottles break. There is
regard to be had to the Auditors. Paul said, 1 Gor. 3. 1. I could not speak
unto you as spiritual, but as carnal. And indeed, all may observe, that Christ
did communicate the knowledge of divine things to the Disciples by degrees: I
have many things to say unto you, (Joh. 16. 12.) but you cannot bear them now.
As the Nurse cheweth her meat for the Infant, does not give it whole to him;
thus did Christ as a Doctor to his Auditors, still accommodating himself
according to the receptivity of the subject. In like manner, thus also God does
in laying afflictions upon us: He takes notice how frail thou art; if this
suffering should be brought upon thee, it would bruise thee to pieces; or if it
lay longer on thee, it would make thee put out thy hand to wickedness; and
therefore he takes it off in due time. If the fourth day would consume thee,
the third day thou shall be freed from it. The Apostle speaks fully to this,
1 Cor. 10. 13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that ye are able. Above your strength, (that is) not our own natural strength;
for there is not the least temptation, the least affliction, but if left to our
selves, we should fall under it. The voice of a maid to Peter, before ever he
came into any danger, made him deny Christ, with cursings and swearings.
Therefore he means the strength which Christ will furnish us with. So that
the sense is, as any temptation comes, so your strength also is supplied. And
indeed, as long as Christ makes us stand upright, so long the affliction cannot
hurt us; but when we bow and yield to carnal reasonings, then we miscarry. As a
Pillar, as long as it stands firm and upright, will bear any weight; but when
it begins to bow, or grow crooked and sloping, then it presently falls. We
have then here a text full of comfort; It is not every affliction, every
suffering thou may be exercised with, but that for which God has furnished
and prepared thee with strength for. We have a notable explication of this,
Isa. 20. 28. where under a parabolical similitude of the diverse ways of the
Husbandman to thresh out his Corn, the lesser grain not requiring such weight
as the other, is signified, that God makes a difference in our afflictions;
some are more knotty and difficult then others, and therefore they need more
strong Physic to free them from their disease. The cart wheel is not turned
about upon the cummin, a rod will serve to beat them out: A word will do more
to some, then a blow to others.

Secondly, God in his dispensations, does not only keep to an equality, but he
The mercies of God do often overflow.
does superabound, his mercy does overflow. The Lord always gives full heaped
measure, overflowing: In all things Christ has an overplus. There cannot be an
hyperbole in his goodness to us: As Luther said, Celum and gehenna non
patiuntur hyperbolen. So neither do the riches and grace of God in Christ: For
if first we confider Christ comparatively with Adam, the one is the original of
condemnation, the other of justification. There we shall see, that Christ is
not only equal to Adam, but exceeds him, transcendeth him. You may read Romans
5. 15. where the Apostle making a Divine collation between Adam and Christ, as
two heads, when he had instanced in Adam, how powerful he was to conveigh
sin and condemnation to all; then on the contrary he instanceth in Christ,
and there he makes an how much more, still on Christ's side: If through the
offense of one, many be dead, much more the grace of God through Christ, has
abounded to many. And Verse. 17. If by one death reigned upon many, much more
they which receive abundance of grace, shall reign in life. Here you see, that
though sin by Adam be very terrible and dreadful in it self, yet if compared
with Christ, it is but as the Nations to God, like a drop, or the small dust in
the balance. Therefore Christ thought it not enough to remove the evil Adam
brought upon us, but to do it abundantly, with a how much more. Thus also, if
we speak of the grace of Christ in pardoning of sin, we do not meet with
grace just equal, and no more, to remove the guilt of it, but it does
overflow. Even as the light of the Sun, is not only enough to inlighten thy
eyes, but for all the world besides. Romans 5. 20. Where sin abounded, grace
has much more abounded. Hence the Prophet compares Gods mercy in pardon of
sin, to the Heavens comparatively with the earth, which is but as a punctum
to it; thus are all our sins to the grace of God. So likewise the
righteousness of Christ, is not a garment too narrow for us, or that will just
serve to cover our nakedness, and no more; but it is an infinite
righteousness, as it is in Christ, though the application of it to us, be
according to our necessity. Thus Christ calls to the Church, Cant. 5. I. to
drink of his wine abundantly. Hence it is called riches of grace; and,
unspeakable riches of grace. And Christ said, He came that his people mght have
life, and that they might have it more abundantly. Thus the power of God, the
favor of God, is in abundance; Heaven, and salvation, is in abundance. As
Christ is our overflowing fountain in all other things, so in this of
consolation likewise. Hence some have received so much comfort from God, that
they have not been able to bear it: They have said, They had enough, more would
even overwhelm. For there are those who dyed by joy, especially when sudden,
as well as by grief.

In the next place, let us consider the grounds, Why God is thus merciful,
that he not just only proportions his comforts to our sufferings, but makes
them to exceed. And Reasons. 1. Because God in all his administrations does
still regard his own glory, not our desert.


First, Because God in these administrations, does chiefly regard his own
honor and greatness, not our deserts. Now because God is a great God,
therefore his mercy is great mercy; his comforts are great comforts: Though
thou art not worthy to have such, yet it beseems Gods glory and greatness to
give such. Wonder not then at the supports and comforts which Gods people may
have, even in the Whales belly, where there seems to be no hope: For,
consider who it is that gives them, from what fountain they flow, even the
Lord Christ, the fountain of all fullness, for his people; and then you will
say, Our cruce is too little to receive all the oil he could create for us. So
that the afflicted soul has this encouragement in prayer; Lord, I ask no more
then a great God is able to give; though I am unworthy to receive it, yet thou
art worthy to be exalted, as the great God, who can as easily give great
comforts as little comforts. God can as easily give an Ocean as a drop.

Secondly, It belongs to the faithfulness of God in his Promises, to make
comforts abound, where sufferings. For, by what reason God out of his
faithfulness 2. Because of Gods faithfulness to his Promises.
will give any support at all, by the same reason he will double and treble his
consolations as need requires. It is a rule among the Schools, Sicutse habet
simpliciter ad simpliciter, ita magis ad magis, and maximum ad maximum. Now
then, as God has promised and engaged to support under sufferings, so also as
these do abound, his comforts must abound; otherwise, his people would be
overcome by their temptations, which is against his Promise. For as such a
degree of heat will not warm cold water, unless it be made more intense; so
neither will comfort simply, unless made more and increased, serve against
grievous afflictions. An ordinary boat would not be like the Ark, when that
deluge of waters did overflow: This support, this joy thou have now, would not
serve, if God should exercise thee with greater trials. The widows food of
Sarepta might have served her in an ordinary way, but when the famine came, and
no supply could be had, then her stock would quickly be spent. Therefore urge
God, and say, Lord, if thou bring me in a wilderness, thou will provide
Manna for me; by what reason thou give me any comfort, give 3. Otherwise God
in his expressions of mercy would be exceeded by man.
me more now that my sufferings are more.

Thirdly, If God should not increase the strength and comforts of his people,
according to the increase of their afflictions, then he who is the fountain of
all pity and wisdom, should be exceeded by man, who is but a cistern receiving
from this fountain. For such is the care and compassion of a man to his beast,
that he will say no more burdens on it, then it can bear, and when he puts it
to more labor, he gives it more meat to strengthen it. Now shall man do thus
to his beast, and not God to his Children? So the Artificer, the Refiner of
gold, when he throws his gold into the fire, he lets it be no longer then the
dross is purged away; it shall not stay a moment longer then will serve for
the preparing it to excellent use: And shall not the great God of Heaven use
such wisdom to his people, when in afflictions, which are called their fire to
try them?

Lastly, If God should not give proportionable comfort in sufferings, his
glorious 4. Because otherwise Gods glorious and in his afflicting, could not be
obtained.
end would not be obtained in bringing these upon us. For these are to
demonstrate and draw out our graces; That we may be more then conquerours, Romans
8. And, That we may (...), as 1 Cor. 10. more then bear. It is not enough
merely to conquer afflictions, but we are more then conquerours: For, there is
no conqueror but has some loss, but the Children of God lose nothing, for
they are advantaged every way, both here and hereafter. So that as their
sufferings are an effect of their Predestination, thus also their support and
consolation flows from the same fountain. Shall God, as the Author of grace,
be more deficient in his works, then as he is the Author of nature? If then,
in the course of nature, we live, and move, and have our being; yea, every
thing has a natural delight and facility to its works of nature; shall not the
godly in the exercises of grace, which are most put forth in the times of
trouble? God will provide, that all thy sufferings shall not be in vain.

But you may say, Have the people of God in their sufferings, always such
overflowings Object.
of comfort? Are they not many times afflicted without, and destitute within?

We have answered this heretofore, informing that Job, yea Christ himself, Answ.
had sufferings without, and sufferings within: Their afflictions did abound,
but their joy did not. We distinguished and explicated that case, only we shall
now give some Reasons why God, at least for a time, may leave a suffering Why
God often denies comfort in trouble. 1. To teach us that comforts are his gifts.
people without consolation, because then they were omitted. As

First, God in thy troubles, may deny thee comfort, to teach thee that they are
his gift. This cooling wind blows when he pleases. We might think, that
comfort was our desert, that God could not be just to leave us without it, when
it is for his cause we are troubled; but God will let thee know, that when thou
have suffered to the utmost, thou have but done thy duty; God is not beholding
to thee. And therefore, if he gives thee these cordials, know, it is of his
mercy; thou have not merited them: And when thou have them, receive them
thankfully.

Secondly, Does God deny thee thy desired comforts? consider whether thy 2.
Because perhaps by our sins we have deserved it. 3. God often denies comforts
for the that they may be the more welcome when they come. 4. And often to try
whether my obedience be pure.
sins have not deserved it. For although thou suffer for him, yet it may
be, much unbelief, much impatience, much frowardness has risen in thy heart;
now these misty foggs, will obscure the glorious beams of his favor. God is
ready with his comfort, but thou art indisposed: Thy heart is like an untuned
Instrument, and so there cannot be any melodious sound.

Thirdly, If thou have no comfort, it may be God delayeth, and puts off, that
so they may be the more welcome, when they do come. Thus God does not answer
prayers presently, that when the mercy does come, it may be the more esteemed.
Christ delayed to raise Lazarus, that when he was restored to life, the mercy
might be acknowdged the greater. When Paul and his passangers for a great while
had not seen the Sun, this made them rejoice the more when they did behold it.

Fourthly, Does God deny thee comfort? it may be it is to try whether thy
obedience be pure. Whether thou will serve him, though he gives thee no wages.
Comfort is for our refreshment, it is to encourage us. We, like Children,
cannot live without these breasts; now, if denied these, though we have a stone
for bread, yet thou will not give over suffering for Christ, then thou show
thy self upright indeed: For we are apt to look to consolations, more then
duty; to regard comfort, more then obedience. Now when thou can say, O Lord,
I will not repine, I will not be weary of righteousness, or deny the Name of
Christ, though I have no comfort at all; it is not my ease, so much as thy
glory, I look at: This will greatly indear thee to God.

Fifthly, God may deny thee comfort, to inform thee how much thou art beholding
5. To teach us how we are beholding to Christ.
to Christ. He suffered for thee, and that without comfort: He was willing to
be deprived of it, that so he might accomplish thy Redemption. Now as Christ
would be tempted like us, so God will have us tempted like Christ, that we
might be the more thankful to him. Certainly, all the pains on his body, all
the disgrace and reproach he went under, was not equal to his being without
comfort; yet this he endured for thee.

Lastly, Conclude on this, That if comfort were absolutely necessary for thee
6. Whenever it is necessary, we are sure to have it.
at this time, thou should have it. Romans 8. How can he not but give us all
other things, who has given us Christ? Is comfort equal to Christ?

SERMON. L.
The Saints Sufferings, are for the Churches good.

2 COR. 1. 6. And whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation, and
salvation, which is effectual in the enduring the same sufferings, which we
also suffer: or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and
salvation.
THis Verse is acknowledged by many Learned Expositors, to be very difficult,
not so much from the matter, for that is easy, as from the grammatical
disposition of the words, there being several conjectures, and diverse
adventures about the transposing of them. In most of the Latin Copies, there
are three members in the disjunction, whereas the Greek has but two, after
this manner: Whether we be afflicted, whether we be comforted, and whether we
exhort. But according to the Greek word, which is (...), this would make a
tautology; therefore, no doubt, this was inserted in the Latin Copies, by some,
not diligently attending to what they did. Then as for the Greek, Chrysostom
does transpose the words otherwise then we do, putting off the second member of
the disjunction, viz. Whether we be comforted, etc. to the next Verse, Knowing
that as you are partakers of the sufferings, etc. and then reduces all the
rest to the former part. Some also blame Erasmus, for adding in the Original,
(it is;) Whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation: which way our
Translators also render. And indeed, the sense would run well enough without
it, relating to those words, Our hope of you is steadfast. But this is not
material, for the sense is still the same. Not therefore to trouble you with
these grammatical difficulties, seeing the scope and meaning of the Apostle is
evident, which is, That whatsoever did befall him in his ministerial Office, it
was for their good, and therefore they were to be so far from being
discouraged at his sufferings, or to despise him for them, as the false
Apostles labored to make them do, that they ought rather to honor him, and
they themselves to be more animated in their sufferings for Christ. And in this
the Apostle does so overflow with words, that Erasmus absurdly gives this
profane censure, Intempestivae copiae affectatio, as if he could teach the
Spirit of God how to speak. But no wonder at this presumption of his, seeing in
his Epistle to Barbirius, (purging himself from being a Lutheran, much more
from holding every thing that Luther wrote,) he adds, he would not be so
addicted to Austin or Hierome; vix etiam ipsi Paulo, scarce even to Paul
himself. Whether this vix would preserve him from blasphemy, let others judge.

But come we to the first member in this distribution, wherein we have the
condition supposed, the consequent and effect of it, with the amplification
thereof.

I shall begin with the condition supposed, (...), whether we be afflicted,
squeezed, or pressed; for the word signifies such afflictions, as are like the
^^ail to the corn, that does bruise it. The end of this, in the general, is for
the good of the Church; more particularly, for their consolation and salvation.
From whence Observe,

That the afflictions and sufferings we endure for Christ, do not only turn to
our The afflictions we suffer for Christ, are not only for our own, but for the
Churches good.
own good, but to the good of Gods Church.

That they are for our own good, has been partly spoken to. Yea every
dispensation of God to those that fear him, is a benefit and an advantage: For
if it be a mercy, it is bonum Dei consolantis; if an affliction, it is bonum
Dei admonentis, as Austin. But I am now to speak of the diffusive good by
afflictions in respect of others.

That sufferings for Christ are of public edification to the Church,
appears by two or three notable texts, concerning what Paul speaks of
himself, Phil. 1. 12. I would ye should understand, that the things which
happened to me, have fallen out rather to the furtherance of the Gospel. I would
ye should understand; It is a truth that Believers should possess themselves
with: For indeed, it is a ridle, that out of this strong one should come honey,
that out of darkness should arise light, from death come life. The not
understanding of this, has made so many Apostates, thinking that the Kingdom
of Christ and his ways, would never hold, because all the power of the world
conspire to oppress it; but the Apostle would have them know, that
persecutions do not hinder, but further the Gospel. The treading and trampling
on this Camomile, makes it thrive the better. Another remarkable text, is 2 Timothy 2. 10. where the Apostle having showed, that though they did cast him into
bonds, yet the Word of God could not be bound; no more then a man (as
Chrysostom observes) that cutteth off a branch from the tree, can cut off the
Sunbeams also from the Sun, that may shine upon that branch: he adds, that
he does endure all things for the elects sake, that they may obtain salvation.
Oh wonderful expression! you might think Paul goes too high, these words
become Christ rather; Who can say this, but Christ? He suffers for the elects
sake, that they may have salvation. But Paul speaks this only as a Minister,
not a Mediator, as is more particularly to be urged: His scope is to show,
that it is not for any sins of his own, any wickedness that he has
committed, but it is for the good of the Church, that he thus suffers. So
that Paul does not only propagate the Gospel by preaching, but by suffering;
when he cannot preach, he does most preach; when his person is bound in chains,
then the Gospel is more enlarged: As Herod by cutting off John Baptists head,
did in effect make John's tongue more speak, and witness against him. The last
instance is, Col. 1. 24. which place is the more famous, because abused by the
Papists, to uphold a treasure or overplus in the sufferings of the Saints, that
they suffer more than they deserve; and therefore the overplus is to be
dispensed by Papal authority, for the relief of such who want merits. And here
comes in their doctrine of Indulgences, which was the occasion of that
Reformation wherein Luther was so greatly instrumental. For the Text it self,
you have Paul professing his rejoicing in his sufferings; though so afflicted,
so reproached, being made a spectacle to men and Angels, Accounted the
offscouring of the world, yet in all this he did rejoice. For God loves a
cheerful sufferer, as well as a cheerful giver, Si quid boni tristis feeris,
per te fit, magis quam tu facis; It is done in thee, rather than by thee, the
good thou do with grudging and reluctance. Yea admire the public affection
of Paul; this was not so much because he should hereby have a greater crown of
glory, that he should hereby be more honored, but principally he rejoiced,
because he suffered for others, that by his persecutions many others may be
imboldened to profess the Gospel. Now he shows in what manner he did suffer
for them, viz. By filling up that which is behind of the affliction of Christ
in his flesh, for the bodies sake, which is the Church. This seems strange,
how could Paul fill up the (...), the things behind of Christ's sufferings? Were
Christ's sufferings imperfect? Could Paul make up that which was deficient in
Christ? This would be to make Paul copartner with Christ in the work of the
mediation; and then Paul might truly have said, that which once by
interrogation he so vehemently denied, Paul was crucified for them. Therefore
you must know, the sufferings of Christ are of two sorts. The sufferings of
Christ of two sorts. 1. In his Person. 2. In his members.


1. Those which he suffered in his own Person, as Mediator and head of his
Church; And thus by once offering up of himself, he for ever made perfect those
that do believe in him; and thus there are no (...), no remainders behind to be
done.

2. There are the sufferings of the members of Christ united to him their Head;
and these are called his sufferings, because of that mystical conjunction
between Christ and his members; as also that sympathy that is in him with them
in their sufferings. Now as Christ was appointed to sufferings; so is every
member of his, by way of conformity to their Head set apart also for their
sufferings; and these are the afflictions of Christ that are still behind. All
the members of Christ have not yet fully suffered. In every age there are some
still to be afflicted for his sake, and as long as any one believer is to
suffer, so long something of Christ's afflictions remains still behind.
Therefore the Apostle adds, He was to fulfill these Propositions clearing the
truth. 1. The sufferings of Saints for the good of the Church, are still to be
distinguished from Christ's sufferings. How Christian Martyrs sufferings differ.
1. His death was not only a Martyrdom, but a propitiation.
afflictions in his flesh; and the end is, for the good of the Church. They
suffer for the Church, but not as Christ suffers, as will appear by some
Propositions to clear the Doctrine.

First therefore, when we say, That the afflictions of the godly, especially of
eminent officers in the Church, are for the good of the Church, you must still
distinguish them from the sufferings of Christ for the Church also. The Martyrs
they died to witness the truth, and hereby occasionally to procure salvation
for others; but Christ's ^ng for others was in a far more transcendent and
efficacious way. For

1. Christ's death was not only a martyrdom, but a propitiation, and an
atonement also. Christ (we grant) did suffer as a Martyr, he came into the
world to bear witness to the truth. And he is said 1 Timothy 6. 13. To have
witnessed a good confession before Pontius Pilate. But those wretched Socinians
are therefore to be abhorred, because they make this the only end of his death,
That he died by way of example, not by way of propitiation for our sins. Thus
with them the sufferings of Christ, and of Paul for the Church, differ only
gradually, not in kind. Christ died as a more eminent Martyr than Paul, but
both only by way of witness to the truth. Take we heed then, that we do not
split our souls at this rock of blasphemy, denying the atonement of Christ's
sufferings.

2. They differ in the efficacy also. For Paul's sufferings, and so all the
sufferings 2. In the efficacy.
of the godly do only objectively, or by way of example turn to the good of
others: They comfort, convert, or save others only ministerially; but Christ's
sufferings did meritoriously and efficiently also procure all the benefits
which the Church stands in need of. Hence remission of sin, justification,
renovation, and glorification are attributed unto his blood, which cannot be to
the blood of the Martyrs. So that Christ's death did by way of merit and
causality procure all the privileges the Church enjoys.

Hence in the second place, All the sufferings which any undergo for the
Churches 2. Our sufferings for the Churches good are not meritorious either for
our selves or others.
good, they are not meritorious or satisfactory, either for our selves or
others. As the Papists do most derogatively to the honor of Christ maintain;
for their Doctrine about the sufferings of Martyrs for Christ's cause, is very
proud and pharisaical. They dogmatize that by these he may merit and satisfy
God (yet through the merits of Christ, Tincta sanguine Christi) yea not only
thus satisfy for his own sins, but may supererogate. So that they exceed the
wise Virgins, they will part with some of their oil, because they have more
than enough. So that from the overplus of all their sufferings the Church has
a great stock and treasure to relieve those that have no merits of their own.
Now this is a mere political engine in Popery, to make the Pope have indeed a
great treasury, for he communicates and dispenses out of this stock for
money. Insomuch that Albertus Magnus says plainly, That a rich man is in a
far better condition to be saved than a poor man, because he has money to
buy his pardon, and to redeem himself, which the poor has not. Thus these like
Judas, make a sale and bargain of Christ; but though the godly suffer, yet
their sufferings are not for that end as Christ's was; even as when they obey
the Law of God they do it not for that end which Christ did. For both in
suffering and doing Christ was only meritorious, because he was without sin,
and did more than he was bound to, which cannot be said of any Martyr.

Thirdly, When we say, the sufferings of the godly turn to the good of others,
3. That our sufferings turn to others good is not from themselves, but from the
power and grace of God.
This is not to be understood, as if of themselves they did so, but by the
mighty power and grace of God working by them. For Paul cannot of himself cause
comfort and courage in others; for he acknowledges God only to be the fountain
of all comfort; and therefore he prays to God, that God would do good by such
afflictions. And as Paul cannot of himself thus do good to others by his
sufferings: (For it is with him, as in his preaching, He does but plant and
water, it is God that gives the increase:) So neither do these sufferings work
good of themselves by any intrinsecal virtue and efficacy they have. For how
many by these persecutions are the rather terrified. So that as the Gospel is,
though to some a savor of life, yet to others a savor of death. Thus
afflictions and troubles to some do discover their hypocrisy and guile, as
winnowing does the cha^^, but to others they are blessed, either to conversion,
or to edification. So that in all the sufferings of the Church, we are by
prayer to importune God, that by these means greater glory may come to Christ;
and that these waters of persecution may be like those to the Ark, which could
not drown it, but exalted it 4. Hence we may admire the wisdom, power and
goodness of God, turning our enemies wicked intentions unto our good.
nearer to Heaven. Hence

Fourthly, We may admire the wisdom, power and goodness of God, that wherein
the enemies of Gods Church deal craftily and cruelly, in that very thing he is
above them, working the contrary to that which they are intending. For how many
persecutors has the Church had, who like Haman resolved to root out the very
name of Christianity, and their persecutions have increased the number of
Christians? Thus it must needs be madness and torment to the Churches enemies
to see that the ways they take to demolish, is indeed to build up the Church
of God. Even as it was with Pharaoh, when he called a counsel to deal craftily
with the Israelites, to oppress and diminish them, then they were the more
multiplied. Thus Act. 12. 24. when Herod set himself to kill the eminent
servants of the Lord, and thereby weaken the Church of God: for when the
shepherds were dissipated, what would become of the flock? it is said, But the
word of God grew and multiplied. See how the contrary fell out to Herod's design.

These things premised, Let us consider, What is the general good promoted by
What is the general good promoted by the Churches sufferings. 1. The glory of
God, Christ, and believers.
the Churches sufferings. And

1. Hereby the glory of God and Christ is the more exalted amongst all that
fear him. For when the Churches of God shall see the wisdom and goodness of
God thus to his people, turning all the cruelty and craft of their adversaries
to their own good, that what they could never do, their enemies do for them:
What glory and praise does this cause in all Congregations? How is the Church
indeared hereby to God, to trust in him, to continue faithful to him in all
exercises? God has been good and will be good. God has turned the greatest
evil of men to the greatest advantage, and he will do it. As Christ's death is
called a glorifying of him: Thus also are the sufferings for Christ, the
believers glory, and not only so, but the glory of Christ also. What says
Paul, Phil. 1. 20. Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether by life or
death. But

2. The great good overflowing to the Church by its sufferings, are the
propagation 2. The propagation and enlargement of the Gospel.
and enlargement of the Gospel thereby. Phil. 1. 13. Paul there shows, how
his troubles fell out to the furtherance of the Gospel; for his bonds were made
manifest in Caesar's palace, and in all other places. That of Tertullian is
known, The blood of Martyrs is the seed of the Church. When men did behold
their faith, the r^patience, their constancy and courage, it made them enquire
into the cause of their sufferings, what it was that could make them so
constantly endure all kind of torments; Insomuch that this was in stead of the
working of miracles, to bring men to faith. So that as the shaking of a ripe
flower makes many seeds fall to the ground, and in stead of that one flower
many come up in the room of it: or as when the Vine has its branches cut off,
there come far more in stead thereof. Thus it has also been by all the
troubles on the Church of God, by afflictions, and by patience under them. How
numerous did the Church of God grow, even like the stars in Heaven?

Let the Use be, To consider those examples of all such worthies, who have
suffered for Christ, whether recorded in Scripture, or in Ecclesiastical
History, read them for thy comfort and thy salvation. The word of God, and the
lives of Martyrs bearing witness to it, may much prevail over a stony heart. It
has been a good blessing of God, that the Names and Histories of most Martyrs
have been preserved and recorded for the good of the Church of God to come. The
lives and sufferings of our Martyrs here in England, what influence may they
not make upon thee? What patience, what heavenly mindedness, what courage
should this put into thee? As Abel though dead speaks: Thus do all the godly
Martyrs, the Bradfords, the Ridleys, the Latimers, they all speak still; and
God suffers such persecutions to be as perpetual Sermons to teach us.

SERMON. LI.
The Afflictions which others suffer for Christ, make much for our Comfort and
Salvation.

2 COR. 1. 6. And whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and
salvation.
THe second particular in this Text, as it stands divided, is the Consequent or
Effect of this tribulation; which is set down in a particular and special
manner above any other fruit of it, and that is twofold, Consolation and
Salvation. Of the word Consolation enough has already been said. For the
other, viz. Salvation, we shall remit it to the end of the verse, where it is
again specified. So that our work is immediately to proceed to the Observation,
which is,

That sufferings for Christ should be so far from disheartning, and offending
Sufferings for Christ help much our comfort and salvation.
others, that a true and right consideration of them, may much provoke our
comfort and salvation.

This truth is of great use. For the afflictions accompanying the ways of
Christ, have been an offense, and a stumbling block to many. Now when a curb
shall be made a spur, when an hinderance, a furtherance; and we shall be
encouraged from those particulars which should drive back, this consideration
must be very profitable.

Before we come to amplify in what manner, in what respects persecutions are
made thus serviceable to others, Let us take notice,

First, That the sufferings of others do work good only occasionally, or by way
1. The sufferings of others work good only occasionally, not efficiently or
meritoriously.
of example. We must not conceive any merit or causality (as was declared
before) in Martyrs; They are Examples, not Mediators; Their light did shine
that we might thereby glorify God. So that we must take heed that the
sufferings of the godly do not obscure the sufferings of Christ, that they
should not be accounted the only treasure of Christ. But as Luther was afraid,
lest his books should take men off from meditating on the Bible: Or as Paul was
afraid men should judge of him, as if he by his own power had done that
miracle; and therefore told them, It was only by the Name of Christ. So also
it was with all the true Martyrs of Christ, they were humble, looking upon
themselves as unworthy of the name of a Martyr; neither would they have their
blood derogate from the blood of Christ. Hence 2. Hence we may bewail the
supersti^ion of the Church about the Martyrs.


Secondly, We may greatly deplore and bewail the Apostasy of the Church
concerning those that were Martyrs and sufferers for Christ: in what
superstition and sinful devotion were they plunged in about them? So that
their sufferings were not for the salvation, but the destruction of many,
through the sin and indiscretion of after ages. It is true there is a lawful
and due honoring of God for his graces bestowed on those Worthies; yet they
were but the pens, Gods Spirit was the ready writer; they were but the vessels
God poured that curious ointment in them. It was not they so much as God in and
by them; for they were men like us, subject to carnal and worldly fears; they
were reeds of themselves ready to be shaken by every wind, but God established
them. So that it is our duty to bless God, who gave such power and grace to
men; yea and we are in a civil way to honor and love them, to desire to
imitate them, to make them examples for us to follow. If the Papists had gone
no further, we and they should have been at concord in this point; but from
imitation they fall to adoration: And although they heap up as many
distinctions, as Samson did men by his slaughter, Heap upon heap, to clear
themselves in this matter, yet it is but vitreum acumen, these glasses are
quickly broken. That the name of such who suffer for Christ should be like a
precious ointment, and an honorable esteem of them be had always in the
Church, none can deny. Therefore those moral respects vouchsafed to them in the
primitive times are not to be blamed; as the regarding of the judgment of a
Martyr, as much or more than any Bishop or Doctor. As also when any had fallen
by infirmity in times of persecution; such repenting did first go to the
Confessors in prisons that were Candidates, or designed Martyrs, entreating
their favor, and desiring liberty of admission into Church Communion from
them, which the Church received, they making public satisfaction in respect of
scandal by serious humiliation; but this afterward began to be greatly abused,
and Cyprian complains of it; therefore it was at last justly abrogated,
howsoever such respects as were merely moral, are to be allowed; but for
religious considerations to do any thing to them that is unjustifiable. A
learned man thinks, that the Prophecy spoken of by Peter, 2 Timothy 4. 1. which
tells of an Apostasy, bringing in Doctrines of daimons, as he explains it, is
the worshipping of these Saints departed; and that this was the great Apostasy
of the Church. Whether that be the intent of the holy Ghost, is not here to be
disputed. Certainly there was great Apostasy in the Church from primitive
simplicity, when they began to worship such who had been Martyrs; yea their
relics they would in a religious manner preserve and adore praying also unto
them, and expecting both soul-mercies and body-mercies from them. Here this
wine did begin to turn into vinegar, and contrary to Christ, they turned wine
into water; that which was only for example and imitation, they turned to
Adoration and worship, wherein they did not only derogate from the glory due to
Christ; but even those Confessors and glorious Martyrs themselves, were they
corporally present, would with Paul and Barnabas rend their clothes, and refuse
such worship. Certainly if the Angel did forbid John from worshipping him,
saying, He was his fellow servants, and therefore he must worship God: How much
more would the Martyrs, who were subject to like passions as we are. Though
therefore the godly are afflicted and persecuted for our comfort and salvation,
yet take heed of superstitious excess about them, turning imitation into
religious adoration.

Thirdly, Those that suffer may be very useful to encourage us, but then we
must be sure they be such, who do indeed suffer for Christ. For no doubt all 3.
The sufferers for Christ may encourage us, but we are to be sure they are
indeed the sufferers for Christ.
those who have suffered in any false way, The Heretic for his heresies, the
Papist for his Idolatry and superstition, have greatly confirmed those that
were of that persuasion. They did greatly comfort and animate others that did
believe them to be the true Martyrs of Christ. So that we may say of such,
contrary to that in the Text, They are afflicted for the destruction and
damnation of others. Others are hardened in their Idolatries and Heresies by
their sufferings. Look we then, that we do propound right paterns to our
selves, that we be not deceived, as sometimes in Popery they have worshipped
the bone of an Ass or an horse for a Saints relic; for the Devil has his
Martyrs. Heresy has her Martyrs; yea vainglory has had many Martyrs. And
Austin says, It is possible for a man who dies for the truth, yet to have no
other motive but vainglory. The Apostle affirms it also, 1 Cor. 13. when he
supposes a man may give his body to be burnt, and yet for want of charity be a
tinkling cymbal, or it will profit him nothing. This is so secret a sin, and
we are so prone to it, that the Heathens did charge it upon all the Christians
(though falsely and maliciously) that they suffered only for vainglory; being
the more induced to think so, because the Christians did in such an excessive
manner give honor and praise to them.

These things premised, let us consider how the afflictions of others for
Christ's How the afflictions of others for Christ work our comfort and
salvation. 1. Hereby we shall have greater assurance of these divine truths for
which they suffer.
cause work to our comfort and salvation.

First, We shall have the greater assurance and persuasion of those Divine
Truths upon our souls, that they are not the mere inventions of men, or
delusions of our own souls. For how can it but greatly assure us, that if this
were not the truth of God, they could never have that comfort, that courage,
that evidence and demonstration upon their hearts: the presence of God with
them in those exquisite sufferings, do demonstrate, that the truths are of God,
as well as the power and comforts to be of him. It is true indeed the mere
suffering, and that with some joy, the most exquisite torments. For a religious
opinion does not presently argue, that it is a divine truth, that it has Gods
superscription upon it. For many heretical and deluded spirits have
demonstrated much confidence and comfort: yet on the other side, there cannot
be an external greater sign of our love to the truth, and that it is of God,
then by patient suffering for it. And therefore though Heretics die, though
Papists die for their Religion, as well as the true Martyr, yet the frame of
their spirits and concomitant dispositions are greatly different. For as their
minds are corrupted with error, so also are their hearts and affections
unsanctified, and therefore discover not the sweet and gracious workings of
Gods Spirit upon them, as the true sufferer does. So that it was not merely
suffering; it was not merely torments, but the patience, faith and heavenly
mindedness, their love even to their very enemies, that did draw out others to
love them. So that when we see others can be imprisoned, executed for such
Doctrines, and they be full of an heavenly, mortified, gracious heart at that
time; this must needs work in us a greater assurance of the truth, especially
this does confirm the more, when we see it is not one or two, but multitudes,
yea millions, which have given testimony to such truths and that by their
blood, that so many should thus be willingly undone for that which is a
falsehood, is very improbable. And therefore our Divines do usually bring the
constancy of Martyrs, as an argument to prove the divine truths of the
Scriptures. Oh then shall thou doubt? Shall thou question, whether this or that
be truth, when thou have such presidents of so many laying down their lives to
confirm it?

Secondly, From the sufferings of others for Christ and his way, we may be 2.
Hence we may be encouraged to trust in God, and depend upon him, to enable us
also, if he should call us thereunto.
greatly encouraged to trust in God, and to depend on him, to enable us also,
if he should call us thereunto. How apt are the people of God to be despondent
within themselves, to be afraid of their own weakness and hypocrisy, saying,
their hearts are so carnal, so unmortified that they know not to part with any
thing, much less life it self for Christ? He cannot, will one say, he dare not
say with Peter, Though all men forsake Christ, yet he would not; but rather if
there be any that will deny Christ, he should be the man. This temptation is
very incident to the gracious heart. But if they look off from themselves to
these champions before their eyes, what hope and confidence may they attain
unto in the Lord? For what were those confessors of themselves? Were they not
men? Were they not flesh and blood as well as thou art? Were they not affected
with wives, children, and life it self? Were they marble and rocks? No surely,
but they were subject to all such temptations as thou art, and yet God was with
them, he raised them up above their own strength. So that while thou art out of
this fight, thou can not conceive what strength, and what gracious influence
God will vouchsafe unto thee. As we read of one French Martyr in Fox his
Martyrologie, that was exceedingly possessed with fear about suffering,
insomuch that he disguised himself, and took upon him to be a pedlar, carrying
ware up and down; but being at last discovered, and hiding himself in a bush,
no sooner was he apprehended, but as he acknowledged afterward, as soon as
ever the enemy had laid hold on him, that spirit of fear and cowardlinesse left
him, being filled with undaunted courage. If therefore we read the lives and
deaths of those who have been persecuted for Christ, and observe what
wonderful supports they have had, and how God has glorified himself in their
infirmities: so that with Paul they could say, I could do all things through
Christ that strengthens me, they did partake of a kind of Omnipotency: And at
another time he says, When I am weak, then am I strong. This may make thee,
though a Lamb for meekness and innocence, yet a Lion for courage and spiritual
fortitude. Hence the Apostle, when Heb. 11. he had instanced in the great
achievements, many worthies had accomplished by faith, at the twelfth Chapter
he begins, Seeing we are compassed about with such a cloud of witnesses, or
Martyrs, for so we may render it, Let us run the race that is set before us.
We have such a cloud of witnesses, that as the cloud did direct and guide the
people of Israel in the wilderness; so also should the lives and examples of
so many (called for that end likewise a cloud) guide us and teach us. Who then
can be diffident, unbelieving, fearful, when he has such encouragements
before his eyes?

Thirdly, From the consideration of such worthies suffering for Christ, we may
also take occasion to rejoice, and to be glad. So far should we be from
shrinking 3. Hereby we may take occasion to rejoice in God, as enabling them,
and as having promised to do so to us.
and apostatizing from Christ, there are several causes of rejoicing; partly in
God, blessing and praising him, who does so much exalt himself in weak vessels.
As God has always delighted to bring about the greatest glory to himself by
abject and contemptible means. Thus also he does by the sufferings of his
people; that which is most unlikely, by that he magnifieth himself: and that
God is seen, and made great in the world, this should mightily rejoice us,
partly, Because we have the same God, and the same promise that they had. And
therefore we may look to rejoice as well as they. They have not a more
merciful or powerful God than thou have; neither have they more excellent or
better promises than thou have. So that as fire kindles fire, thus their joy
may produce joy in thee.

Fourthly, From the sufferings for Christ's sake we may inform our selves 4.
Hence we may inform our selves they were in earnest, and real for Christ.
much in this great lesson, that they were in earnest, and real for him. It was
not only words, or a profession, but a lively submission unto the ways of
Christ. That which the Scripture complains of so much, is the general sin
of the Christian world, They follow Christ, because of loaves: They profess
him while the scorching heat of the Sun does not arise; but when once Christ
and their earthly comforts cannot stand together, then they discover their
unsoundnesse, and that they had no root at all. But those that suffer for
Christ, they profess no more with their tongues then they manifest in their
lives, Non loquimur magna, sed vivimus, as Cyprian, We do not so much speak
great things, as live them. This was the great Objection to Seneca, and such
moral Philosophers, that they had expressions about Virtue, but in their
practice were far from it. Seneca was forced to purge himself in this
accusation. But neither he, nor Socrates, nor Aristotle, nor any of those
Masters in Morality, could acquit themselves. Aristotle that makes Temperance
a virtue, and that he only is temperate who does it for virtues sake, that a
virtuous man will rather die than do an evil or dishonest action, yet he kept a
whore, yea and sacrificed to her, as the Heathens did to a goddess. He was
moved to study Philosophy by the instinct of Pythias, which is no more than by
the command of the Devil. He was ungrateful, betrayed his Country, and then
afterward had a great hand in poisoning Alexander, which made Caracalla the
Emperor, expel all Philosophers of Aristotle's Sect, because of his mischief
to Alexander. He was also exceeding covetous; for this end Lucian brings
Alexander in hell upbraiding Aristotle, that therefore he made riches part of
the Summum bonum, that under that pretext he might the rather heap up wealth;
insomuch that Lactantius said truly of him, Aristoteles nee Deum coluit, nec
curavit. So that these great Moralists were like some Painters, who can draw
excellent and beautiful pictures, when they themselves are foul and deformed.
So that to add action and suffering to our profession, when we are called to
it, this is to show we are Christians indeed, Nunc incipio esse Christianus,
said Ignatius, when he was going to his Martyrdom.

Lastly, By those that suffer we may learn to crucify our hearts to the world,
5. Hence we may learn to mortify our hearts to the world.
to be weaned from all comforts, not to love them more than Christ. Oh say, I
find my heart so inordinate, so glewed to these dear relations I have; I find
them so cleaving to my heart, that much prayer, faith and meditation cannot
cast them out. What a shame is this? I look upon the Martyrs, I see wives,
children, estates, goods were nothing; Christ was all, Heaven was all: Oh how
unworthy am I to be compared with such glorious servants of Christ! I have not
the Martyrdom of the heart, and how then can I endure that of the body?

SERMON. LII.
How Salvation is promoted and advanced by our Sufferings for Christ.

2 COR. 1. 6. Which is effectual in enduring of the same sufferings, which we
also suffer.
WE are now come to the third particular in this Text, which is the
amplification of the end specified of the Apostles sufferings, especially the
latter, viz. Salvation, which Salvation is effectual. Wherein we may take
notice,

1. What is attributed to Salvation, (...). 2. The manner how, (...), in
enduring; with the object of the same sufferings, We also suffer.
I shall at this time only consider the Attribute, or what is predicated of our
Salvation, it is effectual. The Greek word (...) is contested about. Some,
especially Estius is very industrious to prove, that it should be rendered
passively. Thus, which Salvation is wrought. And it is true indeed among
profane Authors, the word is used passively; but in the New Testament in some
places, it must needs be rendered actively. For whereas the word is used four
times in the New Testament, in all which places we translate it actively; yet
he contends for the passive sense, as Gal. 5. 6. Faith which works by love,
he will have it, which is wrought by love: Whereas Vasquez grants it may be
rendered actively. So Jam. 15. 16. the (...), we translate, The effectual
prayer, he would have the prayer wherein the Spirit of God does so powerfully
move us, that we are acted rather than act. Even as afterward in the Church,
those who were possessed by the Devil, were called (...). But though in this
place he may argue something probably, yet in the two other places, Ephesians. 3.
20. According to the power, (...), which works in us. Col. 1. 29. Striving
according to his working, (...), which works in me mightily: Here he cannot
with any color understand it passively. It is true, there is another word
(...), which is in the active sense used so 1 Cor. 16. 9. Heb. 4. 15. but that
does not hinder, but that this in the middle voice may be rendered actively.
Certainly though Greek Authors do not, yet the Apostle uses the verb (...),
actively, as 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. The Mystry of iniquity works. For whereas the
same Estius would have it passively, It is wrought, or is in agitation, that is
no ways probable: for 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. the word of God is there said (...), It
effectually works in them that believe. So also the word is used actively 2
Cor, 4. 12. and Romans 7. 5. It is not then necessary that the word should be
used passively. Hence Erasmus and our Translators render it actively, it is
effectual, yet I rather join with those, that think it more genuine to
understand it passively in this place, Which salvation is wrought by patience
in afflictions. And this is consonant to other Texts, of which I shall instance
in one afterward. Certainly Chrysostom aggravateth the passive signification;
he did not say (says he) (...), but (...); yet the active sense, if it be
retained, comes to the same purpose with the passive. For the Apostle
contends, that by afflictions for Christ's sake, our salvation is advanced:
Salvation puts forth it self, and thereby is more exalted by these sufferings,
which certainly must be of unspeakable comfort, to think that by these I am the
more prepared for Heaven, and my glory will the more increase. Only you must
remember always, that these sufferings have no causality or meritoriousnesse
in them; it is only the gift and grace of God, hereby to increase our
blessedness; for after all our sufferings, we are unprofitable servants, and
might be thrown into hell. Observe,

That the salvation of believers is promoted and advanced by their sufferings
The salvation of believers is promoted by their sufferings for Christ.
for Christ.

Let none with Simon the Cyrenean be compelled to bear Christ's cross; let them
not grudge and repine, thinking they suffer more than Christ will ever make
them amends for, that they are losers by him; for no less than eternal
salvation is exalted hereby; thou have gold and precious stones for parting
with this earth. The Text I promised to confirm this truth, and is a parallel
with mine, is 2 Cor. 4. 17. where the Apostle shows the unspeakable benefit
that we have by our afflictions for God, Our light affliction, which is but for
a moment, works for us a far more, and eternal weight of glory. It is but a
light affliction; light in comparison of hell torments. Are thy sufferings like
to the sufferings of the damned in hell? yet thou have deserved them. And then
light in comparison of the weight of glory. There is no proportion between that
everlasting blessedness, and thy afflictions: If thou should for millions of
years endure such torments as the Martyrs did, yet that was not equivalent to
one hours being in Heaven. Again, he says, It is but for a moment.] All thy
afflictions are not eternal afflictions: Thou shall not for ever and ever be
thus in a suffering condition, compare it with eternity, It is but a moment.
Now these afflictions thus diminished by him, do yet work for us an exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. Oh the goodness of God, not the merit of man,
that blesses such contemptible things with an everlasting reward! It is true,
the Papists do most arrogantly from the word (...) infer, that afflictions
have a causal and meritorious influence upon our salvation; that we are to
abhor such thoughts, as that we should have Heaven, Per modum eleemosynae,
but coronae, Not by way of alms, but by way of a crown for our striving and
conquering. But let men presumptuously dispute this in their Books; when they
are to give up an account to God, and to stand before his bar, they will then
plead mercy, and not justice; but the Word does not signify causality: only
that order God has appointed, that by these sufferings we shall come to glory.
And indeed to inter any causality or merit from that Word, would be plainly to
derogate from the Apostles intention, which is to show the great disproportion
that is between these light afflictions, and that eternal glory, there is no
equality between them; whereas if they had a meritorious causality, there must
be a condign proportion between them.

But let us pursue this comfortable Doctrine. Only How sufferings advance our
salvation. 1. They help to make us mourn for sin, and turn to God.


First, Lay this as a foundation, that when we say, Our salvation is promoted
by afflictions, you must not understand this, as if they of themselves did it;
but it is solely by the power and grace of God. For in many Apostates, and such
who had not deep rooting, sufferings did not promote their salvation, but their
damnation: Even as to herbs not well rooted, the heat of the Sun does wither
them: So that some men falling into afflictions, are like noisome herbs thrown
into the fire, which make the more unsavory smell; like earthen vessels, that
break in the fire. They never discover their rottenness, their love to the
world, their unbelief so much, as in those times. It is true, the Apostle
says, Romans 5. 3. That tribulation works patience: But that is not to be
understood of it self, for in many it works impatience and unbelief; but by
the power of God moving in these waters; there does come healing. So that the
presence of God, and his assistance is that alone which can turn these stones
into bread. Hence also afflictions do not advance our salvation, as the Word
preached does; for that alone is properly the instrumental cause in Gods hand,
both for sanctification and glorification; as afflictions are only occasional,
and set home by the Word. It is true, the Word it self does not convert or
save, by any inherent virtue, as the fire burns, but by the cooperation of
God with it; yet afflictions have not that efficacy, or respect in the same
way, as the Word has. By sufferings then we are as the stone by its hewing and
sawing, prepared for that everlasting building in Heaven; but it is the grace
and power of God that does polish and smooth us, otherwise through tribulations
we should enter even into the kingdom of hell.

But let us examine, Wherein these heavenly sufferings do thus carry on our
salvation. And

First, They are a special means to humble us, to bring us low in our own eyes,
to repent of all the evil we have done, and to turn unto God. As mad men are
cast into prison, kept in the dark, and under all hardship, to bring them to
their mind again: Thus does God with those that are his. So that it is an
effect of his love to bring us into tribulations. It is his love, that makes
him to chastise us, Heb. 12. O beatum cui Deus dignatur irasci. (Tertul. lib.
de patientia.) O blessed is he to whom the Lord vouchsafes to be angry! And
this is true, not only in afflictions merely for sins, but also in our
sufferings for Christ. For though the motive be thy faithfulness in owning of
Christ and his way, though it be not for thy sins principally, but thy
graces, that thou art thus exercised, yet God has some respect to thy sins
also. Therefore such tribulations they are of a mixed consideration, thy
gracious love to Christ provokes the adversary, yet thy sins also God
looks at in this fiery trial to purge them away. Hence 1 Pet. 4: 16, 17. the
Apostle encouraging believers to suffer as Christians, and that by many
arguments, he brings one amongst the rest, that relates to their sins, For
judgment must begin at the house of God. These persecutions he calls them
judgments, and that in respect of the godly, which denotes, That although God
did honor them, as suffering for his truth, yet he did also judge them in
those sufferings for their sins. It is then the duty of all Champions and
sufferers for Christ, as to rejoice, because they are accounted worthy to
suffer for him: So also by those tribulations to humble themselves, to condemn
and judge every sin that they can discover. It is a false and sinful opinion
of some, mentioned by Raynardus (Lib. de Martyrio.) that affirmed, Whosoever
did suffer for the faith of Christ, his very Martyrdom was enough to cleanse
him; so that he was not bound in, or before his sufferings to repent for such
sins, as his conscience might re-mind him of. No, were it possible for a man
to give his body to be burnt for the truth, and yet not to mourn for, and
bewail the sins he was guilty of, such Martyrdom would not profit him. So
that as God commands the Israelites, when they went to war, that they should
cleanse the Camp of unclean things: Thus also all those who suffer for Christ,
and in some sense may be said to fight the battles of the Lord, it is their
duty to arraigne themselves for their sins, and to pray, That this washing of
them, may take away their spots and filthiness.

Secondly, These afflictions for Christ, do much promote our salvation, 2. They
inform us more of God, and Christ, of his grace and power then we knew before.
Because they are a School to every believer, whereby to know more of God and
Christ, of his grace and power then ever they did before. These sufferings lead
us into much experimental knowledge of God, and his ways These see the wonders
of God in the depths. A man not afflicted knows not what the experiences are
that usually the godly find in such exercises. Hence as David acknowledged,
Psalm. 119. Before he was afflicted, he went astray. Those afflictions did him
more good than his mercies. Thus also the godly, who as Joh, come like gold out
of the fire, they can truly say, They would not be without those teachings,
those experiences they have had, not for all the world: especially, this they
are experimentally to observe, How the power of God, as Paul speaks, was
perfect in his infirmities; that the more his troubles did grow, the more were
the supports and comforts of God: Insomuch that the afflicted soul wondereth,
and is amazed to see and feel the presence and power of God with it: It has
that comfort, that courage, which it thought had been impossible for him ever
to enjoy. For (as formerly you heard) as afflictions abound, so also do
consolations and supports. So that you must not expect God should give such
extraordinary discoveries of himself, but in extraordinary cases: As we read of
a notable instance of a woman Martyr in the primitive Heathenish persecutions,
who being great with child, was delivered the day before she was to suffer, and
in her travail sending forth great and grievous groans: The Jailor reproved
her, saying, That if she did thus cry out about the bringing forth of a child,
how would she be able to suffer a cruel and tormenting death? To whom she well
replied, That her present exercise was natural and ordinary, and therefore
expected but common supply in that case, whereas her Martyrdom was
extraordinary, and therefore looked for extraordinary help and comfort from
God. This is to show, That the discoveries we have in our exercises and
troubles under the unusual presence, and consolations of God, make us to say
with Job, They had heard of God with the ear, but now they see him with the
eye. They did but know in a riddle, now they do (as it were) face to face.

Thirdly, These afflictions do promote and quicken to more grace, and more 3.
These afflictsons quicken us to more grace.
grace will have more glory. In these trials and heavenly conflicts, their
faith, their patience, their crucified affections to the world are more
inhanced. As Grapes in the wine press send forth juice and sweetness: As
fragrant Herbs in the fire, send forth a sweeter smell: The Frankincense
needs fire to make it more refreshing: In the race a man puts forth his
swiftness: In the fight, fortitude and valor is more manifested: Natural
exercise increases the health of the body: So also does spiritual, the health
and graces of the soul. Seeing then that these afflictions heat thy soul seven
times hotter than they were before, seeing they make thy five to gain ten: No
wonder if our salvation be exalted by them.

Lastly, Our salvation is advanced by these sufferings, Because of the 4.
Because of the glorious promises which are made to such.
glorious promises which are made to such. Some indeed have doubted, Whether
there be Degrees of Glory or no in Heaven? But that may be fully proved, that
those Stars in Heaven do differ from one another in Glory. And certainly,
those that suffer more, shall have greater Glory. Insomuch that some learned
men have concluded from Revel. 20. 4, 5. That the Martyrs only shall have a
peculiar Glory bestowed on them to reign with Christ a thousand years here on
Earth. But that being not so clear, we may firmly conclude, That if a drop of
cold water be given for Christ's sake, will be so greatly rewarded, How much
more many drops of their own warm blood? Do not then repine under temporal
losses for Christ; it is abundantly made up spiritually here, and will be
eternally hereafter.

SERMON. LIII.
Afflictions not in themselves, but as improved by Patience, conduce to our
Salvation: What goes to the producing of Patience.

2 COR. 1. 6. Which is effectual in enduring of the same afflictions, which we
also suffer.
THe second part considerable in this amplification of the divine advantage and
heavenly profit we have by afflictions for Gods cause, is the manner, how this
salvation is promoted, and that is (...), In the enduring, or in patience under
sufferings. It is not simply and barely sufferings, for murderers suffer,
robbers suffer; but it must be for God; there must be a good cause. And yet
further, a good cause is not enough; there must be an humble, patient and meek
deportment in those that do suffer. For if they suffer with grudging and
repining, thinking God is a severe Master, who imposes such hard tasks upon
them, then they lose their reward; neither is salvation advanced hereby. The
Greek word (...), is translated sometimes tolerantia, enduring; and thus in the
Text: Even as the Verb (...), is sometimes Matthew. 10. 22. Heb. 12. 3. But for
the most part it is rendered patientia, patience. Thus Luke 21. 19. Romans 5. 3.
It is also taken by some for perseverance and constancy; so that is explained,
Heb. 12. 1, Let us run (...), with patience, we render it, or rather with
perseverance and constancy, that we faint not, or be weary, ere we come to the
end of our race. Although therefore many other graces are necessarily required
to go through afflictions; so that our salvation may be exalted thereby, yet
the Apostle here, and in many other places, instanceth impatience, as that
which is the most proper and genuine grace for the improving of our sufferings.
Therefore from hence observe,

That sufferings not barely of themselves, but as improved by patience, do
conduce^ Sufferings not barely in themselves, but as improved by patience,
conduce to our salvation.
to our salvation.

Without patience our corruptions, and our damnation is furthered by all the
tribulations we groan under. So that patience is like the salt to season this
Sacrifice, that it may be acceptable. If we struggle and strive against God,
complain plain and murmur, because we meet with such hardship, this depriveth
us of our glory. We are not to be like the Sacrifice, that did struggle and
strive, and therefore must be bound to the Altar; but we are to deny ourselves,
to take up the cross (which argues voluntariness and readiness) and then we
must follow him. Holy obedience must accompany this bearing of the cross, Luke
9. 23. yea it is added, He must take it up daily; implying, that though this
cross be put upon thy shoulders every day; though it be from week to week,
from year to year, thou must not repine, but take it up daily. You must not
carry the cross of Christ, as the Philistims heifers did the Ark, lowing as
they went for their young ones; where patience is, there is also a quiet, meek
and ready resignation of our selves, even as was in Christ, Behold I come to do
thy will, O God; which will of God was partly to suffer most dreadful things
to flesh and blood. Contranitency then and contrapugnancy to the will of God,
bringing tribulations upon us, does deprive us of all that soul-saving benefit
we might have by them. It is true indeed, there is a conditional will in every
sufferer for Christ, arising necessarily from nature within us, which desires
to preserve it self; and by this we would deprecate that cup which God is
giving us to drink. Even Christ himself in this conditional manner prayed,
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass away from me; but then with their
absolute will, they do submit and say, Not our will, but the will of God be
done. Thus we have a notable expression, John 21. 18. where Christ speaking of
the death and martyrdom Peter should suffer for his name, he says, Another
shall gird thee, and carry thee whether thou would not; not that Peter
suffered against his will absolutely, not that he repined at it, but rather
rejoiced in it, only it was against his conditional will; nature of itself
would have desired rather freedom from those torments.

But let us proceed to enquire into the Nature or Properties of this Patience;
Humane Philosophers agreed in the commending of patience.
and I shall not enlarge my self on this subject in this place, because it will
come in more expressly and explicitly some where else.

1. Therefore take we notice, That although humane Philosophers by their
several Sects did greatly oppose one another, yet they did agree in the
commending of patience. Indeed Aristotle does not reckon patience nor humility
amongst the moral virtues; but the Stoics especially, they did so commend
patience, as that thereby they would have a man turned into a mere stone (as it
were) and an unnatural dedolency; but no Philosophical patience, not that of
Anaxarchus (who cried out so stoutly to the Tyrant, who caused him to be brayed
and pounced to death, Tunde, tunde Anaxarchum non tundis.) or of others so
greatly applauded by humane Writers, is worthy of the name of Christian
patience. There is a vast difference in the principles, in the end, in the
effects, in the concomitants, as might be showed; but I shall not dilate at
this time. This particular is brought in, to make us examine, What is the grace
of patience, and what may be Natural or Moral Patience. Natural Patience I call
that, which comes much from the constitution and complexion of their bodies,
they are more mild, quiet and enduring of grief than others. Moral patience I
call that, when men by wisdom and reading of moral precepts can harden
themselves heroically to bear the tribulations up on them; but Christian
patience is that which comes from a regenerated and sanctified nature, eying
Gods glory, his will and command only, not regarding other sinister respects.
So that a Natural Patience, a Moral Patience under thy sufferings, will not
advance thy salvation, but that which is Christian. You have a notable place
for this 2 Pet. 1. 6. To patience, godliness. The Apostle does there exhort to
have the chain of graces linked together, not to think it enough to have one
grace, unless he have all. And therefore patience must be added to temperance;
for that requires the denial of our pleasures, the crucifying of our delights,
which cannot be without patience: but then to this patience we must add
godliness, implying, that though we be never so meek, so still, so Lamb-like
under our troubles; yet if godliness be not added to this patient deportment,
if it be not from divine principles, and to divine ends, then our patience is
greatly defective. Look we therefore that when we quietly and patiently suffer,
it came from the grace of patience, not from a counterfeit patience, for this
is not true gold, and so will not enrich us.

This distinction being premised, whereby a Christian may be enabled to know
when it is Nature, and when it is Grace that does bear; when flesh and blood
does suffer, and when a divine Nature within him. In the next place, let us
consider, What goes to the producing of this grace of patience; for we cannot
of our selves perform this duty of patience no more than a wilderness can
bringforth roses. Therefore

First, The efficient cause of patience is God only. The heart of man under any
What goes to the producing of patience. 1. The efficient cause is God.
afflictions is like a wild bull in a net, there is nothing but raging and
repining under every exercise, till God give a patient spirit. Hence Romans 15.
5. he is called, The God of patience: For what a wild unruly bedlam is an
unsanctified man under any pressure upon him: Like Cain he cries out, It is
greater than he can bear. Like Jobs wife, he is tempted to curse God, and so
die. Do thou therefore under thy trials, want patience? Does it grieve and
sadly afflict thee, to see thy self so passionate, so impassionate? Then let
this make thee to run to the throne of grace, improve this title, God is the
God of patience: Say, Oh God, it is but speaking the word, it is but saying,
Let there be patience, and there will be patience! How often have I resolved
for patience? How often prayed for patience, and yet Lord my heart is tormented
and tossed up and down, like that Lunatic, which could not be bound by any
chains? Not only my tongue, but my heart are worse than unruly and savage
beasts they may be tamed; but this, no man, only God can tame it. It Is God only
therefore that makes in us patience: The grace of patience is far above our
power. Tertullian wrote a Book of Patience, but in the very beginning he
apologizeth for himself, why he should write of that subject, which he had so
little experimentally and practically attained unto, and he excuses it thus,
That he does as those who are sick, they delight to be talking and praising of
health: So I (says he) who am Aeger caloribus impatientiae, sick with
feavorish impatient heats, do delight to write of patience. Thus do thou,
seeing it is more then of thy self thou art able to do. The least trial, the
least affliction, is ready to heat thee with impatience; pray to God
importunately, let him not alone, till he bless thee with this composed
patient spirit. Say with the same Tertullian, Pereat seculum dummodo patientiam
lucrifaciam, Let the whole world perish, so that God will give me patience.

Secondly, As God is the efficient cause, so the word of God that is
instrumental. 2. The word of God is the instrumental cause.
The Word is like David's harp to drive out this evil spirit. So the Apostle,
Romans 15. 14. That we through patience of the Scriptures might have hope. When
thy impatient flesh does suggest this, and that argument to discontent and
repining, Oh remember what the word of God says! It is for want of
Scripture-consideration, of Scripture-arguments that thy heart is so clamorous
and unruly; such a command, such a promise would presently have made all calm
and quiet. The Heathen advises an angry furious man to look in the glass,
while he is in those passionate fits, that he may see how deformed he is made
thereby; but how much rather, when thy heart has boiled over with impatient
repining thoughts, art thou to recover thy self immediately, and to look into
the Word? See what that faith, what that requires, and then thou will be
ashamed, and abhorring thy self as a very beast.

Thirdly, Afflictions themselves according to Scripture-expression, they work
patience also. Thus Romans 5. 3. Tribulation works patience. Jam. 1. 3. The
trying 3. Afflictions they also work patience.
of your faith works patience. Here you see afflictions are said to work
patience, but not of themselves, it is the power of God in and through them;
only as the beast accustomed to the yoke is more tame than at first; so when we
are constantly exercised with afflictions that they seem to be no new thing,
then through Gods grace, we come to be more ready and willing in a patient
enduring of them. It is said of Christ himself, He learned obedience by the
things which he suffered, Heb. 5. 8. not that he could grow properly in grace,
or be more obedient than he had been formerly; but it is spoken in regard of
experimental obedience, he had the sense and feeling of it more than before:
but the adopted sons of God, they do increase in obedience and patience by the
things that they suffer. Therefore thou who have more afflictions than others,
it is a reproach to thee, if they have not taught thee more patience and
meekness than others.

Fourthly, The exemplary or ideal cause of patience, is God and Christ. From 4.
God and Christ are the exemplary cause.
them we have a most exact and complete rule of patience, Mat. 5. 48. Be ye
therefore perfect, as your heavenly Father is. To be perfect is there to be
patient, for he had before instanced in the patience of God, that even to the
unjust he causes the Sun to arise; and from this infers, Be ye therefore
perfect: To be patient, and that to enemies, may be called perfection, because
this alone is taught in Christianity. To love our friends is acknowledged a
duty by all Nations, but to love enemies is only professed by Christians. Well
then may we be patient under all the persecutions, reproaches and vexations the
enemies of God bring upon us: For is not God patient toward them, and yet they
are more his enemies then thine? He that could immediately be avenged on them;
he that could command legions of Devils to drag them to hell presently, yet
with much patience suffers them. God is so patient, that as Tertullian, Ipsa
sibi detrahit, (^^de pat.) His patience detracteth from him, he seems to be a
loser by it. For people sin the more obstinately and wilfully, because they
meet with impunity. Because vengeance is not speedily executed, therefore the
heart of the wicked is encouraged to evil, Eccles. 8. 11. It is true indeed, if
we speak properly we cannot attribute the Greek word (...) to God, as if that
were an attribute in him. The Scripture uses other words (...) and (...), but
never (...), because God being most absolutely blessed and happy in himself, he
cannot be under any misery: So as to be said (...), to be patient under it:
neither can God be said to pati, to suffer, in a passive sense, yet his
goodness, his forbearance, these are called patience. And from the patience of
God we may be encouraged to a conformity thereunto. Should God be as impatient
of thee, should he as little endure thy failings, as thou can his
dispensations, thou had been with Dives, calling for a drop of water long
before this time, and not able to partake of it. Christ also is a wonderful
examplar cause of patience, for him to lay aside the manifestation of his
glory, to be born of a Virgin, to be exposed to such an ignominious death: in
all which he did seem, as Tertullian expresses it, Contumeliosus sibiipsi,
Injurious and reproachful to himself; which made the Marcionites say, He had
only a fantastical body, thinking it a reproachful and dishonorable thing to
him, to have a true real body of the Virgin Mary. But this exinanition and
emptying of himself, does the more commend and make his patience illustrious.
Hence 1 Pet. 2. 23. and in other places, Christ is commended as a pattern to us
of patience in all our sufferings; and certain never may we more shame and
abhor our selves for all our repining and impatient workings of soul, then
when we set Christ before our eyes; he was as a sheep in the hands of the
shearer that opened not his mouth: Yet how much did he suffer both from God and
man, and that without any cause in respect of himself, though justly in respect
of Gods Covenant with him, as our Surety. Now though all this was for us
enemies to him, such who would contemn his love, and be ready to crucify him
over and over again, yet in these great agonies and unspeakable sufferings, he
is not impatient. Thus we have heard of a patience greater than that of Job,
even of Christ himself, and let his patience shame thee out of thy impatience.

SERMON, LIVE.
Motives exciting us to a patient Submission unto God under all the Afflictions
he lays upon us.

2 COR. 1. 6. Which is effectual in enduring of the same sufferings, which we
also suffer.
WE are yet treating on the manner, How the Salvation of believers is promoted
by their sufferings, which is said to be (...), In enduring or in patience; in
a patient enduring. It is not my purpose (I told you) to enlarge my self
according as this Subject of patience might require. Some things have been
spoken to declare the nature of it; I shall add at this time some motives and
encouragements to be patient under the most extreme sufferings we are put upon.
And

First, This consideration may greatly calm and compose our spirits, If we
Motives to patience. 1. We should consider and be affected with what we have
deserved
sensibly affect our selves with what we have deserved. All-impatiency and
turbulency of heart arises, because we are not thoroughly humbled under our own
guilt and unworthiness; for if this were taken notice of, we would wonder, why
dogs should have childrens bread, why we should have the least drop of mercy,
who deserve the deluge of Gods wrath. Do thou at any time find repinings and
frettings of heart within thee? Do thou presently possess thy soul with thy
wretchedness and unworthiness: Say, Who am I Lord, that it is no worse? This
is not hell, nor everlasting damnation that I am in, and yet I have a thousand
times over deserved that. It was this that quieted David's heart under that
sour affliction he conflicted with, when Absalom had made such a strong
conspiracy against him, 2 Samuel 16. 11. when Shimei cursed him with such a
grievous curse, that Abishai had no patience to bear it, Why should this dead
dog curse my Lord the King (says he) let me go and take off his head? Who but
a David would have been avenged? But what tameth David's heart? Let him alone,
let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him. David knew that it was for his
sins that Absalom rebelled, Shimei cursed; and therefore he dare not grudge nor
mutter. So 2 Samuel 15. 26. while David is compassed about with the same
difficulties; see how soft his heart is, ready to receive any impression; But
if he say, I have no delight in him, behold here I am, let him do to me, as
seems good to him. Thus David's heart is like the vessel cast into the fire,
it may be put into any form, or fashion; and what is the reason of it? A true
humbled spirit under all its unworthiness. Thus the Church Lament. 3. 22.
though she be in such desolations, that she calls to all the passengers who come
by, to see if there were ever any affliction like hers, yet (says she) It is
of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed: As wretched as we are, we might
be worse. It is the Lords mercy that we do but taste of his cup of wrath, that
we do not drink up the dregs. Here is a good pattern to write after. Let thy
troubles and exercises be like Nebuchadnezzars furnace, heated seven times
hotter then ordinary, yet thou will have cause to say, if thou regard thy own
guilt, It is of the Lords mercy, that it is no worse. And verse. 39. Wherefore
does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Art thou a
living man not a damned man, and do thou complain? Think, what if thy
condition were like those that are chained up in everlasting darkness, gnashing
their teeth, and roaring out for the endless torments that are upon them?
Would thou not then judge this condition thou art in, though afflicted and
troublesome, to be a mercy? Certainly if the damned in hell are bound to
acknowledge the justice of God, and to give him the glory thereof, though it be
in their confusion; How much rather art thou bound to give God the glory of all
his Attributes in these dispensations to thee, though bitter to flesh and
blood? Take heed then of being like Jonah, of saying, Thou do well to be
angry. It is an ease to pour forth thy complaints. For what, does God do thee
any wrong? Does not the worm that eats up all thy comfort breed in thy own
breast? Is not thy destruction from thy own self? Certainly if any thing, this
may stop thy mouth, and quietly compose thy soul. But

Secondly, Not only the apprehension of thy guilt may thus rebuke all storms 2.
Consider Gods great goodness in changing the nature of thy afflictions.
within thee, But the consideration of Gods goodness and mercy is admirable,
that does thus alter and change the nature of these afflictions that are upon
thee. For whereas thou might have been suffering for thy sins, thou now
suffer for God and a good cause. Whereas they might have been a curse, now
they are made a blessing, whereas they might have administered all sorrow and
bitterness; now thou art to account it all joy, when thou fallest into diverse
temptations; give not over sucking of this honeycomb, till thou have got all
the sweetness out of it; God makes this crown of thorns, a crown of gold;
That which might have been a stone is turned into bread; The fruit of thy sin
is made a privilege and an honor: Hence the godly have always looked upon
their sufferings, as a blessed thing, as eminent expressions of Gods love to
them: Hence in all their troubles they have been more prepared and purified to
bless God: As Bells cast into the fire, do afterward make a sweeter and
clearer sound; so that this is encouragement enough, to consider how God
changes the nature of these troubles, the fruit of sin is made the fruit of
Gods love to thee, and also of righteousness to thy self.

Thirdly, Be not dejected under sufferings for God, but rejoice with patience,
3. Consider that God will be with thee.
Because God will be with thee, thou shall have the presence and assistance of
Christ, and then Christ being in the ship with thee, thou can not suffer
shipwreck. Paul speaking of that admirable and strong constitution of grace,
whereby he was able to endure heats and cold, he could abound, and he could
want, be changed from one extreme condition to another, and yet be the same in
heart and affection, he adds, He can do all things through Christ that
strengthens him, Phil. 4. 13. Thou have the same power with Christ in some
sense; what he can do thou can do: as a little child enabled by a Giant, can
do what the Giant can do. I can do all things; Paul has a kind of Omnipotency.
If then the troubles thou art to combat with were too strong for thee, such as
would overwhelm thee, then thou might be impatient and discontented, but be
quiet and wait for the power of God. See also how notably Paul speaks to
this, 2 Cor. 12. 10. I take pleasure in my infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, For when I am weak, then am I strong. And verse. 9. Gods strength
is said to be perfected in Paul's weakness: most gladly therefore will I glory
in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest on me. What wonders and
paradoxes does Paul speak? His words are miracles, he will most gladly glory
and rejoice in all his reproaches; and why? Because hereby Gods power will be
the more manifested. Thus you see great ground for patience, because Cods power
will come in, and that very seasonably you will have grace to help in time of
need, Heb. 4. 16. The Pythagoreans called God, Ipsam opportunitatem,
Oppornunity it self, because he did always come in seasonably to help: How
much more may Christians put forth their patience and faith in this particular?
Thou art sure to have his gracious power and assistance, and thou art sure also
to have it in the best season, and most opportunely. Let not then impatience so
trouble the waters of affliction, and bemud them, that thou can not see the
face of God shining upon thee, and his arm stretched out to help and deliver
thee.

Fourthly, As you have need of patience under these exercises, So let it 4.
Consider what good will redound to thee by thy afflictions.
have its perfect work, because of the unspeakable good that will redound to
thee hereby. If this be duly weighed, thou will bless God for thy sufferings
more than for all thy mercies and outward safety; thou will see, that to lose
father, and mother, and life it self, is to win them. God does by these
sufferings bring in Novum and inauditum modum salutis, interire ne poreas, a
new and unheard of way of safety, by making thee to die, that thou may not
perish. We might heap up many places of Scripture that demonstrate the benefit
of such sufferings. So that the opinion of the Gnostics, which Tertullian
confuteth, was directly opposite to Scripture. It seems the Gnostick was an
hater of Martyrdom, and accused Christ of severity and cruelty for requiring
such things at the hand of his followers; he thought Christ was injurious to
his people, if he expected such hard things from them; but this made them
charge Christ thus foolishly, because they did not consider that those
sufferings were advantages, that it was no more a loss to the godly, then it
is to the grains of corn, when thrown into the earth, and die (as it were)
there; unless you do so to the corn, it cannot bring forth fruit. Thus the
godly, except they are thus afflicted, except they have these trials, they are
great losers, and that in a twofold respect. For

1. Their spiritual good is promoted by the patient enduring of afflictions. 1.
What spiritual good.
Our Savior calls it, John 15. The purging of the Vine; that as the cutting of
the luxuriant branches do not hinder, but increase the fruit thereof: Thus also
do these tribulations, they are like razors to cut off all superfluities; and
therefore compared so often to the fire, which does consume the dross, and
make gold more purified. Art thou then impatient, because God takes away thy
corruptions from thee, because he applies such remedies that will kill thy
lusts, and make thee more believing, and more heavenly minded? Do you not see
the diseased person under the Physicians care, though for the present under
austeer remedies? The person complains, and cries out, yet afterward, when by
this means he comes to perfect health, then he thanketh the Physician, and
rewards him. Now all thy afflictions and tribulations for Gods cause are
medicinal: It is God the wise Physician, that commands thee to be thus let
blood: Fear not therefore, neither faint under it; this is the way God takes
to sanctify and cleanse thy soul; this winnowing will deliver thee from thy
chaff; these bitter pills will kill those worms of pride, vainglory, and other
lusts within thee.

2. It Is not only thy spiritual good here, But thy eternal good hereafter that
is promoted by these sufferings. It Is the salvation of thy soul that is
interessed 2. Eternal.
in these troubles; so that thou art to be afraid (as it were) lest if thou art
without these here, thou shall be without salvation hereafter. Christ has
promised so much to him that shall lose any thing for his sake, that it must be
high Atheism not to believe it. And if thou do believe it, and yet had
rather have present pleasures and profits, than future glory, then thou
proclaimest thy exceeding great folly and madness. If then thou love thy self,
thy soul, thy salvation, be patient in enduring all that God lays upon thee.

Fifthly, Be patient under such sufferings, Because hereby thou promotest 5.
Consider by patience thou may promote the good of others
the good of others, the salvation of others. And certainly this should much
prevail with us. These sufferings of mine, these patient endurings for the
cause of Christ may provoke and encourage many others. This did greatly induce
Paul, and animate him in all his reproaches and difficulties he met with for
the Gospel, because that hereby the Church was more propagated. With what joy,
(Phil. 1. 13.) does he speak of this? That his bonds were made manifest every
where, and many of the brethren waxed more confident and bold than before. As
on the contrary we see the impatience, worldly fears, and Apostasy of some
have done a world of hurt to others, not only falling themselves, but making
others also to tumble down with them. This is a sad thing to consider of. If
the Apostle, Romans 14. speaks so dreadfully about a strong Christian abusing his
liberty, that thereby he is a stumbling block, and on his part destroys him
for whom Christ died: How much more will this hold true on him, who shall
perfidiously forsake Christ rather than suffer for him? And although some of
these have recovered again, and manifested as much faithfulness as they had
formerly falsehood, yet those that did wholly fall off, their fall was great,
making the adversary to rejoice, and animating others to do the like. Therefore
on the contrary, if thou endure with constancy and patience under all
opposions, in nothing being dismayed, this will imbolden others; thou may
prevent the backsliding of others. Insomuch that to suffer for Christ is a
great act of love, not only to Christ, but to the Church; when with Paul, we
shall be willing to be sacrified for the good of other men's souls. Now this
duty of love we owe to the Body of Christ, we are bound in conscience to suffer
reproaches, and all manner of trials for righteousness sake, not only because
Christ requires it, and with reference to him, but also out of love to the
souls, and salvation of others. When we suffer, we do not only suffer as
private Christians, but as members of the body; and therefore the concernment
of the whole body is in the suffering of every member. This then should greatly
encourage us in all our afflictions for Christ's sake; It is not I alone, it is
not my salvation only, but the salvation of many others is carried on in this
business. Hence some have thought more implied in that expression then
ordinarily is conceived, 1 Cor. 4. 13. where the Apostle says, We are made as
the filth and offscouring of the world; they say, the words are not to be
understood only of dishonor and reproach; but because they were applied to
such Sacrifices, and devoted things, in the offering whereof common judgments
were removed, piacula; therefore they infer, That the Apostles sufferings did
conduce to the whole Church of God. Others come to obtain mercy by following
them for an example. I shall not plead for this interpretation; only this is a
truth in the general, That many have been converted, and so saved by beholding
the courage and patience of godly Confessors and Martyrs. It Is then a duty we
owe to the Church of God, to suffer when Christ requires. And if we read of
Heathens, the Curtii and Decii, who have devoted themselves to present death,
to remove some public calamity, what shame will this be to Christians, if they
shall not in a regular way show such zeal for the Church of God? We have a
notable passage, 1 John 3. 16. We ought to lay down our lives for the brethren;
What Christ did for us, we are to do for the Church. So that from this Text it
is plain, there are cases and instances wherein a man is bound to lose not only
wealth and estate, but even life it self for others. Hence there is a
distinction of Martyrium charitatis, and Martyrium fidei. A Jesuit (Raynardus
de Martyrio.) does industriously endeavor to maintain, That if a man, having a
call from God, does venture his life by visiting some infected with the plague,
doing this out of love to God, and peoples souls, such a man is as truly and
properly a Martyr, and that in a strict sense, as one who dies for witnessing
the faith. I shall not here examine this point; only in the general we may
conclude, That he who lays down his life for the brethren, for the spiritual
good of others, having a call thereunto, he he is a Martyr, and may encourage
himself with all those promises, that those who died for the faith have done:
Yea such a suffering and Martyrdom may be called Martyrium fidei, as well as
charitatis, or misericordiae; Faith having imperate acts, as well as elicite.
Hence the Apostle, Heb. 11. attributes diverse worthy actions and achievements
unto Faith. By this you see in any suffering whereby the Church of God is
edified, wherein we demonstrate our love to the salvation of others, we may
greatly encourage our selves. Hence also it is observed by one of the Ancients,
That he who shall suffer to prevent schisms and breaches in the Church of God,
is more to be honored, than he who suffers, because he would not offer to an
Idol, because here is more love to the Church of God. Let this then in all
sufferings, whether verbal, or real, mightily support thee, that not my own
salvation only, but the good and salvation of all those, who shall come to
hear or know this, will also be furthered. To be a means of conversion by
suffering, is in some respect greater than by preaching.

SERMON. LV.
All the Dispensations of God carry on, and further the Salvation of his People.

2 COR. 1. 6. Or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and
salvation.
THe first part or member of that distribution, which the Apostle here uses
has been dispatched. For as to the last particular observed in the
illustration, which the Apostle uses, viz. The object matter of their patient
enduring, which is said to be the same sufferings which we also suffer. If any
new matter shall present it self, it will be more fitly considered in the next
verse.

I proceed therefore to the second part of the distribution used here by the
Apostle; In that we may observe, The Condition supposed, If we be comforted.
Here is light as well as darkness, Summer as well as winter. The godly are not
always afflicted, but they have also their seasons of comfort. It is not an
impossible thing here supposed, but what God does ordinarily bring about for
those that fear him. So that in the time of adversity, thou art to remember the
time of thy consolations also; whereas the people of God in their distress are
apt with David to cry out, Has the Lord cast off for ever? Will he be gracious
no more? Thy tribulations are not eternal: After thy wilderness condition thou will be brought into a Canaan.

2. We have the effect or end of such consolations, which are vouchsafed to
others, especially the Officers of the Church, who are like the mountains whose
springs empty themselves into the valleys, and that is two-sold, Consolation
and Salvation. Of the former enough has been said already.

We come therefore to the latter, which is their Salvation, (...). We have
three words in the New Testament, tending to the same, (...), a Savior, thus
Christ is often called; and his Name Jesus is, because he does save his people;
Christ is the cause of our salvation. Then there is (...), Actual salvation,
Act. 4. 12. Yea this is applied sometimes to Christ himself metonymically. Even
as in the Old Testament David does often call God his salvation. Act. 13. 47.
Christ is there said to be (...), For salvation to the ends of the earth. Luke
1. 69. he is called the horn of salvation, that is, a powerful and strong
Savior. Lastly, There is (...), which does not so much signify salvation it
self, as the means and instrument by which it is procured; and thus Christ as
Mediator is our (...), Luke 2. 30. Luke 3. 6. Hence Ephesians. 6. 17. The helmet of
salvation, because it is (...), it may relate even to Christ himself; as David
calls God, his helmet, and his shield, etc.

As for the thing it self, viz. Salvation, that may answer the Hebrew word A
two-sold salvation, temporal and spiritual.
Peace, which contains a confluence of all good things. The Heathens did so
admire it, that they built a Temple Deae Saluti, to the Goddess Safety; though
they understood only a temporal safety; and therefore when they were saved or
delivered from dangers, they did offer their Sacrifices called (...); Thus they
thought all their safety came from Heaven, though corrupted with blind minds.
In the Scripture we read of a twofold salvation: A Temporal one; and the Old
Testament speaks much of this salvation, because temporal mercies were in a
more plentiful manner vouchsafed to them; not but that the godly looked for a
spiritual salvation, as Jacob witnesses in his benedictory prayer before his
death, saying, Genesis 49. 18. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord; only
spiritual things were not so clearly and plainly manifested, as in the Gospel
times. Hence the Temple, 1 King. 6. 4. had windows indeed, but they were of
narrow lights. This Salvation temporal is often in the Old Testament expressed
in the plural number, The salvations of the Lord, because of the multitude and
Frequency of them.

2. There is a spiritual Salvation; and this is sometimes applied to the Gospel
and means of grace, because they are instituted means to bring to salvation,
Act. 13. 26. It Is called the Word of salvation. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold now is the
day of salvation, Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation? So that the very title which is given to the preaching of the
Gospel, should partly much affect and win upon us; who would not be saved?
Why should not all Congregations endeavor after a godly Ministry? This is to
bring in Salvation amongst them: And partly it should terrify all profane
atheistical men, who delight in their lusts, and slight the Gospel preached;
what is this but to refuse salvation? What is this but to say, Let me be
damned, I had rather with my lusts go to hell, then without them to Heaven?
Every Sermon thou despisest, salvation it self is rejected by thee. But then,
2. This spiritual Salvation is either inchoate, or Spiritual salvation is
either inchoate or consummate.
consummate. Inchoate or Salvation begun, is attributed to the works of grace
in this life, Sanctification, especially Justification. So Ephesians. 2. 5. and 2.
8. By grace ye are saved; he speaks of Justification in this life, and as that
which is already ob^ained, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Justification is salvation begun,
though good works are otherwise required to one and the other. The Consummate
or complete Salvation, is that in Heaven, which is the Salvation so often
promised in the Scripture, and that is the Summum bonum, and the ultius finis,
the mark all are to aim at. The Scripture does clearly describe that, which the
Philosophers did grope in the dark about, having many several opinions about
it. That as our Savior asked his Disciples, Whom do men say I am? And they
answered, Some John Baptist, some Elias. Now though these were holy men, yet it
was a dishonor to Christ to be accounted no more than a man; Woe be to us, if
Christ had been no more than a mere Prophet. Seeing therefore these did so
mistake, our Savior asks further; But whom say ye that I am? Then Peter
answered, The Son, of the living God. It was the Father, not flesh and blood
that had revealed this. Thus if you ask, What do the men of the world say
Happiness and Salvation is? One will reply, Riches; another, Honors; but what
do ye say, who are more than flesh and blood, who have the Spirit of God
revealing things to you? Even the enjoyment of God and Christ to all eternity,
this is Salvation, this is Blessedness. This Salvation is that which we are to
endeavor after in our whole life. Better never have been borne, and not saved.
What will it profit thee to have had a little pleasure, a little greatness and
honor in this life, and hereafter to lose this salvation? There are some
places of Scripture, wherein it is disputed, what Salvation is spoken of,
whether temporal or spiritual, or both? 1 Pet. 3. 20. Eight persons were said
to be saved in the Ark. So 1 Pet. 4. 18. The righteous shall scarcely be saved.
The Arminian would bring that place, 1 Timothy 4. 10. Who is the Savior of all
men, to a spiritual salvation. But that is absurd, for he speaks of being an
actual Savior, and that cannot be to wicked men, for they are not saved,
therefore it is of a temporal preservation; for even to wicked men he
vouchsafes daily salvations and deliverances. Now it is plain my Text speaks
of a spiritual Salvation, and that which is to come, called eternal Salvation.
Observe,

That God does by all his dispensations carry on and further the salvation of
God does by all his dispensations carry on and further the salvation of his
people.
his people.

If others be afflicted, if others be comforted, all helps forward to the
salvation of those that believe. In this sense it is said, 1 Cor. 3. ult. All
things are yours. The Officers and Ministers of the Church, life and death,
things present, and things to come, How are all these things a godly man's? Even
because they further his salvation; by all these he promoteth the happiness of
his people. Thus Paul knew, Phil. 1. 19. that all his enemies practices, yea
their preaching Christ out of envy, thinking thereby to afflict him more, yet
this would all turn to his salvation. What Doctrine can be fuller of comfort
than this, to consider that what ever befalls thee, whatsoever Gods
dispensations are toward thee, yet all does advance thy salvation, thou shall
not be a loser by any thing? The people of Israel indeed they were hindered and
put backwards in their journey to Canaan, being forty years detained therein,
when their arrival at Canaan might have been far sooner; but our journey to
Heaven is hastened by every thing, yea our very stumblings do make us
afterward go the faster.

To open this, Consider. What this salvation does imply. 1. It is Negative.


First, What this Salvation does imply; and therein is connoted the state and
condition from which we are saved, that we were in danger of being lost in the
contrary estate. Thus it is called a Salvation, because a man by his sins was
in danger of being eternally damned, and lost in soul and body for ever. Even
as you see it was with Lot, when he was in Sodom, fire and brimstone was ready
to consume the City; now God being merciful to him, he sends an Angel even
to pull him out. Thus it is with every one that is saved, he was in a state
deserving the brimstone and fire of hell, within a little time it would have
been poured upon him; but God in much mercy pulls him out; his neighbors (it
may be) they are lost, some in the same family, some of his brethren or
sisters, yea it may be his parents, they are lost in this fire, and he is
delivered; this is to be saved. It may also be emphatically resembled by Noah's
Ark, when the deluge overwhelmed the whole world, there were but eight persons
put into the Ark, and saved from the waters. Think in what fear and agonies the
rest were, how desirous to come into the Ark; and of all mankind there were but
eight preserved. Thus those who shall be saved, are but very few in comparison
of those who shall eternally perish. And at the day of judgment, what praying
and crying will there be, Lord, Lord, open to us; but they shall be commanded
to depart into everlasting fire. So that while we are here in this life, we
cannot tell what it is to be saved; we know not how to put a due esteem and
prize upon it: But at the day of judgment, when the world shall be on fire,
when all shall stand trembling at the bar of Gods justice; then for you to
hear God call such and such an one, Come into Heaven as an Ark, come and
partake of eternal glory; but to thee God shall say, Go thou cursed. Oh the
unspeakable horror and confusion that will then fall on thee! What worlds
would thou give then to be saved? What cries and agonies will thou then roar
out for thy salvation, but it will be denied thee? Salvation will one day be in
request, and accounted a blessed and happy thing, though now it be contemned by
thee, and thou think thy lusts will be better then salvation to thee. In
what a pathetical manner does our Savior represent this? Luke 13. from verse.
24. to 28. Many shall strive to enter in: And when the Master has shut the
door, then those that stand without shall knock at the door, saying, Lord,
Lord, open to us; but he shall bid them, depart, then there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth; when ye shall see Abraham and Isaac, such and such godly
men received, and your selves thrust out. Does not our Savior speak thus, who
is truth it self? Oh imagine all these things to be now a doing! Let faith make
future things present. If this consideration will not make a change in thee,
what can thou expect, but to be in the number of those, who shall for ever be
denied this salvation?

Again, Salvation does not only denote a Negative, a freedom from all this
misery, 2. Positive.
but also a Positive, a state of glory, holiness and happiness, and that to
all eternity. Thus it is described in Scripture by all such positive good
things, that may make us readily part with all, leave all for this condition.
As Joseph was not only saved from death, and from the prison, but advanced also
to high honor and glory. Thus Salvation does not only deliver from hell
torments and everlasting wrath, but also does give us possession of all
holiness and perfect blessedness. This is the salvation God has provided for
those that fear him. No wonder if all afflictions be born patiently in
expectation of this. No wonder if this be in the eye, and hope of all the
godly. Were it not for this salvation, how miserable and wretched should they
judge themselves? This is the salvation that we are commanded to make sure of
in this life, and who would live in uncertainties about it? Is it not day and
night worth the striving for? This is the salvation that every wicked man
wilfully depriveth himself of. It is for this that sin is justly called folly
and madness; and well may it be so styled. For can there be greater
sottishness and madness to put thy self from this salvation, to have the
pleasures and profits of this world, which abide but for a season? No wonder if
the damned in hell weep and gnash their teeth; if they have a worm always
gnawing of them, a conscience always torturing and tormenting of them, because
for a drop of honey, they are rewarded with an ocean of gall. Would the damned
in hell do as they once did, if they were to live again? Have they such
thoughts, such purposes, now they are roaring in those flames, which they had,
while in their carnal jollity? Oh that God would persuade you about these
things!

But I proceed. This happy and blessed estate is promoted, as the Doctrine
informs us, by all the dispensations which the people of God meet with. That
as passengers in a ship are still carried on to the haven, though sick and
well, though waking and sleeping, yet every moment they are driven forward to
their home. Thus the people of God, if afflicted, this helps forward to
Heaven; if comforted, this also makes for Heaven. So that let the Devil be
never so busy a Lion to devour them; let the world be filled with never so
many snares, yet the counsel of God cannot be frustrated. That gracious purpose
of God to bring them to salvation will be effectual, and be accomplished even
by those things that seem to oppose it.

Now there are two sorts of dispensations from God, which further the salvation
of belivers. Two sorts of dispensations from God which further the salvation of
a believer. 1. The direct means appointed by God for this end.


1. There are those things that are means instituted and appointed by God, and
so do directly and genuinely tend to save them; and these are the Ordinances,
the Ministry, the preaching of the Word, and the Sacraments. These do in Gods
way wonderfully promote the salvation of those that are rightly exercised
therein. Hence you heard, that the preaching of the Gospel is called Salvation,
because it does so directly work thereunto; and those who fear God, do find
these Ordinances very powerful for their salvation. They are like the saws and
hammers, that did prepare and polish the stones to be fit for the building. So
that to be deprived of these, to be denied these, is even to be deprived or
denied salvation it self: Only when we say, they are means instituted to
procure salvation, You must not think there is any intrinsecal virtue in these,
as the Lutherans speak about the Word preached; or as the Papists about the
Sacraments, working salvation, as Physic does health by a natural causality:
No the Apostle tells us, That in some it is not the Word of life, but of death,
2 Cor., 2. 16. It Is to some people as the Ark to the Philistims, because not
used aright, it becomes their further damnation.

2. There are occasional means, which do not directly, but occasionally promote
2. The occasional means, as
the salvation of believers. And they are,

1. Their very sins. These are Occasiones passivae, passive occasions, merely
1. Their sins.
because sin of it self has such a deadly nature, that it is not ordinable
to salvation; only the Omnipotency, the Wisdom and Goodness of God make the
former sins the godly have commitred to be admirable antidotes and
preservatives against future sin. Thus Paul's blasphemy and persecution was
overpowred to promote his salvation by making him more active. Even as one
grief does cure another sometimes, or the burning of fire is taken out by fire,
which made one not afraid to say, That he got good by his sins, more than by
his graces. Hence Romans 8. many learned men do not exclude sins themselves from
that comfortable expression of the Apostle, All things shall work together for
their good.

The second occasional means are Afflictions, and these may be called Active 2.
Their afflictions.
occasions, because in their nature they are ordinable and actually by God are
ordained to help forward our salvation. Now the ground of all this is from Gods
Predestination and Election of such to salvation; and because so elected every
thing becomes instrumental to that end: so that God governs and rules in all
things, thereby to bring them to eternal blessedness; for Election will
obtain, and cannot be frustrated.

So that the Use may be to inform the people of God of their infinite
obligation to the goodness and grace of God toward them in this particular,
if grace did fall asleep (as it were) but a moment; thy salvation might be for
ever lost; but this grace that keeps thee, does neither slumber nor sleep.
What joy and gladness may it fill the godly heart with, when he is allowed to
say with Paul, I know this shall turn to my salvation! If I be afflicted, if I
be comforted, if I have mercies, if I be without them, if I live, if I die, I
know all these things shall carry on my salvation.

SERMON. LVI.
Of Paul's Hope and Persuasion of the Corinthians, with the Reasons and Grounds
of it.

2 COR. 1. 7. And our hope of you is steadfast, knowing that as you are
partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the consolation.
THese words (brought in, as some say, be a parenthesis) are by way of
mitigation and mollifying the minds of the Corinthians. For Paul in his former
Epistle having severely reproved them, it obtained good success, and procured
some spiritual effect upon them, for they were made sorrowful thereby, and set
upon the work of Reformation. And although the false Apostles had too much
prevailed with them, yet they were brought to a sounder temper than formerly.
Neither were Paul's afflictions such matter of contempt as formerly; yea they
are partakers of the same sufferings with him. These things laid together,
makes Paul use these encouraging and softning passages; to rebukes we must
join meekness and love together. The Artificer cannot build his house with
hard brick or stone, he must have his soft mortar to cement them together:
Rigidnesse to rigidnesse will nener unite. There must be yielding as well as
severity, else the edification of Gods Church cannot proceed.

The words are a profession of Paul's charitable esteem and loving apprehensions
of them, though sometimes he does rebuke them very sharply. If he had said, I
have no hopes of you, no Epistle, or writing will do you any good, this might
have more hardened them in obstinacy. Yea as Chrysostom well observes on this
place, He speaks more hopefully and confidently of these Corinthians, then he
does of the Thessalonians: For, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5. he there discovers
the holy jealousy and fear he had, lest they should be oot much moved with the
afflictions that do accompany the Gospel, When I could no longer forbear (says
he) I sent Timotheus to establish you, that no man should be moved by these
afflictions. Again he repeateth it, When I could no longer forbear, I sent to
know your faith, lest by some means the tempter should tempt you. By these
vehement and doubled affectionate expressions, you see with what a holy
jealousy he was possessed concerning them, but he speaks far more
confidently about these Corinthians, Our hope of you is steadfast, That which
the Apostle here calls his hope, he does often in other places name his
persuasion, Heb. 6. 9. We are persuaded better things of you. 2 Timothy 1. 5. I am
persuaded that the same faith dwells in thee also. 1 Pet. 5. 12. The Apostle
speaking of Sylvanus, calls him a faithful brother, (1 Pet. 5. 12.) as I
suppose. The word does not there denote any doubt or fear about him; for that
is contrary to the Apostles scope, who intends to commend him; but it
signifies a firm and steadfast judgment concerning his faithfulness. Now the
Question is, What is that hope and persuasion, or knowledge, What is that hope
and persuasion which Paul had of other men. A twofold hope, Divine and Moral.
which Paul had concerning other men? To understand this you must know, Paul
had a twofold hope, A Divine Hope, and a Charitable or Prudential Hope, which
we may call a Moral Hope. Divine Hope is a supernatural grace wrought by God in
the heart of Paul, and so in every believer, whereby he is enabled to put his
confidence in God, expecting from him only what he stands in need of. So that
of Divine Hope God is the efficient, and God also is the object on which it is
determined, and as we must not believe in any thing, but God, so nether hope in
any thing but God. Of this Divine What is the Divine hope. What Moral hope is.
Hope Paul does not here speak, he does not say, Our hope in you is steadfast,
but of you, (...) for (...) (as those Prepositions are often changed.)
Therefore it is a Moral Hope which is grounded upon principles of prudence and
charity, by which Paul was bound to judge thus favorably of them. Paul could
not tell the hearts of those he wrote to; he could not infallibly discern,
whether they were hypocrites, or sincere, only he judges the tree by the
fruits. Yet you must not understand this, as spoken o^ every particular and
individual, but collectively; for he writes to them as a body, and a Church,
and so it must be understood indefinitely, not determinately of this or that
person. It is true indeed, there was in the primitive times, among other
extraordinary gifts, that of the discerning of spirits (if by Spirit we are not
rather to mean Doctrines pretended to be of the Spirit, as 1 John 4. 1. rather
than the hearts and frames of men's spirits.) For although absolutely,
originally and independently it be Gods only prerogative to know the hearts of
men; yet in some cases, as in Elisha with Gehezi, God may reveal the thoughts
and secret motions of heart to others; but this is extraordinary, not constant,
no more than working of miracles. So that it is a very absurd opinion of those
that are called Quakers, who say, That light within them discovers what is in
other men's hearts, abusing that place, The spiritual man judges all things,
whereas the Apostle there informs us, 1 Cor. 2. 11. That no man knows the
things of a man, save the Spirit of man, which is within him. The persuasion
then or hope, Paul had of these Corinthians, was not divine and infallible, in
which he could not be deceived, but of an inferior nature, yet not light and
foolish neither: for he says, It was (...), firm and steadfast. Hesychius
renders that word (...), unshaken, that is, not like the waves of the Sea. So
that Paul's hope did not fluctuate about him, and (...), abiding, continuing. It
was not hope at sometimes, and fear at another, but it did abide and dwell in
him. Observe, It Is a great encouragement to the Ministers of God, to have good
grounds for the hope of grace and steadfastness in their people.


That it is a great encouragement to a godly Minister, to see good grounds for
the hope of true grace and steadfastness in Gods ways, in the people committed
to his charge.

This was that which did here refresh Paul, that though he was put to many
exercises and temptations about them; yet his hope was, that as it is said of
Lazarus, his sickness was not unto death, but that the glory of God might be
manifested. So those failings and decays amongst the Corinthians were not for
their destruction, but by their recovery and repentance to manifest the truth
of grace more in them. In most of Paul's Epistles you may see this spiritual and
public affection in him, where any are decaying or falling off, there his
heart is wounded within him, where any flourish and continue steadfast in
holiness, there he rejoices and triumphs. How notably does he speak, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 7. We were comforted over you in all our afflictions by your faith:
for now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord. Here we see Paul did not so much
regard his own afflictions and distress, as the grace of the Thessalonians;
and because they did not abate in their faith by the afflictions they met with,
therefore this comforted him in all his distress: Yea he professes he lives,
if they stand fast, as if their Apostasy would be worse than all his troubles
to him, yea would break his heart, and be his death. The Epistle also to the
Galatians, who began to decay and to end in the flesh after their beginning in
the Spirit, does abundantly declare what agonies he was in about them, Galat.
4. 19. Little children of whom I travail again in birth: he compares those
troubles and exercises of his mind about them to the pangs and groans of a
woman in travail, Who has bewitched you, Galat. 3. 1. By this you may gather,
that the joys of Paul did ebb or flow according to the increase or decrease
of the graces of these he had spiritual inspection over.

To discover this truth, Let us consider, What things made Paul have What
things they were which made Paul hope so well of the Corinthians. 1. Their
amendment and repentance by his former Epistle.
such hopes about these Corinthians, and apply these things to our selves And

First, Their amendment and repentance, by the former Epistle wrote to them, in
that you may see the body of the Church of Corinth was almost like Jobs or
Lazarusses body, full of spiritual loathsomeness, corruptions in Doctrine and
practice, and some of them in a very high nature, for which our zealous
Apostle, as the Lord Christ once did, makes a rod to drive these corruptions
out, he is both a light shining and burning; he keeps to that rule, which he
gives Timothy, Rebuke sharply, and reprove in all Doctrine. He is salt to
these Corinthians. Now these sharp reproves do not provoke them to discontent,
to impatience; but it had a savoury and spiritual operation upon them. If he
said, Genus quoddam est Martyrii reprehensionem patienter far, It Is a kind of
Martyrdom to suffer reproof patiently; then these Corinthians were Martyrs in
this sense; for they did not only take these rebukes well, but are thereby put
upon a zealous and powerful repentance. So that when this spiritual Physician
saw his medicines kindly operate, then he began to hope well of them. On the
other side, we se the Prophets complaining of Jerusalem as incurable, Because
she slighted the Prophets, and stoned them, so that there remained no more
remedy for them. The Prophets complained, They stretched out their hands all
the day long to a rebellious people, and that the bellows were consumed, yet
the dross was not purged away, This then is a very hopeful symptom about a
people, when we see by the Word preached, that their hearts are broken, that
they are counvinced and ashamed of what they have done, and reform for the
future. The Apostle speaks fully to this, 2 Cor. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11. This self
same thing that you were made sorry after a godly manner; what carfulness it
wrought in you, yea what zeal, what revenge, etc. In all things you have
approved your selves to be clear in this matter. Oh the carfulness and zeal
that was in the Corinthians after Paul's admonitions to repent and reform. So
that he had good grounds to say, Our hope of you is steadfast. Oh then, let our
Congregations be examined and tried in this very particular. What repentance
and reformation has the profane man showed after the many admonitions to him?
What Reformation is there made about the holy and strict observation of the
Sabbath? What careful performances of holy duties in thy family, concerning
which thou have heard so much? Oh that we had cause to say of such persons, of
such families, though once we feared for them, though once we mourned and
grieved for them, yet now we rejoice, and our hope of them is very steadfast.
But may we not cry, woe, woe, and again woe to our Congregations, that are like
Golgothaes, places not of dead men's skuls, but dead hearts; yea dead men,
according to that of our Savior, Let the dead bury the dead. Have not the
Ministers of God been many years laying the Axe of the Word to the root of
profaneness and ignorance, which is in most families, in most Congregations?
Yet how greatly does it abound? Surely of such families, of such Congregations,
we may with grief of heart say, As yet we have no hope.

Secondly, This is more particularly observable in the Corinthians repentance,
2. Their setting up that good and holy order which was thrown down.
that they repair and set up that good and holy order, which was collapsed
amongst them. And therefore as Paul said to the Colossians, Chap. 2. 5. He did
rejoice to behold their order: So might he here. In his former Epistle he
severely taxes them for want of Church Discipline, that they neglected good
order; there was a scandalous sinner suffered amongst them, and they did not
mourn and humble themselves, because of it; they did not cast him out, and free
the Church from that contagion; therefore with many arguments he presses them
to gather together, and to execute Church Discipline, to cast out this wicked
person from amongst them, 2 Corinthians. 5. which accordingly they did. or were
about to do; yea they seem to fall into too much austerity from their laxe
indulgence and connivence at sin to too much severity against a penitent
humbled sinner, as appears 2 Cor. 2. where the Apostle exhorts them, To
confirm their love to the incestuous person, now deeply sensible of his sin,
lest he be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. When therefore Paul saw that
those who had such disorders in their Church, no zeal against sinners, no
endeavors to purge out the old leaven, to be so greatly changed, that they are
hardly persuaded to moderate their zeal; this may well provoke him to say, His
hope was steadfast of them. For if they would have been remiss, and negligent
in any thing, it would have been about Church Order. For we see sound Doctrine
is sooner received into any Church, than holy Discipline; There were but few
Kings among the Jews, that did endeavor a Reformation of the disorder which
was about Ordinances; and it is noted as a peculiar work of God upon those men's
hearts, who were ready thereunto; as for the other they mocked and derided at
such a pious endeavor, 2 Chronicles. 30. 10, 11, 12. There was the hand of God upon
some in a special manner to induce them thereunto. The Church of Ephesus,
Revel. 2. 2. is commended, Because she could not bear those that were evil. It
argues the strength of the stomach to exonerate it self of burdensome humors.
So that by this we see, That the hopes of those who are faithful Guides in the
Church, are greatly quenched concerning such who are refractory, and
adversaries to that holy order which would deliver the Congregation from the
ignorance and profaneness abiding there. The very Heathens will rise up in
judgment against them, who would admit no profane sinner to their Heathenish
Rites, witness that known acclamation, Procul, o procul este prophani. The
Priest also about to sacrifice, asked, (...), Who was there? And answer was
retuened, (...), Good and honest men. Origin also justifying the Christian
Discipline that did shut out from their communion profane persons, instanceth
in the Sect of Pythagoreans, who when any of their company had fallen into
gross sins, they ejected him, and sent a Coffin to him made for that
purpose; signifying thereby, that he was no better than a dead corpse. Yea, the
Socinians though blaspheming the Deity of Christ, will condemn such carnal
Gospellers. For this is one argument they use against the Evangelical Reformed
Churches, that there is not such holy order against profane and impenitent
sinners, as ought to be. Yea some of them go so far, as to say, That that is
not a Church, which has not Discipline. If then Heathens and damnable
Heretics have been zealous for purity about their religious Rites; how
hopeless are they, who had rather with the Gadarens have Christ go out of
their Country, then be deprived of their swinish lusts?

Thirdly, Lastly, Paul's hope was therefore steadfast concerning the Corinthians,
3. Because they did communicate with Paul in a patient suffering for Christ.
Because of that which follows in the Text: they did communicate with Paul in
a patient suffering for Christ, and therefore being sufferers with Christ, they
should also reign with him. Christ's friends are tried in the time of adversity.
It Is an hopeful sign of an honest and sincere heart, when thou can cleave to
Christ, and confess his Name in the midst of all persecutions: Then Christ
says, Now I know thou love me, because thou have not withholden thy dearest
comforts for my sake. When under persecutions for Christ's name, thou can
rejoice, and not as Bonaventure expresses it, be like the Cart-wheel, which
while it bears its burden, does sometimes make an harsh and unpleasant noise.
Christ has both his Summer and his Winter for his Church; and therefore this
Garden, Habet Lilia sua and rosas suas, Her Lilies in time of peace, and her
Roses in time of persecution. Now those that love Christ more than father or
mother, or life it self; and then (as it follows) Matthew. 10. 37, 38. take up
his cross; for this can never be done without the former; these do give great
hopes of the truth of grace in them. Now the ground of this encouragement to a
godly Minister is, the state of grace here, and of glory hereafter. For his
flock is both the end of his work, and the end of him that works. It is both
finis operis and operantis. As then Christ whose death was for the salvation of
believers, is said to see the travail of his soul, and to be satisfied: So it
is with every true Pastor. What a joyful thing would it be to have good hopes
of the work of grace in every one that belongs to his charge? So that thy
ignorance, dissoluteness, and such damnable ways are the grief and trouble,
the thorns in the sides of those, who are to give an account for thee. Oh let
not the contrary be true, that such is the ungodliness, the profaneness of
thy life, that our fear of thee, our grief about thee is continual!

SERMON. LVII.
Of our partaking with others in their Suffering for Christ, and how this is a
way to interest our selves in the Joy and Glory which such Sufferers enjoy.

2 COR. 1. 7. Knowing that as you are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye
be also of the consolation.
IN these words we have a Declaration or Specification, wherein, or wherefore
the hope of the Apostle was thus steadfast concerning them; it is, because they
did not wholly cast off Paul, and contemn him for his afflictions, as the false
Apostles endeavored. The Apostles hope was steadfast (as you heard) not like
the hope that we sometimes have, which is mutable and uncertain. For how many
are there with Pharaoh and Abab under some judgments of God, or under some
exquisite agonies of the soul, which complain of their sins, cry out of their
impieties? So that we have some buddings of hope concerning them, till at last
they dash all, and disappoint all expectation by their Apostasy; but such is
not the Apostles hope concerning these, he has a surer foundation; and
therefore he says, (...), Knowing, not guessing, or opinionating by slight
conjectures, but knowing. It should according to the rule of Grammar be (...),
for it is constructed with (...), but it is usual with the Apostle to
transgress such rules of Grammar. This Samson is not tied in such cords. The
vehement and affectionate zeal of Paul in his expressions cannot be so
manacled. Thus the word is used abruptly, Romans 13. 11.

In the second place, we have the object of this his knowledge concerning the
Corinthians, and that is, that they were (...), Partakers of, or in communion
with him in his afflictions; (...): What is more humble and lowly than Paul in
this expression? says Chrysostom; they who had not in the least measure
shared with him in sufferings, yet he makes them copartners with him. They are
as Salmeron expresses it, Copartners in the gain, and in the loss with Paul.
They venture (as it were) in the Ship together. The word (...), of which comes
(...) in the Text, is taken sometimes actively, not for communion so much as
commuuication. Therefore it is called distribution, 2 Cor. 9. 13. Thus 1 Cor.
13. 13. The communion of the Spirit, that is, The communication of the Spirit.
And so 1 Cor. 10. 16. The bread and wine, Is it not the communion? The sense
may be, The communication of his body, and his blood; but very often it is used
intransitively (as it were) and signifies Fellowship, Society and Communion.
The Object of which spiritual communion is fully set down, 1 John 1. 3. Ye have
fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with the
Son.

As for the Adjective, which is the word in the Text, we have it used in that A
double communion, 1. In what is evil.
which is Evil, and in that which is Good. In that which is sinful, 2 Cor. 10.
10. I would not have you (...), partakers of the table of Devils. Thus also the
Verb (...) is used, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Partake not of other men's sins. And 2 John
12. He that bids him, God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. We are not
only to keep our selves from acting of sin; but look we do not partake with
other in their impieties; and that is done many ways; most have cause to pray
with that good man, Lord forgive me my other men's sins. If thou do
communicate with such, then the Text will on the contrary be verified upon
thee; as thou do partake with them in their sins, so thou shall in their
terror and damnation. But

2. There is a good participation or copartnership, of which the Text here 2.
In what is good.
speaks. Though Paul was persecuted and suffered much for the preaching of
the Gospel, yet this did not deter the Corinthians, or make them to be
scandalized at Christ, and so to fall off from him; but they looked upon Paul's
sufferings, as their own, and so are affected with his persecutions, as if they
themselves were persecuted. This was it which made Paul have such a steadfast
hope of their sincerity; for if their foundation had been sandy, such
tempestuous winds would have overthrown all. Observe,

That a partaking of, and communion with those who suffer for Christ, is a sure
The communion with those who suffer for Christ, is a fair way to their joy and
glory.
way to interest in all that joy and glory which such sufferers shall at last
receive from God.

The Corinthians shall partake with Paul in joy and glory, because they are
willing to partake with him in afflictions and persecutions. The joy that is
spoken of in the Text, is a distinct thing from glory and eternal happiness;
for that is not till the Resurrection, but Consolation is for the present while
we are here in the valley of tears. And indeed if we take consolation for the
relieving and reviving of the heart under miseries, so it cannot be in Heaven,
but in this world only.

To discover this truth, consider

First, That there may be a twofold participation of, or fellowship with
others 1. A twofold communion with the afflicted. 1. When a man living in
peace and quietness himself, yet is affected with their sufferings.
that are in afflictions:

1. When though we our selves are freed and delivered from all troubles,
enjoying all outward peace and quietness, yet we are compassionately affected
with the condition of all those members of Christ upon the earth who may be in
an afflicted and troubled estate. For seeing all the people of God make up one
body, if any part thereof suffer, the other parts condole and suffer with it:
Insomuch that it is plain, thou art a dead part in the body, destitute of all
spiritual life, if thou can see the Church of God, or any part thereof lie
wounded like the man of Jericho, and thou like the Priest and the Levite pass
by, not laying it to heart. This fellowship in suffering is part of the
Apostles meaning, which he attributes to the Corinthians, and is indeed a good
and sure hope of grace in whomsoever we find it, Heb. 13. 3. The Apostle there
exhorts to remember such as are in bonds, but how? Not in a superficial
careless manner, but as cordially and affectionately, as if we were bound with
them. Now consider, that if thou were impoverished, if thou were banished, if
thou were imprisoned, how much would it possess thy heart all the day long? No
less is to be done for others, whom God thus exercises. The Scripture does
much delight in the comparison of the Church with the natural body, and that
because of the intimate conjunction and sympathy which is between the members
if one be honored, all rejoice; if one be pained, all grieve. The Prophet
complains, Amos 6. 6. of those who enjoyed their pleasures, and made
themselves merry, but did not remember the afflictions of Joseph. Know then,
that it is a special touchstone of thy grace, when with Nehemiah, thou have all
things that can be desired for thy private content, yet do mourn and pray,
because of the desolations of Jerusalem; and this may be one answer to that
Question, Why should you speak so much of afflictions and troubles to those who
have none at all? For let that be granted, yet are all the Churches of God in
quietness and freedom? Look abroad and see how it fares with many that call
on the Name of Christ; and thou will have cause to see, that though thou art
not afflicted outwardly, yet in thy heart and soul thou art to be afflicted in
all the afflictions of others. Why do thou live, as if thou were not of the
body? Be of a more public spirit, let the Churches gain, or losses be as thine
own.

2. There is a fellowship with the afflictions of others, not only spiritual,
but real, when we are cast into the same outward condition, as others are. 2.
When a man is cast into the same outward condition.
And this also may be part of the meaning in the Text. They were not only
Spectators of Paul's troubles, but they themselves had part of this burden upon
their own shoulders: That cup of tribulation was given them to drink, as well
as others. For although persecutions do sometimes fall only upon the Pastors
and Officers in the Church, yet for the most part it is universal, and pursues
all that call on Christ: That as with Christ there is no bond or free, no Jew
or Gentile, all are one; so it is also with the enemies of Gods Church in their
persecutions, all are one to them. Look not then for an Ark, when all the
people of God shall be in the waters. Though an Obadiah may live quietly in
Ahabs Court, when the Elijahs are sought for, to be put to death, yet this is
not always so; and that man, who will own Christ upon no other condition, but
that he may not suffer for him, or be persecuted for him, that man is unsound
and rotten at the very heart.

Secondly, Consider that it is no less glorious before men, and acceptable 2.
It is as glorious and acceptable to be a companion to sufferers, as to suffer.
unto God, to be a companion and an associate with those who do suffer, then if
we did suffer our selves in our own person. This has been always a very hard
task for flesh and blood, to own the godly, while they are in a suffering
condition. The Disciples themselves proved cowards and unfaithful in this
temptation: for when the Shepherd was smitten, all the sheep were scattered.
When Christ was to be crucified, all his Apostles fled from him, they dared not
own him; and when Peter was charged to be one of Christ's company, He curses
and swears, he did not know the man; he was afraid to own so much as the very
knowledge of Christ. Indeed the godly women, Mary the mother of Christ, and
others, they showed more grace and courage than the very Apostles, that all
honor and glory may be given to God alone; but as for his Disciples, they hid
themselves, and were afraid to be companions with him. Hence the Apostle, Heb.
10. 33. exhorting believers, To call to mind their enduring of a great fight of
afflictions, he instanceth wherein, partly, Whilst ye were made a gazing stock
both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly whilst ye became companions of
them, that were so used. Here you see, to become a companion to those that
suffer, not to fly from them, or forsake them, is made a great expression of
their love to God. Paul also 2 Timothy 1. 16. remembers what Onesiphorus did to
him, while in bonds, he mentions it, as if he would never have it forgotten
any more, than that woman's box of ointment poured on Christ. The Lord give
mercy to the house of Onesiphorus; Why? Because he answered his name indeed, He
often refreshed me, he sought me out very diligently, and was not ashamed of my
chain. What a glorious character is here given to Onesiphorus? He was not
persecuted himself, but he made himself a companion with those that were. Paul
complains of Demas, 2 Timothy 4. 10. That he had forsaken him, for he was now in
hands, and to answer before Nero, who was known to be nothing but clay and
blood mingled together, whose cruelty would extend to all abettors and
well-wishers. If any did but sigh in his time, it was a capital crime. This
fear made Demas, (as it did all his other friends, verse. 16.) forsake Paul;
they had not faith and courage enough to venture for him, and therefore it is
said, He did love the present world; he loved his life and liberty too much;
though some think this was but a temptation in Demas, and that he did return to
Paul again. By this we see, how hard a thing it is, to own those that are godly
in their extremities. John 19. 38, 39. It is noted both of Joseph of Arimathea,
and of Nicodemus, both Disciples of Christ, but secretly for fear of the Jews,
yet when Christ was crucified, they showed their boldness and courage about
Christ's body, when he was dead. And Matthew, 25. at that terrible day of
Judgment, judicial process against sins of omission, will be for neglect in
this, I was in prison, and ye visited me not. When Christ and his cause are
discountenanced in the world, then unless a man have a sincere and upright
heart, he will curse with Peter, and swear, That he knows not the men.

These things laid as a foundation, let us consider, why such sympathizing
Reasons why partaking with the Saints afflictions, does interest us in their
glory. 1. This demonstrates our faith in Christ to be upon spiritual grounds.
with, and partaking of others afflictions, does interest in eternal glory. And

First, This Reason is evident, Because hereby we plainly demonstrate, that our
Faith in Christ, and acknowledging of him, is upon divine and spiritual
grounds, that we do not know Christ, and the Christian faith after the flesh,
Matthew. 13. This discovered the thorny ground not to be true and right soil,
because in time of temptation, when the scorching Sun did arise, then all the
hopeful fruit began to wither. This apostatizing from Christ in time of such
temptations, is so great a matter, that we are constantly to pray for the grace
and assistance of God therein, that we be not left to our selves. For Peter
being forsaken in some measure only, how dreadful was his fall? And for this
end it is that God suffers persecutions and troubles to accompany the
profession of his truth, that so it may be known who are sound, and who
hypocrites. If thou art but chaff, this winnowing will drive thee away. They
are but a very few that acknowledge Christ upon spiritual and enduring grounds.
So that though the world rage, though enemies be furious and bloody, yet they
stand like Mount Sion, that cannot be moved. Many become Christians, as some
did Jews in Mardochees time for fear, and because the State favored the
Jews. Outward restraint makes many take the title of Christians, but they
live the life of Heathens, because the pleasures of sin are present, and
affect the sense. Orant quia timent, peccant quia volunt, They pray and
perform outward religious duties, because they are afraid; but they sin,
because their will and pleasure inclines thereunto. Now these drossie
Christians, when they are brought to the fire, they presently melt away. It
cannot be denied but that men may suffer much for a while at least, and yet at
last deny Christ, as we have sad instances in Ecclesiastical History; but many
times such, with that famous Cranmer, did prove the more courageous, and took
an holy revenge upon themselves. This accompanying Christ in his dangers, has
a notable promise, Luke 22. 28. Ye are they which have continued with me in my
temptations, therefore I appoint unto you a Kingdom, that ye may eat and
drink with me, and sit on thrones judging Israel. Even as Christ manifested
his pure love to us, that in the midst of all the agonies and miseries he
grapled with from God and men, yet he did not give over our cause, but
completed our redemption for us. If so be Solomon did so much favor Abiathar,
though he deserved death, that he told him he would not put him to death,
though guilty, because he had been afflicted in all wherein his father was
afflicted, 1 Kin. 2. 26. How much more will Christ say thus to such, who have
not been driven from him by great afflictions?

Secondly, Such communion in afflictions must needs interest in glory, Because
this is suffering for Christ. Thou that art a companion to such as suffer, 2.
Because this is suffering for Christ.
thou do suffer, partly in thy heart and affections, and partly exposing thy
self to the rage of men, for owning such. The approving, the pleading for, and
refreshing of those that do suffer for Christ, proclaims to others, that thou
art of the same way and persuasion, and that thou art ready to receive
whatsoever load the world shall lay upon thee. So that it is not any defect in
thy zeal, or in the adversaries malice that makes thee no sufferer, but the
mere providence of God, which restrains these Lions that they do not devour
thee, when they do others.

Use of Instruction, how false and hypocritical a thing it is to forsake any
godly persons, while they are in danger for Gods work; especially for people to
recoil and draw back from their Pastors and Guides, while valiant for the
truth. In such curnal and worldly fears, thou publishest thy corrupt and
hypocritical heart to all the world: Thou that do not in thy place and
calling stand by and encourage such who suffer for righteousness sake, thou
betrayest Christ like a Judas for thirty pieces of silver. See what a sad
complaint Paul makes of such false and self-seeking revolters, 2 Timothy 4. 16,
17. At my first defense no man stood with me, but all men forsook me. Now lest
you should think that it might be such an infirmity of fear as might excuse, he
adds, I pray God, it be not laid to their charge. The same petition Stephen
(Act. 7.) uses about his persecutors. Indeed concerning Alexander who so much
withstood him, he says, The Lord reward him according to his work; because he
was a malicious opposer; but these did withdraw out of infirmity; yet Paul's
prayer argues it to be a very dangerous thing so to do.

SERMON. LVIII.
How useful it is to the children of God, to know the Afflictions which the
Saints suffer for Christ's sake: And why the Preaching concerning the Saints
afflictions, even from Heathens, is necessary to Christians, though for the
present they be in peace and quietness.

2 COR. 1. 8. For we would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble
which came to us in Asia, that we are pressed out of measure, above strength,
insomuch that we despaired even of life.
WE are now arrived at the eighth verse, which Piscator makes the beginning of
that Apologetical Narration, which we have Paul declaring in the following part
of the Chapter against those calumnies that were cast upon him. The first
whereof was his levity and inconstancy. For having promised to come to them, he
did not, which the false teachers branded with mutability. Now it is thought
that Paul instanceth in this great trouble he met with in Asia, as the cause
why he did not come, as he had promised. But I rather join with those, that do
make it part of the precedent Discourse about afflictions and consolations in
them. So that what he had in the general only spoken of before, he now
illustrateth in particular; because (says Cajetan on the place, Sermones
morales, etc. Moral Discourses are the more effectual, by how much the more
particular they are. Paul therefore having in the general asserted the blessed
fruit and gracious issue of afflictions to such as believe; he instanceth in
himself, by an heavy affliction which did befall him, and of the wonderful
deliverance which God vouchsafed to him. He was like Jonah even in the whales
belly, and yet God vouchsafed mercy and consolation to him.

So that in the words we may take notice of,

1. The Description of the trouble it self. And

2. The Introductory Expression to it.

We begin with the latter at this time, the introductory Expression; and in
that Of the compellation which Paul uses, brethren
we have the Compellation, (...), brethren; a Title which Paul often delights
to use; wherein he does demonstrate his humility and meekness. For though
constituted in so eminent an Office as the Apostleship was, yet he looks upon
all believers, as his brethren. Though he had a paternal power in respect of
his Office, yet such also was his humility therein, that he accounts of them as
brethren, so far was he from affecting any tyrannical dominion over them, he
joyneth a fraternal affection with a paternal office. But of this more in the
last verse. This Title also signifies that love and Christian communion, which
is to be amongst Pastor and people; no contentions, no variance or divisions
are to be entertained. But of this also enough has been spoken elsewhere.

Come we then to the Introduction it self, (...), I would not have you
ignorant. This expression the Apostle commonly uses, when he is to Of the
expression, I would not have you ignorant.
speak of something that is of a very weighty and momentous consideration. Romans
11. 25. I would not have you ignorant of this mystery, that blindness in part
is happened to Israel. So 1 Cor. 10. 1. 1 Cor. 12. 1. Concerning sacramental
administrations, and the nature, with the use of spiritual gifts, Paul would
not have them ignorant. Likewise 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. Paul speaking of that great
and wonderful day of Christ's coming to judgment, with the manner of this
judicial process, says, I would not have you ignorant. So that by this
expression we may see, that the historical passage which Paul mentions of his
Asi^n trouble, was of great use and well worthy to be known. The false Apostles
they took occasion from Paul's sufferings to contemn him, and to bring him into
disgrace, as if he had been a turbulent and seditious person; but Paul is so
far from being ashamed of his troubles, or desirous to conceal them, that he
rather desires to publish them, that all who fear God may know of them, as
also Gods gracious dealing with him in the issue. Observe,

That it is of very great use to know what are the afflictions and troubles
which do It Is of great use to know the afflictions of those who suffer for
Christ's sake.
befall the servants of God for his sake.

The History of the Saints sufferings, what they have endured, how wonderfully
God has preserved and comforted them, is of very great practical use. The
people of God have a communion, not only in Church-duties, and
Church Priviledges, but also in afflictions and sufferings; and therefore if he
as a man said, Nihil humani a se alienum, we may say, Nihil Christiani, etc. No
man is to account that as strange, which he hears any Christian may labor
under. Thus Colos. 4. 7, 8, 9. Paul being in bonds for the Gospel, does on
purpose send One simus and Ty^hicus to them, to declare his estate to them, and
also to know how it stood with them, because by such mutual intercourse, there
is a mutual edification of one another.

I shall briefly instance in some general great advantages that may be made, by
our understanding of the afflictions and troubles, that are very heavy upon
others. And

First, Hereby we shall be the more provoked to pray for them, to wrestle with
God in their behalf. It is good to consider, how earnestly Paul, though
Reasons. 1. Hereby we shall be more provoked to pray for them.
so eminent and choice a man in holiness, does desire the prayers of others;
and therefore when he had spoken of that confidence he had in God, who as he
had, so also would for the future deliver him, he adds, verse. 11. You also
helping together by prayer for us; as if none of those great mercies Paul
looked for could be brought forth, but by the help of their prayers. This then
is that, which makes the godly desirous, that others who fear God, may know
how it is with them, what temptations they lie under, what afflictions they
grapple with, that so they may have the effectual fervent prayers of a
righteous man, which avails much. Though the profane deride and scoff, yet
the prayer of any true godly man is greatly to be valued, and much to be
desired.

Secondly, As such are thereby provoked to pray to God for them; so when 2.
Hereby they will be more encouraged to bless God, when they are delivered.
God shall mercifully deliver them, and turn their afflictions for good, then
they will also be encouraged to bless and praise God also in their behalf, and
thus more glory redoundeth still to God. Thus also the Apostle, verse. 11.
declares, That by the means of many persons thanks may be given to God on
our behalf. Thus you see no Christian is to live to himself, but it is his duty
to be praying to God for others, and praising God in the behalf of others; but
how little are the people of God exercised in these communion duties? How
little zealous in prayer for others, but far more negligent in the praises of
God for others? When do thou bless God for the mercies, deliverance
vouchsafed to the afflicted Saints of God, as if they were thy own? This
public affection is greatly wanting in believers, who do not consider they are
of the body.

Thirdly, By knowing the afflictions of others, and their holy deportment under
3. Hereby we may learn patience, zeal and heavenly mindedness, and other graces.
them, thou may thereby learn patience, zeal, heavenly mindedness, and
many other graces. Afflictions are Gods schools, and that whether on thy self,
or on others. How much patience may we learn by the afflictions upon Job? Thus
James 5. 10, 11. The Prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord must be taken
as an example of suffering affliction, and of patience; and ye have heard of
the patience of Job: How greatly did the waves of God pass over his head? No
Martyr, as Chrysostom amplifieth it, came near Job in all their sufferings:
and therefore the holy Ghost thought fit to have the History of Job recorded,
that all might know and learn by it. Be not then a stranger to the sufferings
of Gods people, but inform thy self about them, to imitate their graces, to be
encouraged to do the like, when God shall call thee to fight his battles.

But you may say, What use can be made from the preaching about such
afflictions Qu. What use is to be made of preaching about such afflictions
which Paul and other Christians suffered from Heathens? Answ. 1.
which Paul, and the other primitive Christians suffered from Paganish and
Heathenish enemies? We have no Neroes or Diocletians, neither are we called to
prisons and Martyrdom. To what purpose is it to preach of sufferings to those,
who live in all quietness and freedom? What use or good improvement can we
make of it?

Therefore it is necessary to answer this Objection. And

First, By the same reason you may say, To what purpose did the Spirit of God
cause this Chapter to be written, with many other passages of the like nature,
which treat of afflictions, and that from Pagans? Certainly, though we be not
for the present exercised as they are, yet the record of this, the Doctrine
about this is of very great concernment. Therefore

Secondly, Though thou art not called to be a Martyr, or to suffer from such
enemies, yet there is none that will live godly, but they shall meet with
afflictions one way or other. We read of no child of God without his
tribulations. None can come into Canaan, but they must first go through a
wilderness: They must first with Christ suffer, and so enter into glory. We
told you, that there are afflictions of diverse sorts; There are real, and there
are verbal afflictions. Though thou do not suffer in thy life, and in thy
liberty, yet thou may in thy name, and in thy outward comforts. There is no
man, which lives in a zealous, lively manner for God, and endeavoring to pull
down the kingdom of Satan; but the Devil and his instruments will raise
opposition enough against him; and therefore it is good to hear Sermons about
sufferings for Christ. For though thy troubles be not such great and bloody
ones, as the Martyrs have been, yet thou art to drink part of this bitter cup:
The Lord he has given thee a portion in these tribulations: and truly there is
not the least affliction befalls us in the way of God, but if God did not
preserve us, and keep us by his grace, we should sink under it. The frowhe of
a man, the fear of a mock is enough to discourage us from our duty, if God does
not corroborate us. If therefore the world does not hate us, if that be not a
professed enemy to us, we may justly doubt, whether we be the Woman's seed, or
not rather the Serpents seed. Seeing therefore thou have thy tribulations more
or less, and that for righteousness, thou may improve this truth for thy
edification.

Secondly, What though the Church of God meets not with persecutions and
Answ. 2.
troubles from Pagans and Heathens, yet those it suffers from such who
pretend to Christ, and judge it special service of God so to afflict them, have
a sharper sting in them. What miseries and bloody cruelties have not many godly
Protestants suffered from Papists? who yet glory that they only are zealous for
Christ, that others are blasphemers and enemies to Christ, and therefore ought
to be punished with such severe censures. Now may not such Martyrs and
sufferers receive as much comfort, as if they had been persecuted from
Heathens? Yea doubtless; for in some respects their suffering is the greater,
and their constancy the more admirable. When the holy Prophets were stoned to
death by the people of the Jews, that yet thought themselves to be the only
people of God, this did not diminish but aggravate their glory. The patience of
Abel was more admirable in being slain by his brother Cain, then if it had been
by a stranger. If therefore thy sufferings arise from such who highly pretend
to the glory and truth of Christ: Be not despondent, for thy crown of glory
will herein be greater, than if it had been from open adversaries. Hence it is
observable, how remarkably the Scripture speaks of those who suffered by
Antichrist, Rev. 13. 10. Here is the patience, and the faith of the Saints,
which is again mentioned, Rev. 14. 12. A true Christian suffering from false
Christians, has not the promises of God obscured or diminished hereby to him,
but rather enlarged; for God considers both from whom it is thou art
troubled, and the cause why, and the manner how thou bear it.

Thirdly, These truths about suffering for Christ are useful even to such who
enjoy all freedom and abundance; because there is a twofold Martyrdom,
Martyrium Answ. 3.
cordis, and Martyrium corporis; a Martyrdom of the heart, and a Martyrdom of
the body. If therefore thou art not called to suffer bodily, it is certain thou
must suffer spiritually, Habes quod in te occidas; if others do not martyr
thee, thou art to martyr thy self. Hence is that duty, Of offering up our
selves as a Sacrifice to God. Hence it is we are commanded, To deny our selves,
to take up our cross, to pull out the right eye, to cut off the right hand;
and the constant practice of Christianity is, To mortify the flesh, to
crucify the flesh. Insomuch that the ancient Writers do frequently compare
this soul-mortification to the bodily Martyrdom. He that does abstain from the
seeming pleasures and profies of slane, this man is a spiritual Martyr. He that
does crucify his will, that does subdue and conquer his corruptions, it is as
much from the grace of God, as he that is enabled to lay down his life for
Christ's sake; all these come from the same principle. There is required an
insuperable divine and efficacious power of grace to bring the heart to any
holy duty, to avoid any sin, from pure and holy motives. It is therefore of
consequence to hear of the consolations which God gives in sufferings: for if
thou have not corporal sufferings, thou have spiritual ones, and therefore God
he will proportion thy comforts to thy exercises.

Fourthly, It is good to understand and possess our souls with the afflictions
of others, that hereby we may acknowledge the mercy of God to us, if he Answ. 4.
give us Sunshine days, when others have lived in trouble some times. Say not
then, What are these Sermons of suffering to us, who are not exercised? for
they greatly concern thee, seeing that hereby thy heart is to be raised up to
more thankfulness, to more joy in blessing and praising of God. Is it not a
mercy that thou did not live in Queen Mary's days; That thou art not one of
those mentioned by the Apostle, Who wandered in sheepskins and goatskins, who
had no settled abode or quietness in any place. They did eat their bread with
trembling, and drink with fear and astonishment, flying from one place to
another, parents bereaved of children, husbands of wives. Now when thou shall
consider, what sad times many of the people of God have lived in, and thou have
days of peace and abundance, Is not this like fire in thy bosom to inflame
thee with the love of God, and constantly to bless him?

Fifthly, It is good to know the sufferings of others, though thou art freed,
Answ. 5.
because none knows when the time of thy trial may come. The times of the
Churches peace, and of her troubles are in Gods hands, and these times are only
known to himself; Thou know not what heavy sufferings thou may be put
upon ere thou die, and therefore it is good to be providing the whole armor
of Christ, before the day of fighting does approach. The Mariner has not his
instruments to provide in the midst of the storm, but he does prepare for it:
so neither is the soldier then to furnish himself with weapons, when the enemy
is approaching to him. Do thou therefore hear much, know much, and be
instructed much about the patience and sufferings of the Saints, that when God
shall call thee to it, it may not seem a strange, and a new thing to thee.

Use of Instruction, not to be afraid to hear of, and know all the difficulties
and calamities which will accompany the powerful way of owning Christ. How
carnal and self-seeking are our hearts, with the Disciples to flee from Christ,
when he is carried to the Cross? We would receive good from Christ, but not
evil; whereas if thou do consider it, thou shall find the earthly and the
worldly man is more afflicted and troubled in getting the things of the world,
then thou in obtaining of Heaven; and what a shame is it, that they shall be
more patient and enduring for these worldly goods, then thou art for heavenly?
Does not the earthly man say to his gold, what shall separate us from the love
of it? Does he not say, for the love of thee I am killed all the day long? This
is the golden Image that every one falls down and worships. Oh then shame thy
self, saying, How much can these suffer? How much can these bear, and for that
which will damn them at last? But my carnal, fearful heart is afraid to suffer
for Christ, who will give me eternal glory. Shall the Devil have his martyrs,
the world its sufferers, and shall not Christ have such as will leave all to
have all by him again?

SERMON. LIX.
The Ministers of the Gospel find much opposition from the carnal and worldly
Professors. Who are these carnal and worldly Professors.

2 COR. 1. 8. Of our trouble, which came to us in Asia.
THe next thing considerable in the Text, is the description of that
tribulation which did fall upon the Apostle, which was so necessary and useful
to be known. In which we have,

1. The Nature of this exercise, expressed in the name it has (...). 2. There
is the place where, in Afia. 3. There is the aggravation of it. Of which in its
time.
The exercise it self is called (...). Beza (in Annotat. in Cor. cap. 13.)
says, this word is properly rendered affliction, not tribulation, for that is
(...), rather than (...). Hence he shows out of Tully, that Affligo is
properly to throw a thing to the ground, so as to press it down, and therefore
is the same with (...). The word then signifies not an ordinary trouble, but
such as does most strictly constringe and bind, pressing a man to the ground;
and this he says, did come upon him in Asia, (...), not that it came by chance
or fortune, or by the mere malice and power of men; no it came by the special
appointment of God, in much wisdom and mercy, thereby propagating the Gospel.
For afflictions are so many arrows delivered out of Gods quiver, which are sure
to hit the mark they are destined unto. Here is no more difficulty in the
words; only Expositors question, What this trouble was, he met with in Asia?
Where may we find any thing about the particulars of it? Cajetan on the place
acknowledges, That concerning this trouble in Asia, he could read nothing in
any Book that was authentic; yet it seems not to refer generally to all
the troubles he met with in publishing of the Gospel, but to some eminent
singular one; and therefore he says, the trouble, not troubles in the plural
number. Some learned men therefore refer this to those passages mentioned in
the former Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16. 9. where he said, A great
door and effectual was opened to him at Ephesus, (that was in Asia the less)
but there were many adversaries; and these no doubt did endeavor to bring him
into much danger. So 1 Cor. 15. 32. he is said there, To fight with beasts at
Ephesus; whether he understand beasts truly and properly, or metaphorically,
men as wild and as savage as beasts, all shows the extreme danger he was in.
It may seem probable, that the Apostle related to this: only it is objected,
That the trouble here mentioned was but lately done, and such as the
Corinthians had not yet heard of. Therefore the general current of most
Interpreters, do conclude, that the Apostle means that danger he was in,
mentioned Acts 19. by Demetrius, and others, when the whole City of Ephesus was
in an uproar, because of the Temple of Diana, concerning which they so
vehemently accused Paul; for there we read was a popular sedition, and the City
was in a great confusion, Demetrius and his company were in a mad rage against
Paul. So that although Luke does not in particular mention the extreme and
grievous danger Paul was in, yet it may well be concluded from the general.
Thus Calvin, and many others. So that this foundation being laid, and this
supposed to be the trouble. We may observe,

That the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, are sure to meet with much
opposition The faithful Ministers of the Gospel are sure to meet with
opposition from the world.
from all such, who regard Religion no further, than it makes for their carnal
advantage and interest.

A necessary truth this is; for hereby every one, whose heart rises against
the powerful preaching of the Word, may examine himself, What is the motive
thereof? What is the cause thereof? Though he may pretend this specious color,
and that fair gloss, yet it is some lust or other, some carnal advantage or
other, that does indeed kindle that flame in his breast.

That this Doctrine may be the better conceived, let us take notice, What was
the cause that brought this trouble upon Paul at Ephesus; and we shall there
see, how the same causes do still make men mad, and bitter enemies against the
ways of God. The History we have related, Acts 19. from verse. 23. to the end
of the Chapter: it is there declared, That no small stir did arise about that
way, that is, the Evangelical way, the Gospel way preached by Paul. The
occasion whereof was by one Demetrius a silver-smith, which made-silver shrines
for Diana, that is, little Images, made for the worship of Diana, which was a
trade of very great profit and advantage to him and others of the like craft;
therefore he consults with them, and uses two arguments to enrage them.

First, That their craft would be in danger. The trade they lived upon would
fall to the ground. And this certainly was that which did most prevail with
him; and by this we see, how hard a matter it is to part with a profession or
way of life, though never so sinful, if it be a profitable way. The matter of
profit will be like dust in our eyes to hinder our sight; it is ready to put
out all spiritual discerning in the conscience between good and evil, just and
unjust. So that we are greatly to suspect our hearts in those things, that are
matter of profit to us, lest they deceive us therein.

The second Argument is religious: Though his heart be carnal, yet he runs
to the Sanctuary of Religion. The former Argument was too gross, if it had
been alone; and therefore he makes Religion the greatest, The great Goddess
Diana shall be despised; her magnificence destroyed. Now this he makes a very
heinous sin, because all Asia, and the world worshipped her. Thus you see
multitude, universality, and the custom of others, that is the great reason he
has to persuade for the worshipping of Diana, which is the same argument that
carnal and superstitious people do still possess their souls with.

So that from this historical passage, you see the Doctrine genuinely deduced,
That men who regard Religion no further, than they have carnal advantages, are
like so many Toads full of poison, full of rage against such as do faithfully
preach the Gospel. Therefore in this very Chapter, we have a notable instance
of the work of Gods grace upon some who believed, for they brought their Books
of curious Arts, which had been gainful and profitable to them, and burnt them
before all men, though the price of them was found to be fifty pieces of
silver; They mattered not their gain, nor their profit, they would part with
all, now they had received the Gospel in the power of it. We have a parallel
History with this of Demetrius, Act. 16. 19. where there was a possessed
Damsel, that had a spirit of divination, which brought her Masters much gain by
soothsaying; but Paul adjureth and dispossesseth that spirit, whereupon it is
said, When her Masters saw that the hope of their gain was gone; They took Paul
and Silas, and carried them to the Rulers, laying great crimes to their charge.
Thus if we do search to the true ground of all that malice which the
Chief-priests vented against Christ, never ceasing till they had crucified him;
although they pretended Religion, and because he spoke blasphemy, and did break
the Sabbath, yet the real cause was, because he discovered their hypocrisy and
covetousness, manifesting that they sought only great things for themselves.
This also Paul charge upon his enemies, the false Apostles, who did create so
much trouble and grief to him, That they were enemies to the cross of Christ,
and did mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19. Thus also Gal. 6. 12. They made a
show in the flesh, that they might not suffer persecution.

But we come more more particularly to enlarge this. And Two sorts which oppose
the truth and ways of Christ. 1. Such as take the true Religion to be
blasphemy and idolatry, or superstition the true service of God.


First, You may take notice, That there are two sorts of persons who do with
much violence and despite oppose the holy truths, and ways of Christ.

First, Such who may have such an absolute blindness and mere error upon
their mind, that they take the true Religion to be blasphemy and horrible
reproach to God; and on the other side, they take Idolatry and superstition to
be the only true service of God, and therefore that they cannot do more
acceptable service unto God, then to oppose that way of Religion, which yet
indeed is only approved of by God. Of such our Savior spoke to his Disciples,
John 16. 2. Whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service; and of
this number was Paul, who professes that he once thought himself bound to set
against the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, Act. 26. 9. Here we see Paul so
convinced in his judgment, that if he did not with all his power and might
oppose the way of Christ, he thought, it would have been his great sin. And
thus no doubt it may be the case of many deluded Heretics and Papists; so that
they shall be persuaded there cannot be more acceptable work unto God, then
that they should imprison and destroy those that do yet truly fear God. This
ignorance upon them, though it may excuse in some degree, and make them less
sinners, then such who do wilfully oppose, and do despite maliciously against
the Spirit of grace, yet it does not totally free them; nay they are
persecutours for all that; as you see Paul acknowledged concerning himself. Now
such enemies as these are acted by religious principles, but in a false way;
they commonly are more zealous and implacable than any other. Paul, because it
was not any carnal advantage or profit he sought after, but a mere zeal for the
Religion he had by tradition from his fathers, therefore did he pursue the
Christians in such a bloody furious manner. Tantum Religio potuit, etc. said
the Poet: Oppositions against the ways of God from such who are zealous and
devout in their false ways, are constantly more dreadful and terrible than
any others. So that we are again and again to try what spirit we are of, to
examine, Whether it be the true Religion indeed that we give our selves up to
the profession thereof. For if it be not, the greater zeal, the greater
forwardness therein, is but the greater condemnation; and like the Traveller
out of the way, the more thou runnest, the further thou go from the true
way. But

The second sort of enemies to the truths of Christ, which are far the 2.
Such who profess religion, merely because it suits with their carnal interests.
more numerous part, is of such, Who are addicted to such a way and persuasion
in Religion, not because of any Divine work of Gods Spirit upon them, but
because it suiteth with their carnal interest, it agrees with their external
profit; and therefore they cry out, Great is Diana, when indeed in their heart
they say, Great is their wealth, great is their gain; this is the Diana. We may
justly charge this upon Popery. What was it that made Luther, and the other
Reformers so odious to the Popish party? What made the Pope with his adherents,
to breath nothing but fire and sword? Was it not because they touched the Popes
Crown, and the Monks belly? Hence

Secondly, The faithful Ministers of the Gospel meet with opposition, not
Hence the Ministers of the Gospel are not only opposed to those who are
without, but by some within the Church.
from the Pagans only that are without, but from the sons of the Church,
which are within; from those who profess the same God, the same faith, the
same Christ with them. And the reason is, because many that profess Christ, do
so for earthly and carnal respects; and such titular and counterfeit Christians
as these, cannot but hate those that are genuine. The Apostle in the large
Catalogue of his manifold sufferings, reckons this up amongst the rest,
Perils from false brethren, 2 Cor. 11. 26. Thus in Abraham's family, there will
be an Ishmael to persecute Isaac, because one is of the bondwoman; and the
other of the free. Think not then, that the Pagan or Jew, will become enemies
to the powerful preaching of the Gospel, for every false Christian will. Every
one that follows Christ only, because of loaves, or with Judas, becomes a
Disciple, because of the bag. Does not experience confirm this, that the
profane Christian does as bitterly rage at, and oppose the holy ways of
Christ, as any Heathen would do? Thus the godly Ministers have trouble (as it
were) from their own flock, their Sheep sometimes becomes Wolves and Bears to
them; and with Ezekiel, They dwell among Scorpions, Ezekiel 2. 6. Who are they
which profess Religion merely for carnal ends. 1. Such as live in their lusts.


Thirdly, The carnal interest and earthy sinful respects, are of diverse sorts;
even as the creeping things that are produced from the earth are innumerable. As

1. He knows Religion only for carnal ends, though it be the true one, that
turns the grace of God into wantonness; That cries up Gospel truths only to
encourage themselves in a licentious way. As many of the mixed multitude went
out with the Israelites from Egypt, yet kept their old and corrupt natures
still; So in the first Reformation many came out of Rome with the blessed
Reformers; many gloried in the name of Evangelici, that they had shaken off the
yoke of Antichristianisme; but at the same time, they did not cast off the yoke
of sin. The first Reformers sadly complained of such, that looked upon the
Gospel, as the casting off not only the Popes Laws, but Gods Law also; as if
to renounce the Images and Mass had been enough, though in the mean time they
did securely sleep in all wickedness. Now from such as these, the Ministers of
the Gospel have found as much unkindnesse and malice, as from their Popish
adversaries: So that both ot home and abroad, the Prophets of the Lord have
been greatly afflicted. These spots in our feasts; these lovers of pleasures
more than God; these are they that have in all places withstood the power and
life of godliness, the holy Order and Discipline Christ has instituted; as if
the liberty Paul bids us stand fast in, were a liberty to sin without
control, and an indulgence in all licentiousness. Such as these, when they
come into the warm Sun, when they have Summer, an opportunity in their hand
will discover that they are Serpents, and will sting. Tertullian apologized of
old, That the Christian Religion had her greatest enemies in Alehouses and
Brothel-houses; and thus still the powerful way of godliness is opposed by
those monsters in Christianity, that have the head of a Christian, but the
heart and life of beasts; Mulier formosa superne desinit in piscem; Like those
Locusts, Revel. 9. 6. that had faces like men, but teeth like Lions, and tails
like Scorpions. Thus how many have the face of Christians, but in heart, in
lives are beasts all over? From these the Ministers of God have received much
opposition.

2. They know Religion only after carnal respects, who intend to enrich and 2.
Such as intend to advance themselves by it.
to advance themselves by it, take up the profession of it for no other end,
but to gain thereby. As this Demetrius made him shrines, not so much out of
devotion to Diana, as to increase his wealth. Our Savior knowing such a
self-seeking disposition was predominant in many, who proffered to be his
Disciples, he therefore prevents their Hypocrisy and Apostasy, by telling
them, The Foxes have holes, but the Son of man has not where to lay his
head; and requires it as a fundamental qualification, That he who would be his
Disciple, must love Christ more than father and mother, and life it self: Yea
must not venture to win the whole world, if thereby he should lose his soul.
Oh take heed of this Judas, this treacherous disposition in thee, to be of the
mind with those Paul speaks of, who supposed, That gain is Godliness, 1 Timothy
6. 5. Yea such are worse than Judas; for he sold Christ but once, thou do
continually; and he was grieved and troubled for what he had done; but thou,
though thou preferrest earthy things all the day long before Christ, yet art
not grieved in heart. Well, such as these are, will in case of profit and
advantage, make all opposition against the preaching of the Gospel, when they
cannot have Christ and their Mammon any longer, when their Dagon and Ark will
consist no longer together, then you shall see all that poison vomited at the
mouth, which before lay close up in the heart; then they will desire no
Ministry, no Gospel, rather than be deprived of their gain.

SERMON. LX.
A further Discovery of such, who take up Religion merely from carnal motives
and worldly respects.

2 COR. 1. 8. Of our trouble, which came to us in Asia.
THe word of God purely preached, with the faithful Ministers thereof, meet
with no greater opposition in the world, then from such who regard Religion, no
further than it makes for their carnal interests.

This truth has been in part opened; and because every Christian
unregenerated, does upon some false and carnal motive or other, take up the
profession More characters of such who profess Religion only upon worldly
respects. 1. Such who in time of temptations prove adversaries to the Gospel
and Ministry of it.
of Christ, whereby when he is put to the denial of that earthly respect, he
can then no longer hold, but breaks out in opposition to the pure ways of
Christ. Therefore it is very useful to give further Characters of such who
regard Religion only upon inferior and worldly respects. And

First, Such are led with corrupt respects, and in time of temptation will
prove adversaries to the Ministers of the Gospel, who are not of a ready and
prepared spirit, to take up the Cross, and to follow Christ in whatsoever
condition he shall command; such who are Christ's Disciples only in the Summer
time, while there are Halcyon days and times of plenty and encouragement to be
a Christian. These when they are urged to part with all, to suffer, and to be
undone for Christ, then they turn into any thing; they will oppose and
contradict that way, which once they did embrace and admire; yea they will
become persecutours of such instruments of Gods glory, which once they did
honor; and all this arises from the earthly and carnal heart, which made them
at first look to Gods ways, Phil. 3. 18. Paul did with tears, and even
weeping, speak of such, Who were enemies to the cross of Christ, who minded
earthly things. So that by Paul's example, we see it is a thing to be bitterly
monrned about, when we see men hopefully professing the true way of Christ; and
then when adversity and persecution does arise, they presently can change, and
turn their faith again; They can withstand and contradict what once they
pleaded for, and all because they are resolved to save themselves: They think
Gain is godliness. Such an one as this, is an object greatly to be pitied, and
mourned over; he loves his ease, his liberty, his advantages more than Christ,
and so is no ways fit to be his Disciple. And for this reason it is our
Savior does so oftten plainly, and in Parables urge all, to consider upon what
terms they take up the profession of his name; he foretells them of all the
hardship and difficulties they must encounter with, that so they may not prove
enemies at last, who in the beginning seemed to be friends. Wonder not then to
see this fall out often in the Christian Church, that those who were once
friends, and went with us unto the house of God, afterward to become like so
many Hazaels to those who fear God. Alas, their earthly advantage, and the
present world, has made them change their opinions and affections: They never
at first did own Christ upon sincere and pure motives, and therefore not being
able to suffer for Christ, they set against him; and this always falls out,
that he who is an Apostate from the true profession of Christ, does become a
cruel and bloody enemy of that way he once walked in. Omnis Apostata est osor
sui ordinis, All Apostate persons, whether in Doctrine or Practice, are
implacable adversaries to truth and holiness. This has been experimentally
proved in all ages; and one reason is, because hereby they would be revenged
upon those from whom they have departed; for their guilty conscience tells
them, they have justly incurred the censure of the godly; They have lost their
repute and esteem, their good name is blasted; and this makes them study all
opposition and malignity that may be. Look then to thy motives at first, to
those terms thou did profess Christ at the beginning; if it was any humane
or false motive, if it was not such an entire and enduring principle, that will
not make thee stand upon a Rock immovable; Let any winds or tempests arise, as
great a friend, and as forward a well-wisher, as now thou seem to be for
good things. Had we a prophetical discerning, we might with the Prophet look
steadfastly upon thee, as he did on Hazael, and weep to think what enmity and
mischief thou may create to such as fear God. This man takes up the old
Rule, Ama tanquam osurus; He loves this way of Christ, so as thinking his
outward advantages may sometimes or other make him hate it.

Secondly, Such regard Religion only in a carnal way, Who though they 2. Such
as maintain doctrines which overthrow the foundation of Religion.
may acknowledge some principles of the Christian Religion, yet at the same
time maintain some damnable or heretical Doctrines that do overthrow the very
foundation. Such as these take up Religion with carnal motives, and so in time
become cruel enemies to the faithful Guides, that are in Gods Church. Wonder
not that I make an Heretic to regard Religion after the flesh; for Galat. 5.
20. Heresies are reckoned a fruit of the flesh. Insomuch that Austin made it an
ingredient into the definition of an Heretic, that he either beget or
propagate false opinions, Alicujus temporalis commodi causa, for some temporal
advantage. And although we cannot say thus of all, because God in just
judgment does deliver up some who receive not the truth in the love of it, to
efficacy of error, to strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. yet this very delusion upon their judgment, this error and
blindness upon their mind, is of the flesh. For you must know, that the flesh,
or to be carnal, does not in the Scripture signify the pollution upon the
sensitive and bodily part only, but also upon the intellectual and rational:
It Is a fleshly mind, as well as fleshly affections. Thus all such, who though
they do retain some principles of the Christian faith, do yet believe other
damnable Doctrines, these are Religions only in a carnal respect; and thereupon
when occasion serves, do manifest the rancour and malice that is in their
heart against the truths of Christ. Ecclesiastical History informs us, of the
bloody cruelty, which the Arrians exercised against the Orthodox, when they had
power in their hands. The Paganish persecutions were not much superior to the
Heretical. Yea, as it is said, amongst brethren discord is the more vehement
and flaming than any other: So it is amongst those that pretend to be of the
same Church of God. So that we ought to walk humbly, and to pray earnestly unto
God, to keep our hearts, to enlighten our minds, to give us tenderness and
lowliness of mind, that we be not led aside with the error of the wicked; for
error and heresy will break out into enmity, and make men think they do God
good service, while they destroy you.

Thirdly, Then we regard Religion after a carnal manner, When we make 3. Such
as make parties and factions in the Church.
parties in it, when we promote factions and divisions, and such as do so are
filled with much spite and malice against those that are contrary to them. This
is a sin the members of the Church are prone to, and nothing inclines more
to oppositions and contentions, then such a frame upon men's spirits. The
Apostle speaks very clearly to this, 1 Cor. 3. 3. Whereas there is among you
envying and strife; one is for Paul, another for Apollo, are ye not carnal? And
verse. 4. Again, are ye not carnal? So that this does plainly discover men not
to be led by divine and holy principles, who are apt to foment differences, who
are ready to set up one Minister against another; to admire the gifts and
abilities of one to the contempt of others. This was the great sin of these
Corinthians, that as they discovered much pride and ambition in the names which
they gave persons, (Capellus Histor. A. M. 3168.) sometimes delighting in
words, which signified power and principality, as Hegemon, etc. Or such as
denoted victory, as Nicolaus, etc. Or such as declared glory, as Polycletus,
etc. Thus such a carnal ambition did still remain in them, though made
Christians, setting up and admiring men's persons, looking after gifts which
brought applause more than grace and sanctification. Now those that are thus
carnally affected, they do continually throw balls of fire into the Church, and
make it a Babylon in stead of a Jerusalem. Jude speaks, verse. 16. Of having
men's persons in admiration, because of advantage. It is some carnal advantage
or other that makes them advance this and that man against others. What the
issue of such divisionsis, appears Jam. 3. 14, 15, 16. viz. To bring in all
confusion, and every evil work. As also he shows the nature and cause of
this, It is earthly, sensual and devilish, though men may judge it zeal, and
think they are active for Gods glory, yet it is sensual, and comes from the
Devil; and it is good to observe how largely the Apostle expatiateth about the
sinfulness of the tongue, That a world of evil is in it; and from that
exhortation, Be not many Masters; that is, do not take upon you to be Teachers,
and so to reprove and censure others in a carnal and sinful way. It is this
that makes not only the tongue, but the pen also to be full of gall and
wormwood; it makes the pen to be an unruly evil, that none can tame. Take we
heed then of minding Religion only to make parties, and different ways
therein; for this will at last break into an open enmity against the truly
godly.

Fourthly, Then we look after Religion in a carnal way, When we make use 4.
Such who make use of the Doctrine of the Gospel only to show their parts and
learning.
of the Doctrine thereof only to show our parts or learning; when we earnestly
contend about it, as it is our opinion, not as it is Gods truth. For this
reason the Apostle does so frequently exhort Timothy, To take heed of disputes,
and vain janglings, 1 Timothy 1. 6. where the end of the preaching of the Gospel,
is said to be Charity out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, with faith
unfeigned; but from these some did swerve, by turning aside unto vain
jangling. Here you see, that those who have not pure and unfeigned hearts in
the things of God, they fall into vain disputes and quarrels. So 2 Timothy 6. 4.
it is called, Doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof comes envy,
railings, and evil surmises: And he adds their character, Supposing that gain
is godliness. Here you see, that in all these disputes and controversies there
is no pure heart, no good conscience, all is to advantage themselves by it: yea
if this be not discovered in any sordid or worldly manner, yet if thy pride,
the loftiness of thy spirit be hereby advanced, and thou do not mind
Religion, to exercise thy self to godliness, but to have men admire thy gifts,
and to wonder at thy abilities: Thy heart is a corrupt heart, and thou will
manifest thy enmity against the ways of Christ, when opposed therein. Thy wit,
thy parts, thy applause, thou may make thy great Diana, and oppose all that
would destroy this Goddess.

Lastly, That we may conclude all, and leave nothing out, Whosoever does 5.
Such as do not own Religion upon divine principles and holy motives.
not own the Christian faith from divine principles, and holy pure motives,
this man is but a titular, and a false Christian, and so cannot, but when
occasion serves manifest his opposition to Christ's ways. And therefore it is,
that as amongst the people of Israel there was an irreconcilable division
between Israel and Judah, and a great opposition between David's house and
Saul's; though all pretending to the only true God: So it is in the Church of
God, though there may be an agreement in the same Doctrine, in the same
Profession of faith; come to the same Ordinances together, yet because one has
not a supernatural life of grace within, has no experimental feeling of the
power of sanctification upon his soul; hence it is that he has a spirit of
antipathy and contrariety to those who are indeed born of God, and walk in
ways of mortification. So that we may conclude, Whosoever is not regenerated,
regards Religion no further than carnal and earthly respects, let his
pretenses be never so high and plausible. And therefore there is no unconverted
man, though he has never so high an Office, never so great repute in the
Church of God, but he serves Christ for loaves; some insincere and
insufficient motive or other works upon him; he has his shrines that he
lives by. And therefore as it was with that rich man, who boasted, He had kept
all Gods Commandments from the youth, when he was tried in one instance, where
his heart was greatly affected, viz. To part with all, and follow Christ, it is
said, He went away exceeding sorrowful. Thus when any such empty, nominal
Christians are put upon such duties and ways, which are contrary to their
lusts, they will go away, not it may be exceedingly grieved, but greatly
enraged and disquieted: This will be like the jealousie-water, to discover the
adulteress. To pull out their right eyes, and to cut off their right hands,
will be like the pronouncing of Shibboleth, to discover what they are. And the
ground of this whole truth is from the exceeding great purity and exactness
that is in the word of God truly preached, it comes to new mould, and change
the whole man, All old things must pass away. This will not abide either a
corrupt mind, or a carnal heart; and therefore one being contrary to the other,
as light to darkness, and fire to water. No wonder if then the hypocrite be
unmasked, and the carnal heart discovered. The Gospel either conquers men, and
makes them friends, or else leaves them more provoked enemies; but the fault
is not in the Gospel preached, neither are faithful Ministers the troublers of
Israel, but thy whoredoms, thy idolatries, thy lusts are the cause of all this
combat.

Use of Instruction, what all godly Ministers, and private Christians, who are
zealous against sin must look for, not from Pagans and Heathens, but false
carnal Christians, that regard no Religion any further then their lusts or
advantages may be kept up. Will those that live by the sins of people, ever
be willing to have sin destroyed? Do not many as Demetrius say, If this way
of Religion go on, we shall not be able to live any longer? And therefore they
fly with open mouth against all holy order, and good discipline against sin.
But know thou that all thy profaneness and dissoluteness does not so much
provoke God, as thy opposition of the Gospel, and the Ministers thereof. Yea we
see Paul using a divine imprecation against such in this case, which neither
Christ or Stephen ever used against those that did put them to death, 2 Timothy 4.
14. Alexander the copper-smith did me much evil. And afterward he instanceth
wherein, He has greatly withstood our words, or preachings. It was not any
personal, or temporal evil that moved Paul, but the withstanding of his
preaching; whereupon he pours out this prayer, The Lord reward him accoeding
to his work. Oh dreadful and terrible imprecation, especially coming from one
acted by the Spirit of God in delivering of it!

Use 2. To exhort us seriously and impartially to examine our selves about our
motives and grounds, which make us to take up the title of Christianity. Is it
for fear, or because of custom, the Laws of the Land require it? Do thou
not find the divine power of holy truths upon thy soul? Then know thy Religion
is like thy life, a bubble, a vapor that will quickly go out: Especially we
are the more diligently to observe our hearts, when we have any profit or
preferment, when we have any external accomodations by our profession. Oh how
hard is it then to discern between true and counterfeit, whether it be the
truth of God, the love of God, or thy own interest that prevails with thee,
when thy enemies and adversaries shall charge thee with it! What a comfort will
it be, when thy conscience upon good ground can clear thee?

SERMON. LXI.
Of the different judgment that Faith and Flesh pass upon Afflictions.

2 COR. 1. 8. That we were pressed above measure,
WE have already considered this trouble which came upon Paul in Asia, in
respect of the occasion of it. Let us proceed to the Aggravation of it; For out
of the strong comes sweet. From this affliction conquered does arise much
encouragement and consolation to those that are followers of Paul.

And in the Description, we have the Aggravation of it from the Quantity:

1. We were pressed out of measure. 2. The Quality, Above measure. 3. From the
Event, So that we despaired of life. And in the next verse it is further
illustrated from a twofold end; of which in its time.
Let us take notice of the first particular; wherein we have this trouble
heightened, viz. from the Quantity or Extension of it, It was above measure,
(...). The word (...) and (...), is applied sometimes to the enduring of a
burden, Matthew. 20. 12. Gal. 6. 2. whether it be a temporal burden, or a
spiritual. Sometimes it is applied to the heaviness of the eyes by drowsiness,
Mark 14. 40. In this place it seems to be taken from Porters, who have a
burden imposed upon them more than they are able to stand under: or as
Chrysostom, from ships who are overmuch burdened, and so are in danger of
being lost: And as if there were not emphasis enough in the word pressed, he
adds another to aggravate it, (...). Pareus says, The Scripture never uses
an hyperbole, because that strictly taken is a lie. But this opinion cannot be
justified, neither is an hyperbole, if you do regard the intention of the
speaker a lie. For such an expression he means not so much the thing
signified by the words; as when the Evangelist says, The world would not
contain all the books that might be written about Christ's deeds; but thereby to
represent to the Reader some further degree, then ordinarily is in other
things. But the Apostle does not here speak of a verbal hyperbole, but a real
one, that which was above expression. The Apostle uses this expression, when
he speaks of the riches of Gods grace and power to believers, 2 Cor. 9. 14.
Ephesians. 2. 7. Ephesians. 1. 19. No ordinary expression will serve Paul, when he comes
to speak of the admirable, and wonderful riches of Gods grace, to those that
do believe in him. As he thus speaks of the grace of the Gospel, so also of
his own sinfulness, both original and actual, there is an hyperbole in both,
Romans 7. 13. Original sin improved and excited by the Commandment, is said to
be (...), Above measure sinful; and for his actual wickedness and impiety,
Gal. 1. 13. there he says, He did (...), persecute the Church, but when he
comes to speak of the glory in Heaven, there one hyperbole will not serve,
according to that of Luther, Coelum and infernus, non patiuntur hyperbolen; but
there he adds, (...).

By the expression then in the Text we see, That this trouble the Apostle was
exercised with, was no little inferior trouble, but that which was of the most
pressing nature that could be, that was out of measure heavy and burdensome.

But you will say, How does this agree with that which we have Paul speaking in
the 4th Chapter of this Epistle, where he calls all the afflictions that do
befall the godly, light, Our light affliction, verse. 17. Can it be light, and
yes out of measure heavy also?

It may be answered and reconciled thus, It is called light in respect of
everlasting How the afflictions of the godly may be called heavy, and yet light.
glory. So that although it be exceeding heavy and pressing in it self, yet if
compared with the weight of glory hereafter, so it is light. Or

Secondly, It may be answered, By distinguishing of the times, when Paul
calls his affliction heavy, it relates to the time, that he was exercised
with it. For Christianity does not require Stoicism, yea patience is the more
admirable, by how much the more apprehensive we are of the trouble upon us.
Thus the Apostle, Heb. 12. 11. No chastisement is joyous for the present, but
grievous. Or,

Thirdly, We may speak of afflictions when they are over, when we are delivered
from them, and find the great good they have done to us, then we may call them
light, and judge them nothing to the benefit we received by them. But

In the fourth place, I conceive that the most genuine answer is, That Paul
does here speak of his trouble according to the sense and apprehension of his
flesh; even as afterward he says, It was above his strength, that is, his
humane, natural strength, as will appear afterward. If therefore flesh and
blood be consulted with, then Paul says, It is an affliction above measure;
but then at verse. 17. of the 2 Cor. 4. as also in other places, he speaks
according to the workings of faith, and the operations of Gods Spirit within
him. So that a godly man speaks one thing according to the flesh, and another
thing according to the Spirit. That is bitter and heavy to the flesh, which may
be sweet Godly men judge otherwise of their afflictions from sense and flesh,
then from grace and reason.
and welcome to the Spirit. From whence observe,

That godly men judge otherwise of their afflictions by the principles of sense
and flesh in them, then they do by the principles of grace and reason in them.

Paul calls it, An affliction above measure, in the lower sphere of nature;
but again he calls it, A light one, in the higher sphere of grace. Even as an
Astronomer, beholding the Sun with his bodily eye, judges it less than the
Earth; but then again, beholding it with the instruments of Art, does conclude,
that it is many degrees bigger than the Earth. Thus the godly man, while he
thinks and speaks according to the law of the flesh within him, he cries
out of his burdens, he is discontented at them, he lookat them as destructive:
but then again, when the same man considers them by the principles of faith,
and Scripture-grounds, then he sees that those stones may be turned into
bread; and from these thorns he may gather grapes. Even as we see in Christ,
because he had two distinct Natures in a personal Union; therefore we say,
Christ died, Christ was in agonies, and that because of his humane Nature; yea
it is called, The blood of God. And again on the other side, Christ is said to
be God, to create the world, to raise himself from the dead, and that because
of his Divine Nature. As he was Son of God, so he was full of power and might
upon the earth; As he was the Son of man, so he was subject to weakness and
infirmity. Now here was no impossibility or repugnancy, that it should be thus
different with Christ under several respects. Thus also it is with every member
of Christ; As he is born of God, so he puts forth divine and gracious
operations; but as he does still retain some relics of his old birth: So
there are sinful and infirm actions coming from him. Therefore when a godly
man does any thing, we must consider from what fountain it is, either the sweet
fountain, or the bitter fountain that it sloweth from.

To discover this truth: Propositions clearing the truth. There are two selves
in every regenerate man.


First, We must know, That in every regenerate man, there are two selfs, (as
it were) the carnal self, and the spiritual self; From which issue all the
works we do, Galat. 5. 17. and also Romans 7. For although Amyraldus. Expos. in
cap. 7. ad Romans (yet professing both against Socinians and Arminians) does
industriously labor to understand it of a man only legally wrought upon, and
that it would be a dishonor to Paul, and injurious to the work of
Sanctification, to affirm, That Paul speaks those things in his own person
while regenerated: yet by that Text in the Galatians, Chap. 5. 17. it is plain,
That those who are godly like Rebeccah, have these two twins struggling in
their womb; and that as a man consisting of soul and body, we may say, he is
mortal and immortal, visible and invisible; in different respects mortal and
visible, in respect of his body; but immortal and invisible, in respect of his
soul. Thus also it is with a godly man in a theological consideration; he has
both corruption and grace, he has both flesh and spirit. Now although this be
so, yet a godly man is not to be called an unregenerate person, as well as a
regenerate; a sinner and a wicked person, as well as holy: Because
denominations are always from the more noble part; and this corruption, though
remaining, yet is to be subdued and conquered. Even as Canaan might be called
the possession and inheritance of the Israelites, although many Jebusites did
still continue therein, and could not be cast out. Let not then any godly man
look for such perfection in this life, as to have only one principle within
him, and that of grace. Do not look that it should be altogether as the Spirit
will have it in thee, not finding the least opposition, or renitency from the
flesh: No, this estate is to be enjoyed only in Heaven.

Secondly, As these two selfs, or principles are in a man that is regenerate,
2. These two selfs oppose one another.
so they do actually oppose and contradict one another. Hence comes that
Christian combat and conflict which the godly find within themselves. Not like
that of the Heathens, Aristotle's incontinent person, or the Poets Medea, a
conflict between reason, and their lusts only. But this opposition is universal
and diffusive in every part of the soul. The carnal part in the mind opposes
the spiritual. The carnal part of the will contradicts the spiritual. So that
they have heart against heart, affections against affections. We are not
therefore to conceive of these two principles, as dormant and latitant in the
soul, but they are as fire and water in the same subject, laboring to expel
each other; and according to the threefold estate or degree, that we may
conceive in persons regenerate, so is this fight and congress more or less
vehement.

The first degree is of such who are newly converted. These although in
Regeneration, they have the seed and root of all grace, yet because of their
former custom in evil ways cannot so immediately conquer and subdue their
lusts; and therefore like children that begin to walk, because of their
feebleness they get many falls.

A second degree is of those, who are in some measure proficients, and have
obtained much victory over sin. And although in such there be many combats,
yet grace has the possession of the whole man, notwithstanding the many
assaults made against it. And then

Lastly, There are such, whom the Scripture calls perfect, not absolutely; but
comparatively to others, because they are as Giants, when others are but
Dwarfs; these are said, To have their senses exercised to discern between good
and evil. Now such, although they do overcome the world, and the Devil by
faith, yet they are not free from this combat within. It is true, some think,
that though it be granted that Paul, Romans 7. speaks in the person of a
regenerate man, yet it is of one in the lowest form, that is but newly come
into the state of Christianity. And Amyraldus does therefore think Paul cannot
mean those things of himself, because he had attained to an higher degree of
grace: Insomuch that he inviteth others to follow him, and to take him for an
example. Hence he is said to know nothing by himself: Whereby the same Author
concludes, That there would be no blame or fault to be found with that man,
who should say, Paul had as much grace here in this life, as some shall have in
the world to come. But although we grant Paul to be among other Christians,
like Saul among other men, higher by the shoulders, yet that he did find the
rebellion and corruption of the flesh debasing his best duties, appears by
his accounting all things dross, and desiring to be found in the
righteousness of Christ, Phil. 3. 8. So that while these endeavor to exalt
the sanctifying grace of God in Paul, they eclipse his justifying; and while
they advance his inherent righteousness, they obscure his imputed
righteousness. Whether Paul then, or any other eminent servant of God, They
all find a law of sin within them, rebelling against the law of the mind; by
which they look upon themselves as miserable captives, and do groan for a
perfect and full redemption by Christ.

Thirdly, These two principles therefore not only residing in them, but acting
3. Hence it is good to observe from which of those principles our actions
proceed.
contrarily, it is very necessary in a Christian, exactly to observe, to what
mother (as it were) the child does belong. To which principle thou art to
attribute thy actions. For the not duly dividing and separating here, does many
times cause great confusion in the godly soul. We see it many times in David's
Psalms, that there are such different expressions, sometimes of faith and joy,
and then again of diffidence and dejection, that we would not think the Psalm
was made by the same man; we would think there were contradictions, and all,
because sometimes it is the voice of Esau, and sometimes the voice of Jacob,
(as I may so say;) Sometimes grace speaks, and sometimes the filth speaks.
In the Disciples also our Savior takes notice of this, and thereby excuses
them, saying, The Spirit is willing, Matthew. 26. 41. Now although it is very
necessary in all our practicals to go to the bottom, to know what is of the
flesh, and what is of the Spirit; yet in the matter of afflictions, and our
bearing of them, there we are much more to attend to it. For afflictions being
grievous to flesh and blood, draws out the corruptions thereof very much. So
that the voice of the flesh is many times far louder than the voice of the
Spirit, which makes the godly ready to conclude, that they are nothing but
flesh, that they have not the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, because they
feel so much distrust, so much diffidence and disquietness of heart within them.

More useful particulars are to be insisted upon; only for the present, let
those who truly fear God, make this Use of the Doctrine, viz. Not to conclude
concerning their estate, as if it were wholly carnal, because they feel the
struglings and motions of sinful flesh within them; let them not despair, if
they feel that they cannot always keep up spiritual apprehensions about their
afflictions; if they cannot say, I bless God for these chastisements, I see the
great advantage comes to me by them. Though they appear like anger, yet they
are indeed the effects of love. If this be not always the blessed and serene
disposition of thy soul, but thy flesh like Job's wife provokes thee to charge
God foolishly, to be impatient and diffident; remember that you have a twofold
self, a carnal self, and a spiritual self; one says one thing, and another
says another thing. It is as impossible to have a man's own heart free from
divisions, as it is for the Church of God. That which faith says is light,
flesh says is heavy. That which faith rejoices at, flesh repineth at. Thus it
has been, and thus it will be with the generation of those that seek God.

SERMON. LXII.
How the voice of the Spirit, and the voice of the Flesh differ in Afflictions:
And why it is necessary a man should know them asunder.

2 COR. 1. 8. That we were pressed above measure,
FRom the Explication of this passage, we have observed, That it is one thing
what a godly man speaks according to the principle of flesh and blood within
him, and another thing what he says according to faith, and the principle of
grace. And because this truth is of perpetual practical use, let us a little
more dilate upon it. And

First, Let us instance in some discoveries, whereby we may know when flesh
speaks, and when the Spirit does. For these, though contrary one to another,
yet are not discerned without spiritual illuminations, and senses exercised How
we may know when faith, and when flesh speaks in our afflictions. 1. Flesh
argues from afflictions, that God has forsaken us.
to know things that differ. And

First, The voice of flesh and blood in such kind of troubles, is to make a
final conclusion and sentence upon our selves, That God has forsaken us, that
we are cast out from his love. Insomuch that did not the principle of grace in
some measure withstand, and at some times overcome these temptations, the soul
would be swallowed up in this whirlpool: but let the godly know, that this is
not the voice of Jacob, but of Esau. The regenerate principle will not, dare
not give in such false testimony, Isai. 49. 14, 15. Zion has said, The Lord
has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. But in the next verse we see
God expressly denying it, and that not only, he had not forsaken her, but that
he could not forsake her, for his affections were more to her, then any mothers
to her sucking child. The Church then was too hasty and precipitate, she should
have considered Gods Word, before she passed such a peremptory sentence
concerning her self. Therefore when God says one thing, and thy heart another;
when the Scripture speaks one thing, and thy flesh another thing, which is
more to be regarded? See this distemper likewise in Jonah, Chap. 2. 6. Then I
said, I am cast out of thy sight. Here the corrupt part in Jonah, made quick
his desperate work, He was cast out of Gods sight, but Nubecula fuit, cito
transivit; it was a little storm, it was presently over; for immediately he
does (as it were) contradict himself, and says, I will look again toward thy
holy Temple. So that it was with corruption and grace at this time, as it was
with Rebeccah in her childbearing; the first came out red and hairy, but the
second came out smooth, and holding Esau by the heel. Thus the first motion of
Jonah's heart comes forth red and hairy, bloody and rough; but then faith like
Jacob follows this Esau immediately, and supplants it. When therefore the
godly do at any time find such motions, and workings of heart, as if their
troubles were a demonstration of Gods desertion of them, that if he loved them,
he would never let it be so with them, rebuke these immediately, and be as much
affected as Hezekiah was, when he heard Rabshakeh blaspheme God. For indeed
such thoughts do highly dishonor God, and represent him otherwise than he is.
For the Apostle directed by the Spirit of God, which searches the deep things
of God, speaks far otherwise, making these troubles to be an effect of his
love, and that if he did not deal thus with us, we might then conclude, we did
not belong to him. Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8. If ye be without chastening, ye are
bastards, and no children, for whom he loves he chasteneth. It behooves thee
to make this difference in thy self, else thy destruction will come upon thee
suddenly.

Secondly, The voice of flesh and blood also speaks after this manner in 2.
Flesh says, afflictions will undo us.
heavy troubles, That they will unto thee, that there can never come any good
out of this to thy self; that it would have been far better for soul and
body, if the Lords hand had not been in this manner upon thee. Here also that
false and corrupt principle is a liar within thee. For David, who at sometimes
is apt enough to be cast down, and exceedingly troubled, yet upon his
recoveries can say, Out of very faithfulness thou have afflicted me; and
before I was afflicted I went astray, Psalm. 119. 75, 67. Thou should
therefore do as the Apostle in another case, making objections against Gods
dispensations, Romans 3. 5. says, Is God unrighteous? And then corrects his
speech, I speak as a man. Thus art thou also bound in all the unsavory
workings and discontents of thy soul, to rebuke thy self, saying, I think now
as a man, I speak as a corrupt sinful man. Yea David, getting some power
against these sinful motions within him, abhors himself in an higher
degree, Psalm 73. 22. So foolish was I and ignorant, even like a (...) before
thee. Hearken not then to those tumultuous thoughts and reasonings within thee,
which would persuade thee, that there can never any good come to thee out of
the present evil upon thee, that God cannot create light out of this darkness.
For as Adam was undone by harkening to Eve, and yielding to her temptation:
Thus flesh is like an Eve within thee, that will betray and destroy all at last.

Thirdly, Flesh and blood under these heavy troubles, does also speak sinfully
3. Flesh says, our afflictions will never end
about the Perpetuity of them; as if after such a black night, there would
never arise a fair day. This froward and peevish corruption within thee, says,
It will never be otherwise. Thus it spoke in David, when he said, I shall one
day perish by the house of Saul. Yea in several Psalms, the Church complains,
As if God had cast off for ever, and that he would remember her no more. Thus
the corrupt principle lies continually in thy bosom, not like a Dalilah,
enticing and deceiving, but like a thorn in thy side daily vexing and
tormenting of thee. David being experimentally exercised, both in the sense of
corruption, and also in the sense of grace, we find him sometimes speaking this
voice within him, Psalm. 31. 22. I said in my haste, I am cut off from thine
eyes. Psalm. 94. 18. When I said, my foot slippeth, thy mercy, O Lord, held me
up. Psalm. 116. 11. I said in my haste all men are liars. By these instances we
see, what an hasty principle a man has within him under troubles. For, who can
expect to have a better heart than David, that was after Gods own heart? and
yet we hear him often complaining, that in his haste he was ready to speak such
and such things, especially that there would never come any help to him, and
that the Prophets of God were but liars, deceiving him with vain hopes. But the
voice of Gods Spirit speaks far otherwise, in a more calm and sweet manner.
As it was in the vision to Elijah, God was not in the fire, nor in the tempest,
but in the still voice: So commonly grace is not seen in those hasty,
boisterous, impetuous thoughts, but in a more serene and calm way. Now (I say)
if we sit still, and hear what God speaks to his people in such great
pressures, it is the clean contrary, Isa. 54. 7. As it were for a little moment
have I forsaken, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee. We
see the holy practice of Harbakkuk likewise notably to this purpose, Habak. 2.
1, 3. Because God did delay, he would stand upon the Tower, and watch to see
what God would say to him. Thus do thou in thy expectations of deliverance.

Fourthly, The principle of flesh and blood does notoriously press to do any
4. Flesh would put us upon any means to get out of trouble.
sinful action, neglect any duty, so that we may come out of such troubles.
And this affection or sense within a man has a most immediate opposition to
the work of grace within him. It is with the flesh in this case, as it was with
Peter to our Savior, Master (says he) save thy self; But with what
indignation did Christ rebuke him, saying, Get thee behind me Satan? Mat. 16.
23. for thou savourest not the things of God, but of man. Such a Peter, such a
Satan is the flesh to thee, that says, Save thy self, do any thing to escape
these troubles: It is not any matter for righteousness or holiness, but look to
thy safety. When these whisperings are within thy heart, then rise up in an
holy zeal against them: Say, Get thee behind me Satan; This is not to savor
the things of God. Had David been filled with such holy zeal, as he was
sometimes, against his wife Michol, despising him for his adoration of God,
then he had not used so many unlawful shifts as he did to escape danger; his
counterfeiting himself mad, his pretending to join with Achish, and to fight
against Israel. These were sad snares that he fell into, because he did not ask
counsel of the Lord, but consulted only with flesh and blood. Do thou then in
thy troubles, as Paul in his extraordinary Call, Obeying immediately the
heavenly vision, and not consulting with flesh and blood. In thy troubles wait
on God, take his way, put not forth thy hand to any sin: Say, it is better to
have misery upon thee, then the guilt of sin. It was Abraham's defect of
faith, though he was the Father of the faithful, and though his faith
staggered not in the trial about offering up of his son, yet in a far more
inferior, and less temptation, there he began to reel out of the way, and from
carnal fear did use sinful equivocation to Abimeleoh, saying, Sarah was his
sister, when she was his wife. This unlawful shift he used to prevent those
things he feared. But as Jonah could observe by his own experience, Jon. 3. 8.
So it will always prove true, Those that observe lying vanities, forsake their
own mercies; when we take not Gods way, we forsake that mercy we might have
had, and so make ous selves miserable for fear of misery. Raynardus the
Jesuit, (Lib. de Mart. part. 1. cap. 21.) reckoning up several kinds of
Martyrs, that may be called so in a large, and an improper sense, does out of
Austin, and more profusely out of Chrysostom show, That those Christians who
lay in great pains, and extreme diseases, and yet would not use such
superstitious and magical remedies that happily might have healed them, but
would die rather than take any one of these medicines, highly commending their
faith and patience, were accounted Martyrs; he is Martyr in lecto, who dies of
his pain, and his disease rather than he will use magical helps to be cured. It
seems in the days of those Fathers, there was that wicked practice, which is
now also too much used by many ungodly wretches, by going to Wisemen and
Wizards, in their diseases, and to make use of their superstitious remedies to
cure them. But as the zeal of these Ancients did burn like fire against such
unjustifiable ways, so do they highly commend the patience and mortification
of such, who would rather die than be healed in this manner, making it in some
sense an holy Martyrdom. I bring this, not only to put them to confusion who
are guilty of such sins, but to confirm the truth I intended, That whatsoever
flesh and blood does suggest, yet faith and grace will make a man go through
any troubles, rather than do that which is unlawful, to come out of trouble.

Lastly, The flesh within a man does only attend to what is troublesome and
grievous, yea aggravateth and heightens every thing, as if there were no
promise, 5. Flesh only attends to what is troublesome and grievous in
afflictions.
no Christ, no grace, or promise from God to rely upon. So that this corrupt
principle makes them like those, who by continual and steadfast looking upon
the water, have their apprehensions disturbed, so that they know not where they
are. It Is flesh and blood in Paul, that makes him put this hyperbole upon the
trouble he was in. For although no doubt, it was in it self very great, and
more than ordinary, yet Paul at another time says, I know how to abound, and
how to want; I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.
12, 13. Here you see he accounts nothing too great for him, nothing above his
strength. Again at another time in this Epistle, Chap. 12. 10. he is not afraid
to say, When he is weak, then he is strong. So that corrupt flesh is apt to
make a man look only at that which is grievous and troublesome; it makes a man
attend only to the dark and displeasing part in the affliction; whereas faith
would show us the clear and comfortable part also. The flesh does with us, as
the Devil with possessed persons, he kept the Demoniack always in the Tombs
and Monuments about sad objects. Thus that corrupt part in a man, detaineth us
about those things which are sad and desolate: And as a man looking upon any
thing through water, it seems as big again, as it would out of water: So
every thing to the sadded and afflicted spirit appears double or treble to
what it is, whereas faith would make us lay all things together; lay the good
and the bad together; regard the flowers as well as the thistles. And thus much
may suffice about the tongue of the flesh speaking in a godly man, while he is
under burdens, which like that tongue the Apostle James speaks of, Is an
unruly evil, Chap. 3. 6, 7. set on fire of hell, full of deadly poison.

In the next place, Let us consider, why it is so useful for a godly man,
exactly Why a man should so much study to discern betwixt the flesh and spirit
within him. 1. Because otherwise he will be apt to pass a false sentence upon
himself.
to study and know himself, that he may be able to discern between flesh and
spirit within him. And

First, If he do not make this distinction, He will quickly pass a false
sentence of condemnation upon himself, Because he finds the flesh speaks
within him after that disquieting manner, he will conclude that he is nothing
but flesh. It is from want of spiritual discerning herein, that so many tender
hearts are discouraged and hopeless under their troubles. For they say, If the
Spirit of Christ did work and breath in them, how could there be such carnal
froward and impetuous risings of heart? Now all this is, because they give both
ears (like an unwise Judge) to one party, and do not keep one for the other
also, to see what that can say; hear what the groans and desires of grace
speak, as well as the sinful motions of the flesh within thee. Paul, Romans 7.
when he had largely discovered this combat of flesh, and the Law of the mind
within him, yet does never give the flesh the total predominancy over him; he
makes it but a part, and the inferior part, I know that in me, verse. 18.
dwells no good; but lest this should be thought his whole self, he tells us
what he means by that me, even my flesh, and concludes the Chapter, So then
with the mend I my self serve the Law of God, but with the flesh the Law of
sin. Let the godly soul then in all its exercises, acknowledge this
distinction: Do not say, thy whole self is carnal, because part is: Say not all
the field is weeds, because some are in it.

Secondly, Hereby we shall be able to prevent the end and drift of Satan, 2.
Hereby he may prevent the Devils end in troubling us.
who is so busy in these troubled waters. For what would he work out of all
these confusions in thy soul, but to press thee to despair, to judge thy
condition hopeless? Why should I wait upon the Lord any longer? To say as Cain,
My sins are greater than I can bear; and he indeed does hotly pursue it,
saying, Are not such thoughts in thee? Do not such motions work in thee? Can
thou deny thy heart to be as it is? Now the godly soul answers, I cannot deny
but such foul stirrings of heart are within me: But I deny the consequence,
that therefore I am all over carnal: I distinguish between that which is
spiritual absolutely and completely, and that which is gradual, and in some
measure only. It is true, I find the workings of sin, but I also find the
workings of grace. Therefore avoid Satan, though thou may bruise my heel,
yet in time, I shall break thy head.

SERMON. LXIII.
What is to be understood by Paul's being pressed above measure; As likewise,
how neither natural, nor moral strength can carry us through troubles in a
gracious manner.

2 COR. 1. 8. Above strength.
THe next particular to be considered in this Description of Paul's trouble, is
the Aggravation of it from the Quality, It was above strength, (...).
Chrysostom observes this differs from the other. For a burden may be
exceeding heavy, yet to some mighty man, it may not be above his strength. When
Samson, Judge. 16. 3. carried away the gates of the City Gaza, with the posts
and bar upon his shoulders: here was a burden out of measure heavy, no
ordinary man could do so; but yet to Samson it was not above his strength. Thus
it was with Paul, who may be called a spiritual Samson, for that heavenly might
and power, which God had endowed him with; he is assaulted with a trouble, that
was not only hyperbolically weighty, but also above his strength. Paul had no
more power to stand under it. The Greek word (...), does often signify that
inward power and ability, which a man has to do any thing; and some
distinguish it from (...), Right or Authority: The one they call Potentia, the
other Potestas: The one is Natural, the other is Moral. Many a man has a power
to do a thing, when yet he has no right or authority to do it. But in the
Scripture we may observe these words promiscuously used for one another; yea
sometimes they are put together, as signifying the same thing, Luke 4. 36. 1
Cor. 15. 24. In the Scripture we find this word often used for that power to
work miracles; yea and miracles themselves are called (...), Act. 2. 22. Romans
15. 19. Sometimes the word is applied to Angels, because of their great
strength and power, 1 Pet. 3. 22. In Heb. 6. 5. we have an expression of the
powers of the world to come, which some are said, to have tasted of; but what
that is, is greatly controverted.

As to our purpose, we may take notice from the Scripture of a twofold power:

1. The power of God, which is put forth in us by his grace, which we receive
and partake of; and so in that sense may be called our power, viz. objectively;
yea and in some sense subjectively, though not efficiently, Ephesians. 3. 20.
According to his power which works in us. Again says Paul, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13.

2. There is our own humane and natural strength, what we can do by our selves
only. Now the Question is, Whether Paul mean that this affliction was above
even his divine strength, or that measure of grace and power which God had
given him. So that if the Lord had not come in with extraordinary supply, and
more than wonted grace, this trouble had overcome him? Or whether he mean only
of his natural strength and power? So that his meaning should be; as a man he
could not bear it, though as a Christian he did. It is very probable, that both
these are included. So that neither the natural strength Paul had, nor that
divine strength which usually he enjoyed, could have carried him through that
difficulty.

Now to this expression which Paul uses in the Text, we have another place in
Paul, which seems directly, and in express words to contradict this; it is 1
Cor. 10. 13. There has no temptation taken you, but what is common to man; but
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are
able, etc. There Paul says, God will not let his people be tempted above what
they are able. And here Paul speaks the contrary, He is troubled above what
he is able: How can this be reconciled? Some untie this knot from the
difference between temptation and affliction; There is no temptation (say they)
befalls the godly above what they are able; but there may some trouble and
affliction. For it is a temptation, when it does induce us into sin, and
makes us to offend God. Therefore we pray, God would not lead us into
temptation; but it may be an affliction, even when it is so far from being a
temptation, that we do thereby more exercise and put forth our graces. Thus
(say they) it was with Paul, It was an affliction above his strength, but not a
temptation above his strength. For at that time Paul kept up his graces, his
faith and patience were made more illustrious, as file gets off rust. I
cannot say this is solid enough.

For the Text therefore, though Expositors go several ways, yet I shall pitch
on this as most probable.

The former part of the verse, is a reason of that good exhortation, and
necessary to every one, which he had given before, Let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall: Why? Because there has no temptation as yet
taken hold of you, but such as all men are capable of. An humane temptation,
that is, little, short and attemperated to man's strength, or what is usual
amongst men; As the rod of a man: And Isa. 8. 1. The pen of a man. Romans 6. 19.
I speak after the manner of men, ye have not yet been afflicted for
Christianity. Nero has not yet commanded the Christians to be vexed and
tormented for the faith you profess: Like that expression, Heb. 12. 4. Ye have
not yet resisted to blood. So that they had just cause to walk humbly, and to
be afraid of falling, because God had not put them yet upon any hard trials for
Christ's sake. What they hitherto suffered was such as other men, though not
Christians, did endure as well as they. But lest this should deject too much,
as if the time were coming, when their persecutions should make them Apostates,
he gives them this wine to comfort their hearts with. This gracious promise
which every Christian should call his promise, a continual Antidote, a daily
Cordial, God is faithful, etc. where every thing ingredient to it, is of
admirable comfort, God is faithful. It belongs to the faithfulness of God to
preserve you, he has taken you for his, and therefore his dishonor would be
more than thy loss, if thou should perish. No husbandman will lay a greater
burden upon his beast, than he can bear: Shall man be pitiful to beasts, and
not God a gracious Father to his children? The Artificer or Refiner likewise,
he will not suffer his gold to lie longer in the fire, than the dross will be
purged away; and shall not God so faithful regard his children under their
burdens? Again, He will not suffer you to be tempted. No Devil, no wicked man
in the world can go further than God suffers: Further, Not above that ye are
able] He knows your strength, he knows what will hurt you; he knows the
time when he must take off the affliction: Therefore the issue will be
comfortable, He will give to escape, (...). Some make it a Metaphor from the
soldier, who escapes out of the war with victory and conquest. Others from
one, who is shut in, in some place, so that he is compassed about, but at last
finds a way to get out: Yea the issue is not only to escape, but God will so
plentifully come in upon us as that we shall (...), more than suffer, more than
bear. As a strong man that is not only able to carry his burden to such a place
he is commanded, but further also, if need require. Thus the godly have no more
laid upon them than they can bear, by this promise; yea they can more than bear
it, how then was Paul's above his strength? The Answer is, That this promise is
to be understood of the final issue of any affliction, though for the present
they may seem even to sink under it: They cry out, they cannot hold, they
cannot bear any longer, yet God does secretly support, and at last will give
them strength, not only to bear, but more than bear, even to glory and rejoice
in it. And thus it was with Paul; this trouble, though so exceedingly presting,
though for the present above his strength; yet see how much strength he feels
at the latter end. This trouble did not overcome him, but he overcame by the
trouble by the grace of God. For by this he was brought not to trust in
himself, but in God, who did deliver him; and thereupon he concludes, he does
and will deliver him. So that God never suffers any trouble, though it be for
the present never so heavy and burdensome, totally and finally to overcome a
man, but at last he proves even more than a conqueror. These things thus
explained, Observe,

That it is not the natural strength of any man, no not of Paul, that is able It
is not the natural strength of any man that can carry him through all
afflictions.
to carry a man through such afflictions, that God may exercise him with.

Paul says here, It was above his strength; not to complain, not to accuse
God, as if he were too severe; but thereby to debase himself, and to give all
glory to God. Thus Isai. 40. 28, 29. when the Church began even to despair
under her long calamities, saying, Her way was hid from God, he took no notice
of her condition. With what encouragement does God speak, and that from this
property in him? The Creator of the earth faints not, neither is weary. God
sinketh not under the government of the world, nor the preservation of the
Church. For if the Sun that has run its course so many years, is not
weary, but can perform it as swiftly as ever: Do we think God will be weary?
But this is not all the comfort. As he has this power, so he communicates it
to his weak people. To them that have no might, he increases strength. So that
the more sensible we are of our own impotency, the more ready is God to put
forth his power.

To explain this, Let us consider,

First, That the sense of the Doctrine is, That no man can bear any burden 1.
No man can bear all afflictions aright in his own strength.
of affliction in a gracious manner without divine assistance from Christ. Men
may be naturally patient under great troubles; yea they may have that
fortitude, as to be able to despise death it self; but all this is not done in
a godly way. There is not the least temptation or affliction that comes upon
thee, but if God should leave thee to thy self, thou would be broken under
it; nothing but sin and corruption would manifest it self therein. Peter's
case is abundantly known, a temptation did befall him, that was more than he
could bear for the present, though he had a good issue out of it. Now this was
a very little one in it self; Peter had not yet resisted to blood; It was but a
Damsel, and some others that told him he was of Christ's company. Here was no
arraigning of him, no impleading of him: Here is no sentence of death
pronounced against him, and yet for all that he falls under it, and in a most
dreadful manner denies Christ. What will any one say here, Peter was pressed
above measure? No: but from hence we may gather, That there is not the least,
or most inconsiderable trouble that is, but falling upon thee in thy own
strength, as Sampson with his hair cut off, but it is able to overwhelme thee.
Therefore in all thy exercises, consider thy infirmity: Know that to bear the
least burden as a Christian, thou can not do it, unless it be given thee
from above. For if (John 15.) We are not able to do any good, separated from
Christ; if we cannot perform any holy action without the help of grace, then
much less are we able to bear any affliction graciously. Conclude then on
this, That so great is thy sinful infirmity and impotency, that thou can no
more in a godly manner bear thy burden, then the lame Cripple could rise up,
and take his bed, and walk, till Christ bid him, and gave him power to do it.

Hence in the second place, All those opinions, which hold, That a man is 2.
All opinion's that hold the contrary, are injurious to the glory of God.
able to resist the tentations of sin, whether by prosperity or adversity, so
that they be not very extreme and grievous, without grace and strength from
Christ, are very injurious to the glory of God, though never so much colored
with specious distinctions. A man cannot do the least good, or bear the least
evil without Gods power, in an holy manner: And (besides many Texts in
Scripture) the reason is plain, Because the power of man, and supernatural
objects have no proportion or habitude between them. Ordo Naturae, and Ordo
Gratiae, differ as much as Heaven and Earth. For this reason the people of God
are so earnestly to pray to God, that they be not lead into temptation. For let
what temptation soever arise, if God leaves thee to thy self, it will be to
thy ruin.

Therefore in the third place, Experience does confirm it, That many men 3.
There is a great difference betwixt a natural and spiritual bearing of troubles
through the natural strength they have, are able to bear up themselves under
extreme troubles. Therefore we must acknowledge a vast difference between a
Natural bearing, and a Spiritual bearing of troubles: And it is the duty for
every one to examine, whether Nature or Grace does support. Romans 4. 18. it is
there said of Abraham, That against hope, he believed in hope; against natural
hope, he believed in divine and supernatural hope. Thus the godly they do above
strength with strength endure afflictions, above natural strength, with divine.

But because many men naturally have patient dispositions; others stout and
strong stomachs, it is good to know, whether Nature or Grace support thee. When
Solomon says, Prove. 18. 14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities,
but a wounded spirit who can bear! He does by that give us a distinction of two
sorts of troubles, The former External, such as fall upon our Body, Estate, or
good Name. And now under these, many a man has so much natural courage and
boldness, that he will not shrink under them. But then

The second sort is Internal, because of the guilt of sins, when the wrath of
God falls upon the conscience being now awakened and made tender; this he
calls a wounded spirit; and concerning this he says, None can bear it. So
that although for outward troubles, many men do with their natural power and
strength go through them, yet a troubled conscience no humane power is able to
bear, if God withdraw his helping hand. Cain cried out, It was greater than he
could bear. Judas was so overwhelmed with it, that he destroyed his own self.
Oh then take heed of bringing a burden upon thy conscience, that is heavier
than any weight! Poverty may be borne, misery and streights may be borne, but a
wounded conscience, who can bear?

In the fourth place, There is not only a great difference between the natural
4. There is a difference likewise betwixt moral and spiritual bearing of
afflictions.
spirit of a man to bear infirmities and a gracious, but also that moral virtue
called Fortitude by Philosophers, which is so commended by them. They make
Fortitude as a virtue, to lie in attempting difficult things, or bearing great
evils for virtues sake. The Romans boast of many such virtuous persons amongst
them, and for patient enduring of bitter torments, what expressions do the
Stoics delight in? They make all Philosophy to be in these two words (...) and
(...), Sustine and abstine. Now although by their rules they would teach a man
to bear afflictions, yet this is but a splendid sin. It Is from Christ only
we can be strengthened to such things. And Paul, Phil. 4. 12. says, (...), I am
instructed as in a secret mystery, to know how to abound, and how to suffer
need. Wonder not then if you read of what fortitude and patience, even to
admiration Heathens have excelled in, who yet were not strengthened by Christ:
for vainglory and corrupt aims may make men contemn their lives; yea, and the
Devil many times fills such with boldness and presumption; as we see in
blasphemous Heretics, who have showed great confidence in their death. For as
the Devil, when he possessed the bodies of some persons, filled them with more
strength than naturally they had, so that they have been able to break iron
chains in pieces; thus when he fills the hearts of men by Gods just judgment
with impudency and mad undaunted boldness, they will willingly adventure any
danger whatsoever. The Devil hurrieth such into danger, yea death it self, as
he did the swine into the sea.

Use of Instruction, to all that fear God, to humble themselves under every
trouble God brings upon them; to go out of themselves, to acknowledge Gods
strength only. Say, O Lord, if I had no more power than my own, there is no
cross I could bear; I am such a bruised reed, that I could not stand under any
tribulation: Therefore I cast my burden upon thee; thou can make me bear it,
though of my self I cannot urge God: When thou feel thy infirmities with
that gracious promise, Isai. 40. 30, 31. All shall lose their strength, rather
than the people of God. What? has God given thee strength to love him, to
believe in him, and have thou no strength to suffer afflictions? Be strong in
the power of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 10.

SERMON. LXIV.
The natural fear of Death is not taken away by Grace. What are the Uses of it.

2 COR. 1. 8. Insomuch that we despaired even of life.
THis last clause in the Text is a further Aggravation of the greatness of this
trouble, which came upon him in Asia, and it is from the Event or Consequent;
It was so great, that he could not escape death. The Greek word (...), has an
emphasis in the Preposition, and so is more than (...), for that does properly
signify, When a man is indeed doubting and full of debates within himself, not
well concluding what to do. Joh. 13. 22. Gal. 4. 20. but when this Preposition
(...) is added it denotes such a perplexing that a man cannot any way evade
out of it. Therefore the Apostle, you would think, speaks the contrary to
this passage (as we showed he did seemingly to the former.) For 2 Cor. 4. 8.
there the Apostle does expressly say, (...). This word is used only there and in
my Text. It may seem then a contradiction for the Apostle here to say, He was
without all help or means, and there to say, The godly never are. But the
answer is easy. For when in the Text Paul says, He was without all help or
means, he means natural and visible; There was no outward way to help him.
Not but that God might deliver him in a way he did not see or apprehend; and so
indeed God did deliver him, as appears afterward. Therefore when in that
fourth Chapter he says, The godly are never so destitute as to be without
help, he means so as to have neither divine or humane help. Even as in the
same place Paul says of the godly (...), We are not distressed; yet 2 Cor. 6.
4. he says, He was in necessities, in distress, (...), so 2 Cor. 12. 10.

The word thus explained, the sum of his meaning is, That this trouble was so
great, that it brought him into such a straight, that in respect of any humane
help, there was a necessity of his death, and this fear of death did much
afflict and assault the spirit of Paul. Some render the word taederet, so that
Paul was even weary of his life, as if he desired to die, his trouble was so
great. Some with our Translators, We despaired of life. But Beza does willingly
abstain from that word; therefore that which does most express the significancy
of the word, is such a perplexity and doubting in his mind about his life, that
he could not see any ways to escape; he was like Jonah in the Whales belly,
out of which there was no visible way to be delivered. So that the word
implies these two things:

1. That Paul was very anxious about his life, and was afraid of death. 2. That
flesh and blood did conclude there was no help for him, because outwardly there
did not appear any. From whence we may observe this Doctrine,
That Grace, though it be never so lively and active, yet does not remove the
natural fear of death. No grace removes the natural fear of death.


Grace does not destroy nature. This holy Apostle, who is so confident of the
love of God, and can triumph in all distresses, is yet afraid of death, is yet
very solicitous about the preserving of his life. There is a natural fear of
death, because there is implanted in a man a desire of self-preservation, so
that to be without it would be a sin. And then there is a sinful fear of
death, which arises from sin, or tends to sin. Now the grace of God does
at least in some measure conquer the latter, but it cannot overcome the former.
Hence Jacob for fear of death, we see him in a great straight upon his meeting
with his brother Esau, greatly praying to God to turn the heart of his brother,
and also studying to mollify his spirit, with presents he sent to him. David
likewise was very sollicitous in the preservation of his life, when Saul did so
bitterly pursue him. Yea Hezekiah, though he had the testimony of a good
conscience, and could appeal even to God, That he had served him with an
upright heart, and in truth, yet when the Prophet Isaiah declared to him, that
he must die, it is said, He wept sore, Isa. 28. 2, 3. and at the ninth verse,
we have a description of the bitterness of his soul under those fears. Yea the
Lord Christ himself, In whom was found no sin, yet we find him greatly
affected with the fear of death. And although he had a peculiar reason, because
he tasted of death for our sake, and so did therein bare our sins,
conflicting with the wrath of God due to us, yet there was included in this a
natural fear of death. They that make Christ's fear of death only natural, and
say, therefore he was more sadly affected with it, than any of the Prophets or
Martyrs, because of the exquisite and tender constitution of his body, do
greatly derogate from that work of mediation for us, and satisfaction, which
was done by his blood to the justice of God.

From these examples you see, that though grace can subdue sin, conquer
lusts, overcome the Devil, yet it cannot totally take away the anxiety and fear
of death, which is altogether natural, though the sinfulness of it may be
mortified. But to this it may be objected, How could Paul be so sollicitous
about death, when Phil. 1. 23. he says, He had a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ? Yea he did not know what to choose, whether life or death, He was
in a straight betwixt two, a desire to be with Christ, and a desire to live,
that he might be serviceable to the Church? That this may be answered, it is
good to take more exact notice of that place; for it is an admirable
demonstration of the gracious frame of Paul's heart: lest the Philippians
should think that he desired their prayers for himself now in bonds for the
Gospel, as being too inordinately affected to the desire of life, he shows
what a blessed frame of heart he had obtained unto; even that if it were put to
his choice, whether he should live or die. he should be straightned what to do;
The desire to be with Christ on one side, did so affect him, and the desire of
the Churches good by his labors on the other side did so much work upon him:
where we may observe, that his desire to depart was not because he had troubles
and calamities here, it was not because of the miseries and afflictions he met
with, but want of love to Christ, That I may be with Christ, says he; he does
not say, that I may have glory, that I may reign in Heaven, but be with Christ.
Christ's presence makes Heaven to be Heaven. Though Paul in this life was in
Christ, yet he was not with Christ. Further, he does not say merely, I desire,
but (...), Having a desire; it was a constant, settled, permanent desire in him,
and that (...), to cut the rope (as it were) and to set fail to Heaven, to
return to him from whom he had his spiritual being. The Apostle then did not
only desire to be with Christ, but he judged it the far better condition for
him.

Therefore we must distinguish of a twofold desire; there is a Natural Desire,
The difference betwixt a natural and an elicite desire.
and an Elicite Desire. A Natural Desire is that which flows from the mere
principles of Nature, desiring to preserve it self; and this Paul could not but
have as he was a man. Even as our Savior told Peter, He should be bound, and
should be carried whether he would not, Joh. 21. 18. that is, according to his
natural will, otherwise according to his will as sanctified, did with readiness
and joy go to the place of his Martyrdom. An Elicite Desire is that which a man
puts forth according to the principles of reason and grace, so that we may
desire one thing with a natural desire, another thing with an elicite. A man
that has a putrified arm, does with a natural desire will to continue his arm
still in his body, but with an elicite desire following reason, so he wills
to cut it off: And thus Paul did with an elicite desire, so he willed Heaven
and being with Christ, rather than to continue in the flesh.

To amplify this, Consider, Propositions clearing the truth. 1. Man was not
made mortal.


First, That death is not according to man's creation at first, he was not made
mortal or corruptible: But as the sentence of God does witness, In the day Adam
did eat of the forbidden fruit, he fell into a dying condition. It is true, The
Question is of a large dispute, Whether Adam was made immortal or no? The
Papists say, he was made mortal; and the Socinians they do more frowardly
oppose this truth, affirming, Adam would have died, though there had not been
any eating of the forbidden fruit. So that with them actual death was necessary
before Adams sin; only it became a punishment after. But Romans 5. the Apostle
at large shows, That by one man's sin death came into the world. And Romans 6.
23. The wages of sin is death. Death then being wholly against the natural
institution: At first Adam had an implanted love of his life in him. And
although his estate was so blessed, that there could not be place for any fear,
yet had he been capable of losing his life, his love to it would have made him
afraid of being deprived of it. This then is the great mystery, that the
natural wise men of the world were ignorant of. Death they would not deny, they
called it, The tribute of Nature, which all must pay; only they did not know
the cause of it, they understood not how it came to sense upon all mankind.

Secondly, Seeing that death is thus connatural, and the effect of sin and 2.
It Is sin that makes death so terrible.
the Devil, Hence it is that which makes Death far more terrible than
otherwise it would be, is sin. Whatsoever bitterness and gall is in death, it
does chiefly come from sin, 1 Cor. 15. 56. The sting of death is sin. So
many sins as thou committest, thou put so many stings into death to make
it more dreadful. Could a man die, and have not any sin laid to his charge,
though it would be pain, yet it would not be terror. When Aristotle calls
death (...), The terrible of terribles. He speaks of death as now it is. Now
in death, as ordinarily men die, there is not a bare apprehension of the
dissolution of soul and body, but there is the guilt of sin likewise
interposing, whereby a dying man is usually terrified with the thoughts of what
he has done, and in Christians, what will become of them when they are dead.
Animula blandula, quae nunc abibis in loca. Die I dare not, live I cannot; and
thus his soul is miserably in agonies, and grievous tormenting fears, and all
because sin is the sting of death. Oh it were easy to die were it not for
sin, for hell, for judgment, were it not for conscience accusing and
condemning. But this is it which makes the thoughts of it so grievous and
terrible. 3. Christ came into the world to remove this sting of death, sin.


Therefore in the third place, The Lord Christ came into the world to destroy
and remove this sting of death. To change the nature of death that it should
not be matter of terror, but of joy and comfort; being like Joseph's Chariot to
carry us to the place of our hope and desire. Thus we have the Apostle
insulting over death, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55. Death is swallowed up in victory.
Death does not swallow the godly man, but he does swallow that up: O death,
where is thy sting? Thanks be to God which gives us victory by our Lord Jesus
Christ. Were it not then for Christ, what would become of a poor humbled
sinner? What terror would compass him about? This powerful effect of Christ's
death (for death overcomes death) is notably spoken of, Heb. 2. 14. That
through death he might deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their
life time subject to bondage. A learned man Cocceius understands this of the
Jews especially, who because of those many Ceremonial Laws, they were in
bondage to, were in continual fear of death, because the transgressing of many
of those Laws God made capital, they were to die for it: hence they could not
be, but in constant fear of death. But it seems more genuine to interpret
more largely, as an effect of Christ's death to believing Gentiles, as well as
to the Jews. It is from Christ only that the terrible thoughts of death can be
mitigated, otherwise to a man not in Christ it is the beginning of hell.

But in the fourth place, Though to the godly thus death is changed in its 4.
Yet howsoever nature cannot but tremble at the thoughts of it.
Nature. The Serpent has its sting taken out; Moses need not run from it, it
is only turned into a rod of a fatherly chastisement, yet Nature cannot but
tremble at the approaches of it. The heart of that man, who is most heavenly,
though he would gladly be in Canaan, yet he is not willing to pass through
this wilderness to it; he would be clothed with immortality, but is unwilling
to put off this garment of the body. We would be happy, but we would not die.
As children cry for a new garment to have it on, and yet cry while it is
putting on: so greatly is the love of life, and the fear of death engraffed Of
what use the natural fear of death is. 1. Hence men do more patiently endure
afflictions.
in the very heart of a man. And so far as this fear of death is only
natural, not immoderate, it is of great use. For

First, Hereby men do more patiently abide under their afflictions. As long as
it is not death, they do the more willingly bear it. Lament. 3. 39. Wherefore
does a living man complain? If a man be greatly punished for his sins, yet if
God keep him alive, he has cause to be more patient. Thus Satan thought (Job
2. 4.) Skin for skin, and all that a man has he will give for life.
Therefore he would have Job tried in that. Fear then of death is a mercy,
because hereby men may the more readily sit down under other afflictions that
are not so bad as death. When therefore men come to such high discontents as
Ahitophel, because his counsel was neglected: or such despairing terrors of
conscience as Judas did, that they choose to die, yea to make away them selves.
This as it is an heavy temptation and desertion from God, so it argues that by
the fear of death, men do patiently abide under their distresses; but when they
care not for this, they voluntarily throw themselves into the flame of hell.

Secondly, The natural fear of death is of great use in this respect, That 2.
It keeps men out of many sins.
it does keep men from the committing of many sins, which otherwise they
would securely offend in. Hence God appointed in the Law, the punishment of
death for many sins. And Romans 13. the Apostle bids him that does evil, be
afraid of the powers, Because they bear not the sword in vain. It is therefore
the fear of death that makes men keep within bounds of righteousness and
honesty. It is not the fear of God, nor the fear of hell, nor the fear of sin
it self, but a bodily corporal death that restrains men from sin. So that
if men come to that height of obstinacy, as not to fear death, they are
prepared for any impiety, Vitam qui contempsit suam tuae Dominus est. When the
Devil would persuade Eve to sin, he tells her, She shall not die; he gives
her hopes of life.

Thirdly, The natural fear of death is thus far advantageous, That it makes
3. It makes a man more thankful for the mercies of life.
a man more thankful for the mercies of his life, for his food and raiment,
which go to the preservation of his life. Therefore a godly man does make
advantage of this fear of death, to stir up himself to all thankfulness, to
look up unto God, as knowing, That in him only we live, move, and have our
being. It is also from this fear of death, that the godly are more quickened to
improve the day of grace; to be working while it is called to day. Those that
had made a Covenant with death, they grew desperate, Let us eat and drink, for
to morrow we shall die, whereas rather to have concluded, Let us pray, mourn
rnd repent, lest to morrow we die. If therefore the godly are at any time
greatly dejected with the fear of death, the thoughts of it are a great
temptation, they sadly complain, that they cannot conquer those slavish
thoughts; the memory of death is bitter to them, they cannot take any joy, when
they think of it: Let them, among other things remember, to turn this water
into wine by faith: Let them make an advantage of this natural infirmity. Do
thou fear to die? Then be more thankful to God for the days and years he has
given thee in this world. Do thou fear to die? Oh then be fruitful, live
holily, make a good use of thy health, that so when death shall come, it may be
only death thou shall grapple with, not death and sin also, death and the anger
of God with it. Death enough is terrible, do not thou make it fuller of horror.

Fifthly, This natural fear of death is very difficultly kept from being a 4.
The natural fear of death is very hardly kept from being sinful.
sinful fear. It is very hard to regulate and order it aright, so that in some
respect or other it does not go beyond its bounds. It Is hard so to fear, and
not to over-fear. Even the most godly have found this fear of death to be a
great snare to them; They have not done the good they should have done, because
of this fear: They have gone against conscience, wounded their spirits, because
of fear. Abraham, though he was the Father of the faithful, yet did use
sinful equivocation with Abimelech about Sarah, from which many sad evils
might have been committed, and all was this sinful fear of death. Though a
godly man be allowed to have a natural fear of death, yet he must take heed of
a sinful fear. This has brought many into such grievous sins, that the fear
of their consciences about Gods anger, about hell and damnation, have quite
swallowed up the fears of death, at last the greater fear has devoured the
less. To whom are woes and wounds of conscience by apostasy and forsaking of
Christ, but to those who have too excessively been afraid of death? As we see
in Peter, and many others. Our next work therefore is to show, when the natural
fear of death goes beyond its bounds, and becomes sinful.

SERMON. LXV.
Of the natural and sinful fear of Death: How to discern between them; and
from whence the sinfulness of that fear proceeds.

2 CO^. 1. 8. So that we despaired even of life.
THis last aggravating particular in the description of Paul's trouble in Asia,
has been explained, and in some measure enlarged. The sum whereof was, That
grace even in a Paul, does not wholly remove the natural fear of death. Grace
does regulate and direct Nature, but not extinguish it. Stoicism and
Christianity differ as much as Heaven and Earth. Not to fear, not to grieve
about due objects in a due manner, is a sin, not a virtue. But though grace
does not extirpate this natural fear of death, yet it subdueth and conquereth
the sinful fear of death. Our natural fear does quickly become immoderate, and
so offensive unto God. Therefore the proper work of grace is to mortify this,
that it may not be over-fearing, that this fear may not prove a temptation to
sin.

Our work therefore in the next place, is to direct a Christian in the
discerning between a Natural fear, and a Sinful fear, that he may know what is
of There is a natural fear of death in all, but in some more, in some less.
mere nature and what is of corrupt nature. Only it is good to take notice of
this:

1. That a natural fear of death may be in some more, and in some less, from
the very constitution and temperament of their body. Some are very fearful by
their very natural complexion, and to such death is more dreadful than to
others, who are of a more bold and stout constitution: Even as some are more
prone to anger than others; so some are more prone to fear than others; and
this being a natural passion, they cannot conquer it, no more than grace can
change the temperament of the body. Only to the godly, such a natural fear is
sanctified: They go out of themselves, they depend much upon God. And therefore
some who have been assaulted exceedingly with fears in the times of
persecution, suspecting their own selves, that they should prove perfidious to
Christ, and Apostates, have found unexpected courage and boldness, because they
have gone out of themselves, and trusted in God only. These Lambs have proved
Lions. Hence the Scripture, antidotes and comfortable promises against this
fear, Isa. 53. 4. Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear
not. Yea we have a precious promise to the godly, that under Christ's government
and protection over them, Ier. 23. 4. They shall fear no more, nor be dismayed.
If then the godly find himself of a fearful disposition, that it is a natural
passion tyrannizing over him, let him pray for the sanctification of it, that
God would turn it to his good; and many times such are preserved from those
wounds of conscience, and those sad falls, which those that are more
presumptuous and self-confident do fall into. As there is thus a natural
passion of fear about death in some more than in others, so also sometimes (by
Gods permission) the children of God have been assaulted by it as a peculiar
temptation, and that improved by Satan. So that whereas there are several
kinds of temptations, whereby the Devil does molest and disquiet the godly,
sometimes by blasphemous thoughts, sometimes by fear of committing that
unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, etc. So sometimes it is by a daily
and constant fear of death, such a persuasion of death does fall upon them, and
that accompanied with much distracting fear and tembling, that it takes away
the comfortable enjoyment of all those mercies God bestows upon them. This
has been the case of many of the children of God, and the Devils design is by
these unprofitable and needless fears, to keep them from that service, which
otherwise they might do for God. For as Timber too moist, and not well dried,
will deceive the builder, and not support the house, as it is expected: so
neither can a Christian, amazed with such dividing fears, do God that service
in his place, as he ought to do. These are like worms in the wood, that at
last eat up the heart of it. Such therefore that are buffeted with these
temptations, they have no other ways to take, but to fly unto God: He is the
Jehovah, who can give power and strength to them, as was done to Daniel, in his
great amazement, and unto the Scripture, as a directive Rule, from whence he
may wisely observe many remedies against such preposterous fears. Let him also
possess his soul with this as an undoubted principle, That the Lord binds
him in this chain (as it were) to prevent other sins that he may boldly
venture upon; and that these fears con^inually annoying, are a means to keep
off some great sins or others. They are like barking curres, that keep off
thieves, when they hear such a noise within.

These things premised, Let us now consider, When, and wherein the fear of When
the fear of death is sinful. 1 When it becomes a snare.
death does manifest it self to be sinful. And

First, When it becomes a snare to a man, so that by it, he either commits
some sin, or omits some duty. When the fear of death has this influence upon
thee, then know it exceeds its limits. Thou fear men more than God, thou
fear death more than hell and damnation, Prove. 29. 25. The fear of a man
brings a snare. When it brings a snare upon thee, conscience says, Do not
this; the Word of God says, Do not this; but fear of death says, Do this,
then this becomes very sad in the issue; as you see it was in Peter, fear made
him deny his Master. So in Abraham, and Isaac, though so great examples of
holiness, yet fear of death put them upon lying and dissimulation. Now to
sin for fear of death, is a most absurd and irrational fear; to fear the
less, and not to fear the greater. Thou do not fear to be damned, yet thou
fear to die. How fully does our Savior convince us of the folly of this
fear? Luke 12. 4, 5. I say to you my friends. Though the Disciples had this
comfortable title and encouraging relation upon them (what could be greater
than to be Christ's friend? Will Christ forsake his friend in adversity? Shall
any have cause to say to Christ, as Absalom to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to
thy friend?) Yet how ready are they to fear men and death immoderately?
Therefore he exhorts them, Not to be afraid of men, who can kill the body,
and after that have no more than they can do; but I will forewarne you whom you
shall fear. They need premonitions about it; the object whereof is, God who
has power to cast into hell, which he redoubleth, yea I say to you, fear him.
So that by this place we see, that it is a most and unreasonable fear, to
venture the damnation of our souls for fear of death: Yet how often has this
been done? but sometimes it has proved so dismal, as in Spira, and others,
that the guilt of sin, and the terrors of Gods wrath falling upon their
conscience, have so greatly overwhelmed them, that the fear of death has been
quite put out by a greater fear. They have desired death, yea they have
hastened to it, by offering violence to themselves. As the fear of death is
thus sinful when it puts thee upon sin: so when it makes thee omit any
duty that God requires; thou dare not confess God and his truth in the midst
of a perverse generation; thou dare not be valiant for the truth, nor plead
for righteousness, this fear is excessive. Love to God, love to his glory
should cast out the fear of death. Observe then thy self in dangers or
temptations, how thou find thy fear to put thee upon sinful compliances or
omissions, and presently, as Jehoshaphat in the midst of a battle being in
great danger, cried out unto God for help, so do thou to be delivered from this
sinful fear, that is a deadly enemy encompassing thee about.

Secondly, Thy fear about death is sinful, when it is immoderate and
disquieting 2. When it is immoderate and disquieting.
of thee, so that thou do not walk with a cheerful quiet and calm spirit.
So that although it may not put thee upon any sinful or unlawful enterprise,
yet if it fill thee with anxieties, with trepidations, so that it depriveth
thee of that Evangelical joy and peace; in this excess it is a sin. All that
are truly godly, Being justified by faith they are to have peace in their
hearts; yea they are to rejoice always in the Lord; but the inordinate fear of
death causes this Sun to be in an eclipse: and as men subject to swooning
fits, or convulsions, cannot go with that courage and confidence up and down,
as those who are freed from such distempers; Thus also the slavish and
immoderate fear of death puts millstones about our neck, is a continual
Ephialtes upon the soul, fills the spirit with heaviness, whereby that
Evangelical life and Gospel-conversation that we are called unto, is seldom or
never exercised. Observe then thy self, does such fears of death make thy soul
full of tumults and distractions? Does it oppose any Evangelical grace, or
retard the Spirit of Adoption upon thy soul? Then humble thy self, know thou
sinnest against God, and pray for the mortification of it; and this thou art to
do, though it does not make thee put out thy hand to any evil way; though it
does not make thee omit any known duty. For as worldly and distrustful cares,
though lodging only in the heart, are greatly displeasing to God, though we do
not thereby fall into covetous and unjust ways, yet the very cares and
distractions of the heart are forbidden, as appears by that reproof given to
Martha, by our Savior himself, Luke 10. 41. Martha, Martha, thou art troubled
about many things, but one thing is needful. Thus it is also in fears, though
thou art not instigated thereby to unlawful ways to preserve thy self, yet
the distractions and divisions of thy heart are offensive to God. Therefore as
the Apostle says, Phil. 4. 6. Be careful in nothing, but let your requests be
made known to God. Let prayer rebuke all storms and tempests of sinful cares,
so in nothing be fearful, no not about death it self, but commit thy self by
prayer to God, to whom the issues of life and death do belong

Thirdly, This fear of death is sinful, when it excludes better and more
profitable, and seasonable fear. The Scripture does frequently command a fear
3. When it excludes much profitable and seasonable fear
of God, and the serving of him with godly trembling, Psalm. 2. 11. Yea the
whole work of grace is expressed in this, That God will put his fear in our
hearts, Jer. 32. 40. If then this fear of God did more prevail and rule in our
hearts, we should not fear diseases and death so much as we do: The fear of God
would put a due moderation upon all the powers of the soul: This would regulate
the fear of all other things, so that we dare not fear otherwise than God has
commanded, then this natural fear is compatible with gracious fear. For as our
love to the creatures must be animated and regulated by our love to God, so
that we are never to love any thing, that thereby our love to God may be abated
or diminished: Thus it must be in fear, we are never to dread any thing further
than it is consistent with the fear of God; therefore it may fall out
sometimes, that the fear of God may justly put us upon the fear of death, as
when we walk negligently, coldly and formally; when we do not make up our daily
accounts with God; when we do not make our daily peace with God, with renewed
repentance and faith. If we live in this manner, then we have good cause to
fear death, because we are unprovided for it, it seizes on us before we are
prepared; and the fear of God may justly put us into this fear of death. For we
know how great, holy and just God is, how dreadful his appearance will be at
the day of judgment; and all that we can do, it must be done before death;
then the night is come, and none can work. To repent, to bewail our
unprofitableness, our neglect of the seasons of grace in hell, will then be as
unprofitable, as Esau's tears when he had lost his birthright. There is
therefore a just and holy fear about death, lest it should take us not doing
the work of God; lest it should come so unexpectedly, that we be forced to cry
out with him, Inducias usque ad mane! O spare me till to morrow! Let one live
another day to make peace with God, and the fear of God will put us upon this
fear, as the Apostle said, 2 Cor. 5. 11. Knowing the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men. Thus it is here, Knowing the terror of the Lord, that he is
greater than our hearts, that if they condemn us, then God will much more; This
will put a fear of death upon us, because that is nothing but the presenting of
our souls in his presence. We read Judge. 6. 23. and in many other places, when
God made any glorious apparition, the persons who beheld it were so amazed and
stricken with the sense of their imbecillty, that they thought they should die
presently; and shall not the thoughts about death, that it is the dislodging of
the soul and bringing it immediately before God, strike much terror into us?
This holy and reverential fear about death is laudable, and is the fruit of the
fear of God; but when this fear of death makes thee fear God the less, or
hinders thee in the service of him, then cast this Hagar out of doors.

Fourthly, The fear of death is sinful, when it does proceed from a sinful
cause. 4. When it proceeds from a sinful cause, as from 1. An inordinate love
of life.
If the fountain be bitter, then the stream is bitter. Now there are these
sinful causes of the fear of death.

1. When it proceeds from an inordinate love of life. An excessive love of
life does always beget an immoderate fear of death. So that we may judge of
the sinfulness of fear by the sinfulness of love: If thy heart be not mortified
and crucified to the world, if thy heart be not loosned and weaned from earthly
comforts; and this makes thee afraid to die, this is sinful. It is a
fundamental qualification required in every Disciple of Christ; he cannot be
Christ's, unless he be above the love of all things, Matthew. 10. 37. He that
loves father, or mother, or life it self, more than me, cannot be my Disoiple.
Why then art thou so afraid to die? Is it because thy heart is so dearly
engaged in such relations, to such creatures? Be humbled for this, and reform.

A second sinful cause which flows from the former, is, The want of love 2.
The want of love to God.
to God, and to Christ. Thy desire is not with Paul, To be with Christ; thou
do not judge this best of all. Not to be willing to die upon this account,
must also be very sinful. Do we not pray for the Kingdom of God? Are we not
to look for, and hasten the coming of Christ? Are we not to be as pilgrims and
strangers in this world? Now if these things were real upon thee, though thou
could not avoid a natural fear, yet thou would greatly subdue a sinful
fear.

3. There is a sinful cause of the fear of death, When we produce those
actions, 3. A sinful life.
and live such a life, which will justly make death terrible. Thou complainest,
I am afraid to die, I dare not think of death, and why? Thou do put stings
into death, thou increasest the guilt of thy conscienne, by living without
repentance and reformation; and then it is no wonder if such a sinful cause
make a sinful effect. Sin less, keep thy conscience clear, and then thou will fear death less.

The last sinful cause of the sinful fear of death, is, Want of faith in
Christ, and this even the godly are subject to, though they live holily and
unblameably, 4. Want of faith in Christ.
though they have kept a good conscience toward God and men, yet they have
sometimes uncomfortable fears about death, because they do not look upon
Christ, they consider not that Christ has conquered death. So that now every
Christian may with Paul triumph, Death is swallowed up in victory, O death,
where is thy sting? 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55. but want of faith depriveth of this holy
comfort and boldness. See then if thy want of faith makes thee fear death; and
consider that if so, this is very injurious to Christ, as if still death were
not subdued, as if death had conquered Christ, and not Christ death. Faith will
make thee see a loveliness and another nature in death, than what it had at
first.

SERMON. LXVI.
The truly godly may sometimes pass false sentences upon their own Persons and
Actions, and Gods dispensations toward them.

2 COR. 1. 9. But we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should
not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead.
THe second Doctrine remaining from the clause of the former verse, viz. That
the children of God judge otherwise, while they attend to second causes and
humane helps, then they do, while they look to the power and promise of God,
will come in very seasonably, as a branch of that general useful matter, which
this Text will afford us.

Come we therefore to the consideration of it.

1. It is a further amplification of this trouble which came upon him in Asia,
and that is the most extreme and highest aggravation that yet has been used,
which is expressed in the beginning, We had the sentence of death in our selves.

2. It is illustrated from the wholesome and saving end of this trouble laid on
him, It was not brought upon him by God for his destruction, but his spiritual
good. His soul might have been in danger, if his body had not been. He might
have perished spiritually, if he had not been in danger of perishing temporally.

Now this blessed effect of his trouble is set down:

1. Negatively, That we might not trust in our selves. 2. Positively, But in
God. Described by a suitable property, Who raises the dead.
Let us begin with the aggravation; his trouble was so great, That he had
received the sentence of death in himself. This is more than the clause in the
precedent verse, for there it was (...), He was in such a doubt and perplexity
about his life, that he did not see any way to evade; but here he is positive,
he comes now to make resolute conclusions, He must die, He had received the
sentence of death. The Greek word is (...), used here in this place only in
the New Testament. The Verb from whence it comes (...) and (...), Budeus
shows to have two more eminent significations; the one is, to separate and
secerne one thing from another; in which sense I do not observe it used in the
New Testament. It uses (...) in that sense, even as humane Authors also do
most frequently. 1 Cor. 1. 15. The spiritual man judges all things, by
searching and judging he comes to discern the truth from error. The other
signification is to answer, in which sense it is always used in the New
Testament. Favorinus in his Lexicon makes this difference between (...) and
(...). The former is a bare simple Answer made to any Question; the later is an
Answer by way of defense against some accusation. The proper word for an Answer
is (...), as Luke 2. 47. Luke 20. 26. Joh. 1. 22. (...) is seldom used for an
Answer, yet Stephen shows out of Suidas an expression (...), like that a
secretis, one whose office was to answer requests. Hence some translate it
answer, as it is in the margin. But the most genuine translation is sentence;
for so Hesychius expounds the word (...), whom Favorinus follows verbatim in
this, as in many other particulars. It is true Heinsius on the place makes the
word in a contrary sense, to signify an answer or inspiration from God,
secretly assuring of him that he should not die; like that Act. 24. 24. Fear
not Paul, such answers were by the Urim and Thummim. So that in his sense it
should imply Gods suretiship or undertaking for his preservation: But the other
is more generally received, and the following words argue such a sense.

The word then does signify a sentence passing upon him, That he must die.
This he had received; but from whom? Not from God, for God delivered him, nor
from the Magistrate, there was no such Decree that we read of against him:
Therefore it was only from his own fears, his own thoughts, which makes him
say, He had received it in himself. You see then, that Gods thoughts were
others then Paul's. Paul absolutely concluded he should die, but God had
purposed the contrary. From whence observe,

That the godly themselves are sometimes greatly deceived about Gods
administrations The godly are sometimes deceived about Gods dispensations
toward them
to them.

They are apt to err in their judgments about Gods dispensation. They gather
such conclusions, and make such inferences as are wholly opposite to Gods
intentions. Though it be said that the people of God do communicate with Christ
in some measure, as with his priestly and Kingly Office, so with his
Prophetical, as if they were able to know the mind of God in many things, yet
we must take heed that such a principle does not draw us into spiritual
delusions. For nothing is more ordinary even to a godly man, then to take his
strong affections and vehement conjectures for impulses and inspirations from
God. Paul in this trouble did absolutely conclude, He should die; he had past
this sentence upon himself, but God had determined otherwise.

I shall handle this truth more generally than the Text does intend, yet
including that also. And

First, Herein the heart of a good man does deceive him, in that he is ready to
1. A godly man may sometimes be deceived in his advise to others, which he may
think is of God, when it is not.
give such advise to others sometimes, which he may apprehend is of God, and
yet it arises from humane persuasion only. Those that are godly are constantly
and judiciously to examine, what is humane, and what is divine in them; what
comes from God, and what from their own spirits. Sad and miserable have the
deceits of many been in this case. No wonder it may be so with a godly man. For
it has sometimes fared thus with those, who besides the spirit of
sanctification, have also been endowed with prophetical illumination. Nathan, 1 Chronicles. 17. 2. bid David do all that was in his heart, when he purposed to build
an house to God; but we see afterward God did forbid it. It is true, there
were in the Old Testament false prophets, who did wittingly and willingly
sin, pretending they had a word from God, when it was only a lying spirit in
them; but of such we speak not. Yea we read of a true Prophet of the Lord, yet
pretending a word from God, when he did wilfully dissemble all that while, 1
King. 13. 18. For when a Prophet had command from God not to eat or drink in
his journey; This other Prophet persuades him to eat, saying, An Angel of God
spoke to him for that purpose. Here was a great temptation to the former
Prophet to eat; it could not but work some scruples in him. So that from this
instance Divines do argue, That it is lawful for a man to go against
scruples. But because the Prophet did not, but was persuaded against Gods
former command, therefore he was severely punished. But this instance is not
fully to my purpose; only from that example we may see, That the corruption in
man inclines him to make pretenses from God to get the more credit. Even as in
Paul's time, some pretended the Spirit and Revelations about the day of
judgment. But the example of Nathan is wholly to our purpose; and therefore
all that fear God, are to pray for an exact judgment, to discern between
things that differ, and that more in our selves than others. For such is our
self-love that we are difficultly brought to know the truth: As a sensible
object put immediately upon the sense, hinders it in its operations. We see
Paul very imitable in this thing, 1 Cor. 7. in answering that case about
marriage, which the Corinthians had propounded to him. Hence verse. 10. and 12.
how careful is he to distinguish between that which he had from the Lord
directly, and was his expressed will, and what he advised as a faithful
Officer in the Church, Not I, but the Lord, says he. Hence he concludes his
Discourse in a most humble and modest manner, calling it his judgment, only
adding, I think also that I have the Spirit of God. Though you must know, that
in all this Paul was acted infallibly by the Spirit; he speaks not as an
humane Author in this thing.

Secondly, The godly are deceived, when they have some prepossessed principles
of error in them, and then think Gods dispensations are to abet and
countenance 2. They are deceived when they thin^. Gods dispensations are to
abet some errors which they may be fallen into.
them. This has commonly caused great mistakes, whereby men have thought they
had Gods approbation to their deceits. We see this plainly in the Disciples,
this false principle they had imbibed, that the Messiah would come as a
temporal and external King, to vindicate their Nation from all the bondage they
were under. Therefore when Christ speaks of his Kingdom, and his Glory, when
he speaks of being exalted, they apply all consonantly to their false
principles. Upon this mistake the sons of Zebedee come to ask Christ for the
chiefest places of honor in his Kingdom, and upon Christ's Ascension in Heaven,
Act. 1. 6. when he had for forty days together been speaking of the Kingdom
of God to them: Then they asked him, Will thou at this time restore the
Kingdom of Israel? Here you see how much even the Apostles, the first fruits
(as it were) of the Spirit were decived; But what was the (...), what was the
deceitful foundation in this building? Even a carnal and an erroneous
persuasion about the temporal dignity and honor of Christ. Take then much heed
that the first concoction be not naught, that there be not Laesum principium,
some principle received, that thou must not so much as question the truth of
it; and then according to this thou make many false and erroneous conjectures
about Gods proceedings to thee.

Thirdly, Then the godly are very apt to be deceived about Gods ways to 3.
When they judge of God after outward appearance.
themselves or others, when they judge of God after outward and humane
appearance. When they expect that God should do, as some high and mighty
Monarch of the world would do. We see hom Samuel, a man so highly proficient in
the fear of God, and all integrity, yet when he came to choose out the man God
had designed for the Kingdom, how quickly he mistook, and was at a loss, 1 Samuel
16. 6, 7. For when Eliab came into his presence, he said, Surely the Lords
anointed is here. But then observe how God did reprove his humane judgment,
when he said to Samuel, Look not upon his high stature, for the Lord sees not
as man sees, adding also the ground of it, because man judges by outward
appearance, but God judges the heart. It is true, the godly have this promise,
that many things shall be manifested to them, which to others the Lord will not
reveal, Psalm. 25. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. Hence
we have that notable expression to Abraham by God, when he was purposed to
destroy Sodom, Genesis 18. 17. Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I will
do? and one reason is, because he will command his children, and his household
to keep the way of the Lord. We have likewise a very comfortable expression
which our Savior uses to his Disciples, John 15. 15. Henceforth I call you
not servants, for the servant knows not what his Lord does, but I have called
you friends, for all things I have heard of my Father I have made known to you.
From this it is, that some eminently godly men have been endowed with a
prophetical spirit, and have used much boldness in prayer to God, as that known
expression of Luthers, Fiat voluntas mea Domine. In Savo^^r^la likewise, even
Machiavil did acknowledge a Divine Spirit in him: Many things he foretold,
which came to pass, and had bold access to the throne of grace, as if he had
been another Moses, speaking to God face to face. In his Homilies upon Micah he
has wonderful assertions about his predictions. But extraordinary
privileges, and that in some cases only, must not be extended to all. When
the glory of God, and the good of his Church is concerned, God does come with
more familiar discoveries of himthan at other times. But though this be so, yet
the godly are many times deceived in themselves and about others, and that
because they judge according to outward appearance.

Fourthly, Then are the people of God apt to be deceived about themselves, 4.
When they give too much credit to their zeal and affections.
When they yield too much, or give too much credit to the strong affections,
and raised zeal, as they think, for the glory of God. In such particulars
they have many times failed as men, yea so as they have sinned thereby, and
offended God. Thus Peter did exceedingly fail, Matthew. 16. 23. when out of his
great affection to his Master, he said, Master, save thy self; What a severe
reproof did his humane affections meet with? Get thee behind me Satan, for thou
savourest not the things of God, but of man. Little did Peter expect such words
for that which he thought was his good will, if not piety to Christ. The like
also we find in those Disciples, Luke 9. 55. when they would have fire come
from Heaven to be avenged on the Samaritans, because they would not receive
Christ; for there Christ gave them a check, saying, Ye know not what spirit ye
are of. They thought that to be a Divine Spirit, they thought the same heavenly
breathing and motion to be upon them, as was upon Elias; but (alas) they did
not know what spirit it was. We find also Paul deceived, or at least forbidden
in some passages which he thought greatly promoting the glory of God, Act. 16.
6. Paul was forbidden to preach the Word in Asia, which implies a desire and
an attempt in him to do it. And verse. 7. Paul essayed to go into Bythinia, but
the Spirit suffered him not. And often he purposed to come to the Churches he
had planted. And although he says in one place, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18. I Paul would
have come to you once and again, but Satan hindered; yet Satan could not have
hindered, had not God permitted him. So that though Satan hindered Paul
sinfully, yet God did hinder him justly, and for wise ends. Which instances
show, what vehement affections the godly may have, and that as they think for
Gods glory, when yet God disposes far otherwise. So that as God may
sometimes for just and holy ends let false prophets speak truth, as Deuteronomy. 13.
1. a false prophet or dreamer may tell a thing which may come to pass, and the
Lord suffer this, to tempt and try his people. Thus Balaam, though a wicked
man, and a Sorcerer, did prophecy of the happy things that were long after to
come upon Israel. Yea the Philistims Priests and Diviners, did by Gods special
permission, 1 Samuel 6. direct to such means about the Ark, and order strange
ways about the milch Kine, to discover whether their evil was of God, or not;
and all this proved successful. As (I say) God may for wise and just ends
suffer the Devils instruments to foretell that which is true, and speak
aforehrnd of things that shall and will come to pass; so on the other side,
God may sometimes hide things from his own people, yea his own Prophets, so
that they may not know them. As Elijah told Gehezi, The Lord had hid from him
what the Shunamites grief was. The people of God then are to walk in all
humility; and as they are not to believe every spirit, but try the spirit of
others; so also they are not to believe their own spirit, but to try that.

Fifthly, The people of God are apt to be deceived about themselves, thinking
otherwise than indeed it is, and that about the frames of their heart, in 5.
They may be deceived in the frame of their own hearts.
respect of the workings of grace. As Paul received a sentence of death upon
himself, so sometimes the children of God, a more terrible sentence upon
themselves, even that they are damned, that they are cast-awayes, that God has
forsaken them, that they have no true grace, that all their Religion is but
hypocrisy. Even these sad decrees the godly in their temptations do receive in
themselves; but God does not pass this sentence upon them, neither does the
word of God; it is their deceived and tempted heart. Thus also it is for grace,
they many times are deceived, thinking they can do those things for God, which
when put upon the trial, they cannot. As Peter thought, Though all men should
for sake him, yet he would not. Oh how little do the godly know of their
hearts, how mutable, how contradictory to themselves? And all because they
think that is not in them, which indeed is. As there are dangerous Rocks in the
Sea, when you would think by the waters that cover them all were safe and
harmless. It was this made David so affectionately cry out, Psalm. 19. Who can
understand his errors? Cleanse me from secret sins; and thereupon prays,
Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins. Remember that in thy heart
there are secret concavities and windings, that it will put on many shapes and
forms, seeming an humble heart, when it is proud, an heavenly heart, when it is
earthly.

SERMON. LXVII.
The People of God often pass false judgment upon the dispensations of God
toward them. The Reasons from whence this false judgment proceeds, with Rules
to prevent it.

2 COR. 1. 9. But we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we might not
trust in our selves.
WE have observed from the first part in this Verse, That even the godly
themselves are apt to be deceived about Gods dispensation toward them. They
make false conclusions because they err in some premises. It remains that
after some general and remote instances, we come to insist on that which the
Text affords, viz.

That then the People of God are deceived, when they judge of Gods Gods people
are deceived when they judge according to sense not says.
dealings according to sense and humane helps, not according to Gods power and
his promise. And with this deceit the Children of God are frequently overtaken.
How often do we find David in many of his Psalms thus deluded? what false
conclusions does he many times make about himself and his affairs, and all
this did arise because he limiteth God to his own thoughts and expectations; if
God remove not such impediments; if his helps come not in before such a time,
then they conclude all is hopeless. It is said of the people of Israel, that
they limited the holy one of Israel, Isa. 78. 41. And wherein did this appear?
The Psalmist spoke of it before, viz. Can God furnish a Table in the
Wilderness; They grant he provided water for them even out of the Rock the
streams overflowed: But can he give bread, can he give flesh also? Oh blind
and foolish unbelief, Is it not as easy for God to provide bread as water in a
dry Wilderness! but they limited God to their own thoughts and ways. Now this
sin of limiting God to such humane helps and ways as we propound to our
selves, does insinuate very much into the hearts of those those that are godly.
What was that expression of David, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul,
but bitter fruit from that bitter root? Oh how often do the people of God in
their extremities say, Can God furnish a Table in the Wilderness? Those
millions of thoughts which eat thee up in a dividing distrusting way, how shall
this difficulty be overcome, how shall that want be supplied, what if God
suffer such a thing to be, then where am I? Is not all this to say, Cen God
prepare bread in the Wilderness? And this way Paul's desponding thought in this
trouble. The extremity is great, death is at hand, there is no way to escape
it; but that which deceives him, is because he looks only to sensible helps,
he considers the instruments, not the hand in which they are. This is a very
secret insinuating sin, and therefore the godly are more diligently to watch
and pray against it, that it do not at any time overcome them. Take heed of
living by sense, The Apostle disclaimeth such a life in the behalf of the
godly, 2 Cor. 5. 7. We walk by faith, and not by sense. Did faith make us
overlooke instruments, second causes and all Creatures, how certain and
constant would the hopes of the godly man be? The Sun would always go down
upon a peaceable fixed, serene frame of heat; but when faith prevails and for
that composeth the soul, and makes it like the Rock, which though one wave
after another fiercely assault, yet that abides in the same place still; so
though conditions alter, though unheard causes and helps be mutable, yet
because God is the same, and the promise is the same, he therefore continues
the same: Let then the Children of God examine and search their hearts more in
this particular, see if the cause of all thy disquietness, of all thy troubles
and fears do not arise from this, that thou art deceived, that thou passest
false judgment upon thy self; certainly the Devil is enemy enough to thy
comfort, he endeavors to seduce thee and deceive thee; Do not thou join with
him against thy own true and solid comfort. But let us proceed to examine the
grounds of this truth. And

The first is, Because the godly are apt to be hasty and too quick in judgeing
Reasons. 1. Because the godly are too hasty in their judgings.
these things. They do not consider and well weigh all things together. They do
not compare Gods promises and his providence together; They do not set Gods
word and his works together, Insipientis est aspicere ad pauca, they cast
their eyes only upon that which is discouraging. They look upon the dead womb
and not on the power of God, and this inconsiderateness makes them pass false
judgment, Psalm. 31. 22. I said in my haste I am cut off from before thy eyes,
and again Psalm. 116. 11. I said in my haste all men are liars. You see what
hasty and sudden thoughts and words may come from those that fear God. Oh do
not judge in thy rashness, do not conclude this or that in thy haste, but
consider, debate and compare all things together. Moses though so meek a man,
and the faithful Servant of God, yet in a sudden haste spoke unadvisedly with
his lips. Examine then, whether most of those thoughts whereby thou have
wronged God and wronged thy self, have not risen from unadvised hastiness. Thou
say in thy haste, God forsakes thee, thou say in thy haste, thou shall be
undone.

2. Another reason why the godly are so apt to be deceived in Gods
administrations, 2. Because of their fear and anger wherewith they are too
passionately transported.
is because they are apt to be passionately transported with anger and fear;
and these are like a misty foggy vapor to the Sun, that does obnubilate it,
and obscure the light. When David does conclude he is cast off, and cut off, he
does not only this in his haste, but in his passions also. It is anger makes
him say so; it is grief makes him say so; his spirit is often troubled,
leavened, and overwhelmed within; so that as when the water is bemuddied, we
are not able to see those little stones in the bottom, which when clear we
might do: Thus it is here, when the heart is moved with fear and grief, when it
is in sad commotions, then it is no wonder if it judge erroneously, anima
sedendo and quiescendo sit sapiens. Let reason and wisdom, or faith, rather
meet thy passionate heart, as Abigal did David, and this may prevent many sad
things, which prove a trouble to thee afterward: let it therefore be thy
wisdom when thou art ready to give this censure, and pass that sentence about
thy affairs, or Gods dealings with thee, to stay till the heat and commotions
of thy soul be over: fear and anger and grief, these are ill counselors;
erect such a Tribunal in thy self, as they say that of the Areopagite was, no
man was to move the affections by any Rhetorical endeavors, least thereby the
judgment might be perverted.

3. Therefore the godly may misjudge and conclude contrary to what God 3. From
the want of spiritual wisdom.
intends, because of the want of that spiritual skill and wisdom, which is
requisite, when we are to inquire or determine about Gods proceedings. Clouds
and darkness says the Psalmist, Psalm. 29. 7. are round about his pavilion, and
as his essence is a light that none can draw nigh unto; so also his
administrations do far exceed our natural capacity, and therefore we are not
able to comprehend his counsel and ways. Now although this be so, yet as the
Scripture is a Directory to us, how we are to conceive of his nature, so it
does also teach us how we are to understand his actions. The Scripture is a Key
that does in some particulars even open the deep things of God; and as Sampson
out of love did disclose to Dalilah such secret things, that none else did or
could know, so (setting aside many imperfections in the comparison) does God
out of his love to his Church reveal to them, wherein his strength lies, how
she may prevail with him, which way if she take, she is sure to have good
acceptance with him; but to receive this, there is a Heavenly wisdom and skill
required. When the Apostle 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16. made a distinction between a
natural man and a spiritual as to their judgment and discerning, (for by the
natural man cannot be meant a weak Christian, as a late Writer would have it,
which is the greater wonder, because those of his way (I mean the Arminians,)
think they strongly conclude Paul does not speak Romans 7. in the person of a
regenerate man, because he calls himself carnal, and yet this Author though of
the same judgment with them will by a natural man understand a babe in Christ,
or a weak Christian.) The Apostle (I say) making this distinction between these
two, says, The natural man receives not the things of God, because they are
spiritually discerned. Now there must be always some proportion between the
faculty and the object. The eye cannot see music, nor the ear hear colors,
nor does a Beast understand reason; but then the spiritual man having received
the Spirit of God, he judges all things, and such have the mind of Christ.
There is then that Heavenly and holy wisdom which if we receive from above,
if we plow with this Heifer, we are able more exactly and certainly to judge of
Gods proceedings then otherwise we could do; for as God gives it to his people
to understand the mysteries of the Gospel, when they are hid from other men's
eyes; so to the godly it is impart given to understand the ways and works of
the Lord, that thereby they may prevent those delusions or deceits which
otherwise they are liable unto. Whereupon it is, that because in this
particular as well as in other, we know but in part, we have heavenly wisdom
but in part. Therefore it is that we do so often miscarry. As in all civil
Government there are arcana imperii, secrets of state, which only the wise
favorite is admitted unto, the single and credulous Subject he believes the
pretenses and appearances of things. Thus God also, though in a wise and just
manner has his secrets in governing of his Church, he proceeds in such
methods that to the judgment of flesh and blood do appear very improbable and
unlikely ever to produce any blessed end; and hence it is that the carnal wise
men of the world are so often taken in their own craft, and wherein they deal
not only proudly, but wisely, God is above them; whereas if they had understood
the method of Gods proceedings, they would not have been found so foolishly to
fight against God: but the godly have Scripture wisdom and prudence, and
therefore are not wholely in the dark, but while they follow them, are kept
from those bogs and pits, which others are very ready to fall into; we may
instance in some of those Divine Maxims of state. As

1. The understanding of this truth will prevent much false judgment, viz.
Rules for the preventing of false judgments concerning Gods dealings with us.
When we consider that God delights to carry on the great things of his Church
in a contrary way to humane thoughts and expectations, let us instance in that
main foundation of all our comfort and duty; Christ Crucified with the benefits
and effects flowing from him. Was not this the master piece of Gods wisdom,
and power, and mercy, yet how contrary and unsuitable to the judgment of flesh
and blood, for God to be made Man, and Man not in a glorious external way as
the great Potentates of the world, but in a most abject and ignominious way;
and then by such an accursed and reproachful death, to procure our pardon of
sin, and acceptance with God; it has so much absurdity in it to flesh and
blood, that to the Jews it was a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles
foolishness. Non pudet, quia pudendum omnino credibile, quia prorsus
impossible. What the thoughts of men were about Christ, while working out our
redemption, appears Isa. 13. 2, 3, 4. There is no beauty that we should
desire him, he is despised and rejected of men, we did esteem him smitten of
God; So that generally all the Nations of the Jews were deceived about a
Messiah; yea the Disciples themselves were full of prejudices in this Point.
This then is Gods way to do the great things of his Church, in a super-humane
way; So that even then when the things themselves are not super-naturall, yet
the manner of accomplishing them is wholely above nature. What therefore God
speaks in one case to his people about the pardon of sin, Isa. 55. 8, 9. is
true in all the rest of Gods administrations, My thoughts are not as your
thoughts; For as the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so are my ways higher
then yours. By this it is plain, that a Dwarf is as able to reach to the
Heavens, as we are to comprehend Gods ways; so that whatsoever God does for
thee whether body or soul, it is a mystery. All will be wonderful, and
marvelous in thy eyes; As he said that was not worthy the name of eloquence
which did not beget admiration in the Hearers; So the Lord accounts of
nothing as beseeming his Majesty which may not put the soul in admiration:
possess thy soul with this principle, and thou will not be often in thy
complaints; I looked for this and hoped for that, but God has taken away that
I never dreamed off.

2. Another Rule is, That when God has promised to do any thing for his
people, yet he does for the most part seem to go contrary to it, especially at
first, as when Abraham was promised a great Posterity; David a Kingdom, they
met at first with nothing, but what did make against these, so that his
providence did seem to gainsay his promise. Now if this be not known, how
quickly will the godly be deceived. The world was a great Chaos and confusion
before it was made so glorious as now it is.

3. This will prevent mistake also, when we consider, That God does usually
hide himself and deny help, till every thing be desperate, and then he comes
to help. When the poor creple that lay so many years, and could not be put
into the Poole, said, I have no help, then Christ healed him; Christ did not
provide Wine at the Marriage Feast till all was spent; Moses comes when the
^aske of brick is doubled; in the Mount the Lord will be seen. Would not this
truth alone deliver thee from many conclusions, as if God had forsaken thee,
and would be merciful no more. What if Christ do with thee as that Woman of
Canaan to put thee off, to call thee Dog? Is it not to provoke thy faith and
importunity more?

4. The Heavenly Artist remembers this Rule also, That God will sometimes alter
his ordinary ways, do things because of his sovereignty and prerogative. What
Disputes and different thoughts had Job and his friends about Gods dealing with
him in his particular, wherein both Job and his friends were at a loss; only
Job spoke more rightly then they? Yet God discovers his greatness and Najesty
to Job, thereby informing of him that he did not sufficiently consider his own
weakness, and Gods infinite greatness.

5. And lastly, God delights to put his people upon a life of faith, and that
in temporal and spiritual mercies, The just shall live by his faith. This
faith does exalt God and debase man; now says and sense they are opposite, one
flies up to Heaven, the other crawleth on the ground; and therefore the most
believing Christian is the least erring. As the Astronomer judges not by
sense, but his Artificial Instruments, of the celestial bodies, and that
makes him not deceived: Thus judge by faith, speak by faith, conclude by
faith, and then thou will not fall into the Ditch.

SERMON. LXVIII.
Of humane and divine Trust, and of the true and proper Objects of our
Confidence.

2 COR. 1. 9. That we should not trust in our selves, but in God, which raises
the dead.
THe trouble which came upon Paul in Asia being described in several
aggravating particulars, the next thing he intends, is to inform us about the
holy and gracious end which God intended in all this. The Lords purpose was by
this heavy exercise to bring Paul off from all self-confidence, to weane him
from all humane props, to teach him to depend upon God alone. Even Paul though
so great a proficient in holiness, who does propound himself a pattern for
others to follow, yet he needs this self-emptying, he is prone to have some
secret confidence in himself, and therefore God as the wise physician provideth
some bitter pills to kill such Worms as these. The last spiritual enemy which
grace is to destroy in a regenerate man, is self-dependence: so hard a matter
is it to be wholly wrought out of our self, that God may be all and we nothing.
The final cause therefore of this trouble we have here most divinely described
by Paul, which is set down first Negatively, That we might not trust in our
selves, Then Positively, but in God, with the reason of it, he raises from the
dead; Let us consider the Negative that we may not trust in our selves. The
Greek word (...), is used sometimes in Scripture of a divine trust, and
sometimes of an humane, of a divine trust, Heb. 2. 13. (...), I will trust in
him, Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom we have access (...), with confidence. Two sorts of
trust, humane and divine.
In the Old Testament the expression of trusting in God is often used, so that
by this word is excellently described one act of faith, whereby the soul
sinking as it were under difficulties does firmly and powerfully lay hold on
Christ. Thus the grace of faith puts us upon the renouncing of all the
wisdom, power, and excellency of Men and Angels, to judge every Creature, but
an easy shadow in comparison of God. This fiduciall resting of the soul on God
by faith, is constantly to be put forth in all spirituals and temporals of the
soul; it is indeed a spiritual and supernatural lesson, very hard for flesh
and blood to learn, which uses to swim with bladders, to walk with clutches,
to have always some humane and earthly prop or other; but yet God does teach
his people this mystery, and acquaints them with this Heavenly art to trust in
him only, and not in any Creature. This ^iduciall resting of the soul is made
by some Learned Men to be only an effect of ^aith. The papists make it an act
of divine hope. But the most Orthodox do maintain that this is an essential
thing in faith, yea that the greatest perfection of faith lies not in knowing,
or giving firm assent, but in confidence; and therefore by this they do
chiefly define it, although it may be granted that there is also a confidence,
or trust which is produced by faith, as that place Ephesians. 3. 12. seems to
intimate, where we are said to have confidence by faith. There is then a divine
trust, which is nothing but faith, whereby the heart of a godly man is enabled
under all discouragements though the Fig tree fail, though the Olive tree
blossom not, to depend upon the Lord; yea with Paul to know how to abound and
to want, because it is not Creatures, not this or that condition which supports
him, but God alone, and therefore the goodness and power of God being always
the same, his heart is the same. This is like an Ark to him in the midst of
waters. This trusting in God must be while we have means, as well as when we
have them not; so when we have outward supports, its hard to know whether the
heart does rest on them or God only; But of this more in the Positive part.

2. There is an humane trust on confidence, and that is either in a good sense
or a bad sense: A good sense, as when the Apostle writing to believers, does
often profess his considence in them concerning their faithfullness and
perseverance Gal. 5. 10. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 4. Which confidence (unless Paul spoke as
having the gift of discerning of spirits) was within the bounds of humane
principles, and so not like that confidence which a man may have about his own
estate, as when Paul says of himself, Heb. 13. 18. (...), we trust we have a
good conscience, for this confidence is either an act of faith, or the sense of
it in the soul. In the next place, the Scripture speaks of an humane
confidence, but in an ill and sinful sense, as Luke 18. 9. When the Pharisees
are said to trust in themselves, and Romans 2. 19. some were confident they were
leaders of the blind, and yet lived in evil ways, so Phil. 3. 3. There is a
putting confidence in the flesh, which was a sin, that Paul was highly
guilty, of while a Pharisee, and that which did chiefly keep him off from faith
in Christ. Now it is this humane sinful trusting in our selves, that the
Apostle here speaks of, and which God would prevent in Paul. From the end of
God then so graciously intended in Paul's trouble, two things are observable.

1. That self confidence or trusting in our selves, is a sin so highly
displeasing to God, that he does often chastise his people in an heavy manner
Selfe-confidence a great sin.
to prevent it.

2. That even the most eminent of the Children of God are very prone to trust
in themselves. Concerning the first, it will be very useful to open the nature
of this self-trusting, it being a sin secretly involved and latent in our
breasts, that without much spiritual illumination and sanctification, we are
not able to know when we are guilty of it. To clear therefore the nature of
it, we are to consider:

1. That a man being a very infirm and weak miserable thing, is therefore
necessitated to trust in some thing or other. Our very trusting does denote
Propositions clearing the nature of self-confidence.
our great impotency; for God because he is omnipotent, wise, alsufficient^,
and happy in himself, therefore he cannot trust in any, he is able to bring
about what he wills; but the rational Creature, even because a Creature,
whether Men or Angels, do necessarily put their trust some where; so that what
the 1. All Creatures necessitated to trust in something.
center is to the stone in its motion it is restless till it come thither; Thus
the soul of a man is in restless motions and constant trepidations till it fix
it self upon that object it trusts to, and when it is there, the soul is no
longer in motu, but in quiet. The very nature then of trusting, and the
actings thereof do proclaim thy inability and insufficiency. It is because
thou art a depending Creature, and not like God allsufficient, that thou art
necessitated to trust in some thing without.

2. This trusting by original sin is horribly corrupted and perverted as
well as the other actings and powers of the soul, for it is wholely perverted
2. Our trust is corrupted by original sin.
in respect of the object. We trust in that, we ought not to do, setting a
Creature in the room of God, and thereby become guilty of secret, but horrible
idolatry, and that which is the true and adequate object of our trusting, that
we neglect. Insomuch that there is no man living till regenerated, that does
put his trust in God, but trusts in man, in the second causes, in his own
self. Thus like a Worm he is always crawling upon the ground, and therefore
if the Creatures and humane helps are removed from him he looks upon himself
as undone, he has no more hope abiding in him. This argues the Creature, not
God, is the object of our trusting; whereas there ought to be the same object
of faith, and trust (I speak as these are divine acts, not of humane faith and
hope) and therefore as we may not believe in any but God; so neither trust in
any. Every thing that is divine and supernatural, must be terminated upon God
himself. Therefore we say that the Church of Rome by her principles can teach
no higher a faith then what is mere humane, because the ultimate motive, in
which they resolve their belief, is the Authority of the Church, which though
they would make a divine motive, yet cannot by any more then humane. This it is
in Practicalls as well as Doctrinalls. A man carried by no higher principle
then nature, can never trust in any thing but a Creature. There is required as
much supernatural and divine influence to trust in God, as to the exercise of
any other grace; yea in some respects more. But man being so inslaved to lust,
and to a concupiscentiall love of the Creature some way or other: Hence it is
that a great part of his sinfullness against God is in perverse and corrupted
trusting, which is a sin that does not make such a terrible guilt and noise in
the Conscience of a man; but it is that which is almost the life and vigor of
every sin. All sin is therefore committed because a man does trust in some
Creature or other, and that admirable choice way of Evangelicall Righteousness
of Gospel justification, yea and the whole treasury of riches of grace in
Christ, is opposed by no sin, so much as a self righteousness; as we see in
Paul before his conversion: Paul was no profane man, no lover of excess and
riot, his conversation was very holy and unblameable as to the Law. But his
selfe-trusting, his selfe-righteousnesse made him a greater enemy to the
Gospell-grace, then any propaneness did most enormious men.

3. Our trusting and confidence being naturally thus put from God the right 3.
Hence our trust is placed upon many false objects.
object, hence it is that it emptyeth it self into many streams, insomuch
that we have as many sinful confidences almost as there are Creatures in the
world. As the Prophet told the people of Israel, that his gods multiplied
acording to their Cities, they had as many Idols as such places; so we may
enlarge it about carnal confidence, and say, it is according to all the
Creatures and comforts we do enjoy. Insomuch that when our Savior said Mark
10. 24. That it was impossible for such who trust in riches to be saved; the
Disciples cry out, Who then can be saved? signifying thereby, that every man
has somewhat he does trust in, as well as the rich man, his riches: And
because particular things do most affect, let us instance in some things which
are commonly made the objects of men's trust. And do you apply which of all
these thy heart is fixed upon by trusting in it; for thou will find whatsoever
it is beside God, it will prove a lie to thee; and as they did by imsultation
say to Christ, he trusted in God, let him save him; so this will be a true
derision at the day of judgment to every man offending this way. Thou did
trust in the power and favor of men, let them save thee from Hell, let them
free thee from damnation. Another he did put his trust in his wealth, he
boasted himself of that, now let thy wealth save thee, let that make thee
escape those everlasting torments if they can. Every man has some thing or
other in his heart he trusts to, as the Ivy that textilis silva, a weaved
wood, as Tertullian calls it, cannot grow without some Tree or Wall to lean
upon; so neither can the heart of a man move or stir without dependence upon
some Creature or other. They did in their Sacrifice for the Muses and Learning
offer Ivy to Apollo, to show that Learning would not or could not grow without
civil encouragement; yea and the Scripture does often compare the Church of
God to a Vine, and amongst other reasons this may be one, because the Vine
cannot grow unless something else bear it up. It is not like other Trees that
bear up themselves. Thus both the world and the Church of God, one is like a
Vine, the other like Ivy. They cannot like the earth be centred on nothing,
there must be suppeditaments to bear them up. And because a natural man wants
the life of faith, which would settle him on God only; therefore he runeth out
to innumerable Crutches to help himself with; as some Creatures for want of
blood abound with many feet to help them in their motion. Now the Scripture
does suggest most of these to us. And

1. Which is indeed the worst of all, is, When a man trusts in his own
wickedness, and bears himself up with that. There are such Sons of 1.
Some trust in their wickedness.
Belial, such monsters of impiety, that do only comfort and support themselves
with the iniquities they have committed, Isai. 30. 12. Some are there shrapely
reproved for trusting in oppression, in perverseness, and fraud, and stay
thereon: An expression the Scripture does much delight to use, when it speaks
of trusting. Here you see because men are subtle, and powerful, and
successful in wickedness, they are apt to trust in this; but see what
bitterness will be in the latter end, Verse 13. Their iniquity should be like
a Wall swelling out ready to make a breach, when a man thinks to lean on it,
presently it falls and overwhelmeth him. The Psalmist also Psalm 62. 10.
speaking of the vanity of men even in the highest degree, he advises them not
to trust in oppression and robbery, in unjust and sinful ways. Not to say
with him in the Poet, Virtus mihi numen, and ensis, quem teneo, My Manhood and
my Sword is my God; for how often has God by tragical instances in the world
made it appear that such mighty Nimrods had no more then a Spiders Web to
trust in: To trust then in sinful ways is the highest degree of folly.

2. The Scripture informs of another sinful object we are apt to trust 2.
Humane power and strength.
in, and that is humane power and strength. Who would not think, that where the
greatest might is, there is the greatest cause of confidence. Yet how often
does God infeeble the greatest power, and blast the greatest strength, and all
that men should not trust in themselves. God would have the Symbol of Sampsons
strength to be in his hair, the weakest part about him, that so he might see
his power was from God only. How often does God complain of Israel of his
sinful confidence? Isaiah 36. 7. They would go down to Egypt, they would
rest in the Chariots and Horses of Egypt; when yet they were but flesh, and
not spirit. Nothing that is weak must we lean upon, least it break under us,
Psalm 146. 3. Put not your trust in Princes, and the reason is, because his
breath goes forth, he returns to the earth, Jerem. 17. 5, 6. You have there
a curse pronounced against every one that shall trust in man; the
unpr^ofitableness also and ill success of all such trusting in man, yet how
natural is this sin to us. To think if we have the favor, the help of
those who are great in the world to trust in this more then in God, though it
be such a sin that the Scripture does scarce speak more terribly against any
other. There is a political and civil Idolatry, as well as a spiritual and
ecclesiastical one; and never did superstitious souls more devoutly pray to
their Saints and adore those Images than these do flatter, and attend upon such
humane helps and powers, that may outwardly advance them. As it has been the
high impiety of some Potentates in the world to arrogate a deity to themselves;
no less impiety is it in inferiors to depend upon them for their help as if
they were Gods, and to fear to offend them more then God himself.

3. Another sinful way of trusting, Is when we put our confidence in our 3.
Wealth.
wealth and riches and such outward greatness. It is so hard to have riches and
not to trust in them, that what our Evangelist calls having riches, Mark
calls it trusting in them. It is the mighty work of Gods grace, if thou do
not trust in these, when God makes them increase, and not to say of them as
the Israelites of their molten Calf, these are thy gods O Israel. Hence it is
that Paul 1 Timothy 6. 17. will have the Ministers of God deal with great zeal
and boldness to such; Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God. Though they
be uncertain riches; though they make themselves wings and fly away; yet how
apt are we to put trust in them, but God is the living God, always the same;
whether thou art living or dying, he is the same God; for this end covetousness
is called Idolatry, Col. 3. 5. There is no rich man, unless made humble by
grace, and rich in God, but his wealth is his God. No godly man can so heartily
trust in God, as he does in his wealth. Job was forced to purge himself from
this sin, as that which could not stand with integrity. If I have made Gold
my hope, or have said to fine Gold thou art my confidence; If I have rejoiced
because my wealth was great, Job. 3. 25, 26. If Job had done thus, he must have
acknowledged then he had been an Hypocrite. Take heed then of this close
lurking sin. It would be endless to reckon up all the external objects that
we may sinfully trust in. Therefore the next kind of sinful trusting to be
named, is concerning that which is spiritual and more subtly carried on; for
Paul could not trust in himself after this manner, he had no outward power, nor
wealth to put confidence in. It was therefore something more close and refined.

SERMON. LXIX.
What are those secret and inward objects, that men are apt to place their
Confidence in; and wherein even the Saints themselves may be guilty of that
sin.

2 COR. 1. 9. That we should not trust in our selves.
THe Lord (we heard) does so greatly abhor self-trusting, that the end of
these manifold troubles which are brought on the godly, is to mortify and kill
this sin.

There are two streams into which this sinful trusting does empty it self.

The first is External and visible, such as power and riches; for this may be
called trusting in our selves; partly because we look upon them, as ours; and
partly it is opposite to trusting in God.

Thesecond stream into which sinful trusting conveys it self, is that which is
Internal and invisible; and of this Paul does principally speak. So that it
will be very useful to enquire into those secret and soul-things, which a man
may put his trust in. No man can live without trusting in some thing or other,
any more than a man can walk without legs, or a bird fly without wings: But of
all trustings, those are most dangerous and unobservable, which are put forth
about that which lies latent in us. And What are those inward things, which a
man is apt to trust in. 1. In his own heart.


First, The Scripture speaks of that sinful trusting, which every natural
man is in an high manner guilty of, and that is, To trust in a man's own heart.
Pro. 28. 26. He that trusts in his own heart, is a fool. Now is not the world
full of such fools? Yea the Church of God? Is not every unregenerate man this
fool? Can you persuade him that his heart is naught, that he is in a state of
gall and bitterness? What is the reason, that under so many powerful
discoveries out of Gods word, every hearer does not wring his hands, smite upon
the breast, cry out, he is undone, he is found out to be a sinner, he cannot
flatter and deceive himself any longer? Whence (I say) is it, that most do sit
so sottishly, so securely and senslesly under the preaching of the Word? Is it
not because they trust in their hearts? They thank God they have a good heart,
their heart is right; and all this while, if they did truly know, what true
grace means, and how short they come of it, they would be amazed, and not
able to open their mouths for their justification any longer. And the truth is
we may call this the damning sin. This is that which destroys soul and body,
that though men are afar off from the way of grace, though they wallow in their
lusts, yet they trust in their hearts for all this. Prove. 21. 2. Every man's way
is right in his own eyes, but the Lord poudereth the hearts. It is no matter
what thy thoughts, thy persuasions are, but how does the Lord account thee? Men
are subject to a twofold great mistake:

1. They mistake about the Nature of Godliness, they understand not what it
is, how high and rare a thing that few do attain it; They take civility for
godliness, they take the outward performance of religious duties for godliness;
they take some sudden pangs and fits of devotion for godliness: Thus they
judge copper to be gold. But

In the next place, if they do understand what it is to be regenerated, how
great a matter it is to be a New Creature, then such is their self-love, that
they presently apply it to themselves, and do believe they are such ones. For
this end is that duty so often commended, To commune with our own hearts, to
try and search our own hearts. For this end we are informed of the
deceitfulness and desperate wickedness of the heart, that no man knows it,
that God only knows it. Thou boastest of thy heart, thou trustest in thy
heart. Ah poor deluded wretch, thou know not what a sea of evil thy heart
is; till grace shine into that dark dungeon, thou can never perceive the
loathsome lusts that crawl there. Pray therefore to be delivered from this
heart-trusting, as from hell it self. It is this that is the Beelzebub sin.
This makes thee shut thy eyes, stop thy ears, harden thy heart; and therefore
till this root be pulled up, no preaching, no Ministry can do thee any good.
For the first thing done by converting grace, is to take away this trusting in
our selves, and in stead thereof to work an holy despair in our selves. This
the Spirit of God does by convincing of sin through the Law: by this we see
our selves a sinful people, and a cursed people; we are also convinced of our
impotency and insufficiency to help our selves. By this we are convinced that
it must be the righteousness of another, even of Christ himself, and not our
own, that we must appear in, when we approach unto God. Till therefore thou art
in this heart-trusting way, as long as this good persuasion and secure thoughts
are in thy self, thou art wholly out of the way to Heaven. This is not the way
to Christ; if thou art not wounded, the good Samaritan will pour no oil into
thee; if thou do not judge all things husks, and see thy self ready to
famish, there will no entertainment be given to thee at thy fathers house. Oh
then that the Spirit of God would in a mighty and powerful manner fall upon
such sinful considers, that he would shake the very foundations of their
souls. For as long as this self-trusting a bideth in thee, thy condition is
incurable; if the heart be deceitful above all things, why do thou believe
it above all things? Thou believe thy own heart more than Gods word, more
than the Ministers of God. No man doubts of his heart, none questioneth or
examineth his heart, and therefore comes not to the Word preached, to have
that purged, to have that cleansed, but takes it for an undoubted principle,
that his heart is good already. But how comes it to be good? When was it made
good? by nature it is full of evil, and therefore it can never be sanctified,
but by the grace of God effectually working by the Ministry.

Secondly, The Scripture instanceth in another object of sinful trusting, that
2. Self-righteousnesse.
is secret and close, but also very dangerous, and that is in the
righteousness we conceit we have; and this was the great pharisaical sin.
This was the Camels bunch; this made them stand in such immediate opposition to
Christ, that they rejected his Person and Offices; They did not look upon
themselves as sick, and therefore would not admit of a Physician. And oh that
this sin had been like Jonah's gourd that sprang up for a day only, and
presently was consumed; but it is a sin that passes from one generation to
another, to put confidence in their own righteousness, to seek to be justified
by the works they do; Does not this reign in Popish spirits, in all formalists,
in civil and moral men? Do they not look to be saved, to be justified by their
works of righteousness and charity? How often does the Scripture thunder
against this sin? And indeed well it may, for it makes our selves our own
Christ's, our own Saviors. It makes Christ to die in vain. Now how natural and
imbred a sin this is, appears by the Jews, Romans 10. 3. They went about to
establish their own righteousness, and would not submit themselves to the
righteousness of faith. Hence because this sin did so reign in the
Pharisees, our Savior spoke that excellent Parable, Luke 18. 9. concerning a
Publican humbling himself, and sensible of his unworthiness, as being justified
rather than a Pharisee; He spoke this (says the Text) to certain who trusted
in themselves, that they were righteous. And why does our savior make those
blessed, that mourn, that are poor in spirit, that hunger and thirst after
righteousness? but to show in what a blasted and cursed estate they are, who
put any trust in the good works they do to be justified by them. You see then
by this, how dangerous and damnable a thing that common sin is, which every
civil, every just and righteous man is apt to lean upon; if his eyes were
opened, and his heart made tender, he would not dare to eat, or sleep, or stay
one night in it, as good and safe, as now he believes it to be.

Thirdly, Another object of this sinful secret trusting, is in spiritual or 3.
Church Priviledges.
Church Priviledges, or Ordinances, that we have more than others. This is also
like the Psalmists plague, which destroys at Midday, thousands fall dead
into hell, because of this religious trusting in privileges and Ordinances.
They trust in them, not regarding what holiness and godliness God does
require of them. How palpably did the Prophet Jeremiah reprove this in the
Jews, Jer. 7. 4. Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The Temple, the Temple
of the Lord are these; but amend your ways, and your doings, as verse. 3. When
the Prophet exhorts them to repentance and reformation, then they plead, The
Temple of the Lord, and the Ordinances. This is so enticing a sin, that in
the Christian Church many were persuaded by false Teachers, That unless they
were circumcised, and kept up the Rites of the Ceremonial Law, they could not
be justified. Therefore the Apostle speaks excellently, Phil. 3. 3. We are
the circumcision, which rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the
flesh. When it comes to this, that thou do not trust in Duties, or in
Ordinances, but in Christ, in them then art thou a true worshipper of God in
the Spirit. In the same Chapter Paul lays upon his own heart, what trust and
confidence he once had in his being a Jew, in being circumcised, in his legal
righteousness. But when it pleased God to reveal Christ to him, What, does he
trust in these privileges any longer? No by no means, for he accounts all
things but dung and loss in comparison of that righteousness which is by
faith in Christ. Is not this likewise an universal predominant sin amongst
Christians? Do they not trust in their Christianity, in their prayers, in their
Baptism, in receiving of the Lords Supper? They put confidence in these
things, as if they were God and Christ. Neither have the Ministers of the
Gospel less work to do with Christians in this respect, than the Prophets had
of old with the Jews. Insomuch that then only we come to be a spiritual
people, when we can discern between Ordinances and Christ in the Ordinances;
when we look upon Duties as the field, and Christ as the pearl hid in that
field. When we look upon the Ordinances as the hemme of Christ's garment we
touch, but we look for virtue to come forth from Christ himself. But when shall
the Ministers of the Gospel persuade in this matter? How long will it be ere
you put a difference between doing a duty, and trusting in a duty, between
presence at an Ordinance, and enjoying Christ himself in that Ordinance. And
thus far men destitute of true solid grace, may yet have some external
apparent righteousness, and other spiritual objects to rest upon.

Let us in the next place consider, Wherein a godly man, yea an eminent Paul
may become guilty of trusting in himself. For seeing God has taken that way
for our justification, which is wholly to take us off our selves; and How even
a godly man may be guilty of self-confidence, by trusting, 1. In his spiritual
gifts.
the Gospel Grace is therefore exalted, that we may be debased; how can it come
about that the dregs of this sin should still be polluting the most holy man?
But

First, Even a Paul, an eminent godly man, may sinfully trust in those
spiritual gifts and assistance, which God has vouchsafed to him rather than
others. This spark of fire will quickly kindle in tinder. Has God given a man
great gifts, great abilities in prayer, great enlargements above others: It
must be the great work of grace to keep this man humble and low, so as not to
trust on them. 2 Cor. 12. 7. Paul there declares what wonderful honor God
had vouchsafed to him; he was lifted up to the third Heaven; he had abundance
of revelations. So that God did in many extraordinary ways communicate himself
to Paul. But could Paul be thus lifted up upon the pinnacle, and his head not
turn round? Can he drink of this wine, and not be giddy? No, he is in much
danger; and therefore observe what way God takes with him at the seventh
verse, Lest I should be pufft up above measure, there was given me a thorn in
the flesh, a messenger from Satan to buffet me. What this was is greatly
disputed by the learned; to be sure it was so heavy and burdensome a
temptation, that he prayed to God often, That it might be removed, but God
would not take it off; and the reason is twice declared, Lest I should be
puffed up above measure; what is this but to have confidence in his gifts and
revelations with those extraordinay dispensations of Gods love to him. If then
the green Tree be so apt to receive these sparks of vainglory and
selfeconfidence, what shall the dry Tree do? Examine then thy self, the more
Gods assistance is with thee, Art thou the more lowly in thy own eyes? Do
thou find an holy fear and trembling under these approaches of God to thy soul?
Art thou affected at these wonderful workings of God upon thee, as Peter, when
he saw that great miracle about the fishes, presently to remember his own
sinfulness: Or as those in the Old Testament, who when they had any glorious
apparitions of God vouchsafed to them, were so considerative of their own
frailty and imbecility, that they generally thought they should die
immediately? Thus the more Gods gifts abound in thee, do thou the more go
out of thy self? And think, now I am in a temptation, the Devil is ready to
puff up with self-content, and so to make these great gifts to become a snare
to thee; to turn these earrings (as it were) of gold, into an Idol to worship
it. This is the reason (say some) why Ezekiel is so often called Son of man,
because of those great visions he had in reference to Jerusalem. And Daniel
likewise is once called the Son of man, for he had great revelations
concerning the Church of God. Now this Title of Son of man might greatly debase
him under those great privileges. God seldom uses his people as great
instruments in his service, but he does something or other that shall be like a
Memento esse hominem. Even as that hand of Moses, in the stretching out whereof
so many miracles were wrought, was affected with a Leprosy, that so the power
might be given to God, and not to Moses. Thus God does wisely mingle gifts and
infirmities, dispenses glorious privileges, and manifold chastisements, that
so the balance may descend downwards, as much as it ascends upwards: That a
gracious man should have that true in him, which is said of the Element, In
tantum ascendit, in quantum descendit.

Secondly, A godly man may sinfully trust in his Graces, in his Holiness, 2.
In his graces.
in his faith, and love of Christ. So that what the pharisaical man does about
his apparent and external holiness, the godly man in some measure may do
about his real graces. Insomuch that many times they have not the reward of a
duty, and the comfort of it in their own hearts, by secret pride and confidence
arising in their heart after they have done. Therefore as pure motives are to
begin, so be sure in the same to conclude thy holy duties. Let not the Dragon
devour the child as soon as it is borne. Take heed of that Euge Bernarde,
benedicis. Thou preachest well, thou prayest well, thy heart has been as thou
would have it. For this is the danger of self-confidence, it breeds out of
holy duties; other sins are committed, because of sinful temptations; but here
poison is sucked from the sweet herb, and thy evil arises from thy good. No
wonder then if the godly have many exhortations, To work out their salvation
with fear and trembling. Not to be high-minded but fear. Though they stand, to
take heed lest they fall; for they are apt to trust in their own strength, and
their own power; and this makes way for their fall, as in Peter, Mark 14. 31.
He would not believe he should deny Christ, though the Lord told him he would:
Yea the more vehemently he affirmed he would not, though he should die: Yea,
says the same Evangelist, Likewise also said they all. They were all confident
as well as Peter, though not so much; yet as Peter did grossly deny Christ, so
all the rest fled from him. By this you see how dangerous it is to put any
trust in our own graces. Remember that place Ezekiel. 33. 13. If a righteous man
trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, etc. By trusting to
himself he begins to fall.

Let then the Use be even to those who are most godly, to take heed and watch
against this subtle sin that may be in thy heart, that may creep into thy
graces, into thy duties: When thou think thy self most free, even then may
it have the greatest hold upon thee: Others sins come like a roaring Lion,
this like a glisteriug Serpent. In other things thy sins hurt thee, here thy
graces and duties make thee fall. Hezekiah humbled himself in his sickness,
but in his mercies, his heart was lifted up. Come off from all duties, and all
religious performances, with trembling reflections upon thy self.

SERMON. LXX.
Whether Paul speaks these words in his own person: And wherein the
sinfulness of Self-confidence appears.

2 COR. 1. 9. That we should not trust in our selves.
THe second Observation from the words was, That even the Paul' s, the most
holy and eminent men, are prone to this sin of trusting in themselves. The
great end why God did thus exercise Paul, it was to prevent this sin above
any other. Paul (you heard) had no riches, no honors, no earthly power to
confide in. Therefore his parts, his revelations, his graces, from these did
arise his danger.

But before we come to explain the Doctrine and amplify it, one Question is to
Whether Paul speaks these words in his own person.
be answered, and that is, Whether the Apostle speak this in regard of his own
person, or by a figure assumes the person of other godly men? For that is many
times the custom of the Apostle to join himself in number with such, whose
infirmities he does not partake of, or is guilty of, as 1 Cor. 11. 31. If we
would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord, putting himself in
the number of those who came unworthily to the Lords Supper. For Chrysostom
does so admire the high degree of grace in Paul, that he thinks Paul does not
say this, because of himself, but by way of instruction to others. There is
also a late learned Writer (Amyraldus Consid. in 7. cap. ad Romanos, and contra
Gul. Rivetum.) who thinks it an assertion no way worthy of reproof, if we say
Paul had even in this life more grace than some glorified Saints may have in
Heaven. So that he will acknowledge Paul, if not the other Apostles, by a
singular and extraordinary privilege, to have obtained perfection. From whence
he gathers, that to expound that Romans 7. of Paul as regenerated, as if he found
the law of sin captivating of him, is to be highly dishonouring of that great
Apostle, and is signally injurious to the grace of the Gospel. And if this be
so, then we cannot say, that Paul spoke this for himself, but for others. For
if he had attained to such a state of perfection, there was no danger of pride
or self-confidence. To make this his opinion good, he observes. That we do not
find Paul charged with any (...), any defect, after he was converted. And
besides, he propounds himself, as an example and a pattern, which could not be,
if what is said in Romans 7. were true in his own person.

I shall not enter upon the Exposition of that Chapter. But certainly that
which is here attributed to Paul, he would with the same fear and trembling
reject, as he did the divine worship the Barbarians would have given to him.
For although it cannot be denied, but that God did furnish Paul with much
grace, far above many others, yet that he thought not of any perfection in him,
appears 1 Cor. 4. 4. where he says, though he knew nothing concerning
himself, as to the discharge of his public Ministry in any wilful careless
way, yet he was not justified thereby, because it was God that did judge him.
God knew more evil and corruption in Paul, than Paul himself was ever able to
discover. Besides this Doctrine of Paul's perfection would overthrow his
justification by the righteousness of Christ, whereas he does in a most
affectionate manner, Phil. 3. 8, 9. Count all things dung and dross, to be
found in Christ, not having his own righteousness, but that which is by faith.
Hence he says, Not as if I had already attained, or were made perfect. Yea we
read of defects in Paul after his conversion, as that which Amyraldus
instanceth in, of the paroxysm or bitter contention between Paul and Barnabas.
For although the Scripture, as he observes, does not relate who was in the
fault, yet it appears very probably, that both had their passions too
inordinately breaking forth at that time. Besides that was a plain defect of a
sudden perturbation in Paul, when being smitten by the Highpriest, he replied
as it seems in a sinful commotion, God shall smite thee thou painted wall;
which upon information he presently retracts. Neither can that be an excuse
which some make, that he did not know him to be the Highpriest, because of the
corrupt customs they had about bestowing the Priesthood as they pleased. For
Paul said to him that did sit to judge him, Sit thou to judge me (says he)
after the Law? Act. 23. 3. Therefore I suppose that the best interpretation of
(...), I know not, I wist not, is this, I attended not, I minded it not. The
injurious dealing Paul met with, made him forget his duty; so that he did not
attend to this, that he was a Magistrate, and though a wicked and unjust one,
yet not to be reviled. And that Paul had corruption within him ready to break
forth upon occasions, appears 2 Cor. 12. by Gods dispensation to him in that
affliction, which he calls a thorn in the flesh, and the messenger of Satan
buffeting of him. I would easily yield to that learned man, That the thorn in
the flesh was not libidinous or lustful temptations, which some have thought,
not so much for that reason which he gives, that it is likely God would cure
one sin by another sin, a less sin by a greater. (For carnal sins are
said to be less than spiritual; and it is often Gods way, to cure the sins
of his people by letting them fall into sin, driving out poison by poison) as
because the Context does more incline another way, as might be showed. Yea
there is one place, which puts it out of all doubt, that Paul needed both
afflictions from God, and voluntary humiliations of himself, lest sparks within
should quickly become a flame, by that known place, 1 Cor. 9. 22. I keep under
my body, and bring it in subjection, lest when I have preached to others I my
self become a castaway. It Is an allusion to those who run in a race, as the
verse precedent shows, who did strictly observe their diet and order, their
body being temperate in all things, that they might obtain victory. Thus Paul
in his Christian race was jealous of corruption arising in him, and clogging of
him, and so retard him therein.

This I have been the larger upon, because it makes the more for the comfort
of the godly to know, that even such as Paul had so much corruption and evil
within them, as well as they, that did not the Lord use several means to humble
them, were he not always filing of their rust, cleansing out their spots, they
would quickly become very loath some and unclean.

Now in the pursuing of this Doctrine, because I have already opened the nature
of this self-trusting; I shall only aggravate the evil of it, that because the
godly are so prone to it, they may the more bewail it, and watch against it.
And certainly the people of God do not think and meditate upon the evil of
this sin enough, you hear them complaining often of other sins, they lie
heavy upon their hearts, but very little of this whereas this is like sweet
poison, it destroys, and you feel it not. And

First, It must nneds be a sin highly displeasing God, Because he does so
severely chastise his own people to prevent this sin. The sharper physic is
given, Of the sinfulness of self-confidence, which appears 1. From Gods
chastising his children so much to prevent it.
the greater danger of the disease. God would not have exercised Paul, thus
above his strength, but that he might see his own feebleness and infirmity, and
might accordingly trust in God only. Lighter and lesser afflictions do not
drive thee out of all humane props; thou have some creature-consideration or
other, that does make thee bear up thy heart; but when God cuts every rope, and
drives the ship into the midst of the Sea, among waves and tempests, then thou
art provoked to look up unto God. Let then the children of God lay to heart
this sin more, and examine themselves in every affliction that does befall
them. Thou many times say, Oh that I could find out the sin, the Jonah
that has raised this tempest! Oh that I knew what was the peculiar corruption
God would bring me in mind of by this trouble upon me! Why, try and search,
whether thou have not secretly trusted in thy own self, or in some earthly
hopes? Whether thy heart has been weaned from all things? It may be there is
this or that creature thou do inordinately lean upon, and therefore because
thou do not yet trust in God with all thy heart, he does thus imbitter thy
condition to thee. Insomuch that were the children of God in no danger of
self-dependance or creature-dependance, they should seldom meet with the rod
of God upon their backs. Who was a man of greater afflictions and exercises
than David was? And who speaks more of trusting in God than he does? This he
learned by all his temptations.

Secondly, This sin is to be aggravated, Because it is such a secret, close
2. It is a secret sin.
imbred sin, it is the last sin that will be mortified. There is a
difficulty of finding it out, and a difficulty of overcoming it, when it is
discovered, and both these make it the more dangerous and damnable sin. It is
difficult to find it out: This sin like Saul hides it self behind the stuff;
you may search and search, as they did for the Spies in Rahab's house; but
because something or other covers this sin, therefore you pass it by
undiscerned. How apt are we to say, I do not trust in my graces. I do not trust
in my gifts? Would you not have me to take notice of them? How can I then be
thankful to God? How can I bless God for them? And for my graces, Do not all
Divines say, though they may not trust in them, yet they may take them as
comfortable signs of Gods favor, and thereupon rejoice before God, yea and
plead them against the accusation of Satan, or as an argument to God, not by
way of merit, but because of the gracious promise made by God to our graces
after this manner? Hezekiah under the sentence of death prayed, Remember, O
Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with an upright heart, 2
King. 20. 3. Thus also Paul did, I have fought a good fight, henceforth is laid
up for me a crown of glory, 2 Timothy 4. 7. All this is true, godly men are
allowed to take comfort from their graces, and thankfully to receive the
evidences of Gods love thereby; but how hard a matter is it to stay there, and
go no further? How difficultly are consolations from them, and confidence in
them, separated one from another? Even as to have riches, and not to trust in
riches, so to have grace, and not trust in grace; and the rather, by how much
grace is accounted a more excellent thing then wealth. As it is hard to find it
out, so no less difficult to overcome it. Caesar had some enemies, of whom he
said it was, Difficilius invenire, quam vincere; but it is not so with this
corruption. Paul himself cannot so quickly shake off this viper that sticks
not to his hand, but close to the heart. For as faith is therefore the most
difficult grace, because it carries us out of our selves, out of the
creatures, out of all things, and fixes the heart upon God alone: So on the
contrary, this is the sin that is most easy, and where unto we are most
propense; with the worm we crawl upon the ground; our feebleness and
infirmity is such, that we must have churches to rest upon; and till faith be
made perfect, we cannot but catch hold upon some reed or other, though never so
weak.

Thirdly, It being an heart-sinne, It may be frequently committed in a day, in
3. It Is a sin soon committed.
an hour. Thy heart is always in motion, it never lies still; now every time
it moves, it may put forth some carnal dependence or other upon the creature.
Thus whereas many sins cannot be often committed, there are many things
concurrent ere they can be accomplished. This may be committed as often as
there is the twinkling of the eye. The air then may not be fuller of Atoms, or
the sea of water, than thy heart of carnal confidences. And certainly every
time God is not made thy refuge, every time thou do not rest under his
shadow, so often do thou put trust in something else than God only. Take
heed then of that sin, which like the Poets Hydra, as often as thou cuttest
off their Heads, new ones arise again in the room thereof. That the emptying of
thy heart, is like emptying of a lively and quick spring; the more water is
cast out, the more new comes in immediately.

Fourthly, This trusting in any thing but God, is a very great sin, 4. It Is a
making the creature a God.
Because it is a making of the creature a God, and so a breach of that first
Commandment, wherein we are forbidden to have any other gods, but the true one.
Now how great a sin Idolatry is, the Scripture does every where speak. Thou
therefore that abhorrest to worship a stock, or a stone, who dare not fall
down before an Idol to do reverence thereunto: How often do thou as bad in
thy heart to the creatures? Yea many times some Idolaters did worship the true
God, they did not err in the object; only they formed sinful representations
of God to themselves. As the Israelites in that Calf which they made, crying
out, These are thy gods, O Israel. And this Idolatry is not so bad, as when
that which is not the true God, is set up for him, and so worshipped. Now to
trust in our selves, or creatures, is to err in the object, we set up another
thing in Gods room; Thy parts are thy God; thy graces, thy Christ; thy
repentance, thy Savior, thou give that to thy tears, which alone does belong
to the blood of Christ. If then God does so often proclaim his jealousy in
worshipping of other gods, will he not also about trusting in any thing but
himself? What are the duties of the first Command, but to love God, to trust
in him, and to depend upon him; for he only is the proper and adequate object
of trust, because in him is infallible verity and truth. Truth of being, so
that he can never die, but be always the same, and truth of promise, so that
Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass away than his Word. Again, he is willing
and ready to help, he manifests his freeness of grace to thee, whereas the
Devils and the damned they cannot trust in God, because they have no promise
from God; yea they are sure he will never help them. Lastly, God is omnipotent,
nothing is impossible to him. Therefore if thou can meet with a creature that
is eternal, unchangeable, omnipotent, then may thou put trust in that; but
the whole world respectively to God, is less than the dust of the balance,
which does not turn the scale one way or other: so neither is all the power,
and all the wisdom of the world able to turn thy condition, to supply thy
wants, if God does not interpose.

Lastly, It is a foolish and unprofitable sin; as Jer. 17. Cursed is he that
5. It Is a foolish and unprofitable sin.
trusts in man. God delights to blast all the things thou have hoped in; so
that commonly we may know what we trusted too much in, by Gods removing of it;
or what we would rest upon too much, by denying us such helps and comforts. No
sooner have we with Jonah got under a gourd to keep our selves from the
scorching heat, but God causes a worm to devour it: how unwise art thou then
by resting thy soul upon any comfort? Thou can not take a more speedy way
then to make God break it under thy arms. Even as the Aegyptiane, because they
boasted of the waters of Nilus, and trusted in them; God turned them all into
blood. Be sure God will make thy confidences, thy sorrows and breakings of
heart, that can never enough be received, which Jonah preached from his own
experience, They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy, Jonah 2.
8. Those very mercies God had purposed for thee, and was in the way of
performing of them, by observing of, and trusting in other means and helps,
thou have utterly deprived thy self of. Even as God did with the Israelites,
Jerem. 2. 37. Thou shall go from Egypt with thine hands upon thy head, for
the Lord has rejected thy confidences, and thou shall not prosper in them.
Thus thou art many times bewailing the loss of thy confidences.

SERMON. LXXI.
Of the Nature, Object and Matter of our Divine Trust, or Dependence upon God.

2 COR. 1. 9. But in God.
WE now come to that blessed and medicinal effect of the grent trouble which
came upon Paul in Asia, as it is positively described. For we have the sinful
and unlawful object of our trust removed (which is our selves,) and the proper
adequate, and only object thereof asserted, and that is the Lord. From whence
observe, God alone is the proper object of our trust.


That God alone is the proper object in whom we are to trust.

As we are not to believe in any but the omnipotent God; so neither to trust in
any besides him.

Because this Text is so proper, I shall enlarge my self about this great duty
of trusting in God, it being of such great practical concernment. For there is
no grace more difficultly and rarely exercised than this. There is indeed much
presumption in the world, and carnal confidence, but little spiritual
dependence upon God alone, and relying upon his promise and power, overlooking
all means and instruments. That therefore we may be fully acquainted with the
nature of this grace, and may accordingly exercise it all the day long, for
every Propositions concerning our trusting in God. 1. It is wrought by the
Spirit of God.
moment, every time we breathe, we have need of trusting in God.

Let us lay down several Propositions. And

First, Consider, that to trust in God is a gracious gift wrought in us by his
Spirit. No man is able of himself, or by himself to rest upon God alone, not
regarding or looking above all second causes, unless he be enabled thereunto by
God. For to trust is an act of faith, as is to be showed: and faith that is in
many places made to be the gift of God, and not accomplished by our strength.
Whereas then you have many people, whose mouths are full of trusting in God,
you must know, that such speak they know not what. For none can trust in God,
but he that is enabled thereunto by the grace of God. For as Peter's body could
not walk upon the waters without sinking, because of the natural weight of the
body, unless Christ had in a wonderful manner supported it. So neither can a
man look higher than means, than instruments, unless the Spirit of God lift
thy soul up. Yea, because man is so apt to live by sense, consisting of a
sensible body, and therefore the things of sense most affect him; Hence it is,
that if there be more difficulty to work one grace than another, because of the
more immediate opposition of the soul against some duty more than another; We
may say, that a man is sooner brought to be just, liberal, and to perform the
duties of the second Table, yea many duties of the first Table, than this. No
wonder then it be made a gracious gift of God. Hence

In the second place, There is none can trust in God, but such as are
regenerated, 2. None but the regenerate can act this grace.
and are made new creatures. For as none have true saving faith but such, so
none have spiritual and heavenly dependence upon God but such. It is an easy
matter to say, We trust in God, when we have the helps and supply of all
creatures; but when all props are removed, then to rest on God, as securely and
quietly, as if thou had all external abundance; this cannot be done but by a
gracious heart. Therefore the unregenerate man, he does but delude himself. It
is not God that he trusts in, but his wealth, his power, some refuge or other
he has in the creature; neither can he live upon higher principles. Hence we
have that place thrice mentioned, The just shall live by faith. Faith is
trusting there; and it is applied both to our life, in respect of temporal
things, in afflictions, as Heb. 10. 38. as also in respect of spiritual things,
especially our justification in the sight of God, as Gal. 3. 11. It is the just
man then, and the sanctified man alone, who can live by trusting on God only.
Sin is such an heavy load, that it presses down, and makes a man creep upon
the ground. Now all those creatures that did so, were unclean by the Law of God.

Thirdly, This trusting, it is an act of faith; by that grace we are able to
depend upon God alone. Indeed the Papists they make trusting to be an act of 3.
It is an act of faith.
Hope: And it may not be denied, but that faith has some such proportionable
act flowing from it; but the trusting that the Scripture speaks so much of, is
plainly an act of faith. For what the Old Testament calls Trusting in God so
often, in the New it is, Believing on God, and on Christ, (...), is no more
than fiducial recumbency, or resting of the soul upon Christ. Though hope
therefore has its trust, yet faith likewise has its trust: Only hopes object
is apprehended as suture, and in expectation; but faiths trusting makes the
object present, as to apprehension: And therefore Heb. 11. 1. it is called, The
substance of things hoped for. By trusting then on God, we mean not that act of
faith, whereby it knows God, nor that whereby it gives assent, that there is
a God; but whereby the whole heart is drawn out to depend on God, and rest
upon him, for whatsoever good thing he stands in need of. And therefore this
trusting in God is necessarily accompanied with a love of God, and endeared
thoughts about him, as a gracious Father, who will mercifully provide for all
our wants. As Austin of old, Credere in Deum, was Credendo amare. So that here
is a great difference between that Historical and Dogmatical faith which many
Christians have, whereby they acknowledge the truths of Christ, and this
fiducial trusting on God; for this is necessarily accompanied with an hearty
love of, and delight in God, and cannot be separated from it. Hence the Devil
that he may tempt to despair, which is a sin opposite to trust in God, he
labors to keep the distressed sinner in hard thoughts of God, as one who is a
provoked Judge, and will not show mercy. So that as long as the heart is by
these sad temptations kept at a distance, and is estranged from God, it cannot
so fully trust in him.

Fourthly, It Is not God absolutely considered that is the object of our
trusting 4. It is not God as absolutely, but relatively considered, that is the
object of our trust. 1. As he is an infinite true and everlasting God.
in him. For the Devils and damned in hell, though none need mercy and help
more than they do, yet they cannot trust in him. Therefore God relatively
considered, as revealing himself to his people, is the object of their hope,
and these Attributes or Properties do especially sustain our trusting in him.

1. That he is the infinite, true and ever living God. Upon this ground to
trust in Idols, to trust in riches, to trust in men, though never so great, is
forbidden, not only as a sin, but as a vain thing; uncertain riches they are,
Idols are vanities, they are nothing. Man has his breath in his nostrils; and
therefore it is foolish to trust in such things; but God being the Jehovah, and
Eternal, even the Everlasting God, the same for ever; therefore it is that he
only must be trusted in. Are thy creatures a Jehovah? Have they an infinite
being? Are they from everlasting to everlasting? No certainly; then it is
Idolatry to put trust in them.

2. God is the Adequate Object of our hope, Because of his Immutability 2. As
immutable in his promises.
on his Promises, as well as in his Being. Here are two particulars included in
this.

1. A Promise. For if God had not revealed to us, what he would do for us,
there could not be any trusting in him. Hence Gods promise, and man's trusting,
they must always go together. To trust for such things he has never promised,
is presumption, and a temptation of God; and not to trust for such things as he
has promised, though they seem never so improbable or impossible to us, is to
limit God, and to measure him according to our apprehensions. This is to make
trusting an act of sense or of reason, not of faith. The Rule then of our
trusting is Gods promise. It is not Gods Infiniteness and Eternity as such,
but we must also have a promise. Therefore though God be so full of Goodness
and Mercy, yet the damned cannot trust in him, because they have no promise
from God, that he will do good to them. But though we have a promise, yet if
it were the promise of a man, who is a liar, who is inconstant and mutable,
ready to repent of what he has promised, then our trusting would be weak and
uncomfortable; but God is unchangeable in his promise, Heaven and Earth shall
sooner pass away, than this gracious word of God. James 1. 17. With him there
is no variableness, nor shadow of change. God then being the supreme verity,
and it being impossible for him to lie, as Hebr. 6. 18, 19. No wonder that our
hope and trusting in God under all waves of temptations, be a sure and steadfast
Anchor, as the Apostle calls it. Why then is it, that you see even the people
of God tossed up and down with such uncertain thoughts and workings of heart?
Why is it they have not a serene and quiet frame of heart all the day long? It
is because they let go this Anchor; They intermit this trusting in God;
otherwise because God is the same, and his promise is the same, they also would
be the same. You see then, why God is the Adequate Object of our trust, because
he has promised, and because he is unchangeable in his promise. What folly is
it to trust in any earthly greatness and power? It is but as the shadow that
passes away. The Apostle calls it, The fashion of the world, 1 Corinthians. 7.
because it is so transitory. Therefore our name we customarily use to express
things by, is most absurd and improper, if we regard Scripture-expression. For
we use to say, A Kingly State, A Christian State; and so Statu^ Magnatum;
Status is a stando, and denotes what is stable; whereas all these are but a
Fashion, a Show that passes away. Thus when we would express the glory of a
man, we say, he appeared in Great State. Now no word is so improper as that; it
is as if you should call a shadow a substance, or say, the substance of a
shadow; or as if running should be called standing still. The Scripture
expresses it more fully, when Act. 25. 23. Agrippa and Bernice are said to
appear (...), With great pomp, we translate; in the original it is, With a
great fantasy or apparition. The word (...) is applied in Scripture to
apparitions of Spirits, which quickly vanish away. Now how contradictory is it
to call a fantasy a State, as if we should call a feather which flies up and
down, a mountain that abides, and cannot be removed? Seeing therefore all
earthly greatness is thus fluid and ambulatory, how can we put any trust
therein?

Lastly, Therefore is God the ground of our trusting, Because he is only 3. As
he is omnipotent.
Almighty and Omnipotent, able to do of himself whatsoever he has promised.
For though we had Gods promise to do such things for us, yet if he had not the
supreme power to order and work all things when he pleases, but were
subordinate to some higher power, then we could not trust in him. Hence we
justly charge the Papists with Idolatry for trusting in the Virgin Mary, whom
they call their hope in prayer, as also in the other Saints. For although they
would elude by a distinction of trusting in one, as the primary efficient
cause, and in one as a secondary and instrumental cause, in which latter sense
they only trust in the Saints, as they would persuade us; yet that is against
the very nature of divine trust, which must have for its object only, that
which is supreme and omnipotent. So that unless they will distinguish of a
primary God, and a secondary God, they cannot so distinguish about trusting in
the same manner. Even as it is with the other act of faith, as it gives a
divine assent to any truth. The Schoolmen generally say, That the Ratio
formalis fidei, is, Revelatio Divina, and Suprema veritas. So that we cannot
with a Divine Faith believe upon any thing, but a Divine Testimony. Thus it is
in this other act of faith, which we call trusting. It must be a Divine
Promise, a Divine Power, else we cannot put this holy and divine trust in it.
As therefore the Psalmist said, Some put their trust in their horses, some in
chariots, but we will trust in the Name of the Lord, Psalm. 20. 7. Thus let us;
Some trust in Angels, some in Saints, some in great men, in wise men; but we
will trust in the Lord. From hence also it is, that we do clearly confute the
Socinian, who denies the Eternal Deity of Christ. For if Christ were not God,
if he were only the best of creatures, yet as a creature, it would be
unlawful to trust in him, we should be guilty of great Idolatry to put
confidence in him. Now it is plainly a duty to trust in Christ, as well as in
God the Father, Romans 15. 12. Though the root of Jesse, yet in him shall the
Gentiles trust; and that is, because he is not a mere man, but God as well as
man. Ephesians 1. 12. So they are called, The first fruits of Achaia, who first
trusted in Christ. This then is a plain demonstration of the Godhead of Christ,
because it is our duty to trust in him. You see by all these glorious
properties in God, which are the full reason of our trusting in him, that it is
not lawful under any nice and subtle distinctions whatsoever to put our trust
any where, but in the 2. The matter for which we trust in God is the good thing
we want, either spiritual or temporal.
Lord.

Secondly, As God is the object in whom we trust, So the matter for which we
are to trust in him, is all the good things we want. There is not any one
mercy, whether for soul or body, but we are to trust in God alone for it.

Now the good things we want, empty themselves in two streams, The spiritual
mercies, and the temporal mercies; and we are to trust in God for all these.
There is not a crumme of bread, or a drop of drink, but we are to trust and
depend on God for it. We are not to trust in our labor, in our barn and
store, but are to lie in prayer at the throne of grace every day, as Lazarus
did at Dives his gate, even for a crum of spiritual mercies; and they are of
many sorts:

1. That which is the ultimate and last end of all grace and holiness here,
which is Eternal Life, and Everlasting Glory. The trusting in God for this, is
that which should keep up our hearts in all the streights we are to meet with.
1 Corinthians. 15. If we had hope only in this life, says the Apostle, we were of
all men most miserable. So Titus 1. 2. and 3. 7. there is the hope of eternal
life. The trusting by faith, and by hope, are of so near union, that one may
well be brought to confirm the other. Now let a Christian be frequently
putting forth these vigorous trustings in Christ for everlasting glory, what
heavenly, joyful and undaunted resolutions will it work in him?

2. There are mercies that are the means to lead to this end, such as
Justification, and Sanctification of our natures, daily remission of sins,
and a daily preservation in the state of grace, that we may never fall away.
For these things we are certainly to trust for at Gods hand. We have Gods
promise for these things, and who dare question, whether God be thus able to
keep us to salvation or no? Thus remission of sin is by faith in his blood,
Romans 3. Yea the life of a godly man, as to his spirituals and supernaturals, is
wholly in this trusting. Thus the just (you heard) lives by his faith. And
Paul professes aloud, That the life he did live, (Galat. 2. 20.) though in the
flesh, was by faith in the Son of God. Oh that this spiritual truth were
received and digested more by the godly! Do you not look more into your
selves, then up to God? Do you not more live in the thoughts of your own
graces, than of Gods promises? Truly the right improving of this Doctrine about
trusting in God, it would be like Solomon's North-winde, to blow away the rain,
to dispell all sinful sorrow.

SERMON. LXXII.
What is required in our trusting in God, ex part subjecti. And of the
excellency of this grace.

2 COR. 1. 9. But in the Lord.
WE are treating of this choice and necessary duty of trusting in God, and
several things have been spoken to acquaint us with the nature thereof; we
proceed therefore, and as we have told you what is required ex part objecti,
to cause this trusting in the Lord; from the next place let us declare what is
ex part objecti, necessary to this duty. And for the What is required to our
trusting in the Lord.
explicating of that, there are these things concurrent to our trusting in the
Lord.

1. There must be a serious and powerful apprehension of our own inability, 1.
A powerful apprehension of our own and the creatures inability to help us.
yea, and of the weakness of all Creatures to help us, or to do good to us; for
till this foundation be laid, that all power, wisdom, righteousness, and
whatsoever the Creature can affoard, is but a shadow, a reed, that can do no
good at all, it is impossible that we should trust in the Lord. So that by this
we may see the difficulty and rarity of this grace, for how hard a matter is it
thus to be affected about all the means that are in the world, about all the
Creatures we do enjoy; to look upon them but as those Instruments of Music,
which cannot sound any longer then they are blown into? How difficult to
possess our souls with this principle? to look upon thy self and all
Creatures, no otherwise then the poor creple that lay by the Poole side, that
could not at all help or move it self? That do behold all things as Sarahs dead
womb, or Ezekiels dry bones, unless the Lord quicken and give life? You may
see this practiced by the Church of Israel, when she had smarted for her
carnal confidence and dependence on outward helps, so as to neglect God; see
in what an humble gracious manner she makes her confession to God, Hos. 14. 3.
Asshur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any
more to the works of our hands, ye are our gods: for in thee the fatherless
finds mercy. Oh blessed and self-emptyed frame! here the Church repenting and
turning unto God, of all the sins which she was guilty of, does instance in
her carnal confidence, as that which had most provoked God, and therefore she
does renounce and disavow all civil confidence and trusting; Asshur shall not
save us, etc. And 2. All religious confidence. They will no more make their
applications to their gods; and then here is the reason, because in thee the
fatherless finds mercy. By this proclaiming, that they looked upon themselves,
as so many poor fatherless Children, that had not wherewith to help
themselves. If then an whole Nation do thus, how much more ought every
particular Christian, though great, though rich, yet respectively to God, to
look upon himself, even as that Infant the Prophet speaks of, Newborn and
exposed to danger, and no ways able to succor it self. Thus he that would
trust in God, must begin here and lay his foundation thus low, even as the
Apostle says, 1 Timothy 5. 5. She that is a widow indeed and desolate, trusts
in God. We cannot come to rest upon God, till we look upon our selves as
desolate and destitute of all humane succor. The Bohemians when they lost
their famous Captain Zisca, called themselves Orphans. Thus when our helps,
our outward supports are removed, then we are driven to look up unto God, and
not before. The Heathens had a custom when they went into their Temples to
pray, that none would go in with a Sword, or money in their Purse; which was to
denote that they did not put confidence either in strength or wealth, but did
rest upon their gods for relief only. We then that are Christians, who have the
Word of God to be a guide unto us, ought to have low thoughts of our selves,
and of all Creatures, accounting of them as nothing respectively unto God.

2. To trust in God is required in the next place a practical Meditation
concerning 2. A practical consideration of Gods greatness and goodness.
the greatness and goodness of God, how infinitely able he is, and how willing
to help his people. It is the not attending to this, but the looking unto the
power and strength of second causes, that makes us so full of distrust in God.
Is it not then for this reason, that the Scripture does so often delight to
represent the greatness and majesty of God, That all the Nations are but as a
drop to him; that they are less then nothing; that he created the world out of
nothing? All this is to raise up the heart, that it should have high and
hopeful thoughts about God. This makes David attribute so many metaphorical
titles to God, that he is his strength, his rock, his fortress and strong
tower. Did we meditate upon these things; did we with Abraham not consider the
dead womb, but the power of God, with what dependence on God, and quietness of
mind should we pass our lives? But now we are tossed up and down with many
waves; we are like Noah's Raven sent out of the Ark, we know not where to set
our feet; and all is, because we do not settle on God; omnis motus fit super
immobili. The soul cannot move unless it have a steadfast and immovable
foundation to stand upon, and that is not the Creature, but God only. Thus
David Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my
right hand, I shall not be moved; and therefore Verse 2. expressing this act of
trusting in God, he says, thou art my Lord Adonai. The word signifies that
which is the basis, the foundation that keeps up all things. Oh then let
nothing be great in thy thoughts but God: Grotius Prologom. in Epist. ad Romans
would make that faith, which the Apostle does so much commend in his Epistle to
the Romans, to be nothing but an high and eminent esteem of Gods power, etc.
So that faith in this respect, and not the obedience of Christ as apprehended
by faith, is by him that imputed righteousness, Paul does so much instance in;
But he is deceived therein, and lays this as a foundation for his other
errors about Justification. Though we do easily grant that in faith, there is a
most raised and elevated apprehension about the majesty, and power of God.

3. To trust in God there is required a peculiar and particular appropriation
3. A particular appropriation of God, as our God.
of God to our souls, as our God, as our Father; to say as Thomas to Christ,
my God, and my Lord. Thus David in the forementioned Psalm. 16. 2. when he had
pressed God with this Argument to preserve him, because he trusted in him, he
declares what his trusting is. Oh my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou
art my Lord. Thus we are particularly to apply and to say, Thou art my Father,
thou art my God. And this is the reason why the people of God are so full of
distrust, of despondent and dejecting fears. They cannot say, Oh my soul, thou
have said to God, thou art my Lord; yea we look upon him as a judge that will
condemn.

4. To trust in God there is required some experimental knowledge of God, 4.
An experimental knowledge of Gods promises and providence.
to be acquainted with his former works of mercy and deliverance to them; for
when we have both Gods promise and his providence seconding it, this makes us
to have more vigorous trusting in God, as David argued; God had delivered him
from the Bear and Lion, and therefore would from the Philistin. Thus the
Apostle at the 10. Verse from the present deliverance does argue, that he
trusts he will deliver also. Thus Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy name will
trust in thee. It is for want of experience and practical knowledge about God
that makes us so full of diffidence.

5. To trust in God, there is required a faithful and diligent use of all 5.
An use of means.
those means that God has required; and by this it is fully distinguished
from presumption, which many take to be in their trusting in God: for when you
hear such who live impenitently in evil and ungodly ways, yet say they trust
in Christ with all their heart for the pardon of their sins; they do
desperately presume, for if they did trust in God, they would be constant in
the use of those means God has required, 1 John 3. 3. He that has this hope
in him, purifieth himself as God is pure. Its not their trusting in God, but
presumption, which makes thee expect such glorious privileges, and do not
walk in the way thereunto.

6. To trust in God, there is required a sound judgment, and right
understanding, 6. A sound judgment.
especially when we speak of spiritual mercies, such as justification, and
reconciliation with God. Aegid. Coninck. de arteb. supernat. de spe. a Popish
Writer makes a threefold hope, or trusting in God. One he calls Pelagian,
and that is when we rest upon God only because of our own merits, and our own
strength; and this he does reject, as well he may, for this is not to trust in
God, but in our selves. A second hope he calls Lutheran, and that is when he
trusts only in the grace of God, excluding all merits; this also he rejects,
and thereby also the only hope the Scripture commends to us. The third hope he
calls the Catholic trusting in God, and that is partly upon the grace of God,
and partly upon our own merits, yet wrought also by the grace of God. But to
think of merits, or to speak of merits, when we come into the presence of so
great and holy a God, whose Law we break daily, and in all our best duties
fail exceedingly, is to play the Pharisee and not the Publican, who yet only
was accepted with God. The second way of trusting therefore, viz. only in the
grace of God, excluding all our own strength, is that which is approved of by
the Word of God; So that till we be sound in our judgment about this Point, we
cannot rightly trust in God.

In the next place a second main particular to clear the Doctrine about this
Of the excellency of this grace of trusting in God. 1. It is many times put for
the whole worship of God.
trusting, is to consider the excellency of their grace, that so we may thereby
be the more exercised therein. For

1. It is many times put for the whole worship of God, because he that does
trust in God, he will be sure to perform all those other duties God does
require. Thus Psalm. 115. 9, 10. when the house of Israel and Aaron are exhorted
to trust in the Lord; by that is meant the whole worship of God, even as to
fear God is sometimes also put for the whole service of God. The excellency and
dignity of the grace appears herein.

2. It is therefore excellent, because the Lord so delights to put us upon 2.
The Lord delights to put us upon the daily practice of it.
the daily practice of it. Insomuch that whatsoever he does for his people
either in spiritual or temporal mercies, they do obtain it wholely by
trusting. What is that great way, whereby we are justified before God, how come
we to obtain this blessed privilege? It is only by faith. And what is this
faith, but a trusting and resting upon Christ alone? So that the most noble and
essential consideration in justifying faith, is that it does make the soul
rest and depend on the Lord Jesus. God would not justify us by any other way,
by working, by doing, but by trusting; which does greatly demonstrate the
acceptableness of this grace to God. So also for temporal mercies, that
assertion twice or thrice used; The just shall live by faith, does in part
relate to those temporal promises, which God makes for the preservation and
support of his people; and now God will have these performed to such who wait
on him, who trust on him. It is not the just shall live by love, by repentance,
but by faith; God therefore would have us wholly depend upon him for every
mercy we have; hence we are commanded to pray for our daily bread: trust not in
thy store or treasure; trust not in thy labor and skill, but be every day at
the Throne of grace, begging for every mercy thou desire. Oh but what
dishonor is there to God in this respect? Does not the rich man look more to
his revennues then Gods promise. Does not the Tradesman look more to his
custom and his gains then Gods power; yea the laboring man is apt to trust
in his health, and strength, as if he needed not to depend upon God all the
while he has that; Sanitas pauperis est patrimonium; a poor man's health is
his patrimony, his freehold, and he is apt to make it his god to trust in. What
excellency then is in this grace, when no mercy either spiritual or temporal
can be obtained but by the exrecise thereof. For the soul you must trust God,
and the mercies thereof; for the body you must trust God, and the mercies
thereof. And observe the deceitfullness of thy heart herein, who trusts in
Christ for thy justification and salvation, but art full of disquieting cares
and fears about thy external preservation and maintenance. Oh foolish and
unwise! which is greater, salvation then raiment and food? and yet thou art
persuaded God will do the greater, but doubts about the lesser.

3. It is excellent because it does indeare God to us, and in a peculiar manner
3. It indeareth God to us, and engages him for us.
obliges God to look to us. For when the soul can say, O Lord, I renounce all
other helps; I trust not in any other support; I leave all things to adhere to
thee; this does in particular manner engage God to look upon us as his own, and
so to defend us. Thus David argues Psalm. 16. 1. Preserve me O Lord, for I
trust in thee, Psalm. 7. 1. In thee (O Lord) I put my trust save me; so 1 Chronicles.
5. 20. it is said of the Sons of Reuben, when they were in great distress, yet
the Hagarens were delivered into their hands, because they did put their trust
in God. It is also attributed unto Hezekiah, as a great and glorious honor to
him, 2 Kings 18. 5. That he trusted in the Lord God of Israel, and Verse 7. The
Lord was with him, and he prospered. Therefore the committing of our selves
into Gods hands, is a special way to secure us.

4. The excellency of this grace is seen in the difficulty of it, and
transcendency 4. It Is difficult to flesh and blood.
to flesh and blood: for if Aristotle could say homo was magis sensus, quam
intellectus, more sense then understanding, putting forth the acts thereof more
then of reason, we may say much rather he is more reason then faith. The
difficulty of it makes the People of God oftener in distracting fears and
carking cares then in any other sins. David who professes his trust in God,
yet how often tempted to difidence? Asa a good man 2 Chronicles. 16. 12. is blamed
that in his disease he sought not to God, but to the Physicians. It was lawful
for him to seek to them, but because he rested wholly on them, and not on God,
therefore is he thus taken notice of: seeing then its our duty to use means
and not to expect that God will in a miraculous and immediate manner work all
things for us: Hence is the great difficulty in this matter, so to use them, as
not to put confidence in them. Alas all the Creatures, all the second causes by
their own power without Gods blessing, could do us no good; our clothes would
not warm us; our food nourish us, unless God command it. Hence our Savior
says, Man does not live by bread alone, but by every word proceeding out of
Gods mouth. Matthew. 4. 4. It is not then the Creatures; it is not the conditions
and relations we are in, that do support us, but God only. Again the difficulty
is seen in trusting of God, because Gods promise and his providence seem to go
contrary to one another. The godly have the promises of this life, health,
wealth: Peace is promised to them, and yet how often exercised with the
contrary; and this makes trusting in God the more difficult. So that what
inevidence is, in respect of faith assenting, the same arduity and
improbability, yea appearing impossibility is in respect of faith trusting. In
all believing there is an inevidence, not in respect of the testimony, as the
Papists dream; and therefore would have faith defined by ignorance, rather
then by knowledge; but in respect of the thing it self. We do not apprehend the
things of faith by reason, as we do natural truth; and this makes faith, as
it is assenting, to be so difficult; and no less is it in faith, as trusting,
for the difficulty and improbability, which appears in the things hoped for,
so much is contrary to flesh and blood; that we deny sense and reason many
times when we put forth faith.

5. The excellency of this grace is seen, in that God does on purpose in much
mercy afflict us, keep us low, remove all our props from us, that so we may 5.
One of Gods ends in afflicting us is to work this grace.
learn to depend on him; for this end we are afflicted, for this end God
makes widows and fatherless, and brings us into a Wilderness that we may live
on him only.

6. This excellency of it is manifested only in that it gives all glory to
God, deba^eth man, makes all the greatness of the world to be no more 6. It
gives all glory to God.
then a reed or a feather. And no wonder then, if God so much encourage this
grace of trusting in him; for we cannot glorify God more and debase our
selves. Therefore he will have us justified by trusting in him; therefore he
will have us in all temporals look up to him only, because then God is always
in our thoughts; we look above men as Jacob, above the rounds of the Ladder to
the upper end where God was.

7. This is excellent because of the blessed effect it has, causing all
tranquillity and quietness of spirit. Where this grace is vigorously put
forth, 7. It calmes and quiets the spirit.
there are no sad complaints, no unruly passions and discontents; but like the
strong man, it keeps the house quiet and at peace: for this excellent effect
thereof it is, that the Devil does so much oppose it, raise seeming objections
against it, because he would bring the people of God into an Hell here, seeing
he cannot do it hereafter.

SERMON. LXXIII.
Of the Expression, God who raises the dead, how it is to be understood, and
what it implies.

2 COR. 1. 9. Which raises the dead.
THis last clause is added, as a reason, why we are not to trust in our selves,
but in God; he can do that, which no King, no Emperor, no Sovereign power in
the world can do, he can raise from the dead. By this instance the Apostle
discovers Gods omnipotency; for none but an infinite power can do this; even
as an infinite power is required to create, to make something out of nothing.
Therefore the Philosopher speaking according to the ordinary way of nature,
says ex nihilo nihil fit. Thus it is also in regard of raising the dead,
nothing but an infinite power can do this, because there is another rule in
Philosophy, A privatione ad habitum non datur regressus. We read indeed of
Elishah raising the dead Child; and so the Apostles were enabled to work this
miracle, but they did these things not authoritative but adprecative, not by
way of authority but prayer. Christ wrought these miracles at their prayer to
him, and therefore they are said to do these things in his name. He only then
who has an infinite power can raise the dead. Neither does the Apostle say,
who can, but who does raise, signyfying not only Gods power, but his will and
readiness; and then in the present tense, denoting, God does this daily and
continually to his people. Now when the Apostle describes God thus as raising
the dead, you must understand it of the dead literally. Those that are actually
dead, or as good as dead, as to any humane power, which was the case of Paul;
and also dead, metaphorically, viz. such who are in those outward calamities
and streights, that they have no visible way to escape out of them. In this
extent you must understand the expression; and from thence observe,

That God is both able and willing to help and deliver his people in hopeless
God both can and will help his people in their extremitics.
and helpelesse troubles.

For by this expession Paul does denote the utmost extremity; if God can and
will do the greatest, how much more easy is it to him to do the less? Though
nothing is hard to God, for he does great things as easily as less things; so
that this is brought in as unspeakeable comfort to the godly who are apt to
say; This trouble is so great; this straight is so heavy, that I have no hope,
my soul does sink under it. Oh remember, it cannot be more desperate then to be
a dead man, and yet God does recover out of that condition: He does not say,
God that heals the sick; God that comfort those which are in darkness; God
who raises up those that are cast down. Though in other places, these things
are attributed to God, but God who raises the dead, which is far more then the
former.

To prosecute this, let us consider wherein this Doctrine is true, both
literally, and metaphorically; and then how much is comprehended in the
expression. For the

1. This is true in the natural dead, that God can, and does raise up such to
life again. In the New Testament we read of several persons raised by 1. God
raises up the naturally dead.
Christ to life again, such a miracle and wonder, that unless in the Old
Testament the like was never heard of in the world before; for they are but
Fables what some Heathens may record to be done amongst them in this matter.
Yea, at Christ's Resurrection, it is said that many did rise again, and went
into the holy City. Which makes the Apostle Heb. 11. 35. instance in this as
one of the great wonders wrought for the Saints, That women received their dead
raised to life again. And truly this consideration of Gods power should
wonderfully support us in all troubles, in all exigences; God can create, where
there is nothing pre-existent; I create peace; and he can also restore and give
a resurrection to those that are dead. Let us not then have low thoughts of the
power of God, as if he were limited in his works, as man is; but the
demonstration of Gods power will be evidently and palpably manifested in that
great and universal Resurrection of all that are dead, at the day of
judgment. This work of God does transcend all humane reason and power;
therefore when Paul Preached this, they accounted him nothing but a babbler. It
is Disputed, whether the Resurrection of the dead can be proved possible by
natural reason; but whether it can or no, we are sure the Scripture does so
positively and plainly affirm it, that it must be bold Atheism to deny it.
Now do but consider how great a matter it is to exercise faith in this
particular; how improbable, yea, and impossible does it seem to natural
reason? All those who have dyed ever since Adam, so many thousand years ago,
who have been for so long a time consumed into ashes; All such bodies which
have been eaten with fish, or beasts; yet God will raise the same body again,
the same bones and flesh again. What amazement and astonishment may this raise
in thee? yet it is clear by Scripture, God can and will do this. Oh then that
the godly did more vigorously exercise their faith in this fundamental point
of Religion. What, can thou believe in God concerning this great and
admirable truth? yet doubtest whether he can raise thee out of those petty and
minute troubles thou art exercised with. When was news brought to the Pope of
the murder of Henry the fourth of France, he was exceedingly affected with it
in his speech, in the conclave blaspemously aggravating the mercy as he
thought, and among other particulars said; the fact was so incredible, that had
he not used himself to believe the high and mysterious points of Religion, he
could not have believed this fact. Thus he in a wretched manner; but thou may
in a true and godly sense say, Oh Lord this temptation is so great, this
trouble is so pressing, I am so greatly overwhelmed, that did I not believe
those wonderful Principles of Religion; were I not used all the day long to
things above humane reason and expectation; I could not be able to bear up my
self in these extremities.

2. This Doctrine is metaphorically true, also God raises from the dead, and
that again in a twofold extremity, external and internal, external troubles,
2. God raises the metaphorically dead, and such who are in any trouble either
external or internal.
the Scripture does delight to represent the great and extreme troubles of the
Church, when it has visible help or deliverance, under the name of death,
Isaiah 26. 19. We have the Prophet comforting the Church in her desolate
estate. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise.
It is true many Interpreters expound this, as if properly and immediately
spoken of the Resurrection: and it should seem our Translators understood it
so, when they render it (together with my body,) but the context makes it
clear: God speaks of their deliverance from captivity, wherein he calls
his people, Cadaver meum, my dead body, because in outward appearance so; now
the reason of this may be, because Gods power would be to them, as the dew, to
herbs ready to perish, which does revive them. Thus their deliverance out of
their calamity is described, Hosea 6. 2. After two days he will revive us, in
the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. This Text is
literally and immediately to be understood of the Jews, yet by consequence it
may be applied to Christ; so that it argues the calumniating spirit of Hunnius
who would make Calvin to jadaize because he does not expound it as a promise of
Christ's Resurrection. God will do with his Church as he did with the body of
Christ, he would not suffer it to see corruption, but within three days raise
it again. Thus says the Church, though we be in a dead condition, yet he will
within two or three days, within a short time revive us again. But above all,
you have a most evident allusion to this Ezekiel. 37. Where the Prophet in a
vision saw a Valley full of dry bones; and breath from the Lord brought sinews
and flesh upon these bones, and the bones came together and lived. Now what the
meaning of this parabolicall vision is, appears Verse 11. These bones are the
whole house of Israel: Behold they say our bones are dried up, our hope is
lost, we are cut off from all parts: but says God, I will open your Graves,
and you shall come out.

By these expressions you see how true the Doctrine is, that in the Churches
extreme calamities, God raises the dead; neither was this opening of the
graves, and making dry bones to live once, done by God only, for that people of
that time: But such has been the condition of the Church in several Ages. It
has been the dry bones, and God has breathed life into them. Now the Child of
God should daily meditate upon these great works of God to his People, and
then he will be ashamed to see himself so much dejected about his own
particular. What, thou art but one dry bone, and cannot God restore thee when
he does help so many? Can he deliver his whole Church, and not a particular
Member therein? More faith in the general affairs of the Church would
facilitate thy particular.

Come we then to internal extremities and exigences, and there in a twofold
Of Gods raising from internal extremities.
sense, likewise we shall find it is God, that raises the dead.

In the first place, If you consider man in his state by nature, he is wholly
dead in sin; and therefore when God by his grace does correct him, then he
raises the dead. Thus every godly man, in this spiritual change wrought upon
him, can experimentally say, God who raises the dead. I was senseless in
sin; I was stupid; I felt no burden; I desired no deliverance, but God raised
me from the dead. Even as the Father said of his Prodigal Son converted,
this our Son was dead, but is alive. This expression in a spiritual sense
the Scripture does much delight in, Ephesians. 2. You who were dead in sin, has
he quickened, and therefore the work of grace is compared to a Resurrection: and
from this similitude we justly urge against the Arminians, that man has no
active power to prepare himself for grace, or to turn himself to God; no
more then a dead Lazarus did dispose himself to a Resurrection. Thou then who
labourest under many temptations about the weakness of thy graces; that
bewail thy dead heart, thy dead duties, thy dead Religion; Oh thou art
withered, and have no life in thee: Remember it is God that raises the dead.
And certainly if he did infuse the life of grace into thee at first, when thou
wast wholly dead, can he not much more now thou art quickened, recover thee out
of thy decayings and swounding fits; he that has spiritual life at first, can
much more recover thee out of thy consumptions; he that delivered from death,
can much more from sickness.

2. There is another internal exigency upon the soul, which may be called a
spiritual death, and that is the sad desolations and terrible blackness, that
may cover the soul because of desertions; God may have forsaken thee; thou
may not only look upon thy self as a dead man, but as a damned man. Oh this
temptation when God sets himself against a broken soul, shootes his arrows
into his heart; Though a bruised reed breaks him more, though but a smoking
flax, yet ready to quench it; this (I say) is adjudged by those who labor
under, it worse then death, more bitter then death. We have a remarkable
instance for this, in Heman, Psalm 88. where Verse 14, 15, 16. he makes
bitter complaint under soul-terrours, Why castest thou off my soul? why hidest
thou thy face from me? While I suffer thy terrors I am distracted; and Verse 3.
he says, He was free from amongst the dead, as the slain that lie in the
grave, whom God remembers no more. Yea his temptation does so overcloud him,
that he seems to question the truth of our Doctrine, v. 10. Will thou show
wonders to the dead? shall the dead arise and praise thee? This good man must
needs be greatly dejected when he doubts of this: for nothing is more
ordinary with God, then to show wonders to the dead; and therefore had he but
possessed his heart with this truth, he had been able to walk on those waters,
whereas now he is ready to sink: had he concluded, saying, Oh my soul, why art
thou cast down within thee? what, though thou art dead, yet it is God that
raises the dead; the dead have cause to praise him; this would have revived
him. Yea God for the most part will not come in to help till we look upon our
selves as dead: even as Christ did delay till Lazarus was dead and putrefying
in the grave, that so his glorious power might be the more discovered in
restoring of him to life. Indeed the Psalmist might have argued, that if God
should ^uite forsake him, suffering him to be swallowed up in despair; Do
those that despair, do they praise thee? Do the damned in Hell bless and
glorify thy name? If then in these sad and bitter temptations upon thy soul,
thou would have some work to get into, then remember this truth, God raises
the dead.

Thus we have heard in what particulars this Doctrine is true; let us now What
is employed in the expression God raises from the dead. 1. That Gods own
Children may be brought into helpless and hopeless conditions.
consider what is employed in this expression, God raises the dead. And

1. It supposes That Gods own Children may be brought into an helpless and
hopeless estate. They may be in a Wilderness, so that if God does not
extraordinarily provide Manna for them, they will perish; for you must know
that this is attributed to God, chiefly for the godly man's sake. For though the
wicked may sometimes be delivered from imminent dangers, yet that is by the
general providence of God, who does in Heaven and Earth what he pleases; but
the godly are delivered from the special love of God, and his peculiar promise
to them, of being their God: So that it is in this case, as it is in the
Resurrection, all men shall be raised from the dead, even the wicked as well as
the just; only the wicked shall be raised by the power of God as a just judge;
but the godly as Members of Christ, and from that special Covenant of grace
God, made with them; and upon this foundation Luke 20. 37. does Christ prove
the Resurrection, because he is the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob. These are mentioned rather then Noah or Enoch, when yet God was
also their God, because to those the promise of grace was either at first made,
or afterward repeated. As therefore because God is a God in Covenant, he will
raise up their dead bodies; so from this relation he will raise thee up from
thy extreme necessities; yet this supposes that God though he loves us, so
as to deliver from evil, yet he will not always prevent the evil.

2. Here is employed, That God has an immediate sovereignty and domini^^ 2.
That God has power over all estates whatsoever.
over all conditions and estates, be they never so bitter and hopeless. We
cannot say of the true God, that he is the God of the Valleys, but not of the
Hills also. When that Lord would not believe God could on a sudden provide
such incredible plenty, he was severely punished for it. The Israelites also
are taken notice of for limiting God, Psalm. 78 9. Though God had given them
water, yet say they, Can he furnish a Table in the Wilderness? Oh how often are
we guilty of such distrust? though God has done thus and thus, yet can he do
this also? But he raises the dead, he has a command over all things. Hence
God is said 1 Cor. 1. 28. To choose things that are not, thereby to confound
things that are. So that there is no tentation, no affliction, but God can
command it, and work what he pleases out of it for thy good; he can raise up
Children to Abraham out of stones, he can make Grapes to grow of Thorns, and
Figs of Thistles.

3. There is employed, That our extremities are Gods opportunities, They 3. That
our extremities are Gods opportunities.
are the proper time to work in and not before: Why does he not say, God that
heals the sick; that comfort the sorrowful; but instanceth in the utmost
of all, that raises the dead, but to show that it is commonly Gods way to
delay his help till it be at the very outmost? Christ would not turn water
into Wine, till all was spent. When the poor creeple that lay so long by the
Poole side said, I have no man to help me, then Christ healed him. It became a
Proverb in the Church of old. In the Mount the Lord will be seen. God lets
Abraham alone till he was lifting up his hand to give a mortal blow, and then
God appears, providing also a Ram in Isaacs stead. Thus it was also with
Abraham, God provideth him a Son out of a dead Womb, that so his glory may be
more exalted; commonly a godly man's Isaacs, his joys and comforts are brought
out of the dead Womb of the Creatures. What more is to be said herein, will
come in seasonably in the next Verse.

Let us from the premises make this Use, Does God raise even the dead, and may
such put trust in God? Then shame and reprove thy saying; oh me slow to
believe! oh me dull and heavy about Heavenly duties! for though my afflictions
are but weak and ordinary, there is nothing above measure or strength in them,
yet I am ready to faint; how can this be forgiven to me? As the Apostle said in
another case, you have not yet resisted to blood. So it may be thy exercises
have never been so grievous and extreme, so as thou art to be accounted as a
dry bone, as a dead man, and yet I have much ado to trust in God in these
inferior trials. Cry out unto the Lord to help thee in these weak graces, be
ashamed when any little trouble is apt to disquiet thee, to discompose thee. Oh
say if it were the worst condition that could come upon me, if it were the
heaviest trial that could fall on me, yet I was to trust in him who raises
the dead.

SERMON. LXXIV.
We are not to consider Gods Mercies in general only, but their several
Aggravations also.

2 COR. 1. 10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver: in
whom we trust that he will yet deliver us.
THe Apostle having formerly discovered his humane fears and diffidence under
that great trouble which came upon him in Asia, does now recollect himself, and
revive out of his swoonings. The Sun that was in an Eclipse, does now begin
to shine forth in glorious luster. He had informed us, that the end of that
heavy tribulattion was, That he should not trust in himself, but in God. And
now in this verse, we see this blessed effect took place in him. For by the
experience of Gods mercy to him at this time, he is encouraged to trust in God
for the future; he has, does, and will deliver. One favor from God is a
pledge of more to come.

In this verse then we see Paul got above, and conquering that weakness and
imbecility which he found in himself, and acknowledging the goodness of God,
and his power to him, Paul found God able to raise the dead, by what he had
done to him in his particular.

In the Text then we may take notice of,

1. Paul's solemn acknowledgement of the goodness and power of God to him in
delivering of him. And 2. His Encouragement from thence to trust in God for the
future.
In the former part we have his celebration of Gods goodness to him; and this
he aggravateth from the hopelesnesse and desperateness of his estate, which he
calls a Death, not a sickness, but a death. Yea Chrysostom observes, That
he does not say, Who has delivered us from such dangers, but such death, to
show the extremity. Chrysostom reads it in the plural number (...), deaths;
but the general Copy is otherwise. Now Paul does not only call it death, but
(...), such death. The word is used in the New Testament about three times,
besides in this place; and it is always applied to the great aggravation of a
thing, so as we are to admire it, as if the like had never been heard of. Thus
Revel. 16. 18. (...), is such an Earthquake as never had been before. James
Chap. 3. 4. (...), are ships very great. And Hebr. 2. 3. How shall we escape,
if we neglect, (...), so great salvation? then which there cannot be a greater.
The Apostle therefore in using this word, does intend to aggravate the
goodness of God toward him, to leave out no circumstance that may not
heighten the mercy. It is not enough with him to take notice of the mercy, but
the aggravation of his mercy; and this makes his heart seven times hotter (as
it were) in praising of God, than otherwise it would be. From whence observe,

That the children of God do not only acknowledge the mercy of God to them,
The children of God do not only take notice of Gods mercies, but their
aggravations likewise.
but they also consider of every circumstance that may make the mercy appear
greater.

They will take up every crumme, and the fragments (as it were) that Gods
miraculous power may be more demonstrated. They do not content themselves with
a beholding of the mercy in the bulk, but they weigh every particular
ingredient, and so of one mercy make many mercies. That as the godly in their
humiliation for sin, think it not enough to humble themselves in the
general, but they endeavor to bring to mind every circumstance that may
aggravate it, and so make themselves more abominable and loathsome in their own
eyes: Thus they do also in matter of thanksgiving; They do not take the mercy
in the gross, but they look through it, and about it to epsy out every
particular that may be like a coal of fire in their bosoms. Thus we have the
thankful Psalmist, Psalm. 136. severing every particular mercy of God to Israel
by it self, and then adds, For his mercy endures for ever: Sihon King of the
Amorites; for his mercy endures for ever. Og King of Basan; for his mercy
endures for ever. He reckons them up one, and by one, though he might have
satisfied himself with that expression, verse. 24. Who has redeemed us from all
our enemies: But a gracious heart dare not rob God of his glory in any one
benefit that he has from him. For if he must say with Jacob, He is less than
the least of his mercies; It is not for him to pass it by; for every little
mercy is far above his deserts; to him belongs all the curses of the Law;
whatsoever is not hell and damnation, comes from the mere bounty of God.

But let us illustrate this truth in the particulars, showing wherein the
people of God use to make their aggravation. And

First, The children of God use to enlarge their thoughts in praises of God, 1.
From their own low condition.
from the low, weak and impotent condition they of themselves were in. Now the
more the disease is found out to be desperate and incurable, the greater is the
art and skill of the Physician. Thus Psalm. 136. 23. Who remembered us in our low
estate. The blackest Eclipse makes the Suns light, when recovering, more
glorious. The lower and weaker in thy self, the more is God thereby
acknowledged. So Psalm. 34. 6. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him. This
aggravateth the mercy of God, that though a very Lazar, yet God would not
despise him. So Psalm. 142. 3. When my Spirit was overwhelmed within me, then
thou knew my path. Nothing is more ordinary then such passages in the
Psalms to aggravate the goodness of God toward the godly from the lowness,
and the impotency they were in: Oh if God had not come in at that time, I had
utterly perished! How many low conditions have many of Gods people been in,
sometimes in respect of their outward, sometimes in respect of their inward?
yet God has delivered them from those whales bellies. Your affections to
praise God, will be very cold and dull, till you possess your souls with this
thought. Oh how low was it with me! Little did others know how it fared with
me, One step further would have cast me into utter horror, and then when I
could bear no longer, God supported me. Many Psalms may the chilren of God
make (as it were) I was in such a sad temptation, but God rescued me, For his
mercy endures for ever; I was in such an outward straight, and the Lord made a
way to escape, For his mercy endures for ever. Thus the thoughts of thy low
condition will greatly advance the help of God vouchsafed to thee.

Secondly, The people of God do aggravate the mercy of God, not only 2. From
their own sinfulness
from the greatness of the danger they were in, but also their sinfulness,
their unworthiness, that ever God should cast an eye of pity on them; and this
they do whether in temporal or spiritual mercies. And truly this is an
excellent way to enlarge the heart in blessing of God; when we shall consider,
how unworthy we are, we that deserved cursing, to meet with blessing. See this
humble frame in David, 1 Chronicles. 17. 16. when Nathan came to declare the good
purpose of God toward him, in raising up him and his posterity to glory; see
how humbly, and in a self-emptied manner he addressed himself to God, Who am I,
and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? As if he should say,
Oh Lord, what am I, and my family, the meanest, and most unworthy, and will thou do this to me? Yea, as if this were a small thing, thou have spoken of
thy servants house, for a great while to come, and have regarded me after the
estate of a man of high degree: What can David speak more? Yea as it is 1 Samuel
7. he says, Is this the manner of men, O Lord God? implying, that only God
vouchsafes mercy to such as are unworthy. As then he, who would build high
must lay a deep foundation: So he that would exalt God on high, must lay
himself low. And if it be thus for temporal mercies, we are not worthy of a
crumme of bread; and though with Dives, we should beg for a drop of water, it
might be denied us: Then how much more in spiritual mercies, if God bestow them
upon us, Shall not our affections be greatly kindled in blessing of God? Take
that fountain of all mercies, the giving of the Lord Christ to believers, to
work out their salvation, by being made a curse for them. How diligent is the
Scripture to put an account (as it were) upon every passage therein? That it
should be as impossible for a believer to think of this love of the Father to
us, and not be ravished with it, as for a man to carry hot coals in his
bosom, and they not burn him. For the Scripture aggravateth it from the person
who died for us, even the only begotten Son of God, John 3. 16. For God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son. He so loved it; if God
would have denied any thing to mankind, it would have been this, who would not
think that he should rather suffer all men to be damned, then to give up his
Son to death? And yet what astonishing love is here? Dared a poor sinner of
himself ever thought to have begged such a thing at Gods hand? Romans 8. 32. He
spared not his own Son. Certainly thy heart may be amazed, more than the
Queen of Shebaes, in seeing of Solomon's glory, in meditating on this, God to
give his own Son, his only begotten Son, his Son out of his bosom; all
which are aggravating circumstances. If all the parts of the body, if all the
hairs of thy head, were turned into tongues, could they speak enough of this
goodness of God? As God said to Abraham, Now I know thou love me, because
thou have not withholden thy only son from me. How much more may we conclude
from Gods giving his Son to us? As the Scripture aggravateth it thus from the
quality of the person, so also from the quality of those, for whom Christ was
thus given, and that is for enemies and adversaries. And here is an aggravating
circumstance to inflame thy heart, Romans 5. 6. When we were without strength,
when we were enemies. To die for righteous men, to die for godly men, would not
have been such an aggravation; but for sinners and enemies, this is wonderful.
Here then is another coal from the Altar, to warm thy heart with, when thou
would bless God for Christ again. The Scripture to aggravate this mercy,
does consider to what end he is given for us, that is, To die for us, to die an
ignominious death, to be made accursed for us, to bear the punishment of our
sins upon himself. This also does deeply sink into the heart. This is like
oil to the Chariot wheels of the soul. This is like the Spirit in Ezekiel's
wheel: Thy heart cannot be quiet, but it will exceedingly dilate it self in
blessing of God for him. That whereas he who would be our Savior, must
purchase our salvation at so dear a rate; yet he does willingly make his soul
an offering for our sins. Lastly, The Scripture aggravateth this
comparatively, That Christ did not take upon him the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.
16. He did not so love them; he died not for those Apostate Angels, who yet
were more glorious creatures than man; and if redeemed, would have brought God
more glory; but it was for sinful, wretched, and weak man. But this mercy of
God in Christ, can never be comprehended in the depth, breadth and length
thereof; it being like Ezekiel's waters, that will ascend higher and higher,
even till it covers our head. We may instance in a second spiritual mercy, viz.
of Conversion, or Effectual Calling us out of the damned world. Oh the soul can
never be affected with this! How much does it delight to speak of his own
vileness and unworthiness once, that so the riches of Gods grace in calling
of us, may be the more exalted? We see it in Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 15. how
willing he is to speak what a blasphemous persecutour he had once been, even
the greatest and chiefest of sinners; and therefore in him the grace of God was
manifested, even for the ages to come. To this purpose also 1 Corinthians. 15. 8,
9, 10. he speaks, debasing himself, That he was not meet to be called an
Apostle, because he persecuted the Church of God. This discriminating and
differing grace of God, whereby God chooses thee a poor contemptible worm,
and passes by others; many in the same Town, in the same family, of the same
profession, yet converting grace lays hold on thee, and not on another. As
our Savior said, There were many widows at that time, besides she of Sarepta,
yet the Prophet was sent to her alone. This comparative work of grace, passing
by others, and taking thee, when if God would have regarded Externals, or
Internals, there were richer, there were more learned, there were less
vicious, must for ever enlarge the soul, yea so astonish her, that she will
cry out, What shall I say to these things?

A third Aggravation of Gods mercy, that the people of God take notice 3. From
the times and seasons of Gods mercies.
of, is, From the time, and season that God does it. In the fulness of time
God sent his Son. And the Wiseman says, God does every thing beautiful in
its season. To have mercy out of its due time, is to give bread instead of
stones. It is like good Physic, but not administered in its proper season. Now
the observing Christian, who loves to seek out the works of God toward him,
and studieth all Gods dispensations toward him, does in this respect find out
infinite matter of praising of God; that the Lord should put off to help so
long, that he should let Lazarus die, and be buried; all this is to make the
soul affected with the seasonable timing of a mercy. To have a mercy in its
season, makes it a double mercy. Only you must remember that Gods seasons and
fit opportunities are not always well discerned by us. We are ready to think
it had been better, if Gods help had come sooner, if he had not deferred so
long; but this is, as if the patient should take upon him to direct the
Physician, when is the fittest time for the administration of his medicinal
help.

Fourthly, The people of God aggravate their mercies, By comparing them with
others miseries. I have health, how many are in pains and 4. Fromothers
miseries.
exquisite torments? I have sufficiency and fulness, how many Lazar's are
there that would be glad of the crummes that fall from my Table? As those
Lepers that were ready to be famished, but unexpectedly met with full provision
in the Syrian's Camps, said, We do not well, (2 King. 7. 9.) let us inform
the Kings household. For alas they were ready to eat their own children through
the famine, while these had all plenty. In the same manner may thou reflect
with thy self, How many are there even of the dear servants of God, that are
naked, hungry, persecuted, and destitute of all hope? There is scarce any so
afflicted, or in a low condition, but he may look upon others, who are more
miserable than he. This therefore will greatly sharpen thy affections to bless
God. When thou shall compare thy mercies with others miseries, especially if
you do consider it in spirituals. How many thousands sit in Paganism, and
know nothing of Christ? How many lie roaring in hell for the same sins, or
less sins (it may be) that thou have committed? Thus if thou set thy self to
aggravate the mercy of God from every consideration, thou will find the
circumstances will increase upon thee, as the widows oil did; and thou will see
thou have more cause to bless Ood, then ever thou did apprehend at first. If
I say, thou did this, thou would no more complain of the coldness and
chillness that is upon thy heart. Nothing does so much dull the heart, as
resting in generals, blessing God in generals, Take every mercy as thou would
some Watch or curious work of Art, and view every piece, every part: or as
those that hehold some admirable Image, they are intentive to every part
thereof, to observe the beauty, life and proportion thereof. Oh it is this, and
this only will draw out thy soul, and make thee have rivers of water flowing
from thee! It is this that will make thee say with Elihu, Job 32. 18. I am full
of matter, the Spirit within me constrains me, my belly is as wine which has
no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles. Thus five words of praise
coming from an heart aggravating Gods mercy, are more effectual then five
hundred in a formal general way.

SERMON. LXXV.
Privative and preventing Mercies are to be accounted of, as Positive.

2 COR. 1. 10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver.
IN this Text we have Paul celebrating the goodness of God to him, in that
extreme trouble mentioned before, wherein was observed, First, The holy
thankful temper of Paul studying to aggravate the mercy of God. He leaves
out nothing unexpressed, which may not make for the great exaltation of Gods
goodness toward him. There remains a second Doctrine, which is,

That the children of God are to account of the privative and preventing
mercies, We should account of privative and preventing mercies, as of positive.
as much as positive.

Paul calls this deliverance, a deliverance from such a death, so great a death;
yet he was not actually killed, he was only in danger of it, but because (had
not the mercy of God prevented) death had surely seized on him. Therefore this
mercy of preventing death, he does judge to be (as it were) a positive
deliverance from it. That as we see God does deal with his people, He accepts
of a willing mind for the deed. And Heb. 11. 17. Abraham is said to offer up
his only begotten son, because it was in the immediate disposition and
preparation of his heart; he had done it, had not God prevented it: So it is
here with the people of God, Those mercies which keep off the dangers that are
immediately issuing out upon us, they take as if the mercy was it self
positively done to them. Divines have a saying, Plures sunt gratiae privativae,
quam positivae; There are more privative favors of God, than positive; and
this they apply to spiritual things. And indeed if we consider how many sins
God may keep thee from, which others fall into, how many temptations God does
preserve thee in, which swallow up others, we must needs acknowledge, that we
are no more able to reckon up these preventing mercies of God, than we can
count the stars, or reckon up the sand upon the seashore.

That this truth may affect us, and cause us more to employ our thoughts in a
thankful way toward God concerning all that evil which might come upon us, if
God did not interpose. Let us take notice of these particulars.

First, That there are some mercies God does vouchsafe to his people, which 1.
Some mercies suppose evil inflicted, others do not.
do suppose evil to be actually come upon them. As when Joseph was delivered
out of prison, Jonah out of the whales belly, the Lord did not prevent (which
he could have done, if he had pleased) but suffered them to overtake those
children of his. Yea all the troubles which do befall the godly, he could have
prevented them, if he had pleased. He that can deliver out of them, can also
stop them from coming: but God out of wise ends, both relating to his own
glory, and the good of his people, does bring these exercises upon them. Then
on the other side, There are mercies, which do not suppose evil actually to
come upon us, but ready and prepared to fall on us, if the Lord did not forbid.
That as we see it was with the Angel, when he had his drawn sword, and was
ready to strike Jerusalem with the plague, as well as other places, the Lord
did mercifully command the Angel to put up his sword. Now no doubt but David
did account this preventing mercy, this stopping of the plague, to be as great,
as if they had been delivered in the midst of it. For in regard of the
preparation to this judgment, they were but as so many dead corpses. So that
the people of God are of too narrow and straightened a spirit, when they look
only to what troubles they have been in, and God has delivered them. Oh
consider further, how many might have fallen upon thee, yea would certainly
have bruised thee, had not the Lord kept them off!

Secondly, These preventing mercies do empty themselves in a twofold chanel.
2. Two sorts of evils, spiritual and temporal, which the mercy of God prevents.
For they are either Temporal evils, or Spiritual evils, that these mercies do
relate unto: and thus preventing mercies do compass us about all the day long;
what evil might not have fallen upon thee every moment? This disease, that
casualty, such a sudden and unexpected calamity. Insomuch that thou can not
hear of any misery, fallen upon any living, but it also might have come upon
thee. Does any sit mourning and wringing their hands, crying out, O ye that
pass by, see if there be any afflicted with bitterness, as I am! And is not
this thy case? Is not thy house a house of mourning, for dead fathers, or dead
husbands, as well as others? Is not all this from the preventing mercy of God?
The second chanel in which these mercies may be discovered, is, In spiritual
things. And certainly here we may cry out also, That they are more than can be
numbered. For what sin, what temptations, what terrors and troubles of heart,
what wounds and gashes of soul do any of the godly fall into, and thou may
not also be plunged into the same? Who makes thee to differ? Why must not the
branch ingraffed in, insult over that which is broken off, but take heed and
tremble? Is it not because God may break off those also? Oh then with bleeding
and melting hearts, acknowledge and say, O Lord, what would have become of me,
if left to such a passion, if forsaken in such a temptation! Why is it that I
have not the guilt, the condemnation that others lie under? Is it not because
thy goodness did keep me? Even as David was preserved in respect of that
busines^ of the men of Keilah, he asks of God, Whether they would deliver him
into Readiness hands, and God tells him, they would certainly do it; thereupon
David will not commit himself to them. It is thus often in respect of thy soul;
if thou go to such a place, if thou art put into such a temptation, if placed
in such a condition or relation, God knows that this would prove a snare to
thee, it would be a ruin to thee. Therefore the Lord does so order by his
mercy, that thou shall not come into that condition. Divines have one kind of
grace, that they call Gratia praeveniens, which does prevent us, it comes upon
us before we have any thought, any will or desire about it. As God said, He was
found of those, that sought him not. And truly such preventing grace we do not
only need at our first conversion, but all our life long, as much as our daily
bread. Grace must prevent our mind, our will, our affections; otherwise some
sin, some lust or other would immediately fasten upon us. Let then the godly
soul remember, what a deep and vast ocean this is of preventing grace, the
bottom whereof thou can never dive into. As Paul said, By the grace of God,
I am what I am; so says Austin, he might have added, By the grace of God, I am
not, what I am not. It Is the grace of God, that thou art not a withered tree, a
barren wilderness. It is the grace of God keeps thee from Hypocrisy and from
Apostasy; what a sinner and evil wretch thou art not, it is wholly by the
grace of God.

Thirdly, Although the godly do thus judge of preventing mercies, as well 3.
The godly are o^^ forgetful about these preventing mercies.
as of positive mercies, yet because we are apt to account of mercies by sense,
and feeling we have, hence it is, That the godly are exceedingly-forgetfull
many times about preventing mercies. It is often said, We never prize a mercy
till we want it. How precious is health to a diseased man, ease to a tormented
man? And so also we never account any evil grievous, but while we feel it,
while it is upon our backs; and thereupon we are most sensible of such mercies,
which do take off this burden from us. Thus it is indeed, because we judge of
all things according to our sense; but if we did let judgment work, then the
godly soul would be likewise greatly enlarged for the keeping of evil, as well
as removing of it. The evil we never felt, yet because ready to come upon us,
had not the mercy of God kept it off, is affectionately taken notice of by that
soul, which delights to search out the works of God toward it. The godly ought
not be so brutish, as to be taught only by thorns, or to be like the horse
which must have always the bit and bridle. Preventing mercy is as real a mercy
as a positive one. God is as truly good in keeping of evil from thee, as
removing of it: Shall God therefore lose such of his glory and honor, because
thou will judge only by sense?

Fourthly, That therefore the children of God may know, It is their duty to 4.
It is therefore their duty to go further in praise and thankfulness for these
mercies, then usually they do. 1 Whatsoever evil is not inflicted that we have
deserved, is to be acknowledged a preventing mercy.
go further in the way of praise to God, then usually they do. Let them
consider these ensuing rules, concerning preventing mercies. And

1. Persuade thy self of this, That whatsoever evil thou have deserved by thy
sins, and is not brought upon thee, look upon this as a preventing mercy, and
be affected wit it as much as with any positive mercy. And truly this very
particular may be like a live coal from the Altar to warm and purify thy
heart. For have thou not deserved all the curses threatened in the Law. As soon
as ever as thou have sinned, may not the Law of God immediately challenge thee,
take thee by the throat, and hale thee to hell? Well if so, consider this
preventing mercy of God, that keeps thee from them. May thou not truly
say, remembering the deserts of thy sin, not only the God who delivers from
so great a death, but also so great an hell, and so great a damnation? Were not
thy heart like a clod of earth, like a stone, how greatly would thou be
affected in this particular, saying, It Is the Lords mercy I am not in the
grave; It Is the Lords mercy I am not roaring in hell; for the Law curses me, I
have transgressed that, there is nothing keeps off the execution of that
dreadful sentence, but the mere mercy of God? And therefore if thou were dead
and raised again, if damned in hell, and yet delivered out: Would not thy mouth
and heart be filled all over with blessing and praising of God? Why not then
when God keeps thee out of this destruction every moment? It Is observed as
the demonstration of Gods great power and mercy, that the waters of the sea
being higher than the earth, yet they are so checked and bounded by the power
of God, that they do not overflow the earth. This is the mere preventing mercy
of God. Insomuch that Luther said, The Inhabitants of the earth are as
wonderfully preserved from destruction by the sea, as the people of Israel were
in their passage to Canaan, when the waters stood like walls on both sides. And
thus it is in any mercy we enjoy, if we consider what the Law threatens, how
that curses, what we have deserved. It Is a wonder of wonders that every hour
we do not fall into hell. Therefore if thou find thy heart not affected
with these preventing mercies, lay this particular close to thy soul. 2.
Whatsoever evil falls upon others, and not upon us, it is a preventing mercy.


2. Consider, That whatsoever evil does actually fall upon any other in the
world, and not on thee, this is a preventing mercy. Is another sick, and not
thou? Is another poor, not thou? This is a privative mercy. For what reason can
there be given of thy difference from others, but only the discriminating
mercy of God; he kills and makes alive, he makes poor, and makes rich. So
that all these things are distributed according to the wisdom and pleasure of
God. If so, how then comes it about, that thou escapest such a misery, and
another does not? Afflictions rise not out of the dust, neither does preferment
and honor. God then gives a cup of gladness and joy, or a cup of gall and
wormwood to drink off. Now then look about thee, and behold how many sit in
darkness, and have no light; how many are bereaved of senses, of their
understandings, and of all comforts, even brought to be like Dives in hell,
asking for a drop of water, and cannot obtain it; but it is light in thy
Goshen, while darkness with others. Does not this preventing mercy melt thy
soul? Art thou not made of brass and iron, if thy preservation from the
miseries of others, especially the damnable and sinful ways, do not
exceedingly move thee? How can thou carry such live coals in thy bosom, as
these thoughts are, and not be wholly inflamed with them?

3. Acknowledge this likewise, That whatsoever God in justice might inflict 3.
Whatsoever evil God justly may, and yet does not inflict, it is a preventing
mercy.
upon thee, and yet does not, therein is also preventing mercy. It may amaze us
to consider, what objects of wrath, and examples of Gods vengeance there have
been in the world. Cain was in the beginning of the world; God made him like an
Anatomy-lecture for all succeeding evil men to beware of his impieties. Pharaoh
also, God says of him, For this cause have I raised thee up; or as some
contend, I have kept thee alive in the midst of those many judgments, that
destroyed round about him, Romans 9. 17. Exodus 9. 16. Now let any thankful,
godly heart meditate on these Histories. Consider these examples, Why wast not
thou a Cain, thou a Pharaoh? Why should not God make thee an example of his
wrath, to be a pillar of salt to season others, as well as others are to thee?
Oh the depths of this preventing mercy, how incomprehensible and unsearchable
are they! Must not this astonish thee to think, that whatsoever God in the way
of wrath has done to any man in the world, the same God might have done to
thee, and no more have wronged thee than he did them? Account this therefore
upon the riches of his mercy, that these things have not come upon thee. Look
upon all such mercies, as privileges and exemptions. God does otherwise with
thee than many others; he punishes their sins, he animadverteth their
iniquities, they are howling under his anger, and thou art preserved. It is
true, God is no accepter of persons; and therefore Cain cannot expostulate with
God, why he did not make him Abel; nor can Pharaoh complain of God, because he
was not David; nor yet can Judas find fault with the Lord, because he was not
Peter, because as Aquinas observes well, in things of mere bounty and
liberality, there cannot be any accepting of persons, seeing that if no
munificence to any at all were extended; there was no cause of grievance. And
thus it is wholly with God, he is no debtor, nor obliged in any way of justice
to man; and therefore if he do what he pleases with his own, Shall thy eye be
evil, because he is good? So that God must needs be justified by these
different dispensations; only thou whom the Lord does thus spare and exempt
from his way of wrath, look upon it as so much mercy; as if God had said to the
damned in hell, as he did to Lazarus in the grave, Come forth.

4. Not only whatsoever God does in a way of justice, but also in a
providential way (which we call chance) bring upon others, and not upon thee,
this 4. What evils God brings upon others in a providential way, and not upon
thee, it is of his preventing mercy.
also is a preventing mercy. We read, that if a man were cutting a tree, and
the Axes head fall off, and kill another, it is said, The Lord delivered that
man into his hand, Exodus 21. 13. compared with Deuteronomy. 13. 19. Although to man
there be such a thing as contingency and casualty, such sad things fall out
many times, that no wisdom of man could foresee, yet in respect both of Gods
knowledge and providence, no thing is uncertain to God: and therefore those
casual things are as much under Gods providence, as necessary things. What can
be more inconsiderable than an hair? Yet not one of these falls from the head
without Gods will. This being so, let a godly man but think with himself, How
many casual murders, how many sudden and unexpected deaths have many met
withal in the world? What sad changes have been made in families, in
relations, by some accidents, that were never thought of, yea it may be the
like never fall out again? Now then cast up thy accounts, o child of God, see
how much is owing to God in this very particular: Count every such preventing
mercy, as much as a positive one.

5. Whatsoever the frailty, imbecility and weakness of man would cast him 5.
Whatsoever man's own weakness would cast him into, and yet God keeps it off, is
a preventing mercy.
into, yet God keeps thee from; know this is a preventing mercy. Man is such
a poor, infirm creature, so many things are requisite to keep up life, that we
may wonder every man who goes from home alive, is not brought home dead at
night. How is it that this candle under so many puffs of wind, is not
extinguished? How comes this spark of fire to be kept in a sea of water? So
that thou may justly account every days life a resurrection from the dead.
Had man no other keeper, or preserver than himself, both in temporals and
spirituals, every moment he would die, both in soul and body. Say then, O Lord,
my heart is affected, my soul suffers violence within me! If I had the tongue
of men and Angels, I could not exalt thy mercy according to the nature of it; I
look upon my self, as brought out of the grave, yea brought out of hell many
times a day. The Papists have an opinion about the Virgin Mary, That she was
borne in no original sin, nor ever committed any actual sin; and therefore
(say they) when she called Christ her Redeemer, that is, by way of
preservation, not that she was actually redeemed from sin, but would
necessarily have been, if Christ had not preserved her. This is an absurd and a
foolish opinion. Only in the general we may say, That Christ, as he is a
Redeemer to his people by actual deliverance; so also by preservation, Christ
is a Savior, in that he preserves thee from the sins thou would have
committed, as well as those thou have committed. Yea all those iniquities thy
heart, thy temptations would have carried thee unto, if God had not prevented,
thou art to bless God for, as well as the pardon of those sins actually
committed by thee. Fill thy soul therefore with the meditation of these things:
Say, Lord, what I am is a mercy, what I am not is a mercy! The removing of evil
is a mercy; the keeping of it off is likewise a mercy.

SERMON. LXXVI.
Of the Necessity of Gods continuing his Mercies to us, as well as his
conferring Mercies upon us.

2 COR. 1. 10. And does deliver.
THe Apostle having thankfully acknowledged the goodness of God to him in what
was past, he comes to celebrate what was for the present; for we see in this
Verse the goodness of God, extending it self to all differences of times: If
God should but once help us, but once deliver us, we should immediately fall
into utter destruction. Therefore the Apostle observes that the mercies of God
are chained together. God does not only begin to do good, but he continues it.
Hence he adds (...), and does deliver. Indeed Beza speaks of the Syriack
Interpreter, as not reading this passage and also some Coppies, and therefore
adds, Fortassis hoc redundat, it may be this is superfluous. Chrysostom also
takes no notice of it, but it being so generally received in most Copies; and
the Apostle nameing the past and future time, it is likely he would also
celebrate the goodness of God which he did enjoy for the present; for if the
Lord did not continually deliver all, our former deliverances would do us no
good. The Greek word (...), is observed by Varinus to be customarily used in
Homer for (...), to keep, keeping, being a kind of deliverance; Hesychius
renders it by (...), but the most eminent and principal is (...), to save, and
hence in the Scripture Christ who is the Savior is called Romans 11. 26. (...),
out of Sion shall come the deliverer. Now when Paul speaks thus in the
present tense, he does deliver, it supposes that that as he was as yet in
troubles, as he says, We suffer even to this present hour, 1 Cor. 4. 11. Paul
needs deliverance continually, because he is in troubles continually, though
happily for the present they were not so great as those he formerly conflicted
with. Again, In nameing the present tense he implies, That if God did not
daily keep him, the same, or the like decumane waves would overwhelme him. But
lastly, With which sense I close, this signifies that it is not enough for God
to vouchsafe mercies once to his people unless he continue to do so all the day
long. From whence observe,

That Gods continuing of his mercies is as necessary as his first bestowing of
Gods continuing his mercies, is as necessary to us as his first bestowing them.
them.

If the Lord should deliver us from any evil, and afterward leave us to our
own strength and wisdom, to preserve our selves, how inevitable would our
ruin be? Therefore we must turn this Text into Prayer. O Lord, thou who have
delivered, still deliver, go on, and continue thy helping hand. To illustrate
this, let us consider.

1. In what particulars this word in the Text is used in the holy Scriptures,
for What deliverances God works for us.
we are apt to look only to bodily deliverances, to external mercies. Whereas
we shall find a soul deliverance, and spiritual deliverance, principally
spoken of in Gods word, and for which Christ is called the deliverer, so that
the consideration of this should raise us up into spiritual and heavenly
Meditations. And

1. For a bodily deliverance. This Paul speaks off, 2 Timothy 4. 17. I was 1.
Temporal.
delivered (...), from the mouth of the Lion, a Lion, and the mouth of the
Lion, he was in the very mouth, little hope of salvation. When the danger is so
extreme, whether he meant it particularly of Nero, or whether by that he would
allegorically express some eminent danger, to be sure he means Gods helping
hand, and that in bodily misery. Thus also Paul 2 Timothy 3. 11 enumerating
several persecutions, he concludes, but out of them all God delivered me.
Although therefore spiritual evils are judged by the godly the greatest
evils, and spiritual deliverances the greatest deliverances; yet the godly
being men, consisting of flesh and blood, they also are sensible of external
evils, and thereupon do greatly need Gods mercies toward them in their outward
deliverances. David's Psalms do for the most part glorify and praise God in
respect of temporal deliverances; and therefore such Psalms have the most
powerful influence, and do most affect the heart, when we come to be in the
same dangers and fears with him; so that in all our outward deliverances we
are to acknowledge God only; not our own wisdom or our own power. Not unto us
Lord, but unto thy name be all glory given.

2. There is also a spiritual deliverance the Scripture mentions, and this
2. Spiritual.
ought diligently to be headed by us.

1. There is Christ's sperituall deliverance of us 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. in respect of
1. From wrath to come.
the wrath and vengeance to come, we are there said to wait for Jesus, which
delivered us from the wrath to come. What is that wrath to come? even the day
of judgment, wherein God will be avenged upon all impenitent wicked men,
adjudging them to those external torments prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Oh how little do men think of the wrath to come? so they may enjoy
their present pleasures, their present lusts and advantages, they never
remember what wrath is to come, for all this. Oh let the profane man say to
his soul in the midst of all jollities! well, for all this, there is wrath to
come, put not this out of your mind day and night; but to the godly, the
Apostle says, he has delivered us from this wrath to come. We may truly say
with Agag, The bitterness of death is over, yea the bitterness of Hell and
damnation is over. Oh what an unspeakeable deliverance is this? who art thou
that God should deliver thee from that wrath which consumes so many thousands?
how can the believing soul ever let this mercy slip out of his mind. When
others shall hear that dreadful sentence, depart ye cursed into everlasting
fire, then shall they be called to inherit everlasting glory. Though now for
the present, for want of says, those future things are not realized to us. Yet
at that great day, when we shall see all these terrible things transacted
before our eyes. Oh the thoughts of heart that then will work in us! what
outrages to Mountains and Hills if possible to save them from this wrath? The
godly are said to be already delivered from it, because Christ has purchased
their deliverance, and they have right thereunto by the promise of God; so that
they are as firmly to conclude of it, as if it were already done. Even as we
are said to sit already in heavenly places with Christ.

2. There is a spiritual deliverance from the Bower of sin and Satan. We 2.
From the power of sin and Satan.
are by nature captives and slaves unto him, we are in bondage to every lust,
and we greedily fulfill the desires of our own corrupt hearts. But by Christ
we obtain a deliverance, we are set free faom the power our former sins had
over us, Col. 1. 13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and
translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. You see what the condition of
every man is till converted, it is said to be under the power of darkness. How
unspeakeable is the misery of all unregenerate men, who are thus the Devils
prisoners bound hand and foot, that they are not able to shake off any one
sin they are accustomed unto, neither are they willing to be delivered? They
do not mourn and groan after a Redeemer; how enlarged therefore should the
heart of a godly man be, when he shall see himself thus delivered? the time was
I could not give over my loose and wanton ways; I could not part from my
profane and wicked Companions; the time was, I hated such as feared God, I
could not endure any holy strictness, any family duties. The time was when the
cares of the world did lord it over me, so that neither praying, or hearing, or
any holy Ordinances had any influence upon me, being so greatly inslaved to
those earthly thing: but now blessed be God the snare is broken, and my soul
like a Bird is escaped; I can now run with delight in the ways of God. Oh how
blessed a deliverance is this, to be saved from thy former impieties, to be
delivered out of thy old blindness and wickedness? See thou not in what
miserable bondage many persons are entangled in by their lust? They have some
convictions, some terrors upon their conscience; they cry out, oh that they
could never fall into such sins again, and yet upon every temptation
hideously relapse again. Augustine before his full conversion to God,
complained of this captivity exceedingly. If therefore God has delivered thee
from thy former unregenerate estate; if he have made thee a new Creature, then
know the goodness of God toward thee, is more then ever can be comprehended by
thee. It cannot enter into thy heart to conceive of the fullness thereof: But
because this deliverance is not complete and perfect in this life, as
appears Romans 7. where Paul complains of a captivity, still he was plunged
into, he breaks out at last into that affectionate expression, Who will
deliver me from the body of this death? Oh how blessed and happy will that day
be! when thou shall have no more thorns in thy side, or rather in thy heart;
no more Jebusite to disquiet thee, but all sin with the effects thereof shall
be wholly dried up.

3. There is a spiritual deliverance in respect of the continual temptations
3. From temptations to sin and apostasy.
we meet with in this world, to draw us to sin, and to make us turn the back
upon God. That we may always have Gods protection herein, we are taught to
pray, even as often as for our daily bread, that he would deliver us from
evi'l, Luke 11. 4. and herein the Lord does vouchsafe more daily deliverance to
us, then we can possibly apprehend. Every condition, every mercy, every
affiction, would be a temptation to us, to allure us to sin; did not the Lord
daily deliver; What is it that keeps thee from the Apostasy of others? and so
from the wounds and gashes of Conscience, which usually fall thereupon; but the
mere delivering mercy of God? Thus you see in how many particulars God does
deliver his people; but as the Doctrine is; It is not enough for God to deliver
once, unless he does it daily, continually, never withdrawing his arm from
under us; and the grounds of the necessity of continued mercy are these. Why
it is necessary God should continue his mercies as well as give them to us. 1.
Because we cannot continue them our selves.


1. Because of our utter inability and impotency to continue the same to our
selves. If the Lord does bestow such and such deliverances on us, leaving us
afterward to our selves, that we by our own wisdom and power should preserve
our selves; Alas, This would immediately prove a ruin to us; for we can no
more continue the deliverance, then we could procure it at first; he that has
delivered, must be the same that does deliver. Its not God that has delivered,
and then we who do deliver. Humble thy self therefore thankfully under all Gods
merciful dispensations toward thee; say, O Lord I depend on thee for daily
bread, for daily grace, for daily pardon, for daily preservation. The same
infinite power and wisdom is required to uphold thy mercy, as was at first to
bring it to thee.

2. This continuance of mercy is requisite not only from our natural
imbecility, 2. Because of our unworthiness.
but also our moral unworthiness; So that though the Lord has delivered once
and twice; yet we are apt to be so unthankful and forgetful, that the Lord
may deliver no more. Oh how often do we forfeit the good mercies that God
vouchsafes us? how often have we provoked him to take away his good gifts from
us? but it is his mercy, it is his goodness to continue them unto us. Every day
thou do enough to make God take away all he had bestowed upon thee. Even as
when he had made man, who revolted from him, and was plunged into obstinate
wickedness; it is said Genesis 6. It repented him that he made man, and it grieved
him at the heart; an expression to humane capacity, to show how unworthy a
Subject man was now become of all that love, God had shown to him; and may
thou not fear, when thou look upon thy own barrenness and unworthy dealings
with God? that God does repent that ever he thus honored thee; that ever he
thus blessed thee; that ever he vouchsafed such grace to thee, and so take all
from thee? Take Saul for an instance, how many personal favors did the Lord
bestow on him? but at last God quite forsook him because of his Hypocrisy ane
Rebellion; If therefore we consider how forgetfully and wretchedly we walk
under Gods mercy, we may evidently see, that if the goodness of God did not
continue them, as well as at first bestow them, we should quickly be stripped of
all. How many not persons only but Churches, for want of the continuance of
Gods mercies are of Gardens become a very Wilderness? Is God to the Nation of
the Jews, as to the Churches of Asia as he was once? so that the demerit which
is upon us after mercies received, our not improving of them for God, may
provoke God after the good he has done for us to bring all evil upon us.

3. It is necessary the Lord should continue mercies and deliverances, as 3.
Because our dangers and temptations continue.
well as at first vouchsafe them to us, because our dangers, our temptations
continue. They that renew their disease daily, must also renew their Physic.
They that fall daily, need to be raised daily. Iterated troubles, need iterated
deliverances. It is true, there are some mercies that cannot be iterated any
more, the benefits of them may, but not the mercies themselves. Thus the
Creation of the world was at first, and it would be absurd to pray that God
would create it. So the Incarnation of Christ, this was once done, that it
cannot be done any more; Gods Predestination likewise of his people was from
all eternity; neither can it be iterated. But then there are other mercies
which are duly to be continued, yea, often to be repeated; such as pardon of
sin, the daily quicknings and excitings of grace. It is true, some have of
late affirmed, that sin is pardoned from eternity, and that we cannot pray
for the pardon of it; only we may for the sense and assurance of the pardon.
But it is absurd to think a sin should be remitted, before committed; and
therefore as we multiply to offend, so God is said to multiply to pardon. Do
not therefore think it enough that God has once sanctified thee, once
justified thee; and therefore thou need not the help and daily succor of
Gods grace; for if the same grace did not preserve and keep thee, which did at
first regenerate thee, thou would fall into thy old Chaos thou wast once in:
We do not therefore fall from grace, because man of himself, if absolutely
considered, cannot throw himself out of it; but because Christ will loose none
of his Members, and therefore he keeps them united to him. Even as we see it
is in regard of the world, it is not enough that God did once make it; but it
is necessary he should conserve and uphold it, as Heb. 1. he keeps up all
things by his power; hence conservation is called a Creation, and they require
the same infinite power for the one as as the other. Thus it is also in the
work of grace, in the whole conduct to salvation. An infinite power, an
infinite love must begin continue, and at last consummate. Thus by these
Reasons you see, why God that has delivered, does continue to deliver.

Use. 1. To reprove that unthankfullness and unworthiness which is in most men.
It is God that daily continues their mercies to them. It Is he that upholds the
world. He that keeps up the means of grace, and yet we take these things as if
they were so many debts to us. How little does it enter into our hearts to
think if God withdraw it, if God give but a blast, all the world is but as dust
before him. It is God that has continued thy health, thy strength to thee this
day more, this week more. It Is God continues thy relations alive: had not he
done thus, all had been broken in pieces before this time.

Use. 2. Does God thus continue deliverances and mercies? then take heed of
abusing them, to wantonness, of not improving them faithfully for God; if he
continues thy health and life, lay it out to the Author thereof; if he
continues thy wealth, and greatness, let not the Devil and sin have the
fruit of it. Oh how unjustifiable is it? what curses and torments do we
deserve, if when God continues our mercies, we thereby serve the Devil? if
the Devil did create thee; if the Devil did preserve thee; if you did live
and move in him: then you might pay him out of his own. But oh the patience of
God that suffers so many wretched sinners to advance the Devils Kingdom by
those good gifts he has given to them.

SERMON. LXXVII.
Former Experience should be a sufficient Argument for future Confidence.

2 COR. 1. 10. In whom we trust that he will yet deliver.
In this last Clause we have Paul's confidence in the power and goodness of God,
for the future bottomed upon his former and present deliverances; for were it
not the duty of a believer quietly to repose his soul with a firm trusting in
the truth and goodness of God; he could not live an hour, or a day, without
perpetual hesitation and anxiety about what might befall him.

In the words we have

1. His trust professed. 2. The matter or object thereof.
The profession of his confidence is in these words, (...), in whom we have
hoped, Erasmus renders, in whom we have fixed hope, in opposition to that
vain, moveable, and uncertain hope, which men have in earthly and transitory
things; we render it trusting, though it be not the same word with that used in
the 9. Verse; But we told you that faith has its trusting, and hope has its
trusting, and these two graces are of so near affinity, that they are often put
for one another; and indeed they both denote some recumbency and resting of the
soul upon him, whom they trust or hope in: So that as we read (...), and (...),
so also of (...), 1. Tim. 5. 5. and (...), 1 Timothy 4. 10. Which words denote,
that hope does always carry along with it some affections, and cordial
adhesion to God; So that as we reject the Popish distinction of fides informis
and formata, we do also of spes informis and formata; because the grace of hope
does sanctify the soul for its respective operations, as well as love does to
its proper actings. Concerning the word (...), Favorinus says, it differs
thus from (...), which is applied to the expectation of evil things, as well
as of God. (although in the Scripture it is hardly used any where, but
concerning good things.) Whereas (...), is only used of good things; the word
coming either of (...), or (...), to draw; because the things hoped for, do
draw and allure the soul toward them. Among the Latins, sperare is sometimes
for timere, but that is very abusively spoken. You see then, whom Paul makes
the object of his hope and trusting, even God alone. So that we may not place
our hope, in the wisdom or power of men, nor in Angels or Saints; no not as
isntrumental causes to procure us our good we need: For a divine hope, must
have for the motive of it divine truth and goodness; divine power and help, as
well as assenting faith, must have divine revelation and authority. Besides,
second causes though causatively concurring to such effects, yet because they
have both their esse, and operari dependently from God, and so do not help in
and of themselves, it is vain to trust in them.

2. There is the object trusted for, and that is, a temporal deliverance. For
although God himself, and eternal glory, be the principal objects of our hope
and trust; yet temporal mercies may be the secondary and less principal, as
they relate and conduce to this eternal blessedness; for some are only to hope
for outward mercies, as thereby our everlasting happiness may be advanced. Now
Paul by trusting in God for future deliverances, does thereby suppose that he
shall always be in dangers; and that though once or twice delivered, yet new
temptations will assault him. But though they do, he is not disheartened. The
sense he has had of Gods former mercies, does encourage him for the future:
for seeing God does help his people because they are in misery, because they
are his, and he stands engaged in promise to them: These Reasons being
perpetual and always the same, no wonder if Gods mercies and deliverances
likewise be continual. Observe.

That the experience of Gods goodness and power to his people formerly, may The
experience of former mercies should encourage us to trust in God for the future.
encourage them to trust in him for the future.

Paul was delivered by God, and therefore he trusts he will deliver him. Thus
David also argued, 1 Samuel 17. 37. God had delivered from the Lion and the
Bear, therefore also he trusted, he would from that uncircumcised Philistian.
Hence at another time David professes, He will remember the mercies of God,
which had been of old; for these are of great use to keep the heart fixed for
the future. We have the Apostle expressing his confidence even concerning
others, and that in the matter of grace and salvation; from the foundation God
had already laid that spiritual building, Phil. 1. 6. Being confident of this
very thing, that he which has begun a good work in you, will perform it till
the day of Jesus Christ. That this hope in Paul concluding from one deliverance
to another, was fixed upon, may see also at another time, 2 Timothy 4. 18. Where
having acknowledged Gods mighty prefervation to him, in that he was delivered
from the mouth of the Lion, he adds, And the Lord shall deliver me from every
evil work; How greatly then are the people of God to be reproved for their
diffidence and distrust, who though they have the Word of God, and the works
of God; the promise of God, and the providence of God, upon which to quiet
their souls concerning all events to come: yet upon every new trouble, are as
much tormented and perplexed, as if they had never heard or known any thing of
God.

To amplyfie this, consider,

1. That although we have in many particulars found the goodness and
Considerations clearing the truth. 1. Though we have often had experience of Gods
goodness, yet every new trouble is ready to startle us.
power of God to us; yet every new trouble, every new danger, is ready to
startle us, and to overwhelme us. The Children of God in any new exercise, are
many times as much to seek, as if they had never been delivered by him. They
are ready to fear, that now they shall sink, though hitherto preserved. Even
as David, when his trust in God was weakened, then he cries out, He should one
day perish by the hands of Saul: all the great deliverances vouchsafed to him,
did not settle his heart for the future. Such therefore is the diffidence, and
sinful fear which is ready to surprise us upon any new trial, that we are apt
to think; though God has done thus and thus for us, yet can he conquer this
temptation? can he help out of this trouble? This is worse then all the rest;
and can he deliver herein? Even as we read of the people of Israel, who had the
experience of so many wonderful preservations, and miraculous mercies bestowed
on them in the Wilderness, Psalm 78. 19. yet questioning, Whether he could
furnish a Table in the Wilderness? and Verse 20. Behold he smote the rock, and
waters gushed out; can he give bread also? See here how they limited God to one
mercy, and to one deliverance; now this was so great a sin, that the Psalmist
calls it, a speaking against God, it was Blasphemy; and he adds an aggravating
particular, yea, they speak against God; as if this were a greater sin then
all their former rebellions; therefore it is said Verse 21, 22. The Lord heard
this, and was wroth, his fire was kindled against Jacob: Because they trusted
not in his salvation. Oh let this be a dreadful instance, never to be
forgotten by thee! how often does thy heart say such things? God has hitherto
maintained; hitherto delivered; hitherto provided for me, and mine: But, Can he
furnish a Table in this Wilderness? can he succor me in this exigency that I
am now plunged in? Oh take heed of such distrusting thoughts! it is, speaking
against God, it is a kind of blasphemy.

2. Although the promise of God be ground sure enough for us to trust in, 2.
Though the promises be sufficient grounds for our trust, yet experiences do
much promote faith.
yet such is our weakness and infimity, that experiences and sensible props do
wonderfully promote our faith. Could we act purely and perfectly from Divine
Motives, the promise of God would be as good to us, as all the experiences in
the world; for it is the word of him that cannot iye; and therefore nothing of
sense or reason, is so sure as that of faith. But because we consist of a body
as well as a soul; therefore as in other things, God does condescend to our
weakness, so here also. The Sacraments and miracles were vouchsafed by God, to
confirm our faith; not that they add any certainty to the promise, or can
bring more authority to it; only in respect of our imbecility, so they became
helps to our faith. Thus also when we have great and glorious promises, which
may abundantly satisfy us, so as to conquer all distrustful and perplexing
thoughts, yet experiences joined with these; and when we see him fullfilling
with his hand, what he has spoken with his mouth; this does greatly add to our
confidence. It is true, our Savior says, John 20. 29. to Thomas, who would
not believe, unless his sense did confirm him, Blessed are they that have not
seen, and yet have believed, because such do give more glory and honor to God;
As Abraham did, who regarded the power of God, resting on that, and considered
not Sarahs dead Womb: Yet they are not wholly cast off by God, who do believe,
and see also. There is a time when we are to trust in God before we can have
experience of Gods dispensations; such is the time of conversion. Then the soul
being brought into the deeps of the Lord, then it being in diverse and sad
agonies, the heart is more difficultly brought to trust in God. For all things
are then new; the soul never felt such temptations before; it was never in such
fears before; it is ready to cry out, Never any was in the like case with me;
what will be the issue of those wonderful things, in his soul he knows not.
All this diffidence is, because at that time the believer had no experience of
Gods dealings; is not acquainted with the deep mysteries of God in bringing us
to salvation, our with the depths of Satan, who endeavors our destruction. But
when once the soul comes to have more experience of Gods works upon it self,
and is more acquainted with the ways of God, then he comes to hope, whereas
before he was ready to cast off all in despair. If then God has from year to
year, trained thee up in many experimental discoveries of soul-mercies, and
body-mercis; how inexcusable will thou be, if thou are ready to be shaken, and
to loose thy hold upon every new trouble? Gods promise should be enough to
thee; thou need no more: If a man that is faithful and able should assure
thee so much, thou would rest contented. How unworthily then do thou deal
with God, when his word and his works put together, yet do not compose thy
heart? Oh remember! is not he the God, that created light out of such darkness,
as did once cover thy soul? Is no^ he the God, that helped in such a trouble?
that came in with so seasonable a deliverance? and when thou know his name
thus, will thou not trust in him?

3. It is a special way to keep the heart in a serene and quiet frame, to 3.
It Is a good way to keep the heart calm, even to exercise trust in God for the
future.
exercise trust in God for the future. Not only to bless God for the mercies we
have, and do enjoy; but also as confidently and securely to trust in God for
all future things, that shall befall us, as if we did for the present enjoy
what we could desire. We shall find, that for want of this trusting in God for
the future, all our anxieties and disquietness does arise. We do continually
create unto our selves constant molestations of spirit, because we make
suppositions about the future. What if I should be brought into such a
condition? What if such a sad estate should befall me? What if I be left unto
such a temptation? Thus constant conflicts about what is to come, takes off
all joy and thankfullness, for what we have for the present. Therefore it is a
special duty in the Children of God, to be acting dependently upon God for the
future, as well as for the present. Our Savior Mat. 6. 25. does by several
choice and precious Arguments, endeavor to conquer that ill temper in his
Disciples, who were so sollicitous what would befall them to morrow? how they
should be clothed hereafter? how they should live hereafter? Therefore the
Child of God is to live with as much joy and contentation in respect of future
things, as if they were present; And this is the reason why the promises in
Scripture are sometimes expressed in the past tense, and sometime in the
present, because we are also as much assured of every good thing promised, as
if we had it already in our hands.

4. The good things we are to trust in the Lord for, as future, are both 4. The
future good things that we are to trust in the Lord for, are both spiritual
and temporal.
spiritual and temporal things. Though Paul speaks here, and David many
times in his Psalms of trusting in God for temporal mercies; yet the most
noble and excellent objects of our confidence, is to be eternal glory, or the
enjoying of God in that state of blessedness. Hence it is, that God is
sometimes, and everlasting glory is sometimes called our hope, because in the
expectation of these things the soul is daily supported: and certainly if the
Husbandman would not plow, but in hope; neither would a believer endure all
those sufferings and afflictions for Christ's sake, but for this hope. This
trusting, to have that unspeakable joy hereafter, and to be for ever with God,
should be put forth more vigorously by us. And we should find it excellently
useful to weane us from the world, and to make us part with our dearest
comforts for Christ's sake; yea, as was hinted before, we are to trust in God,
for these temporal things only as they are conducible thereby, because God
has promised them no further, and so far they are absolutely promised;
insomuch, that we may no more distrust God about temporal things, so far as
necessary to our salvation, then we may of spiritual and gracious things:
which may detect the Hypocrisy of our hearts, whereby we please our selves, as
if we trusted on Christ for our justification, and the salvation of our souls;
when in the mean while we distrust him about a morsel of bread, or a drop of
water. Only it may be doubted, how Paul, and any godly man can trust in the
Lord for the future about temporal mercies, seeing Object.
that the godly may many times be without them; and if Paul be delivered once
by God, it dothnot follow, he must be delivered every time; for then he could
not have suffered Martyrdom as he did at last. And why might not John the
Baptist, and James have trusted in the Lord to be delivered? Which if they had
done, it had been a false trusting. To this some say, that we are as absolutely
bound to trust in God for every temporal mercy, as we are for any spiritual;
Answer.
and that it is merely for want of faith or trusting in God, if we have not all
the temporal deliverances we stand in need of. If a man dye of the Plague,
they will say it is for want of faith in God; but although no doubt the People
of God are greatly to be blamed for their diffidence, and for want of trusting
in God, they loose many outward mercies; yet because temporal things are not
so absolutely promised as spiritual, therefore there cannot be such an
absolute trusting for them. Others they say, that we are to trust in Gone
conditionally. To rest upon him for this and that mercy, with this condition,
if God will. But those that say we are absolutely to pray for temporal things,
these must also conclude, that we are to trust in God for them absolutely
likewise: and therefore such do not like that expression, by way of condition,
when we pray for these outward mercies. They like not this expression in
prayer, Father, if it be thy will, recover such an one that is sick. They think
this is not a Prayer, because from a conditional supposition, no certain thing
is inferred.

Others therefore they conclude, we are to pray absolutely for temporal
things, (and by consequence we may also add to trust for them,) only there
ought to be a submission in our spirits, that if God give us not our requests,
we yield our selves up to his holy and wise will. Thus with them, though we may
not pray with condition, yet we ought with subordination; and happily they that
speak of this condition, mean no more then subordination. There is then a
difference about trusting in God concerning spiritual and temporal things;
eternal glory absolutely, and such a measure of grace as will bear us through
all temptations, that we shall not totally and finally be overcome by them,
temporal things with subordination, yet so far also absolutely ab out them,
that no good thing shall be withheld from us; so that we may with Paul Romans 8.
in an holy triumph profess, That neither life nor death; neither things
present, or things to come, shall separate us from the love of God in Christ.

SERMON. LXXVIII.
Of Motives to trust in God, and the Opposites to it, Presumption and Despair.

2 COR. 1. 10. In whom we trust, he will yet deliver.
EXperiences of Gods mercies that are past (you heard) may justly excourage us
to trust in God for the future. Now although much has been said concerning
this necessary grace of trusting, with the object in which, and for which, yet
some particulars are to be added for further explication. As

First, There are some peculiar and proper motives, to trust in God, which 1.
There are motives to trust in God from both the personal and general
privileges of believers.
were the personal privileges of some believers only; and there are general
common ones, which do belong to all the godly. As for example, when David in
that place mentioned before, argued, that God who had delivered from the Bear
and Lion, would also from that uncircumcised Philistim. We may very well
conclude, that David in that particular act, had some immediate inspiration,
and divine instinct upon his soul, whereby he was raised up to trust in God
assuredly, for that particular deliverance. And this is the more probable,
because of the manner he did encounter Goliath with, going out against him, In
the Name of the Lord, with a sling, and stones out from the brook. By which
preparation it is plain, that David was therein guided by immediate revelation.
And happily Paul in this act of trusting, which here he professes, he might
have more than the general and ordinary promises, which all the people of God
have to rely upon, there might be some special assurance and revelation
vouchsafed to him, that he had more work to do for God, that all his enemies
could not for the present take away his life. Therefore he adds, He will yet
deliver; not always, but as yet he will, till he had finished his course, and
fought the good fight of faith, he was called to. Thus we read that Paul had a
vision, Acts 18. 9, 10. while he was at this Corinth, commanding him, Not to be
afraid, for no man should set on him to hurt him. Thus many of the people of
God in former times, they had immediate revelations, and personal discoveries
made to them, whereby they were called to believe in God for such a particular
temporal mercy, and that every way absolutely. But then

2. There are common, general mercies, which are to work upon all the godly;
and such are those universal propositions revealed in Gods word, whereby we are
antidoted against diffidence and distrust in any estate whatsoever. So that
although thou have not that peculiar revelation made to thee for such mercies,
as those Ancients had, yet thou have as sure a word of promise to depend upon.
For it is the same God which speaks in a general promise to thee, that did in
a particular to them. Hence we find the Apostle comforting and encouraging the
godly by such a promise, as was peculiarly made to Joshua in that extraordinary
Office he was called unto, Heb. 13. 5. For he has said, I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee; from this see what he infers, So that we may boldly
say, The Lord is my helper: which proves, that even particular promises made
to any godly man, do in the general reason of them belong to every believer.
Even as we say of the Judicial Law, though the particular duty or punishment
may not oblige us Christians, yet the moral equity and reason, upon which it
was grounded, does. So though the very particular thing promised belong not to
thee, yet that protection, support and preservation, which is necessary to thee
in thy way, that thou may rely upon God for. Know then, that it is but the
deceitfulness of thy heart, when thou think, Oh if God would speak from
Heaven to me, or if an Angel should come from God, and bid me, Be of good
comfort, this or that shall be done for thee, then I could rest satisfied. For
if thou do not believe God speaking in a general promise, neither would
thou in a particular one. Mary Magdolen, and some others had a peculiar
particular testimony from Christ, That her sins were forgiven her, yet every
humbled and repenting sinner may apply the promises of pardon to his own soul,
as fully and as boldly as she did. For Christ does still in the world speak so
to every unfeigned convert. It is true, we grant, that in the Apostles days,
when the gift of miracles was necessary for the Church, then some had a
peculiar command and promise by faith and trusting, wherein they were able to
do miracles and wonders, and this was called, The faith of miracles. And for
any to conceive such a thing of himself now, and to trust in God for to
perform some miracle, is to be ignorant of what spirit we are: yet still we
are called to a faith and trust in God, which is almost as wonderful, as that
of Miracles. The trusting in God for the pardon of thy sins, for thy
preservation in temptations, for thy safe conducting thee to Heaven, through
all the oppositions in the way, is as difficult as miraculous faith. So also
the trusting upon God in temporals, when thy condition has been like a
wilderness, when no visible hopes or props have appeared, is like a miraculous
faith. Hence there are learned Divines (Synopsis puri. Theol.) that do grant,
there is still in the godly a faith, though not miraculous, yet answering that,
which they call Fides specialis, whereby the Spirit of God does in a peculiar
manner raise up the soul to trust in God. For this particular God sometimes,
when he provideth a mercy for his people, does prepare their hearts to expect
it. Only we must take heed that we do not baptize our delusions, and the
strong conjectures of our humane persuasions with the name of this special
faith. The sum of this head is to inform the people of God, that the general
promises are as sure an anchor to fasten thy soul in the midst of waves, as
particular are.

Secondly, It is good to consider, What are the immediate opposites and
contraries 2. What are the opposites, to trusting in God. 1. Presumption.
to this grace of trusting in God, that so we may avoid those rocks from
splitting our souls thereat.

The first enemy to it is Presumption, and that is, When men do not trust in
God, in his way. We represent God to our selves in our own carnal imaginations,
and then we trust in him, which is indeed nothing else, but to trust in our
vain lying hearts. Now this presumption, which has the appearance of trusting
in God, but is not so, may be discovered these Signs of presumption. 1. When we
walk not by Scripture Light.
ways:

1. When we do not judge of God according to the Scripture-discovery made of
him, when we walk not by Scripture Light. There can be no trusting in God
without a true knowledge of him out of his Word. Now if you observe ignorance
herein is the cause of all that presumption which drowneth many souls in
perdition. Take the most profane and profligate wretch, who like Cain almost
have the marks of Gods displeasure against them, palpably manifesting
themselves, yet they will tell you, they trust in God for mercy, they rest on
Christ to be saved: Is not all this, because they do not know God out of his
Word? If they did, would not they find there, that he is angry with the wicked
every day, That he is a consuming fire; That if a man regard iniquity in his
heart, God will not hear such a man's prayer? Are not these so many
thunderbolts to strike thee out of thy presumption?

2. It is not trusting in God, but presumption, When we are confident and 2.
When we are confident without a promise.
bold, where we have no promise from God. For this you heard, That Gods promise
and our trust, does necessarily respect each other: So that if you take away
the promise, you remove the foundation, and so faith must fall to the ground.
And this does plainly also discover, that that which some call their trusting,
and their dependence upon God, is nothing but their arrogance and their false
presumption. Such are the confidences that men have for suffering in their
heretical and damnable opinions. No doubt but such may find in themselves a
resolved and pertinacious frame of heart, which they call a trusting in God;
but because they have no promise made to their errors, therefore they have no
true faith in God. I speak of such opinions, as are not consistent with the
work of grace, and fundamental principles of Religion: otherwise if gold and
precious stones be built on the foundation, though hay and stubble be the
superstructure, such shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

3. Presumption is palpably discovered from trusting in God, By severing the
means from the end. And this is commonly made the very essence of presumption,
3. When we separate the means from the end.
that it divides those things, which God has necessarily conjoined together.
It is the Scriptures maxim, which can never fall to the ground, That without
holiness no man shall see God. Where there is no grace here, there shall not be
any glory hereafter: yet do not men generally presume, as if that Text would
not prove true; otherwise, why is it, that thou do not lay all thoughts and
endeavors about other things aside, and see to the work of grace above all
things? I may be wealthy and damned, I may be learned and damned, but I cannot
be gracious and damned: yet who is there that makes this his study and
inquisition of soul, whether this necessary work of grace has ever yet been
wrought in him? But

4. This presumption is still the more palpable and gross, When men do not 4.
When we use false means
only divide between the true means and the end, but use false and contrary
means. And this is the condition of all those who live in the common practice
of any gross sin, never reforming of it. For these men to trust in Christ, to
be saved, living and dying after that manner, is the most absurd and maddest
presumption that can be: As if thou should think by brimstone, to quench the
fire upon thy house. God indeed does sometimes work his glorious ends by those
means which are contrary; but for thee to think to go to Heaven by the way that
leads to hell, argues thou art bewitched with thy lusts. Repent, for thou
art as yet in the gall of bitterness, and bonds of iniquity.

Lastly, This presumption does powerfully, but subtly work in all those, who
5. When we think by our own strength to obtain grace and glory.
deny either in whole, or in part the grace of God, and think by their own
strength and merits to obtain the good things they hope for. Therefore
Pelagians and Papists do by the very genius of their Doctrine, teach men to
presume, when they define their Spes to be, Partim e gratia Dei, partim e
meritis proveniens. So that pure faith, and trusting in God, is not taught by
Popish principles, but presumption and self-confidence is taught by a Law. And
under this head, all those civil and moral men are comprehended, who think that
for their own righteousness, God must bestow such and such mercies upon them: a
sin that every man is very prone unto, as appears by Moses his prohibition
of it so often in one Chapter to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 9. 4, 5, 6. Speak not in
thy heart, saying, for my righteousness the Lord has brought me to possess
this Land. The Pharisee then does presume as well as the Publican, though upon
different grounds.

The second opposite on the contrary is, Despair. Indeed all diffidence and 2.
Despair.
distrust does gradually and in part oppose this excellent grace; but despair
does fully and totally. And this arises from these causes:

1. Low thoughts of God and his Attributes. Whence despair arises. 1. From low
thoughts of God. As 1. The power of God.
2. High thoughts of our own sins and unworthiness. Both these commonly go to
make the soul wholly distrustful.
First, Low thoughts of God, and his Attributes. As if God had not power and
strength enough to do what he promised. As that Lord, who would not believe God
could suddenly provide such incredible plenty. And this is the reason why God
does represent his Greatness, Majesty and Power so often, because all the
distrustful thoughts we have, do arise, because we measure God after the
capacity of a man. Hence is that expression, Zech. 8. 6. when God had promised
the restoration of the people of Israel, an impossible thing to humane
conjectures, If it be mavelous in the eyes of the people, should it also be
mavelous in my eyes. says God? As also that full affirmation, That with God
nothing is impossible; yea nothing is hard and difficult to God; he does as
easily work extraordinary and miraculous things, as he does ordinary and common
things: But why do we diffide or despair at any time, but because we judge of
God according as we would do of men?

Again, Low thoughts about the goodness, mercy and compassions of God, do 2.
The goodness of God.
compel to despair. My thoughts as are not your thoughts; but as the Heavens
do exceed the earth, so does my ways your ways, says God in this particular
about pardon of sin, Isa. 55. 8, 9. Narrow apprehensions also about the
dignity, merit, and infinite worth of Christ, of his Godhead as well as
manhood, makes us to sink under the guilt of our sins. How could any
tormenting fears 3. Of the merits of Christ.
arise in thee, if the love of Christ, and the atonement by his blood be
considered in the breadth, length and depth of it. It was attentive meditation
on this infinite subject, that made Paul so triumph, and be raised above the
guilt of his sins, his Egyptian sins, were easily drowned in this sea of blood.

The second cause of our despair and total distrust in God, is a preposterous
2. From wrong apprehensions about our sins.
and irregular apprehension about our sins. That no soul can obtain pardon
without repentance, without a deep and serious humiliation, is without doubt
the Scripture-Doctrine; but then every contrite soul is to know, that there is
a spiritual skill and heavenly art required in this sorrow for it. If we so
look upon sin, as to think it our duty to fly from Christ, to run from the
promise, that no consolation does belong to us: This is not repentance for
sin, but running from one sin to another: As if the Israelites stung with a
Serpent would obstinately refuse to look upon the brazen Serpent. For the
Gospel that vouchsafes other light, that informs us, as soon as ever we have
unfeigned sorrow for sin, and are brought low in our own eyes, not to stay in
that wilderness, not to think that we can make any satisfaction by tears or
sorrow, but immediately to lay hold on Christ, and to embrace those offers of
grace, which are tendered to all that are poor and contrite in heart. Hence it
is that the Spirit of Adoption, and an Evangelical frame of heart, are
wonderfully conducing to trust in God; as legal terrors, and tormenting fears
of conscience do greatly shake the foundations of all hope in God. 3. This
grace of trusting in God cannot be expected to be perfect here.


Thirdly, You are always to remember, that although we are to press after
perfection in this grace, as well as any other, yet none can attain to such a
constant, settled, and fixed frame of heart in trusting in God, that in no
temptation, or at no time, he should ever be moved and cast down with
diffidence. Who can express greater trust in God than David does at sometimes?
yea would think this mountain can never be moved, as Psalm. 112. 7. which indeed
is spoken of every godly man, He will not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart
is fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 56. 3. at what time, I was afraid; I will
trust in thee. Yea in many Psalms did he so far proclaim his confidence in
God, that by the event it seems, that this did regenerate into self-trusting,
for which God did for sake him sometimes, and leave him in darkness. But as
confident as he is in God sometimes, you have him at other times as much
dejected, and without comfort or support. Though therefore thou prayest and
mournest after this blessed grace, which if perfectly enjoyed, would put thee
into Heaven, while on earth, yet look to be often in conflicts, sometimes
trusting, and sometimes distrusting, till God should make thee perfect in
Heaven, where there is no more ground for fear, sorrow, or any diffidence.

Let the Use be to humble the children of God under all those distrustful and
despondent thoughts they labor with. What are become of Gods mercies of old?
Where are thy former experiences? Let such as never knew the name of God, that
have no interest in Christ, or his promises; let such (I say) like Judas and
Cain, go up and down with perpetual tremblings and anxiety of heart: but thou
dishonourest God, and the promise, and that holy calling by which thou art
called, while thou art tormenting thy self with cares about future things.
Matthew. 6. 36. It is made the Gentiles sin, an Heathenish sin. How then
comes it about that Christianity has taught thee no better? Who may walk
confidently, and with quiet spirits, though the Earth be removed into the Sea,
if thou may not? Aristotle giving Characters of confident men, (Rhetor. lib.
2do.) among others has these two particulars, 1. Such are confident, who have
great power and might, or have friends that are so: Now is there any greater
than God? Is there any mightier than he? 2. Those are confident (says he) that
are well-affected to religious and divine things. And is it not thus with thee?
Art not thou careful to observe the commands of God? Art not thou tender about
his worship, and his glory? Indeed sin and contempt of holy things, that must
needs emasculate and take away all courage; but thy faithfulness to God, may
make thee assured of his faithfulness to thee.

SERMON. LXXIX.
How we are to rely upon God, and yet make use of requisite Means too.

2 COR. 1. 11. You also helping together by prayer for us, that for the gift
bestowed upon us by the means of many persons, thanks may be given by many, on
our behalf.
THe Apostle having commemorated the goodness and power of God in his
deliverances, attributing all to his mercy; he does in this verse declare what
helps and means were likewise to be used for the accomplishing thereof. For he
that trusts in God alone for any deliverance, does also diligently use those
appointed means, which God has commanded. Neither does the goodness and power
of God to do any thing for us, disoblige us from a careful attendance to those
ways, wherein the mercy is to be obtained.

In that therefore Paul having expressed his assurance of present and future
deliverance, does also excite and exhort them to pray for him, we have

1. A Demonstration of the nature of that confidence which was in him; it was
divine and genuine, not presumption, which separateth end and means from
another. 2. Here was an Evidence of his humility and modesty. For though a
Saint in the highest form, far excelling others is gifts and graces, yet he
earnestly desires the prayers of those that are inferior to him.
The Text therefore is a further amplification of his deliverance:

1. From the Means used to obtain it. Piscator calls this prayer, Causam
adjuvantem, but that expression is too big. The Churches prayer is a means, not
a cause prevailing in the behalf of others. 2. From the End, which is,
Thanksgiving by others, as in time is to be showed.
Let us consider the Means specified in the Text; and therein we have the Means
it self, (...). The particle (...) is emphatical, You also, implying, that
neither Gods promise, or his power, would procure this mercy alone without
their prayer. Besides the goodness of God on his part, there must be prayer on
their part. The word in the original for helping is emphatical, being twice
compounded. (...), This word does denote the Service and Ministry of those who
are under us; and so it does imply, that the Church does owe as a debt unto
their spiritual guides earnest prayer for them. Though the Ministers be their
servants in some respects, in respect of the end of their office, as all
Governors are; yet they are their servants in other respects, by way of
obedience to their word, and constant prayer for them. But then there is the
Preposition (...) added, which does denote not only their effectual prayers,
but their concord and agreement therein, and that in their public and solemn
Assemblies. Again, the word signifying to work and labor, does denote what the
nature of prayer is, that the soul labors therein, is fervent, full of
agonies: which shows, that the customary formal prayers of most people are
not worthy of the name; there is no labor or fervency of the soul therein.

In the second place, You have the way, how they labored by prayer. The
meaning of (...) is to be spoken to afterward. They did not labor by using
friends to solicit the Magistrate in Paul's behalf, for there was no hope
from them, but they made their addresses to God.

Lastly, Here is the Subject (...), You helping together. It is an honor Paul
puts upon them by this expression, and thereby also commends their duty to
them, of praying for them.

Several Observations are contained in this particular. As

First, Whereas we see Paul resting alone upon the goodness and power of God
for his deliverance, yet not excluding, but rather desiring the prayers of the
Corinthians, as a necessary means to have this also obtained. Observe,

That it is a Christians duty not to separate from, or oppose the grace and
It Is our duty not to separate Gods power and goodness from the means required.
power of God to the duties and means he also has required.

Not to say, because it is Gods grace, and Gods work, therefore I will sit down
and do nothing. Now on the other side, God commands me to pray, to work,
therefore it is not the grace of God, but my duties that do justify and save
me. You may read how happily the Apostle conjoyneth them together, Phil. 2. 12,
13. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God that
works in you both to will and to do. It is true, the enemies of Gods grace,
who detract from it in whole or in part, do gladly embrace this truth, and
compel it to go two miles further than it would; They force it so much, that
blood comes out in stead of milk. As Austin, while he writes against
Manichees, Pelagians did take some expressions of his commending them
exceedingly (as that all sin must be voluntary, else it could not be a sin,
etc.) as if he had been on their party. Then on the other side, when he did
valiantly write against the Pelagians, they branded him for a Manichee. So hard
a matter is it to defend truth which lies between two extremes; but while we
set against one, we are thought to draw nigh to another. And thus it is in the
Doctrine now observed, while we maintain the necessity of our duty, as well as
Gods grace, we are thought to go into the Papists quarters. Again, while
against them, we set up the grace and power of God, excluding, though not the
duties and means God has appointed, yet the merit and causality of them, we
are thought to join with the Antinomians, whereas indeed we have no affinity
with either.

Let us therefore labor after that spiritual skill and discerning whereby we
How God and the creature work together 1. All Gods spiritual mercies have many
things concurrent before they be accomplished.
may be able to know what God does, and what we are to do, yet so as not to
take off in the least manner from the glory of God.

First, Therefore consider, That all the great spiritual mercies which God does
vouchsafe in time to his people, have many things concurrent before they be
accomplished. It is not the presence of one thing alone can effect that mercy,
unless all be present: I say it is thus with these spiritual privileges God
vouchsafes in time. For as for predestination, which is an immanent act, and
the purpose of God from eternity to prepare for glory. There is nothing at all
concurrent to that, but the mere good pleasure of his will. The Scripture
always resolves it into that alone, but it is otherwise with justification
and glorification. For to justification many things are required, there is the
grace of God, as the efficient cause, the blood of Christ as the meritorious
cause, and faith as the instrument, the hysop to sprinkle this blood upon the
soul. Now till all these meet together, a man is not justified. God indeed has
decreed to justify thee from all eternity; but the actual justification of thy
person is in this order and method. So for glorification, the kingdom of glory
is said to be prepared for the godly, viz. from eternity, they were before the
foundations of the world were laid, elected to this everlasting happiness; but
an holy life, and a godly conversation is the way thereunto. No unclean thing
can enter there. This being so,

Hence in the second place, It has always bred much confusion and error 2.
The opposing of these requisites one against another, has bred much confusion
and error.
in Doctrine, to oppose these requisites one against another. To argue from the
inclusion of some to the exclusion of others; if duty, then no Christ; if
Christ, then no duty. The Antinomian he argues, If Christ by his blood made
atonement for our sins, if our iniquities were laid upon him, then we are
justified from that time in the sight of God, before we do believe or repent.
Now whence arises this error? Because they consider not that as Christ is
required in a meritorious way, so also faith in an instrumental way: And though
Christ do more principally concur to our justification, yet faith is required
by necessity of precept and means also. Christ without faith does not justify,
no more than faith without Christ. Hence they are put together, Romans 3. 25.
Whom God has sit out to be a propitiation through faith in his blood. The
Papist on the other side, though the Scripture mentions not the word merit
and satisfaction, yet by their forced consequences they would establish such a
Doctrine. Now in the sense they and others plead for works, notwithstanding all
their subtle distinctions; The Apostle argues infallibly, Romans 11. If of
grace, then not of works; and if of works, then grace is no longer grace.
Though therefore some do more grossly then others set up works against Christ,
yet they become guilty of dishonouring him, who give him not the sole glory of
our redemption.

But you will say, If Gods grace and our duty must go together, if we must look
to Christ for salvation, and yet to holiness, to prayer and repentance, as the
means conducing thereunto: How may we be directed so to live, as that we shall
give all to the glory of Gods grace, and his power, and yet to act in the
duties God has commanded, without any negligence therein? For seeing that
Satan is very busy in his temptations on both sides, either to be careless of
prayer, and other ordinances, because we are to give all to Christ; or because
they are necessarily required, to put our trust and confidence in the
performance of them, it is good to be informed wherein the way is clear for a
believers avoiding all dangers.

To answer this, which will indeed explicate the whole nature of the Doctrine,
How we should rely wholly upon Christ, and yet make use of the means, and how
we may know whether we do or no. 1. When we acknowledge whatsoever we have to
come from Christ.
consider these particulars:

First, Then thou may rely on Christ, and yet be diligent in the use of all
Ordinances, when thou do acknowledge all the power thou have, both in whole
or in part, to the very beginning of godliness, to come alone from him. When
whatsoever thou art able to do thou do confess, it is his gift, thou have
received it from him; so that it is not thou that do it, not thy power, thy
strength, but the gift of God alone. Thus Phil. 4. 12, 13. when he had
mentioned that excellent frame of heart, That he knew how to abound and how to
want; yea, that he could do all things; he mollifieth this presently, by adding
Christ, He could do all things through Christ that strengthened him. Here Paul
does put forth the life of grace, but the fountain of it is Christ. So again, 1
Cor. 15. 10. I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace
of God, which was with me, or in me, exciting of me, and giving me strength to
do it. The trumpet of grace is often in these acknowledgements, 2 Cor. 3. 5. We
are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves. He does
not say to do, but not so much as to think. And he does not say, great things,
or high things, but any thing: Not the least good thing in his ministerial way,
but our sufficiency is of God. Therefore to curb the insolency of such proud
thoughts, as if we could do any thing of our selves, see with what authority he
speaks, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee to differ from another? And what have
thou, that thou diast not receive? Therefore the Pelagians and Semi-pelagians
of old, these did so set up duty, and their own power therein, that they did
take off from Christ and his grace. The former, they held not grace necessary,
unless it were for the more easy working, ad facilius operandum; but if this
were so, then Christ was in vain in respect of any absolute necessity. The
latter, they held our endeavors, our desires and groans did go before, and
then grace was bestowed upon us to put them into effectual operations: But all
this is derogatory to the grace and power of God, who of spiritually dead,
makes us to live a supernatural life, being made new creatures, and so act from
that principle of life infused into us.

Secondly, We do exercise our selves in prayer and other Ordinances without 2.
When we attribute no merit or causality to the means.
any dishonor to the grace and power of Christ, when we attribute no merit, or
causality to them. And this is a step higher than the former. For in Popery,
besides Christ they press the necessity of holy works, as merits; but they
acknowledge the grace of God, to be the foundation thereof. They say, our
faith, our love, our repentance must be the fruits of the Spirit, and the
effects of Gods grace; but then they destructively add, That these do merit
eternal life, and by such duties we make compensation to the justice of God.
Now you must know, that they plead not for merit in a rude and gross manner,
as if the works flowing from us did deserve a crown of glory, but as we are
enabled to them by grace, and thereupon they say, to call the graces we are
enabled unto by Christ menstruous clothes, or dung and dross, they think to be
a manifest injury to God himself. But certainly when Paul would not be found in
the righteousness he had; And Abraham and David were not justified by the
works they did, though regenerated persons; This does fully overthrow all
merit, under any distinction whatsoever. Look then thou distinguish between the
necessity of the duty, and the merit thereof. See thy self bound to the use of
all Ordinances, but attribute no condignity to them to make thee worthy of Gods
favor.

Thirdly, Then we derogate not from Christ, when in the constant exercise 3.
When we rest upon Christ only for our justification.
of these, we rest only upon him for our justification. Though we pray for our
selves and others, though we diligently attend to the whole course of
godliness, yet in regard of reconciliation with God, and acceptance of our
persons, we go out of all to Christ alone; It has pleased the Father, that in
Christ all fulness should dwell, Col. 1. 14. Fullness is not to dwell in thy
duties or graces, but in Christ. Hence also Ephesians. 1. 6. We are accepted of in
the beloved. It is not then in our own performances, nor in any thing that we
can do, that we are to look for acceptance. David, though living under the Old
Testament dispensations, yet saw so much of Gospel Light and Gospel Grace, That
if God entered into judgment with his servant, no flesh could be justified in
his sight, Psalm 143. 2. Do not then confound sanctification and justification
together, which is the continual error in Popery. Be diligent in active
righteousness, but rest in passive, viz. that righteousness of Christ imputed
to the believer.

Fourthly, We perform duties and Ordinances without derogation to Christ, 4.
When we put no trust or confidence in the means.
when we put no trust or secret confidence in them, but look upon them only as
the signs and evidences of Christ's dwelling in us. We may indeed be much
comforted, and rejoice in the discovering of graces in our hearts: but to put
any confidence in them, to rest upon them, as if in them we might stand before
God: This is to mistake, and to give to our graces what belongs to Christ; and
that Christian must have a discerning spirit, even an Eagles eye, that can
difference between comfort from duties, and resting in duties. Then also we put
no trust in them, when we are by them lifted up to draw nigh to Christ; when
they are to us, what the tree was to Zacheus, to raise us up higher, that we
may have communion with Christ. If then we look upon our graces, as the
restimonies of Gods love, and exercise our selves in duties, as those whereby
we draw nigh to Christ himself, then Christ is glorified, not dishonored by
them.

Fifthly, Then we use spiritual duties oppositely to the honor of God, when we
think to profit him, or advantage him thereby. When we have done all, 5. We
dishonor God in the use of the means, when we think we profit him thereby.
we are to judge our selves unprofitable servants, as to God: God needs not
any of our service; He has millions of Angels, and thousands of the spirits of
just men made perfect, which offer him praise and honor, without the least
spot and defilement: So that it is his gracious condescension to accept of our
duties: It is his mercy, that he will regard our prayers; They are liker to
noisome vapors, than to frankincense, and yet God is pleased to receive them
as such. If therefore thou art after all duties exceedingly debased and
humbled, saying, Who am I Lord? And what am I, that I should be received into
thy presence? and so going from duties, not as giving to God, but receiving
from him, not as if thou had honored him, but he had honored thee, then
Christ and duties are well accorded together.

Use of Instruction. What subtle and secret refined ways of sinning the heart
of man is guilty of? For whereas all will conclude, that not to pray, not to be
diligent in duties, is to oppose Christ, and withstand him; there is a more
mystical and undiscerned way of opposing Christ and God, which is by religious
duties and Ordinances, when we make them more than means, when we give merit to
them, and put any confidence in them. How heavy an aggravation is this, while
we pray to God to provoke God, while we call on Christ, to dishonor Christ?
Search out therefore for thy sins, not only in the open ways of impiety, but
in the paths of holiness. In thy prayers, in the ordinances, look to find out
sins there, as well as temptations of more dissoluteness. The works of the
Law kept men off from Christ, as well as the works of the flesh.

SERMON. LXXX.
The highest in Gifts and Graces, should desire the Prayers of the Meanest: And
People ought to Pray for their Ministers, as well as Ministers for their People.

2 COR. 1. 11. You also helping together by Prayer for us.
THis Text you heard, is declarative of the means which were to be used by the
Corinthians, that the mercy Paul trusted in God for, might be accomplished. The
means, that is Prayer, but a laboring Prayer, and with accord and agreement;
yea, such an helping in Prayer, as is a debt of service, and ministration to
their spiritual guides. The word (...), when taken strictly, and distinctly to
other words that are also rendered prayers and supplications; (as some would
expound that place, 1 Timothy 2. 1.) does signify prayer only in this limited
sense, as it is a deprecation against some evil, rather then a petition for
some good; and in this sense it may very well be used here. But because we see
the Scripture commonly using it in a more large sense, neither will we
restrain it in this place. From the former part then of this Verse, there
remain further Doctrines observable. As

First. Those that are the most eminent in gifts and office, yea and grace The
most eminent in gifts and graces, need the prayers of their inferiors.
also, do need the Prayers of those, who are far inferior in the Church of
God.

No eye in this spiritual body is so perfect, that it may say to the foot, I
have no need of thee. When the Apostle does thus desire the Prayers of the
Corinthians, he does it not in a complement, neither does he speak it for
modesty and humility sake, but cordially and really, as finding the want of
them. Christ indeed being God and Man, though as Man he prayed to God, yet he
needed no man's prayer for him; neither did he ever require his Disciples to
pray for him, no, not when he was in the greatest agonies. He blamed them
indeed for their dullness, and that they could not watch with him one hour; but
he did not require their prayers for him. But there is no godly man, though a
Paul, though never so eminent, but as he is to pray for others; so also he
needs that others should pray for him. Hence you have this eminent Saint
often desiring the prayers of others, his interest in God alone will not do it.
Though he be a favorite in the Court of Heaven, yet others also must intercede
for him. Job, Daniel, and others, though they be instanced in, as such who can
greatly prevail with God in prayers for others, as if the ear of God were
open to them, more than to others; yet they themselves did want the prayers of
others for them. And thus we have Paul again and again desiring the prayers of
others for him, 1 These. 1. 17. when he had delivered many short and excellent
Aphorisms, more necessary to the souls health, then those of Hippocrates for
the body; and having also prayed for them, he requires the same duty for
himself, Brethren pray for us. That as the Clouds drop upon the earth to
refresh that, and that sends up vapors again, which are congealed into Clouds;
thus it should be with Pastors and People, a mutual and a reciprocal praying
for each other, will greatly advantage and promote their spiritual good. Thus
the same Apostle, to the same people, 2 These. 3. 1. says in a concluding way,
Finally, Brethren pray for us. In the like manner, also Heb. 13. 18. he
desires they would pray for him, giving his reason, because of the good
conscience he had in his work; So that where there is godliness and holiness,
we ought to be so far from neglecting prayer for them, thinking they do not
need it, that we are the rather to be encouraged in that service for them. And
if you say these instances are of whole Churches, Paul may well desire the
prayers of Churches Assembled together; but does he need the prayer of a
particular person? Yes; this you will also find, Phil. 2. 2. I trust, through
your prayers, I shall be given to you. Thus you see the most eminent desiring
the prayers of those that are inferior to them; and there are good grounds for
this.

First, Because there is a more particular promise made of Gods presence and
power to many gathered together, than to one; to the prayers of more then
Reasons. 1. Because there is a more peculiar promise made to the prayers of
many then one.
one, as more coals together do the more easily inflame. What Solomon says,
of two, that they are better than one, is true also in respect of prayer. You
have this notably affirmed by Christ himself, Matthew. 18. 19, 20 If two of you
shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be
done for them. This is so remarkable, that our Savior uses that expression,
Again I say to you, and then gives the reason, For where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there I am in the midst of them. By this it is
plain, that vis unita est fortior, the united force of believers, is stronger
then single and alone. Hence our Savior in his Form of Prayer directs to
say, Our Father, not, my Father, because of the Communion the godly have in
this duty. Seeing then there is a more peculiar presence of God in the midst of
his people Assembled together, then when alone; no wonder if Paul desire their
prayers. Thus it was in Peter's case, the whole Church met together to pray for
his deliverance; which prayer was so prevalent, that it broke open the Prison
doors, and made every thing yield to it. It is mentioned as a special
privilege by the Psalmist to be vouchsafed to Solomon, Psalm. 72. 15. Prayer
also shall be made for him. It is of great consequence to be remembered in the
Assembly of the Saints; as on the other side, when the Church following
Scripture-Rules have cast some persecuting Emperors out of their Prayers: this
has been the greatest evil that could befall them, a forerunner, that God
also would cast them out of his favor. One occasion which made Licinius to
oppose Constantine, was because the Christians in their meeting prayed for
Constantine, but not for him; though happily he regarded more the dishonor he
thought put upon him, than any esteem he had of their Prayers.

Secondly, Another Reason is, From the similitude, which the Scripture
delights 2. Because the Church in Scripture is called a body, whose parts
stand in need one of another.
much in, when it speaks of the Church of God, that it is a body, and every
particular Christian is a Member thereof; now in any natural body, though the
noble and eminent parts thereof be never so sound and able for their particular
operations, yet there is not the most ignoble part in the body, but they want
the help thereof, and therefore nourishment is carefully distributed to every
part, as having its respective necessity. Thus it is also in the spiritual
body, the Church of God; only Christ the head, needs not the Members, but
they him. As for the rest there is a mutual help of every part, so that unless
Paul were not of the body, unless he were not of this spiritual union, he must
need the prayers of others. The Communion then that the body has in this life,
is the ground of praying for one another; and that is the reason, why, though
we pray for others though alive; yet not when they are dead. It is absurd to
pray for such who are deceased, because they are now no longer in this
Church Communion. The eye does not now need the feet, all want is removed, and
that visible union of believers in Church-administrations, is now quite
dissolved. What else may be added in this particular, shall be suggested in the
next.

Only the Use of this is to admonish the most excellent and choicest Christian
Use.
of humility and modesty; though thy gifts and graces, though thy office and
place be far above other private Christians, yet remember thou want their
prayers. They that cannot help thee by counsel and advice; they that cannot
help thee by direction, yet may by prayer. Therefore do nothing that may abate
their zeal and love in prayer for thee. It may also teach thee humility in
this respect. When thou find great inlargements, good success in thy
Ministry, be not lifted up; as if God did this for any righteousness it may be
in thee, but because of other men's prayers; attribute such things to their
prayers, rather then thy graces. But we proceed to the second Doctrine, which
is,

Secondly, That people do owe unto their spiritual guide, as a debt of People
ought to pray for their spiritual guides.
service, their earnest prayers for them.

Thus much you heard was employed in the Greek word. Those that sow unto you
spirituals, are not only to reap of your carnals, but also of your spirituals;
you are not to communicate only with him that teaches you, in your temporal
good things but your spiritual also. Thus the Church looked upon it as a duty
to make supplications for Peter, when he was in Prison; and certainly the
spiritual labourer is not only worthy of his wages, but of your heartiest and
most fervent prayers; and those people who do neglect this duty, it is a sign
that they never get good by the Ministry, nor is it their desire to do so.
Hence so much laboring and Preaching becomes so ineffectuall to thee. Thou
art the same ignorant and profane man, as thou were many years ago. Is not
this because thou never rightly prayest to God that the ministry may be blessed
to thee. But to enlarge on this, Consider

1. That it is a wild and absurd opinion of the Socinians, who hold that
Considerations explaining the truth. 1. It Is an error of the Socinians to say,
God commands prayer only in the New Testament.
prayer is only commanded in the New Testament. That Christ made it a new
precept to pray, so that although the godly in the Old Testament did pray, yet
they say, they had no command for it. This they make one of the new
Evangelicall precepts Christ brought into the Church; but this does openly
contradict Scripture. Does not the Scripture say, Call upon me in the time of
trouble; does not the Old Testament say, Seek ye the Lord while he may be
found; was not the Temple of God called the house of prayer? does not Solomon
in the Dedication of his Temple, suppose that its a peoples duty under
judgments to pray and humble themselves under Gods hand, that so they may be
removed from off them. It was therefore always a duty both in the Old and New
Testament to pray to God.

2. Though prayer be the means whereby God accomplisheth great things 2. No
merit or confidence to be put in our prayers.
for his people, yet we must not put any merit or confidence in our prayers. To
be proud of thy prayers, is a great absurdity; for thy prayer to God does
testify that thou art nothing, that thou can do nothing: for if thou can
do things of thy self, why need thou pray? That is the reason, the
Socinians give, why in the Old Testament, there needed no precept of prayer,
because there was then nothing promised; but they were able to fulfill the
condition thereof by their own power. But the foundation of that is rotten, for
they had the same spiritual things promised only more obscurely, that we have;
and were no ways of themselves to perform their conditions: otherwise we will
grant that what a man can do of his own power independently upon God, he
needs not pray for it; but there is nothing wherein man does not need the
gift of God, whether for temporal, or necessary things: and seeing the way to
have it is only by prayer, this exalts God, and debaseth man, so that it is a
contradiction to the duty in hand, when we rest upon our prayers, as if the
beggar should be proud from his asking of alms.

3. The duty of prayer is reciprocal; Ministers are to pray for their People,
3. Ministers are to pray for their people, and people for their Ministers.
and People for their Ministers. This Paul who so often desires the Churches
prayers, does as often demonstrate his continual and fervent prayers for them;
yea, though a people be never so unworthy, so wretched and malicious, yet they
will say with Samuel, God forbid I should cease to pray for you; so that thy
prayers for those who labor in the work of the Lord, are not in vain. They are
recompensed with prayers again, and never are people a blessing and comfort to
a Minister, nor is a Minister a blessing to them, till there be this mutual
praying; for if the prayer of one man does prevail much, how much then will
the prayers of many righteous persons for each other? So that we see why the
Devil and his instruments are so busy in sowing of discords and contentions
between Pastor and People; why instead of praying for one another, there are
slanderings, detractitions, and malicious oppositions of one another: for by
this discord the Devils Kingdom is promoted, and their prayers for one another
are hindered.

4. When we say, That its a debt which people owe, to pray for their spiritual
4. This supposes the people to be both gifted and gracious.
guides; this supposes that the people whom he watch over, should be both a
gifted and a gracious people. Gifted, Such who are able to make their requests
known to God, and that with others, as well as alone; for how can it be
expected, that he who cannot pray for himself, will ever pray for the Minister?
Would it not be very ridiculous to desire the prayers of many, who live under
our continual teaching. Pray, Alas they never prayed in their lives. They
never pray for themselves, or for others. But gifts without grace, are like a
tinckling Cymball: God will not hear the prayers of wicked men. Therefore our
people ought to be gracious as well as gifted. They must have pure hearts, and
pure hands: how uncomely are holy prayers in an unholy mouth? There must be no
dead fly in this precious box of Ointment. Oh then that our Congregations were
awakned to be such a people, that can discharge spiritual duties to a
spiritual overseer! Do you by your prayers help on the work of their ministry;
for our Preaching alone, without your effectual praying, will not have its
blessed effect.

5. There are many particulars in which your souls are to be emptyed in 5.
Many things there are which people are to desire of God for their Ministor. 1.
That they may be preserved. 2. That their word may be suceesfull.
prayer for them, for their preservation and safety. As here Paul prays for
their works sake; they are exposed to the hatred and rage of man; if the
shepherd be scattered, the sheep will quickly fly: now because their calling
is to remove the sins of people, to set the Kingdom of Christ in the place
where they live; therefore none meet with more absurd and unreasonable
adversaries then they do: for this Paul desires their prayers, 2 These. 3. 2.
That he might be delivered from unreasonable men.

2. You are to pray for them in this particular also, that their Ministry may
be successful. That the word they Preach may find room in the hearts of the
people. As it is the Ministers duty to give himself to study, and to seek out
fit words, that may be as so many Nails fastened by the Master of the
Assemblies; so it is your duty to be as diligent in prayer for a blessing upon
it. That to your selves, to your families, to your neighbors, it may be a
quickening and converting word. Thus Paul in that forementioned place, pray for
us, that the Gospel may have a free course, and be glorified. Oh what auditor
does his duty in this respect? thou complainest of the dullness and frowardness
of people; how much good seed falls upon stony ground? see if thy soul may
not be charged with negligence herein; had thou prayed more earnestly; had
thou sought the Lord more; there might have been a more plentiful harvest.
When the Ministers faithful Preaching, and the Peoples fervent Prayer go
together, then Satan will fall like lightning before them.

3. You are to Pray for their qualifications, that their gifts and graces may
3. That their gifts and graces may be quickened.
be quickened. That they may be filled with boldness, and the spirit of power,
not fearning man, or sinfully pleasing him. It is a very hard thing to be
qualified with all abilities and graces for the ministerial employment, who is
sufficient for these things? and the work we have to do is unpleasing and
distrustful to all natural men. Now how difficultly can men subject to
weaknesses and infirmities do such angelical work? Thus Paul himself, who
professed he dyed daily, and attained to such a measure of grace, as to bid
others follow him, yet see the reason, Ephesians. 6. 20, 21. why he desires the
Ephesians to pray for him, viz. that I may open my mouth boldly, that I may
speak boldly as I ought to speak.

Lastly, You are to pray even for their salvation, for their office being so
great, 4. That they may be saved.
and they standing accountable for their own and the peoples souls, their
salvation is the more improbable. Chrysostom speaks very sadly to this
point, as if very few Ministers would be saved, because of their office;
however we find Paul awing his heart with this, and keeping down his body,
using all means to suppress the very beginning of sin, 1 Cor. 9. 17. lest when
he had Preached to others, he himself might be a castaway. These offices in
the Church, though some do ambitiously intrude into them, looking for glory and
advantage thereby; yet such, who consider the difficulty of the office, the
necessary qualifications and due administrations thereof, do tremble under it;
and like Moses and Jeremy are afraid to take such an office upon them; but men
whose spirits are hardy and confident, matter not the danger thereof. As you
see in great high Buildings, how Masons and other Artificers can stand upon an
high Pinnacle, and their head never be giddy, nor have any fear, but those who
are not accustomed to that way, do exceedingly tremble; thus men, who are
accustomed to high thoughts of themselves, that have great confidence of their
own abilities, they can work on these Battlements, and their heads never go
round; whereas men of deep modesty and humility, are afraid to climb so high.

Use of Admonition, to our people generally, how greatly is this duty
neglected? how many instead of praying for them, curse and revile them? but no
wonder at this, seeing many never pray for themselves, they never pray, nor
their families pray, and then how can you help us by your prayers? Let this
particular move thee, that by prayer for a blessing upon our Ministerial
labors, thou will find the benefit redound upon thy own soul. It will be a
quickening ministry to thee, whatever it be to others, to thee it will be
soul-saving. Do you pray that your corporal bread may nourish your body? and
will you not much rather, that your spiritual bread may be the bread of life
to you? All lies not in hearing, writing, and repeating, but add to these
effectual prayers.

SERMON. LXXXI.
How, and why we should praise God for all his Mercies vouchsafed to us.

2 COR. 1. 11. That for the gift bestowed upon us by means of many persons,
thanks may be given by many on our behalf.
THis latter part of the Verse, contains the reason or final cause of his
request, for the unanimous public paryers of the Corinthians. viz. That as by
the prayers of many, his deliverance has been obtained; so also by them
public praises and thanksgivings may be given to God in his behalf.

The sense of the words is very plain and clear, only the Grammatical
Construction has caused great variety of Interpretations; I shall endeavor to
clear every obscurity, as it comes in order.

In the words there is,

1. The end it self, and that is, that thanks may be given. 2. The Object
matter for which, and that is called (...), the gift. viz. of deliverance from
that great death. 3. The Subject by whom this gift is obtained, and that is by
many. 4. The Persons who are to give thanks, and that is also many, (...), And
Lastly, In whose behalf, and that on our behalf.

Let us take these parts of division, as they come in order. And

First, We meet with the final cause, That thanks may be given, (...), it is
in the passive sense, and therefore noted to be an unusual and a very rare
phrase, it being every where else used actively. Observe

That when by prayers we have obtained mercy, it is our duties by praises
Whenever we have received mercies from God, we are by praise and
thankfullness to acknowledge then to him.
and thankfullness to acknowledge the same to God.

Prayer must not be alone, when it has prevailed with God like Castor and
Pollux, prayer and praises must go together, Phil. 4. 6. In every thing by
prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to
God. Here you see supplication and thanksgiving must go hand in hand. Its no
less Gods command to praise him for mercies, then to pray to him; and this
truth is the more to be pressed, because of our horrible negligence herein. In
our distresses, in our exigences, we call and cry unto the Lord, but in our
mercies and deliverances we forget him, and do not own the Author of our
favors and benefits. This is notably represented in that History Luke 17. 17,
18. Where often Lepers that were cleansed, there was but one did return and
give glory to God by thanksgiving, and he was a Samaritan also. So that those
from whom it was expected, did neglect this duty. We see by this how backward
we are to praise God, though very forward and earnest to pray to him in our
miseries. Those nine Lepers that regarded not to praise God, yet they lifted up
their voices and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us; and thus while we are
in any exigences, then our hearts are very hot and lively. Then we cry and
pray, Lord hear us, our trouble is great; but if the Lord do vouchsafe his
mercy to us, then God may say, where is the man, where is the woman that was
cleansed, that was healed, that had this or that mercy and deliverance, for
they have not returned to glorify me. It is love to our selves; it is a
self-seeking that makes us pray, but it would argue love to God, and an
honoring of him, when we return praises to him. It is therefore the duties of
Ministers to press you upon the duty of praising of God, as well as of praying
unto him. Many are horribly negligent in both, some are more often in prayer,
then they are in thanksgiving. Whereas God is said to inhabit the praises of
his people, Psalm 22. 3. as well as he is the God that hears prayers, Psalm
65. 2. God dwells in the praises of Israel, that is, in or amongst Israel
continually praising of him; or else it is to show, that as a man dwells in
his house constantly residing there; so God is daily administering matter of
praises to his people; implying thereby, that there is no time, no place, no
condition, wherein we ought not to bless and praise God. Those many Psalms
which David made, declare how necessary a duty it is, and how much the people
of God are to exercise themselves therein. Hence it is that David professes he
will never intermit this duty; as we are to pray without ceasing, so to praise
God without ceasing, Psalm 145. 1, 2. I will bless thy name for ever and ever;
I will bless thee every day: See what an ardent affection David has to this.
For although the Apostle James says, Is any man afflicted let him pray, is any
man merry let him sing Psalms, James 5. 13. implying thereby, that there are
special times wherein one duty is to be exercised, more than another: yet
there is no time wherein the Lord does not give his people occasion to give
thanks to him.

That your hearts may be both rightly instructed in the manner of this duty,
and awed against all slothfullness therein, take notice of these ensuing
particulars.

1. What is required to this Duty. And 2. The Motives thereunto. And
First, To praise God, there is required an acknowledgement by faith, that What
is required to the praising of God. 1. An acknowledgement that God alone is the
Author of all our mercies.
God, and God alone, is the Author of all the mercies, both temporal and
spiritual, that we do enjoy. Hence an Atheist can never be thankful, because
he owneth no God, the giver of mercies: And the practical Atheist, who lives
as if there were no God; he like the Swine, eats indeed upon the fruit that
he finds upon the ground, but never looks up to the tree from whence it
falls. Now this practical Atheism does reign every where, and that causes
the universal ingratitude that is in the world: men take these mercies as so
many debts belonging to them. They look upon them as the things of a natural
course, not as the dispensations of a free and voluntary Agent; even the great
God who gives them, and denies them at his pleasure. David therefore in his
Psalms, does so often magnify God by many glorious Titles, thereby
professing, that From God comes every good and perfect gift. Hence also the
Apostle James, Cap. 4. 15. makes it the duty of every one in their daily
resolutions, to buy and sell, or to go to such a place, to say, if the Lord
will; declaring hereby, that it is from God that we are enabled to perform any
natural or civil action. I also add, that it must be an acknowledgment of God
alone, because in spiritual mercies many corrupt Teachers have divided the
kingdom between Gods gracious power and man's man's free will. Therefore the
Papists, the Socinians, the Arminians, these do either in whole or in part
destroy the very foundation of thanksgiving to God, in respect of spiritual
mercies; especially in that whereby one man differs from another. That which
the Apostle does so evidently attribute to God only, 1 Cor. 4. 7. that they
appropriate to themselves the good use of free will, or the improving of grace
offered, is made man's work; and then certainly we are to glory more in our
selves then in God. But if we are to give God thanks for every morsel of
bread we eat; shall we not much rather for every spiritual mercy to the soul?
It was Tullies observation, that though their Ancestors praised God for their
prosperity and success, yet they never did for their virtuous actions, thinking
that absurd, as if unless they were not done by their own power, there was no
commendation due to them; and too much of this Heathenish and Philosophical
leaven does still sour the minds of many Learned men in the Church. Know then,
so much as thou set up a free will beyond Scripture bounds, so far thou
take off from the duty of praising and blessing of God. Besides we say, God
must be acknowledged in every mercy, temporal and spiritual. Thou that
prayest God would give thee thy daily bread, will thou not praise God when he
does it? yet how sottish and brutish are many persons and Families, when they
go to meals, and rise from meals, and no thanks or praises are given to God,
should not the example of Christ move thee? when he had but some loaves of
Barley and a little Fish; yet he blessed God, before he did eat thereof. How
then comes it about, that there should be such unthankful wretches that take
their food, and yet never thank God that gives it? Thou would account that
poor man a proud or unworthy person, to whom thou should give some food in
his necessity, and he never so much as open his mouth to give one word of
thankfullness to thee. Thou dealest more frowardly and wickedly with God. And
if for temporal mercies, then much more for spiritual; if thy meat, thy
drink, thy raiment, be Gods mercy, much more is thy regeneration, thy
justification, which do so far transcend the power of nature.

2. To this duty of praising God, is not only required These general acts 2.
Both the general and particular acts of faith.
of faith whereby we own him for the Jehova, and the Creator of Heaven and
Earth; but also those particular Acts, whereby we do apply and appropriate him
as our God in particular. For it is this particular applying Act of faith that
makes the heart full of praise and thanksgivihg. Therefore you may observe
David in his Psalms, not only calling God a buckler, a refuge, a strong tower,
but his buckler, his strong tower, his God. Neither can we be thankful in
spiritual mercies, about pardon of sin, support in temptations, till with
Paul, Gal. 2, we say, Who loved us, and gave himself for us; and this is one
reason why we urge the People to take heed of diffidence, not to give way to
distrust and doubtful perplexities of soul, because while these are
predominant, they cannot walk thankfully and give the glory, that is due, to
him.

3. Love to God, Because he hears our prayers, will raise up the heart
exceedingly 3. Love to God.
to thanksgiving, Psalm. 116. 1. I will love the Lord, because he has heard my
supplications. That God should hear the prayers of one so unworthy and polluted
as thou art; that God should do thee good, who art so evil; this freeness of
his love, this riches of his grace should exceedingly melt thee; it should be
like fire that assimilateth every thing into its self: now when this love, like
so many coals of fire is in thy breast, it cannot be, but that it will open
thy heart, and thy mouth wide to praise the Lord. This is our corruption, we
love the mercy it self, but not God that gives it; we delight in the comforts
that are bestowed upon us, but do not rejoice in God from whence they come. If
therefore thou find thy heart frozen and dull; thou can not raise it up to
bless God; meditate much upon the love of God to thee, so vile and unworthy.

4. An heavenly heart is necessary to bless and praise God. The praising of God
is Angels works, and the employment of the glorified Saints to all eternity. 4.
Heavenly mindedness.
Praise is comely, but it is from clean hearts and clean mouths. We need the
Spirit of God to enable us to thanksgiving, as well as to prayer. Psalm. 119. 7.
I Will praise thee with uprightness. An hypocrite who gives God glory by his
mouth, but reproacheth him by his life, not only his prayer, but his praises
are abominable. Hence Psalm. 50. ult. it is said, Who so offers praise,
glorifieth God. But lest you should extend this to every man; See what is
added, And who so orders his conversation aright, etc. If a man praise God in
never so melodious a tune, but then there is no harmony, nor order in his life,
this is a reproach to God. We may benedicere lingua, when we do maledicere
vita. There is a real praising of God by exercised holiness, as well as verbal
by the tongue. In the Sacrifices of thanksgiving, Levit. 7. 10. Whosoever did
eat thereof, that had uncleanness upon him, he was to be cut off. By this is
typified, how unpleasing the praises of such are, who live in their sins; it is
as uncomely, as a pearl in the Swines mouth. It is true, God does greatly
condescend to accept of our praises; for he has millions and millions of
Angels continually praising of him, who have not the least blemish or spot upon
them: but yet he is pleased to take this Sacrifice at our hands. In the
Sacrifice of thanksgiving, Levit. 7. 13. there was leaven allowed. Junius
observes, That whereas God allowed leaven in no other Sacrifice (though
Bonfrerius thinks otherwise, and that leaven only was forbidden so far as
to be offered, but the common opinion is otherwise) why then was leaven allowed
only in this Sacrifice? Hereby to teach us (says Junius) that there is
corruption and sinfulness in our best actions, and that we need the
righteousness of Christ, that they be accepted of. Even then in our praises
there is matter of humiliation, there is some bitterness, yet through Christ we
are accepted of. But though all pollution cannot be purged out, yet he that
lives in a wilful way of sinning, cannot give glory to God acceptably.

5. He that praises God, must do it voluntarily, readily, cheerfully,
otherwise 5. Chearfulnes.
it is not worthy the name of praise. As God loves a cheerful giver, so
especially a thanksgiver. To praise God with an heavy, lumpish, unwilling
heart, is a contradiction to the duty in thy hand; it is as if we should say, a
black Sun, or a cold fire. Lev. 22. 29, 30. The Law about a Sacrifice of
thanksgiving is that when they offer it, it must be at their own will, which
argues the readiness and willingness that ought to be in us at that time; and
then on the same day it was to be offered, they were to eat it all up, to leave
none till the morrow, whereas in other Sacrifices they might. And this was to
show, that he who would give thanks to God, he must do it speedily, he must not
delay, or put off. So that by this you see a praising frame of heart requires
a most curious, exact temperature. It Is that Apothecaries ointment which
belonged to the Highpriest, only made up of choice ingredients. A sinful
heart cannot praise God, and a worldly heart cannot praise God, that wants
wheels to its chariots, wings to fly up with. The Lark lifts her self off
from the earth, ere she begins to sing. And then a sorrowful dejected heart,
that cannot praise God, no more than a string in the instrument too much
wetted, can cause a melodious sound,

In the next place, Let us consider the encouragements thereunto. And Motives
to praise God. 1. It Is an excellent duty, in that we are so backward to it.


1. The excellency of this duty is apparent, in that the heart is naturally so
froward and opposite to it. It may cause some wonder, why the soul of a man
should be slow to this work; and commonly all are more in petitions, then in
thanksgivings. Hence David, Psalm. 103. though a man more exercised in this
service, than any one, called therefore the sweet singer of Israel, and who is
not contented himself to praise God, but calls upon all the creatures in Heaven
and earth, yea the most inconsiderable ones to praise God; yet he finds some
listlesness and slothfulness in himself, see therefore how he prepares and
stirs up himself, as the Cock does before his crow, Bless the Lord, O my
soul, and let all within thee praise his holy name. His heart does need calling
upon, his soul must be moved and quicknnd ere it does his duty. Conclude then
certainly this duty is most excellent, it is very pleasing to God, because I am
so backward, I am never scarce in a praising temper, one clog or other is upon
me.

2. Consider, That the Scripture vouchsafes it the name of a Sacrifice, Heb.
13. 15. 2. It is called a Sacrifice.
Where you have the duty commanded, the time when, and the manner how, Let us
offer the sacrifice of praise to God, and that continually. As David said,
Seven times a day will I praise thee, Ps. 119. 164. It is a sacrifice, and
every sacrifice must have fire; there must be zeal and fervency; but by whom
must we offer it? it is by Christ; so that he is the Altar upon which the
incense of prayers and praises are to be offered to God. By him we have both
power and acceptance to praise God; and in this sense all the people of God are
called Priests, and they have the sacrifices of praise continually to offer up
unto God. Hence to praise God, is expressed Hos. 14. 2. by rendering the calves
of our lips.

3. It is a debt that is due to God. He that has commanded thee to pray to
him, has also enjoined thee to praise him. Yea this is all that God looks
for; Thou 3. It Is a debt due to God.
can not satisfy God for thy sins committed, thou art not able to repair his
honor and glory should thou be damned a thousand times over, yet it could
not recompense to God according to what thou have dishonored him. Therefore
seeing this is the only debt God obliges unto, why should we not be more
diligent in it? If he had required some greater service of us, and more
terrible to flesh and blood, ought we not to have done it?

4. One chief motive, which is to put us upon all holy obedience unto God, is,
Thankfulness. There are two great and principal parts of Divinity, the one is,
De gratia 4. The chief motive is thankfulness.
Dei, of the grace of God; and the other, De gratitudine hominis, of man's
thankfulness. There are indeed several reasons why we are commanded to abound in
holy works, but one of them is thereby to testify our thankfulness to God, that
though we cannot do anything to merit at his hands; though Christ as Mediator
has purchased all spiritual privileges; so that we cannot do any holy duty,
as a cause to procure them; yet to manifest our thankfulness to God, we are
ready with delight to do his will.

5. A thanksgiving heart is the most proper and suitable disposition to the
Gospel dispensation; wherein grace does in so many wonderful effects
demonstrate it self. Now 5. A thankful heart is the most proper disposition to
Gospel dispensations.
praise does properly answer to free grace and love, Ephesians. 1. 16. Gods
predestination and his adoption, it is, That we should be to the praise of the
glory of his grace. These new songs should always be in our mouths. And again,
v. 12. That we should be to the praise of his glory. So that if you say, Why
did God predestinate thee? It is to his praise. Why does he convert? It is to
his praise. Thus he adopts, he justifies, that we might be only to his praise.
Thus 1 Pet. 2. 9. we are a chosen generation, a peculiar people, that we should
show forth his praises. The children then of free grace, must be the children
of praises and thanksgivings unto God. Every power of the soul, every part of
the body should be a tongue (as it were) to glorify God. Were we more affected
with the depth, breadth and length of this grace of God, we should be more
abounding in this duty of blessing God. David calls his tongue, his glory
(though some apply it to the soul) because of this work.

Lastly, If we praise not God when mercies are obtained by prayer, it
discovers a rotten and insincere heart. It argued thou never did pray for
mercies upon right 6. The neglect of this duty is an argument of a rotten heart.
grounds to glorify God, to be thereby more instrumental in our service of
him, but only for our own ends, and our own necessities. For he that prays
spiritually, will praise God cheerfully; he will more rejoice in the favor of
God, because God hears his prayers, then the benefit obtained. If then thou
neglectest this duty of thanksgiving, thou discoverest a profane earthly
heart, that thou preferrest the mercy desired above the glory and honor of
God; and therefore it will be just with God, never to hear thy prayers more.
For thankfulness is the only way to preserve mercies, and to have more added.

SERMON. LXXXII.
God is the fountain of all our Mercies, they are his Gifts, and why.

2 COR. I. II. That for the gift bestowed upon us.
THe second part in order to be treated of, is, The Object matter for which, or
that for which Paul would have solemn thanksgiving after such solemn prayer.
The gift bestowed upon us, (...), This temporal deliverance he calls (...),
because it came from the favor of God, not from any merits or deserts in Paul.
Some make a difference between (...) and (...), as if (...) was applied only
to the common gifts of Gods Spirit, especially those which Divines call Dona
ministrantia, Gifts of service; and the Schools, Gratiae gratis datae, and
(...), to the grace and favor of God in a special manner; or to the effect
thereof, which is inherent grace in the soul. These graces are called Dona
sanctificantia, Gifts that do truly sanctify those that have them. The
Schools falsely call them, Gratiae gratum facientes. But though (...) be often
applied to such common spiritual gifts, as 1 Cor. 12. and alibi. Yet sometimes
we must thereby understand sanctifying grace, and justifying grace, Romans 5. 16.
Romans 11. 28. And indeed, if we will make any difference, it seems to be this
rather, that (...) is the Effect, and (...), the Cause, as Romans 12. 6. Having
gifts according to the grace that is given to us. Hence it is that (...) is
generally translated gift, in the New Testament. So Favorinus (...). So that
what the Scripture other where calls (...), or (...), or (...), Jac. 1. 17.
Act. 8. 21. Psalm. 1. 17. it may be the same with (...) only it does properly
signify such a gift, as makes to the public and spiritual advantage of the
Church; only in this Text it may have the general signification, and the
special. The general, Paul's Deliverance was a temporal gift. It was a mercy in
these outward things, a preservation from death, either violent, as the common
exposition (you heard) is, or from natural. For Baldwin the Lutheran Expositor,
thinks it may well enough be understood of some desperate sickness Paul was
afflicted with. Howsoever this outward mercy of preservation is called (...),
and it may have also the special signification of a common gift advancing the
Church of God spiritually. Paul's life and preservation was a gift in this
sense: for hereby his ministerial labors might be more successful. But this
latter consideration will come in, in the close of this verse.

Let us take notice of the general one, Paul's life and preservation, it is a
gift. From whence observe, Our ordinary temporal enjoyments are the gifts of
God.


That not only spiritual mercies which are above natural causes, but even our
ordinary temporal enjoyments, are the gift of God.

It Is not Gods gift only to sanctify us, to justify us, but to give us our
health, our food, our preservation; so that we live wholly upon the mere bounty
of God; we are all so many Almes-men; the world is an Almeshouse. Man does not,
or cannot obtain the least mercy with his own wisdom and power, without the
blessing of God. This is a necessary truth. For we look more upon these
ordinary mercies, as the fruit of our own labor, than as Gods mere free gift.
The Apostle Jam. 1. 17. says, Every good gift is from God. Every gift, whether
natural or supernatural; what have we, that we have not received, is true both
in nature and grace. For although in the sense that Pelagians did, it was very
erroneous to confound Creation and Nature, with grace; yet in this respect we
may say, That Creation and Preservation is of the grace and favor of God,
because he communicated of his goodness to the creature only from his mere
favor. But to speak after the Scripture Language; only those spiritual
favors and Church Priviledges, which conduce to eternal blessedness, are
called, The grace of God. So that health, life, and other mercies, though they
be The gifts of God, yet are not called, The grace of God. However they both
agree in this; our temporal mercies, and spiritual mercies come from God the
fountain of them, though spiritual mercies have a more special and restrained
consideration.

To affect us with humility and thankfulness in this point, consider these
particulars.

First, That even those mercies which are the effects of natural causes, yet 1.
The effects of natural causes, are still the gift of God.
they are the gift of God. Should he withdraw his concourse, no creature were
able to perform its useful operations. The fire would not warm us, our bread
would not nourish us, our raiment would not comfort us against the cold. So
that we are not only to bless God that we have such creatures as these are, but
that they are useful. We are not only to praise God that we have bread and
raiment, but that these things can do their office. For in these there is a
twofold mercy,

1. That God does provide them for us.

2. That when they are provided, they put forth their usefulness. Thus our
Savior alleges out of Deuteronomy, Mat. 4. 4. Thou shall not live by bread
only, but by every word that proceeds out of Gods mouth. If God give not a
word of blessing, our bread cannot nourish us. Hence we are also said, In God
to live, and move, and have our being, Act. 17. 28. Although therefore there
are natural causes, and these do produce their effects from a natural
necessity, yet because they are second causes, they do therefore depend upon
God the chiefest and supreme cause both in esse and operari, in their being and
operation. Thus the fire would not burn, if God should not give concourse
thereunto, as appears in the case of the three Worthies: and the reason which
is given by the Dominicans (though the Jesuits do not well relish it) is that
every second cause, though it be a natural agent, and so determined to
operation, yet because it is in a potentiality to work, it has a potentia, a
power; this must be reduced to act, by that which is the pure and chief act,
viz. God himself. So that it is not enough for God to give a natural power to
produce such an effect, unless he also actuate that power, and go along with
it. This is a truth, and when believed, will draw off our eyes from the
creature more, so as to set them upon God, and to acknowledge him more in all
things. This then thou art to know, That even those natural comforts, which
flow from natural causes, so that it would be a miracle, if they should not
produce them, are yet from the goodness and bounty of God. Now how often are
we unthankful for these mercies? we do not bless God for the gift of seeing,
the gift of hearing, the gift of walking.

Secondly, Those comforts which flow from moral causes, these also are to 2.
The comforts that flow from moral causes, are still the gifts of God.
be attributed to the gift of God. A man that is diligent in his place, he may
grow to be rich. The strongest usually prevail in battle. The swiftest they
overcome in a race; yet where these moral causes are, the effect is Gods gift.
Therefore Solomon observes, that the clean contrary falls out sometimes,
Eccles. 9. 11. That the battle is not to the strong, nor the race to the swift.
How many are diligent, careful and wise in their places, and yet cannot obtain
wealth in this world? So that even those things which are brought about by the
means that we use, we must acknowledge they are Gods gift; if his blessing be
not upon the means, they are frustrated. Thus the Lord does instruct Israel
against any pride and confidence that might arise, as if their power and
strength did make them rich; For it is the Lord (says he) that gives thee
power to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. You see whatsoever wisdom, diligence, and
good husbandry we use, yet if any thing come thereby, it is the gift of God.
You have a most significant place for this truth, Hag. 1. 6. where the Prophet
shows, whatever we eat, or drink, or take care and labor about, the Lord
can blast it, and make it come to nothing, Ye eat, but have not enough, ye
cloathe you, but there is none warm, and he that earneth wages, it is to put
in a bag with holes. Does not this Text evidently proclaim, that the labourer
in his wages, the tradesman in his buying and selling, the husbandman in his
plowing and sowing cannot add one farthing to his efface, unless the Lord
bless it?

Thirdly, All those comforts we have, and gifts, either to relieve or refresh
3. What we receive from men, it is still the gift of God.
us, that we have from others, we are to account them Gods gifts rather than
men's. If any man help thee in thy necessities; if any man prefer and honor
thee, thou art indeed to be thankful unto men that are benefactors, but more
to God who inclined their hearts to thee: Yet how little is this thought upon,
when we receive courtesies from men, kindnesses from men? we look upon these
alone: whereas if God did not move their hearts, thou would have found no
relief from them. It was thus with Joseph, he was cast into prison upon the
Kings displeasure, in all outward appearance the Jailer would have used him
with all cruelty; yet says the Text, Genes. 39. 21. God showed mercy to
Joseph, and gave him favor in the sight of the keeper of the prison. The Lord
has a command over men's hearts; he makes them merciful and free to some; and
again he turns the hearts of some men against others. Now we poor creatures
look only upon men, as if they did all, as if all were in their power. But as
God commanded Laban, who was in a rage against Jacob, not to speak an ill word
against him: So also does the Lord daily, he makes men thy friends, and he
raises them up to be foes. We have likewise a notable instance, Exodus 12. 36.
when the Israelites were upon their departure, the Egyptians though their
cruel enemies, who hated and oppressed them, yet it is said, The Lord gave them
favor in their eyes, that they lent them even jewels of gold and silver. On
the contrary, when God was provoked, it is said, Psalm. 105. He turned their
heart to his people. As David then said, when Shimei reviled him bitterly, The
Lord has bid him: So when thou receivest any favor, any mercy from men, look
up higher than men, The Lord has bid him. Men's gifts are much rather Gods
gifts: yea even what those do for us, who are in the most indeared relations,
and so have principles of nature to instigate them to help thee, yet thou art
to look upon all their care and love as Gods gift to thee. If thy parents have
taken care of thee; if they have provided for thee; if they have looked to
thee; though it was their duty, and they would have been unnatural, if they had
done otherwise, yet do thou look upon it, as Gods gift to thee. How many
parents are given up to unnatural affections? How many love their lusts and
their whores more than their children? So that spending all upon their
pleasures, they regard not their children, but leave them in poverty and
misery. Now it is Gods gift to thee informing of thy parents heart to their
duties concerning thee. Thus if wives love husbands, love children, all this is
Gods gift. Gerson relates of his parents, who desired to instruct him in this,
that he had all things from God as a gift, that they made an Engine, whereby
descended from above whatsoever he desired, or cried for, as if it came from
God immediately.

Fourthly, Even those things that are brought about for us, by the art and 4.
Whatsoever we have by the art and skill of others.
skill of others, as well as their bounty, we are to acknowledge God the giver
of them. Thus if Physicians by their art and skill have been a means to recover
thee out of any disease, thou art to confess it Gods gift. It was Asa his great
sin, That he relied on the Physician in his disease, more than on God. And
men think themselves bound to reward the Physician, to see he has his fee; but
how little do they think to glorify God, and to give him the praises due to
his name? It is the midwives care and skill that brings the child into the
world: yet we have David taking notice of God, as if he alone had done it,
Psalm. 22. 9. Thou art he that took me from my mothers womb; Thou art my God
from my mothers belly. Oh how thankfully, how humbly should we live did we
consider how we are compassed about with Gods gifts? Every thing we enjoy is
the gift of God.

Lastly, If all these things, that yet seem to be the proper effects of second
5. Such things as come upon us without our care.
causes, are yet the gifts of God, Then how much more are all those enjoyments,
wherein man's wisdom and power cannot claim any work at all? Such are now all
those favors of God in a temporal may, that are cast upon us without any care
or providence of ours. That as God provided a wife for Adam, while he was in a
sleep; Thus does the Lord bring about many providence of love for his
children, that they never thought of, that they could not in the least manner
imagine. To this head we may refer Paul's mercy in the Text. It might well be
called a gift, because he was pressed above strength, and had no hope of life,
yet even then God did deliver him. Such mercies also must needs be Gods gifts,
which are bestowed upon us while we are asleep, while all the senses are locked
up; our preservation then from outward dangers, yea, and from many other ways,
which might be our death or ruin, when we have no use of reason to prevent
them, they must needs be Gods gift. And lastly, All the providence of God to
us, while little children, having no wit or power to help our selves, but
exposed to danger every way, all these were the gifts of God. But who does with
thankfulness remember and meditate upon Gods mercies to him, while a little
child, when he did eat, and drink, and play, and thought of no God, yet even
then did God vouchsafe mercy to him? David did acknowledge this, Psalm. 22. 9.
Thou did make me hope, when I was upon my mothers breasts. David was a sucking
child then, he could not put forth the actings of hope, or any grace at that
time, but [I] means God was he that did then support and preserve him, though
he did not know of it. Thus you see, that if you let your thoughts run over
all the good things you enjoy, let them come in what channel they can, yet they
are all gifts from God. So that we are to overlook all natural causes, all
means, all men, all our own wisdom, and labor, and take them from Gods hand
alone. That which David says in reference to the creatures, belongs also to
man, Psalm. 104. 27. These all wait upon thee, that thou may give them their
meat in due season; That thou give them, they gather; thou openest thy hand,
and they are filled.

Now the grounds why they are Gods gifts are,

First, Because there is no necessity upon God, either natural or moral to
Reasons. Why these are all Gods gifts. 1. God is not necessitated to give them.
vouchsafe them to thee. He is not bound to give the life, senses, wealth;
there is no natural necessity, for he made thee out of his mere good pleasure,
and he made thee a man, whereas thou might have been a Toad or a Serpent. Nor
was there any moral necessity; thou do not deserve any thing at Gods hand;
thou do not deserve a morset of bread, nor a drop of water; therefore all is
the mere gift of God. It is his free gift, God does it purely out of his love,
according to that saying, (...), Favors are to be free and naked, not
dissembled and counterfeited. Thus God having nothing from thee to move him,
does it from himself alone.

Secondly, It Is Gods gift, Because thy sins are such, that he is provoked to 2.
We have often forseited them by our sins.
blast all thy comforts, to continue them no longer to thee. As God threatens,
Hos. 2. 8, 9. I will take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the
season thereof. You see God calls it his corn, and his wine, because he
gives it. Thus all thy mercies are Gods gifts upon a twofold account, both
because he gave them at first; and also because he continneth them still unto
thee, notwithstanding thy unworthiness.

Thirdly, They are Gods gifts, Because we are commanded to pray unto him for
them. In that short sum of Petitions our Lord remembers this, when he 3. We
are to pray to him for them.
directs us, To pray for our daily bread; and this the rich man must do as well
as the poor; a Dives that has his barns full, as well as a Lazarns that wants
crumbs. If then we pray to God for it, it is plain, that it is his gift.

Use of Exhortation. Are all the comforts we enjoy, Gods gifts? Then walk more
thankfully; Think of God more; do not mind second causes and instruments so
much. David, Psalm. 27. 10. says, When his father and mother forsook him, then
the Lord will take him up. David's parents did not forsake him, but he
compares himself to a little Infant, exposed as Moses was, and God did take
him up to provide for him. Thus we are to regard God more than father or
mother. Labor to speak the language of Scripture more: Say, God has given
this, God continues this; and be diligent to use these gifts to the honor and
glory of the giver, for that is the chief end why he gives them. Shall God
give to thee, and then will thou take off from his glory and honor? Provoke
not God to repent (as it were) that ever he did thus and thus to thee, as he
did about the making of man, and preferring of Saul. Those that said, Their
tongues were their own, Psalm. 12. 4. were thereby encouraged to wickedness;
whereas to consider thy wealth is not thy own, thy health is not thy own, thy
eyes, thy tongue, thy body, these are not thy own, they are Gods gift. How
careful would thou be to improve them all for his glory? (...) Let this
grace of God, and his favor to thee, work thankfulness in thy life. It is Gods
gift, do not then use it for sin and the devil.

SERMON. LXXXIII.
Of the Necessity and Usefulness of public Ordinances; And of the Churches
Interest in its Ministers Mercies.

2 COR. 1. 11. That for the gift bestowed upon us by the means of many persons,
thanks may be given by many, on our behalf.
THere remain three particulars in this Text, which are at this time to be
dispatched. The two former because of their affinity shall be joined together.
For they contain the persons by whose prayers Paul's gift was bestowed upon
him, and whose praises are to be returned to God in his behalf. Those by whose
means this gift was bestowed, are said to be (...), which expression has
caused very many conjectures amongst the learned.

I shall not be large about the word, for we shall meet with the word often in
this second Epistle. Musculus observing the diversity of interpretations, does
offer his conjecture to the learned, that (...), was at first written, which by
mistake was afterward turned to (...). Now if this were so, viz. By many
prayers, then the coherence would be very evident. But it is very dangerous to
give way to the expunging of words in the original, and to substitute others in
the room. Though humane Authors may endure such critical hands, yet the
Scripture being divinely inspired, both in respect of the matter, and also the
very words, it behooves us to be the more fearful herein. Chrysostom reads
the word in the singular number, (...), though afterward he applies it to
many. Retaining then the word, the question is about the sense. Some by (...)
understand the face, especially the mouth; as if the meaning were, by many
mouths. Others observe that the Greek word with the Septuagint is put for
panim, which primarily signifies the face and countenance, and from thence the
respect and manner of a thing. So that the sense should be, That thanks should
be given to God for many respects. There were many considerations in this one
mercy, for which they were to bless God. Others read (...), In the face or
presence of many, that is, in the public Congregation, as 2 Corinthians. 8. 24.
(...), Before the Churches. And certainly, though we will not contend for the
reading of the words so, yet the meaning of Paul is, That in their
Church-societies, and public meetings, they should both pray unto God, and
praise God. But we shall pitch upon the ordinary use of the word, and
understand it for as much as (...), By many persons, or by many men.

The second thing is, By whom thanks are to be given, and that is, (...), By
many. Some do add the word (...), That several ways, or, for many things
praises may be given to God, because they think it very redundant to have
persons again expressed. Some render it great thanks, and eminent praises; but
it is most consonant to interpret it of persons; That the same many, who did
pray for this mercy, were also to praise God for it.

Therefore from both these joined together, we may take notice, That Paul does
not simply look at prayers and praises, from others singly and distributively,
but as conjoined and collectively. The prayers of many met together, the
praises of many assembled together, are more acceptable then of one alone. From
whence observe,

That not only personal prayers and praises, but public and solemn ones
performed Not only personal, but public prayers and praises are acceptable to
God.
by many, are very acceptable together.

Chrysostom does from this enlarge himself, concerning the great power that a
multitude has, if met in an holy manner to prevail with God. They do (as it
were) put God to shame (that is his expression) he knows not how to gainsay
many, when they knock and importune: whereupon he takes occasion to speak of
the public Church-prayers that were then made for the Catechumenoi, and does
in particular explicate every petition. But we shall keep to the Apostle, who
does desire their public prayers and praises, thereby commending the profit
and efficacy of them.

To amplify this, consider this Caution,

First, That though God delights in the assembling of many, yet they must be
such as are qualified according to Gods will. It is not simply a multitude that
God regards. We read of the Israelites, that in their distresses, they would
make their approaches to God in great troops; yet the Lord abhorred their
Sacrifices, because they did not wash themselves, nor make them clean, so as to
put away their iniquities and transgressions far from them. If so be, the
Wiseman says, That one sinner destroys much good, then how much good do many
destroy? If one dead fly spoil a box of ointment, what will many dead flies
do? So that the more assembled together in this manner, the more is God
provoked. For Matthew. 18. our meeting must be in Christ's name; not only by his
appointment, but also in that manner he has required. Therefore you must take
the Doctrine thus, Many godly persons met together, do more prevail than some
few, or one only: Otherwise one Job, one Daniel, may obtain more at Gods
hand, then many thousands of wicked men; for they have crying sins which do
outcry their prayers.

This being premised, let us consider, Why public duties are to be preferred
Reasons.
before private. And

First, Because hereby the glory and honor of God is more promoted. If the 1.
Hereby the honor of God is more promoted.
multitude of Subjects be the glory of a King, then also is the multitude of
true and spiritual worshippers the glory of God. Hence David does profess,
That he will bless God in the great Congregation, Psalm. 22. 25. and Psalm. 26.
12. Psalm. 40. 9, 10. The greater the Congregation is, if duly qualified, the
more honor comes to God. Hence it is that in the Old Testament God commanded
set days for all the people to meet together, and worship God. And in the New
Testament, we have frequent instances of the Churches meeting together to
worship God. Insomuch that it is a very sinful reasoning which some have, What
should they go to Church for? They can stay at home, and read of a good book,
and so get as much good. Oh but know, o vain man! Though that should be
granted, which yet is not, that thou could profit as much, yet thou owe
honor, and glory, and worship to God, and that in the Congregation. Do not the
Angels in multitudes praise God together? Why is it called a Church, but
because many are to have communion together? So that unless God does dispense
with thee, that he will have no honor or glory from thee, it is thy sin, if
not otherwise necessarily detained, voluntarily to absent from these public
Ordinances. The Apostle, Heb. 10. 25. does reprove the manner of some in those
days, who did not assemble themselves together. You see even in the Apostles
days the Devil tempted some in this kind; yet they are reproved, though
private Christians in those days had greater gifts, and abilities then now
ordinarily men have; yea they are reproved, though some think the cause was not
voluntary, but that it was fear of danger and persecution. It was criminal to
meet together, and therefore fear of death, and other miseries might make some
forbear to assemble themselves; yet for all this they are censured by the
Apostle. Let this then be laid to heart by thee: look that no reason keep thee
from this public worship of God, but what God himself will allow of: For in
some cases God has condescended that his own worship shall rather be omitted,
then men's necessities not supplied.

Secondly, As God is more honored, so hereby The love and charity of 2. Hereby
our love to one another is much quickened.
the people of God is greatly quickened to one another. This public and holy
meeting together, is a special means to inflame the affections of one believer
to another. Hence you have it so often noted, That the Disciples met together
with one accord, and they had one heart. And therefore diversities of opinions
and alienation of affections, do cause commonly a public rent and division in
Church-societies. David does with affection express the advantage of the
public Ordinances, We went to the house of the Lord, and we took sweet counsel
together, Psalm. 55. 14. This is the visible communion of the Saints, wherein as
members of the same body, they are so firmly and nearly compacted together.
There is nothing that the Devil does so much design, as rents, schisms and
differences in the Church of God, knowing that these, if not healed, will
certainly destroy all at last. Now a right and orderly meeting in these public
Assemblies, are a special means to preserve love. How shall those mouths speak
against one another, that joined together to pray to God, and to praise God?
You that called upon one Father, as Brethren, How shall ye disagree, as if one
had not the same God, and the same Father with another? Therefore our Savior
directs to say, Our Father, not my Father; hereby commanding our public
meetings together, and also our union and brotherly love.

Thirdly, Therefore are these public duties to be the more prized, Because of
Gods special presence and power there. Mat. 18. You have a peculiar promise, 3.
God in a more especial manner present there.
for two or three meeting together in Christ's name, even as by way of type, God
had promised his peculiar presence in the Temple. And for this reason you have
David with such ardent and passionate affections expressing his esteem of the
Ordinances of God, Psalm. 63. 1, 2. My soul thirsts, and my flesh longs as
in a dry land, where no water is, to see thy power. And at another time, How
amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts? And, As the Heart pants after
the brooks, so does his soul after God in the Ordinances. Though David when he
was banished, and by force could not come to the public Congregation, no doubt
did enjoy God in a most comfortable and full manner, yet still he is not
satisfied, but breaths for his presence in those Ordinances. And therefore for
thee to think, that thou may meet God as well at home, is as if a cripple
should have looked to be healed by going into some other water, then that of
the pool of Bethesda.

Lastly, These public Ordinances are therefore to be highly esteemed, Because
those who are quickened and enlivened, may prevail for those who are 4. Herein
the lively may prevail for the dull and indisposed.
indisposed and unfit for prayer. So that the coldness and dullness of one man
may be supplied by the zeal and fervency of another. Insomuch that happily the
prayer, which if performed by thy own self, would not be successful, being
now joined with others, does obtain its desired effect; yea it may be in that
public service, when thou through temptations can or dare not pray for thy
self; others accompanying of thee, do put up thy own thoughts, and speak the
desires of thy own heart: So that thou art even astonished to see, how God
orders the gracious gifts of others to be helpful unto thee. As it was with
Job, his whole body, though full of ulcers and pains, yet because his mouth was
free, that could plead with God in behalf of the whole body; Thus it may be,
when many are gathered together, that Christian who could not speak for it
self, which could not pray for it self, finds the hearts and mouths of others
opened in his behalf. So that as when many coals are laid together, some live
ones may revive those that are ready to decay: Thus the zeal of others may
help thy coldness: The life of others may quicken thee up against deadness;
and thou find that spiritual heat come upon thee from others, which thou
would not have had alone.

Use of Exhortation, To prize these public Assemblies more than thou have
done. Pray for such strong and earnest affections, as thou find David
manifesting after them. Oh let these public meetings raise up thy heart, as if
thou were in Heaven! The beholding of the faces, of the affections, and of the
graces of others, let it assimilate thee also into them. As when Saul came
among the Prophets, the spirit of prophecy fell upon him likewise. Oh let the
Congregation of those who fear God work upon thee also! Be in these
Assemblies, as Peter on the Mount of transfiguration, saying in an holy excess
of spirit, It is good to be here. What high expressions are those of David, in
reference to the solemn Ordinances? Psalm. 65. 4. Blessed is the man thou
choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts;
we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple.
Here is sweetness and fulness that the people of God find in these public
approaches. All the merry meetings, all the fairs and markets, are nothing to
this spiritual society. And Psalm. 84. 10. A day in thy Courts, is better than
a thousand otherwhere. Hence he had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of
God, then dwell in the tents of wickedness. Oh heavenly and gracious frame! A
Sabbath day is better than all the days of the week, he has more rejoicing
there, then a thousand days can afford that are spent in worldly affairs. But
when these public duties are thus advanced (as you hear) you must always
look, that they be done holily, spiritually, fervently, that they be not turned
into a mere custom and external fashion, as it too often falls out in
Church Assemblies, their bodies are present, but their souls are absent; and
therefore they have no more than the carcass and outside. Such prayers and
praises God will not accept.

The third and last particular is to be spoken to in a word; and that is, In
whose behalf these public prayers and praises are, and that is said, In our
behalf. Some Copies have read it (...), but that is not probable. It is then
for that deliverance vouchsafed to Paul, that they are to be thankful; and the
reason is clear, because mercies vouchsafed to Paul, were their mercies also.
From whence observe,

That the mercies vouchsafed to the pastors and guides of the Church, are
Mercies vouch. safed to the Ministers, are to be accounted as Church mercies.
to be accounted the Churches mercies.

What advantage comes to the shepherd, it redounds to the sheep. The rain that
falls upon the mountains, descends to the benefit of the valleys. Your life,
your comfort is bound up in theirs. Paul indeed said, We live, if you stand
fast. It was his comfort, his life, to see them preserved from Apostasy by
persecution, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 8. And on the contrary, the Church may say of her
guides, We stand fast, if you live. As mercies to the public Magistrates are
to be accounted the peoples mercies; so the mercies of Church Officers are to
be reckoned the Churches. If the Pilotes be in danger, it can never be well
with the ship. When Elijah was taken away, the cry was, The chariots of Israel,
and the horsemen thereof. So great a mercy was one Prophet accounted to be. We
have a notable instance of the holy care of the Philippians about their Pastor
Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 26, 27. when he was sick unto death, how heavily did
they lay it to heart? Insomuch that Epaphroditus was exceedingly grieved, that
they had heard of his being sick, he knew it would so greatly afflict them. Yea
Paul accounted it a mercy to him also, that God did heal him. For though Paul
did recover many out of their diseases, yet this gift was not when they
pleased, and it was least of all extended to those that were of their intimate
acquaintance, but rather to such as were brought to them, that so the truth of
their miracles might be more manifested.

Use of Instruction. How happy and blessed a thing it is, when people are able
to do their duty herein; To look upon all the favors and good providence of
God to the Ministers of the Gospel, as their own mercies; their health,
encouragements, preservations, as their own; but how bitterly does Satan fill
the hearts of some men, who out of love to their lusts, and their errors, look
upon their godly guides, as the greatest burdens, and would heartily rejoice
in any evil that should befall them? This is clean contrary to those gracious,
loving and indeared affections, which ought to be in people to their spiritual
shepherds.

SERMON. LXXXIV.
Of our Glorying and Rejoicing in our Gifts and Graces; Why, and how it is
lawful, and how not.

2 COR. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
you-wards.
THis verse (as appears by the raciocinative particular, or note of
inference, For) is brought in as a reason of something which went before. But
Interpreters do differ about the coherence thereof. Some make this to be a
reason of that hope and trust he formerly spoke of, which he had in God. Though
he did trust in Gods mercies, yet not in them alone, but in his own endeavors
also. Hence Aquinas from this says, That hope does arise from the mercy of
God, and man's merits. But this does not consist with Scripture. Others do make
it part of his Apologetical Narration, defending himself, as against that crime
of inconstancy and levity, which was cast upon him, because of his promise to
come to them, which yet he did not; and therefore they think these words look
backward, and not forward. Calvin and others (which is most probable) refer
it to the words immediately preceding, viz. their prayers and praises to God in
his behalf. This is given as a reason, why they should be thus tender about
him, because he had obtained grace to be faithful; he had not sought himself,
or his own glory; he had not walked in hypocrisy and fraud, but had been kept
by the grace of God in all sincerity in his conversation in the world, not only
at Corinth, but every where else. Now it is a great motive and encouragement to
pray for such. The Apostle uses this argument, Heb. 13. 18. Pray for us, for
we trust we have a good conscience in all things.

The connection then being thus discovered, we come to the Text absolutely
considered; and therein we may consider,

1. The ground and reason it self. 2. That which is affirmed and predicated of
it. And this is set down in the forepart of the verse, and therefore we shall
begin with it.
The words are, This is our rejoicing, (...), it is rendered by most, our glory,
or our boasting. The Apostle does very often use the words, (...), and (...),
it seems to come of (...), which is of (...), the neck, and so is a
metaphore, signifying for the most part pride and loftiness, taken from
horses, whose pride will be discovered by their neck; and therefore called
(...), or as Homer (...). So that for the most part it is taken in an ill
sense. Hence Hesychius (...), and with Budaeus (...) is a proud boaster and
bragger; but with Paul it is used sometimes in a good sense, as here. For the
word is used in a threefold sense, gradual to one another.

1. To rest and rely upon a thing. 2. From thence to rejoice and to be glad in
it. 3. From thence to declare and publish this with boasting.
Now though Paul did not put confidence and trust in his good and sincere
conscience, yet from the perceiving of that, he did rejoice. Whereas then we
see Paul rejoicing and glorying from the testimony and evidence of that grace
he had in him. We may observe,

That an holy glorying, and rejoicing in the graces of God, we perceive in us,
An holy rejoicing and glorying in the graces of God is lawful.
is allowed and lawful.

I say, an holy glorying, for the heart may quickly degenerate into a proud
sinful boasting. Therefore this truth must be warily bounded: So that the
dejected and tempted soul, may be quickened to its duty of comfort, and not to
deny the work of grace that it may feel, and the proud pharisaical spirit may
be debased. The valley must be exalted, and the mountain made low. It is true
indeed, we have the Scripture saying, Let him that glories, glory in the Lord.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 31, And if Abraham had not
wherewith to glory, who can have? Yea the Apostle says expressly, Romans 3. 27.
That glorying is excluded by the law of faith. But in what sense this is to be
understood, will appear, when we come to manifest, how many ways it is not
lawful to glory, or to rejoice, no not in our gifts and graces. Only this Text
makes it plain, that in some sense our graces may be matter of glory and
rejoicing to us. So likewise Gal. 6. 4. the Apostle pressing every man to try
his own works, to examine his intentions therein, gives this as the consequent
fruit thereof, That then he shall have rejoicing in himself, (...), a kind of
glorying and boasting in himself.

To clear this truth, let us first show what is required to this glorying, and
then What is required to our glorying in the gifts and graces we have received
from God. 1. An high esteem of our graces.
in what respects it is lawful and allowed us. And for the former,

First, It is necessary to this rejoicing and glorying, in the first place,
That we have an high esteem of the excellency and worth of that grace we
discover to be in us. If so be we are to rejoice in these outward mercies,
which yet are only for the body, what matter of joy should it be, to find those
spiritual workings of Gods Spirit in us, which are of eternal concernment? What
Solomon says concerning the esteem of wisdom, which is indeed nothing but
grace, we should all make good, Prove. 2. 4. If thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her, as for hid treasures. That soul then, which can rejoice in
the discovery of grace, must esteem of it more than all the treasures of the
world: To say, O Lord, I had rather find my self sanctified, I had rather see
the powerful workings of grace upon me, then to be made the greatest or
richest man in the world; we have many exhortations to examine our selves, and
try our hearts, to see if we can find this precious jewel in our souls. Now
none will be cordial to examine and search herein, but those who look upon it
as the greatest treasure. Did the woman in the Gospel make such diligent search
for a lost groat only, and call her neighbors to rejoice with her, when she
had found it? How large and boundless then should our thoughts be about the
excellency of grace? And indeed to the godly soul this is the great question it
labors to study, and to resolve, Whether it be in the state of grace or no,
knowing that this only is the most blessed and happy estate in the world.

Secondly, As we must highly esteem this work of grace, so we must have a 2. A
certain persuasion that we have them.
Certainty and persuasion that we have obtained it. Had not Paul known, that
his heart had been sincere, that he was not acted by carnal wisdom, he could
never have rejoiced. For Philosophers make joy to be in that good thing we do
possess, and also the knowledge thereof. This Text then does abundantly
declare, that the people of God may have a certain knowledge of the work of
grace. So that although the heart be indeed deceitful and full of hypocrisy,
yet when sanctified, it has some measure of truth and sincerity in it, and so
far does not deceive us. He then that would rejoice in the grace of God wrought
in him, must press after assurance, must endeavor after a certain persuasion
of the truth of grace in him. And although this persuasion be not justifying
faith, yea it is separable from it. A man may be justified, may be sanctified,
and not know it, yet it is such a privilege, yea and duty also, that we should
diligently take heed of all those things, that may weaken our assurance, that
may make us to doubt and question, whether Jesus Christ be in us or no.

Thirdly, A sure persuasion of the goodness and integrity of our hearts, is 3.
Good grounds and Scripture-demonstrations thereof.
not enough, but it must be upon right grounds, and in a
Scripture-demonstration. For if it be a false persuasion, it may produce indeed
a rejoicing, but a false rejoicing also. It is more than probable, that Paul
while a persecutor, being zealously affected to the tradition of his fathers,
and thinking himself bound (as he professes) to do what he did against Christ
and his members, could then say, His rejoicing was the testimony of his
conscience, being persuaded that in those ways he glorified God: And therefore
some do extend that profession of his before the Council, That he had lived in
all good conscience before God until that day. And if this be so, then we see
plainly, That every persuasion, though never so confident, is not enough to
make us rejoice; but we must look to Scripture-grounds. Does not experience
confirm this? Take any heretical person, any erroneous person, though it be to
the destruction of the very fundamentals of Religion, yet he will proclaim a
rejoicing in his heart, from the good testimony of his conscience. So that an
erroneous conscience satisfied, does bring peace and rejoicing, but it is an
erroneous joy. It is either from mere humane principles, or from diabolical
delusions. But this will come in more properly, when we come to the ground or
reason it self of Paul's rejoicing.

Fourthly, To this rejoicing there is required, The Spirit of God enabling 4.
The Spirit of God.
us thereunto. So that the same spirit, which does seal to us the assurance of
our estate, does also cause comfort in us. The Spirit of God does enlighten and
sanctify, after this it does seal and comfort. And this latter work of Gods
Spirit is necessary, as well as the other. For we see it lies not in the power
of Gods people to have comfort when they will. Hence Gal. 5. Joy is the fruit
of the Spirit; and it is called Joy in the holy Ghost; not only objectively,
because it is a joy in spiritual objects; but also efficiently, because it is
wrought by him. Hence it is that the Spirit of God mouldeth the heart for
comfort, removes fears and doubts, restrains and keeps off Satan, whereby
no sin, no Devil is able to deject and cast down, because God comfort.
^Thus you see what goes to rejoicing in the graces of God, and thereby an holy
glorying in them.

Now let us see in what respect it is lawful thus to rejoice. And In what
respect it is lawful thus to rejoice and glory. 1. As they are the fruits of
Gods favor.


First, It is lawful to rejoice in them, as they are the effects and fruits of
Gods favor and love, as they signify the cause from whence they come. Rahab
could not but rejoice to see the thread that was a sign of such a great mercy
designed for her. If then the godly man have that spiritual skill, as to
difference between trusting in his graces, as any way causes of his salvation,
and thankfully receiving them assigns, from which he may be persuaded of it,
then does he hit the mark. It is usually said from Luther, That we are to take
heed not only of evil deeds, but of good and holy works also, because the
heart is apt to be carried away with pride and self-confidence insensibly, yet
this much not so deter the people of God, that they may not take comfort from
their graces. For how can they see them, and not rejoice, because they are the
pledge of Gods favor it self, and of an interest in Christ? So that though
their graces be weak, and full of imperfections, yet they manifest that to be
ours, which is fully perfect, and has no fault at all in it. Imperfect graces
do manifest Gods perfect grace to us.

Secondly, We may rejoice in them so far as thereby to bear up our hearts 2.
As they bear up our hearts against all accusations, either external or internal.
against all accusations, whether internally from Satan, or externally from the
malice of men. Is there any greater temptation in the world, then that when
Satan accuses the children of God, that they are hypocrites, that there is no
truth of grace in them, that what they do is not from a right principle, but
sel^seeking? Even as he accused Job to God, that he served God for carnal ends,
because God had hedged him about; but if he were touched in these things, and
stripped of them, then he would betray his hypocrisy. Now it is lawful for the
children of God to defy these accusations of Satan; to rejoice in the sense of
their uprigtness, though the Devil rage at it. While he roareth, do thou be
glad and praise God. Oh how often are believers shaken in this very particular!
They are afraid to own what God has done for them; they think it their
humility and lowliness thus to be in doubts, and to be perplexed with fears,
not remembering how necessary it is, to acknowledge thankfully what God has
done for us, and to walk with joy, triumphing over all the fiery darts of
Satan. It is the great blame of Christ's Disciples, that they do not more glory
and rejoice in this respect. And then

2. This rejoicing is lawful, when we have to do with malicious enemies, that
are ready to charge us with hypocrisy and self-seeking, that for all our
religious pretenses, we have rotten and earthly hearts; then is a time for thee
to make use of rejoicing in the sincerity of thy soul. And this indeed is one
great part of the Apostles meaning. The false Apostles they calumniated him,
they made the cause of all his afflictions and troubles to be his evil life,
and Gods displeasure upon him. Now the Apostle has this brazen wall within, as
the Heathen called it, He has the witness of a good conscience. As Austin to
Secundinus, Senti de Augustino quid velis, etc. Think of Austin what you will,
so that my own conscience does not condemn me. This rejoicing therefore is
necessarily seen in this particular.

In the third place, Let us see, wherein this rejoicing in our graces may be
unlawful. Wherein this rejoicing is unlawful. 1. When we rejoice in our
graces, as if they were perfect.
And

1. It is when we dare rejoice, and that in the sight of God, as if there were
no blemish or damnable matter in them. To rejoice as Perfectionists do in their
holiness, daring to hold it up to God himself in his strict justice, this is
highly provoking God. Hence this Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. Though he regarded
not men's judgment concerning him, because he knew nothing by himself, yet he
says, He was not thereby justified, because it was God that judges: God that
knew more evil, and saw more sin in him, then he could do in himself.
Therefore though we may rejoice in them, yet take heed of opposing them to the
strict and righteous judgment of God. And it is in this sense, that Paul, Romans
3. says, All boasting is excluded; and that Abraham in the matter of
justification, had not wherewith to boast.

2. It is not lawful to rejoice in them, as if they had any inherent dignity
or worth to rest upon. When we approach to God, we must rest alone upon 2. When
we so rejoice in them, as so rest upon them.
Gods grace, as the efficient cause, and Christ as the meritorious cause. These
are the only foundation we can build upon. When therefore we have given Gods
grace, and Christ's merits their full due, then may we rejoice in our holiness.
It is true, we read of Hezekiah, David, Nehemiah, and Paul here, as also in
other places, pleading even in prayer their righteousness, and desiring God to
remember them, and not wipe out their good deeds. But these instances are
partly in some particular, wherein they were innocent, as in David: Or else
they only plead these, as the qualifications in them, to which Gods promises
are made; they are such to whom God has vouchsafed his promises; and therefore
they may plead them in their prayers in this sense; otherwise to urge them, as
having dignity, they could not. For at that very time Nehemiah prays, God
would spare him, and have mercy on him.

3. We must not rejoice in these graces, as if we had them of our selves, as 3.
When we rejoice in them as coming from our selves, not God
if they were not the gift of God. Therefore Chrysostom's note upon the place
is dangerous, saying, The reason why this good conscience is called glorying,
is, because we obtain it by our own strength; otherwise it would not be our
glorying. But the Apostle directly opposes this, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Why do thou
glory, as if thou had not received? But you may then say, The Papists are not
to be found fault with in their rejoicing in their good works, for they make
them the gifts of Gods grace, and presuppose Christ's merits. But this will not
acquit them. For the Apostle makes that a contradiction, If of grace, then not
of works: It cannot be of grace and works together. Besides, they make grace
only an universal cause, and our own will to be the particular determining
cause, and thereby give much more to that, then the grace of God. If then we
take heed of these three rocks, we are allowed to rejoice in our graces.

Use 1. Of severe and sharp reproof, to such, who do indeed rejoice, but it is
in their lusts, in the pleasures of sin, which is to rejoice in their shame,
and that which will be terror and torment to them. What can these wretches
say? But our rejoicing is an evil and a seared conscience, that we have lived
in all profaneness and impiety? Oh remember into what howling and gnashing of
teeth these short pleasures will at last be changed!

Use 2. Of Admonition to the godly, to take this rejoicing which God does allow
them. Why do they stand aloof off, and trembling? Why do they nourish doubts
and fears? Why will ye not own what God has done for you? Take an holy
boldness, call that grace, which is grace. Let not the Devil and thy fears
dispute thee out of what thou art. Be not so easily baffled and driven out of
thy integrity. Because hypocrites do deceive themselves, do the sincere also?
Because Copper may appear splendidly, is there therefore no gold? Because a
dreamer deceives himself, shall he that is awakened?

SERMON. LXXXV.
What is required to a good and well ordered Conscience.

2 COR. 1. 12. The testimony of our conscience.
THe second particular, which is also the ground of that rejoicing which Paul
had, does in the next place come to be treated of, and that is said, to be The
testimony of his conscience. The object matter whereof is afterward declared.

Let us consider this as it is in the general set down. Concerning the word
(...), also the nature of the conscience, what it is, I have elsewhere at large
showed. It is enough to re-mind you of thus much, That in the Old Testament it
is generally called the heart, as it is said, David's heart smote him, that is,
his conscience did witness against him, and condemn him. And because of that
remorsus, that regreting and displicency which conscience puts forth, Durand
is singular in his opinion, holding that the practical understanding is not the
conscience only, but the will likewise is included in it. The Hebrew word Leb,
signifying the Heart, does also originally denote the sprinkling of the meal
with leaven: Thus the heart has naturally some principles in it, which are
like leaven to it, as speculative and practical axioms concerning God, and
just, and unjust. In the New Testament likewise it is called the heart, 1 John
3. 20. If our heart condemn us, (that is, our conscience) God is greater than
our heart. But no more of this here.

This conscience is here described by one special act it has, and that is, To
bear witness, (...). The word in the Scripture is commonly used for that
public testimony and witness, which either God did give unto the Gospel by
miracles and signs, or men by their public profession and attestation. Hence
1 Cor. 2. 1. the Gospel is called the testimony of God, because so wonderfully
confirmed by him: So to men it is applied, Act. 4. 3. The Apostles with great
power gave witness of the Resurrection of Christ; and because believers by
their deaths did give the greatest testimony to the truths of God, hence they
are called Martyrs, and their death is called (...), a Martyrdom in a
principal sense. Hence some have expounded that place, Heb. 11. 4, 39. where we
render it, The Elders obtained a good report of their Martyrdom. They were
made Martyrs, because it is the passive sense (...). Sometimes the word is used
metaphorically, as James 5. 3. the rust of covetous, and wicked rich men's gold
and silver, is said to be a witness against them: But here it is used
concerning the work of conscience within a man, and is in other places
compounded, denoting some joynt-witnesse with another, Romans 2. 15. Their
conscience bearing witness, (...). So Romans 9. 1. My conscience also bearing me
witness. The Preposition (...), though some think is not to be regarded, yet
it does denote, (as most say) a respect to God, who is our Superior, and to
whom our conscience does attend, and therefore called not Science, but
Conscience. So that Gods witness, and the witness of conscience, are both
conjoined together, yea seem to be but one testimony, as it were. Hence the
very Heathens could say, (...), Conscience is a God to every man. Therefore
Paul uses an equivalent expression in other places, Romans 1. 9. Phil. 1. 8. God
is my witness. Salmeron out of Bernard speaks of a twofold testimony of the
conscience, Testimonium conscientiae perhibentis, that which the conscience
does actively exhibit; and Conscientiae percipientis, that which it does
receive from the Spirit of God, of which we read Romans 8. 16. and in this later
sense he understands it: But we take both in, viz. that witness which the
conscience did actually give of Paul's sincerity. But because this could not be
done without the Spirit of God inabling thereunto, therefore it is a witness
received from Gods Spirit first, and from that conscience is enabled to deliver
it to us.

Now when so much rejoicing is attributed to the testimony of conscience, you
must take along with you, who it is that speaks thus, The testimony of our
conscience, of Paul, who was sanctified, enlightened, and guided by the Word;
otherwise there is a testimony of a deluded conscience, of a secure conscience,
that speaks peace, when there is no peace; and this does not afford any true
or solid ground of rejoicing; it must be therefore the testimony of such a
conscience, which Paul had. And so observe,

That the witness of our conscience rightly guided in acquitting of us, is a
The witness of a good conscience is great ground of comfort.
ground of unspeakable comfort.

He that has his conscience rightly clearing of him, he need not care for all
the accusations of the Devils in hell, and wicked men upon the earth. It
breeds confidence both toward God and toward men. Toward God, 1 John 3.
21. If our hearts condemn us not, we have confidence toward God, and
whatsoever we ask, we receive of him. This encourages and imboldeneth in
prayer. And toward men: As you see Paul justified himself by this, when called
before the Council, and made to plead for himself, Act. 23. 1. Yea the
Heathens, though they could never attain to a true spiritually sanctified
conscience, yet not to live according to the natural dictates thereof, they
accounted the only happiness, Nil conscire sibi -- was the only thing that
made happy. And Hic murus aheneus esto. Pindar called it, The good nurse in our
old age. So great a matter is it to have the testimony of a good conscience,
void of offense, for that is Mill testes, more than all the testimonies in the
world.

Seeing therefore men have such constant recourse to this witness within, What
is required to a good conscience.
and their comfort is true or false, according as that is guided; Let us
enquire first into the constituent or ingredient qualities, of a rightly guided
conscience. And

First, There is necessarily required to a good and true testimony of our
conscience, 1. That it witness according to the word of God.
That it take the word of God as a Rule to judge by, to witness by, to accuse
by, and to acquit by. The conscience of a man is not the supreme rule, but an
inferior; and therefore is Regula regulata, as well as Regula regulans, a rule
to be ruled by an higher rule, which is the Scripture. To the Law, to the
testimony, if they speak not according to this, it is because there is no light
in them, Isa. 8. 20. If a man pretend to never so much light within, if he
rejoices never so much in the light that he has, yet if it be not from the
light of the Word, if it be not examined, tried and judged to be according to
that it is but a false light, a light that will end in darkness. So then,
though conscience be a testimony, yet you see that bath another testimony to be
guided by; though it be a Law in a man, yet there is a superior Law to that,
which is the word of God. By this you may see, what a rotten foundation they
have to build their comforts upon, who take up other rules for their
conscience, besides the Scripture. These joys are all but like the
morning-dew. Some make their rule in Religion, to be the tradition of their
Fathers. The Papist does so extol tradition, that they think that alone
without Scripture is star bright enough to guide us. Paul's zeal while a
persecutor seemed to be grounded much upon this, because they were the
traditions of his fathers. And truly tradition is the greatest reason of most
men's faith, whether it be in a right way, or a true. But this is an improper
foundation for thy faith. As thy faith is hereby a blind faith, so thy comfort
is but a blind comfort. How greatly do the Popish Casuists perplex their people
with such cases of conscience, and about such superstitious things, that they
have only tradition for, and that it may be not many years neither, without
any stamp or superscription of the Scripture? Have not they comfort in their
Penances, in their Indulgences? Will not their Friars and Monks (not those slow
beasts and idle bellies) who from deluded principles of conscience, do severely
and austeerly mortify themselves, say, They have the testimony of their
consciences, and make a bulwark from thence? But where is the rule they go by?
Is it not tradition? On the contrary side, in another extreme, there is the
Enthusiast, who rejects the Scripture as a dead letter, and does adhere only
to revelations, to pretended workings of Gods Spirit, to the manifest light
within them: Do not these even boast in their joys and ravishments? Do they
not, when unable to answer arguments, fly to a light within them? But what
ground is there for this? Is not the Apostles command, That we should not
believe every spirit, but try them? 1 John 4. 1. And how must that be but by
the Scripture? You see then, that it is not conscience simply and alone, but a
Scripture-conscience that is the ground of comfort. To leave that, and to trust
in our conscience, is to make our consciences a Bible, to attribute
infallibility to our selves. Now this Scrigture is not only a Rule for our
conscience in matters of faith, but also of manners, of righteousness toward
man. Conscience must witness to thee, not only that thou art in the true
Religion, but also do walk in holy conversation. It must testify of thy
righteousness toward man, as well as of Religion toward God. This was Paul's
continual exercise, Act. 24. 26. To have a conscience void of offense toward
God, and toward man. There are many voluminous Tractates of Cases of
Conscience, De jure and justitia, Of Righteousness toward man. And although
the Scripture does not particularly decide Law-cases, yet it lays down such
general rules, that by them particulars may easily be decided, if our hearts
were not corrupt. As for example, that famous rule, What you would have men do
to you; do ye to them, Mat. 7. 12. Our Savior after he had given religious
precepts about prayer; etc. he adds this, to show that Religion and
righteousness must always go together. And Adrian the Emperor was so affected
with this Rule, saying, He had it from the Jews or Christians, that he
commanded it to be written on the doors and gates of his Palace; and before he
would punish any offender, would inform him of this Rule. And our Savior
says, This is the Law and the Prophets. A great expression. Look then to thy
conscience, that it take the Scripture for a Rule in its adequate nature. For
faith and conversation, this is no rule for conscience to go by. Others do say,
every 2. The help of the Spirit to instruct us in the true meaning of the Word.
one is to look to himself; but the word of God that must bear evidence to thee
by thy conscience.

Secondly, To the right guidance of our conscience, in witnessing to us, there
is not only required the Word as a Rule, But the Spirit of God to enlighten thy
mind to receive the true meaning thereof. Such are the powerful delusions of
Satan, that when he can no longer dethrone the Scripture from its authority,
but men will appeal to that, then he looks about to advance his Kingdom by
the Scriptures ill handled, and wrested to corrupt opinions; and by this means
men are brought into a worse condition, and more incurable then those who walk
by no Scripture at all. For if a man be delivered up to this persuasion, that
his opinions and ways are allowed by Scripture, warranted by Scripture, what
way shall we take to reduce him? The Apostle Peter tells us of some unstable
and unlearned men, 2 Pet. 3. 16. which did wrest the Scriptures to their own
perdition; And nothing is more ordinary, which made Luther say, That the Bible
was the Heretics book; not in the sense the Papists do, accusing it thereby of
insufficiency and imperfection: But for the dignity of it, having such
authority, that every Heretic would gladly run to this Sanctuary. The
Scripture then, though a perfect Rule, yet is not enough to guide our
conscience, unless the Spirit of God, as is promised, lead us into truth; As
the Sun, though never so full of light, yet cannot guide a blind man. We
grant indeed that the Scripture is but a dead letter, and of it self without
Gods Spirit, does not enlighten the mind, and convert the heart. Only we say,
The Spirit does this, in and by the Scripture, and that all men's consciences,
impulses, light, revelations and joys, must be examined, and stand or fall
according to this Rule. Let this be granted, and then we plead as fervently as
any can, for the work of Gods Spirit. This must enlighten the conscience, to be
able to understand and believe the things revealed there. Hence the Disciples
could not attempt their office, of publishing the Gospel, without this
assistance from the holy Ghost, John 16. 13. he is said, To guide them into all
truth. To guide them, (...), this signifies that they did not know the way; or
if they were in, they would quickly divert into bypath, if this Spirit did
not guide them. When David said, The Word was a lamp and light to his feet: If
we understand it effectually, so that it did not only propound the light
objectively, but that also he was subjectively thereby illuminated, this does
necessarily presuppose the work of Gods Spirit. No wonder then, if so many may
be exceedingly acquainted with Scripture, be ready with some Texts upon every
occasion, yet for all that be deluded with errors, because they want Gods
Spirit to enlighten them, and instruct them thereby. Let us look upon the Jews,
the sad dest object in the world at this day; they have been so skillful in the
Old Testament, that some could remember how many words and syllables were
therein, and that is read to them daily; yet who more maliciously opposite unto
the Lord Christ, promised in the Old Testament, than they are? But the
Scripture gives a full reason thereof, The veil is upon their eyes. And long
before there was such a prediction of this spiritual judgment upon them, That
seeing they should not see, hearing not hear, lest they understand and be
converted. Therefore to have a pure and true conscience, we must be sure to
pray and exercise our selves herein, that the Spirit of God would direct us
into the true sense and meaning of the Word, which is to be expected in the
holy use of those means which are necessary to find out the sense thereof. For
you must not expect that Gods Spirit will immediately reveal the sense of the
Scripture, without other helps, no more than he will make you understand Greek
and Hebrew. Know then, it is a very sad, and almost incurable condition, when
the holy Scriptures do become a snare to us, when we suck poison out of these
sweet herbs. Although indeed we cannot from the Scripture get any hurt, but our
own corruptions procure it to us, because we bring the Scripture to our ends
and affections, not them to the Scripture.

Thirdly, To the having of a well-ordered conscience, There is greatly required
3. Pure aims and intentions
pure aims and intentions. For although a good intention cannot sanctifile an
unlawful action, yet corrupt intentions will blast, and defile the best
actions. Insomuch that if we had the gifts and parts of the ablest men, yea of
Angels themselves, yet sinful aims would be like Locusts and Caterpillars to
devour this hopeful fruit. But oh the unsearchable hypocrisy and
deceitfulness of man's heart, even in this very respect! How ready is every
Pharisee, every Heretic and Papist to appropriate this to themselves? How
often do we find them professing to the whole world, that it is not any outward
advantage, any temporal emolument that they look at or regard, but the glory of
God, and that therefore they have much rejoicing, because of this? But if the
counterfeit will bring such peace, what will the real and sincere intentions of
a man do? And certainly though a man be clothed with never so much glory in
the Church of God; so that we are ready to say, not only a greater than Austin
or Chrysostom, but even than Paul or Peter (For some have cried up the heads
of their parties, as having greater gifts, than the Apostles themselves:) Yet
without sincere intentions they are but as a tinkling cymbal. This therefore is
the life, soul, and the all in a good conscience. But that will come in more
seasonably afterward.

Fourthly, To a right ordered conscience, whose witness may be received, and 4.
Inward sanctification.
comfort taken thereby, That there is required the inward sanctification and
effectual renovation thereof. So that till this be, every man's conscience is
like a man himself, a mere liar; There is no believing of it, no trusting of
it. When it is said, Jer. 17. That the heart of a man is deceitfully wicked, or
crafty, and supplanting a man. This comprehends conscience, as well as any part
else. For you have heard, that original sin is in this, as well as in other
powers of the soul. So that in these two respects, the natural conscience does
always fail. For either it does not witness that which is right, or not to a
right end. Insomuch, that though a natural man is not to gainsay, or contradict
his conscience, yet nothing lies upon him more, than to have his conscience
rightly informed or regulated by Gods word. What is the reason you see every
civil man, every formal man so applauding himself in his good condition? It is
because his conscience is not a spiritual conscience, a Scripture-conscience;
for that would make him abhor himself, and fly out of the Sodom he was in.
For in most things the conscience does not witness the truth at all, but it
does fl^tter and deceive thee. How seldom does it tell thee, thou art the
drunkard, the hypocrite, the neglecter of private duties, etc! Or if it does,
then it is to a false end, either to drive to despair, and to fly from Christ,
whose blood only can cleanse the conscience; or else to quiet it again by some
superstitious usages, and non-instituted remedies. And this is the reason, why
so few are brought out of the troubles of their conscience into an Evangelical
and Gospel way. Know then, here is the root of all thy misery, thy conscience
being unsanctified, lulleth thee asleep, whereby thou rejoycest in thy
condition, when thou have cause to fear and tremble.

SERMON. LXXXVI.
Further Discoveries of what is required to a well-regulated Conscience, with
Distinctions concerning it.

2 COR. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience.
THere remain more particulars to be insisted upon, which are requisite to make
a well-regulated conscience, whose testimony (you heard) is the cause of such
unspeakable comfort. And

First, There is in a peculiar manner necessary, the witnessing and sealing
What else is requisite to a well-regulated conscience. 1. The witnessing and
sealing power of the Spirit with our consciences.
power of the holy Ghost to, and with our consciences. The illumination and
sanctification of Gods Spirit, is not enough to make our consciences speak
fully and clearly, so as to have rejoicing thereby, unless the Spirit of God
does also bear witness with it. Hence we have them both put together, Romans 8.
16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God. And therefore you heard, that Bernard understood this
testimony of conscience in the Text, of a Testimonium percipientis, not
Perhibentis; but they are both included. For our conscience cannot give any
eviden^e, and sure testimony of the grace inus, unless enabled thereunto by
the Spirit of God; and this is called, The work of Gods Spirit sealing and
witnessing with our spirits. The Text is very famous, and greatly agitated in
the controversy about the assurance of our sanctification and salvation.
Grotius, and some others neglect the Preposition (...), and would have it no
more than simply (...). But the word is not any where so used, the instances of
Grotius are against him, Romans 2. 15. For Conscience there is said to bear
witness, (...), in respect of God, and so does relate to his testimony. We
therefore conclude, That the Spirit of God is here said to bear witness with
our spirit; only the difficulty is, How How the Spirit of God does not witness
with our consciences.
this is done? And

1. It is not done by any external voice and sound made in the air, as Christ
had, when it was said, This is my beloved Son. Neither may we apprehend any
immediate testimony by an extraordinary revelation, as some have pleaded for;
but in a mediate way, partly by exciting and inabling of our spirits to call
God Father, against that slavishness and servility, which is apt to bear us
down; and partly by working in us those heavenly and holy qualifications, by
which we do certainly gather, that we are the children of God. Indeed the
Papists make the testimony of Gods Spirit, to be no more, as applied to
particular subjects (though in it self they say, it is infallible) then a moral
certainty by probable conjectures and signs. But this is derogatory to the
Spirit of God, and takes away all that Evangelical joy, and holy boldness,
which we are allowed to have at the throue of grace.

This witnessing then of Gods Spirit is two ways: How it does. 1. Effectively.


1. Effective, When it does enable the conscience of man to cast off all legal
terrors and tormenting fears, and so in serenity of spirit, to believe God is
our Father. And for this end it is called, The Spirit of Adoption. For (alas)
take the conscience of the most holy man, without this Spirit of Adoption. How
legal and timorated is it? How slavish and unbelieving? Hence is it, that the
people of God need so many instructions and informations. Hence is it, that
they are often in prayers and groans unutterable, ere they can truly and
cordially call God Father. They fear him as a Judge, and fly from him rather
as an enemy. Even as if there be never such glorious and delightful objects to
refresh the eyes with; yet if a man be in the dark, he cannot take any pleasure
therein. Thus many of Gods dear children, who walk with a tender conscience,
who are diligent in all the ways of holiness, yet have not this testimony of
conscience to comfort them, it is hid from their eyes, only because the Spirit
of God does not enable them thereunto. Now the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 2.
17. It is the Spirit of God, whereby we know the things, that we have freely
received of God.

2. The Spirit of God does witness unto us Objectively, as I may so call it; 2.
Objectively.
and that is by some effects, and fruits of his grace upon our hearts, by which
we gather, as by so many sure signs, that we are in the state of grace, and
not hypocrites. But because this will come in more fully in the ensuing
particulars; What are the effects of the Spirit by which our consciences are
rightly guided in witnessing to us. 1. A purpose to leave all known sin.
I shall only touch upon those effects by which the testimony of our conscience
is rightly guided in witnessing to us. And

First, By having a full and serious purpose to avoid all sin, as it shall
become manifested to us. As David professed, That he did hate every evil way,
Psalm. 119. 104. He that does allow and indulge himself in any known sin,
cannot have the testimony of this good conscience. It is true (as is to be
showed) there is no man living, though never so holy, but his conscience
convinces him of much sin and many infirmities; and this makes him so
highly esteem Christ, and a Gospel-righteousness: but yet it does not witness
to him, that he lives in the customary acting of gross sins; if it does,
the Spirit of God never witnesses with such a man's conscience, that he is the
child of God. No, if thou live quietly, without the smitings and
condemnations of conscience, it is because it is stupid, and the Devil has
deluded and hardened thee; for Gods Spirit witnesses with our conscience, and
by this effect, that we have a tender respect to avoid all known sin.

Secondly, Another effect is, A zeal for the glory of God, to honor him, 2. A
zeal for the glory of God.
to magnify Christ, and to set up his Kingdom, as much as we are able. The
more zeal and fervency men have had for Gods honor, the more powerful
testimony of a good conscience they always enjoyed. As we see in this Paul, in
his whole ministerial course, with what burning zeal did he flame forth
continually? and on the contrary so much remisness, so much negligence and
lukewarmness, so much is the abating of consciences testimony.

Thirdly, An holy confidence and boldness in our approachings to God. And 3.
An holy confidence in our approachings unto God
of this the Apostle speaks, Romans 8. The Spirit of Adoption, removing our
fears, our unbelief, and dejection, raising us up also with an holy confidence
and humble boldness, does hereby testify with our consciences, that we are the
children of God. Hence the more distrustful fears, the more tormenting doubts
that we groan under, the weaker and more feeble is the witness of our
conscience; yea if those prevail and are predominant, then our conscience is
set against us, and witnesses against us; and then the child of God is in sad
desertions, when his heart witnesses against him, that he is an hypocrite,
that he did serve the Lord without integrity. For though this be false, yet
till Gods Spirit remove this darkness, and fill thee with an Evangelical
confidence, thou art not able to hold up thy head.

Fourthly, Another effect, by which Gods Spirit witnesses with our conscience,
4. Love to the Brethren.
is, An unfeigned love to the brethren, a delight in all those that love God.
Where this is, that thou love godly men for their godliness sake, this
demonstrateth thou art born of God, and have the same Image in thee, as they
have. And if thy love also extend to thy enemies, if thou find that thou
can pray for them that curse thee, do good to them that revile, especially
thou pitiest their souls, and would be helpful to them in the way to Heaven;
though they are enraged adversaries to thee, and that without cause: By this
frame of heart, the conscience does give a full and precious evidence.

Fifthly, In daily and faithful exercises of self-denial in the ways of God,
5. Self-denial.
does the Spirit of God greatly assure the conscience. In sufferings for
Christ, in enduring the loss of name, liberty, and li^e it self for Gods
cause, is the clearest testimony of our conscience. Hence the Martyrs had so
much serenity of spirit, such unspeakable consolations, because they found they
loved Christ, better than all things. As they gave a testimony to the word of
God, called therefore Martyrs; so God also gave them a testimony within,
whereby they did glory in tribulations, and triumph over all adversaries. We
see that if men suffer in false ways, if they be Martyrs for the Devil, if
they die for that which is highly offending God, they many times glory in the
comfort they have from the testimony of their conscience. Now if a deluded
conscience, if deluded joys can do so much, what shall not the Spirit of God
do, sealing and confirming his love to us, by our patient sufferings for him?
Thus when happily the world does witness against thee, wicked men they condemn
thee, and lay many heavy accusations against thee, as the false Apostles did
here concerning Paul, yet this testimony with in will answer all, and God does
come in with fuller evidences of his love in such passages of self denial.

Lastly, The Spirit of God does witness to our spirit, in this blessed effect,
6. Delight in heavenly things.
viz. When we do with delight and joy meditate, think and speak about heavenly
things, when the Ordinances of God are matter of pleasure to us. David does
often pro^efs what delight he had in the Ordinances of God, how the word of God
was more precious than gold, more sweet than the honeycomb. Now when the heart
is thus affected to holy things, that they find more joy, as David professes,
Psalm. 4. in the things of God, then worldly men do in their corn and wine, when
these increase: By this excellent heavenly temper, the Spirit of God witnesses
with our conscience, that we are the children of God.

But I shall enlarge no more on this, because the Doctrine of Assurance will
follow upon the next words.

We shall now lay down some distinctions, to clear this truth to you, because
Distinctions concerning the testimony of our conscience.
it is plain, That many times the people of God being cast down with black
thoughts, that cannot say with Paul, The testimony of our conscience is our
rejoicing. And on the other side, many heretical, pharisaical and self-deluded
persons, will at least outwardly boast of this. Therefore

First, We may take notice, That there is a twofold testimony of our
conscience, 1. It Is either particular or general.
which does afford matter of rejoicing; either particular, as to some matter of
fact, or one particular business, especially when calummated by adversaries. Or
secondly, General, which is to the whole frame of our heart, and our whole
conversation. These two are greatly to be distinguished. For we see David in
many places praying to God, That he would reward him according to his
innocence, and deal with him according to the righteousness of his hands: and
he does many times appeal to God concerning his integrity. Now this was from a
testimony of his conscience to a particular fact. Saul, and others did
maliciously accuse him, laying to his charge things that he never did. Of this
Paul speaks also, 1 Cor. 4. 2. I know nothing by my self. He did not matter
those crimes that the false Apostles burdened him with, because his conscience
did clear him, as to any gross neglect in his ministerial course. Now you must
know, that many a natural or moral man, may have in some cases this particular
testimony of his conscience, and receive comfort from it, and yet be far
enough from the state of grace. How many persons in the world are slandered by
some malicious adversaries, as guilty of such crimes, which are altogether
false? Now happily thou art pure and free from them, thy conscience justifies
thee, and thou have comfort from this; but this is not all which God requires.
Therefore there is a second testimony of the conscience, which is General, and
that speaks to the whole man, witnessing that thy whole conversation is
unblameable, and that thy heart in the universal inclination thereof, is wholly
for God, and against sin. It is this general testimony that is the foundation
of true comfort. A man may be free and innocent, as to some particular sins,
and yet the state of his soul be in gall and bitterness.

Secondly, This testimony of the conscience even in general, witnessing unto 2.
It witnesses either perfection or sincerity.
thee thy state of grace, may be considered two ways. For either it may be
supposed or expected, that it should testify unto thee an heart and life free
from all sin, failing in nothing at all. Or else, To witness sincerity and
uprightness for the main, though failing in many things. If then a Christian
should resolve to take no joy, unless his conscience can witness perfection,
and an immunity from any failings, such an one must resolve to have no comfort
all his life time; but if it witness the main bent and frame of thy heart to be
for God, though carried aside often through the violence and deceitfulness of
temptations, from this thou may rejoice. This is much to be observed; for
why are the discouragements and disconsolateness of Gods own children so great,
but because their conscience tells them of several failings, and they desire
some testimony of a perfection? Satisfy your selves therefore, and regulate
your thoughts in this particular. And thus we must expound that place, 1 John
3. 20, 21. which at first appearance seems to speak very terribly, If our
hearts condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all things. This
Text if not rightly understood, is enough like Belshazzars writing in the wall,
to strike us with trembling. For is there any man living, whose heart does not
condemn him for sin? Does not this very Apostle say, 1 John 1. 8. If we say
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and no truth is in us? If then we have
sin, how can our hearts but condemn us? And then God knowing our hearts, and
seeing more evil and error in us, then we can understand, must condemn us much
more. What is this then, but to fill every godly man with despair? But that the
Apostle himself may not speak a contradiction, we must have recourse to the
mentioned distinction, viz. That our hearts condemn us justly, for the main,
that our foundation is rotten, that we love sin more than God, then we have
cause to be wholly cast down; but if our hearts do not condemn us for the main,
only for those imperfections and frailties, which we cannot perfectly be purged
from in this life, then we may have confidence toward God.

Thirdly, Our conscience may be considered as Habitually able to testify, or
as Actually and immediately prepared. This is necessary to be observed; For 3.
Conscience is either habitually enabled, or actually prepared to testify.
every regenerate man having his conscience sanctified, is thereby habitually
able to give a good testimony, but many things may intervene that hinder it in
its actings. Even as the Sun is able to give a clear light to the whole
world; but clouds and mists may hinder the actual communication of it. And thus
it is often with the children of God; their conscience is sanctified, but many
doubts arise, many scruples and fears do interpose, so that they have not that
actual witness in their conscience which they might have. So that as in
sanctification there are the principles of grace, though the exercise of them
may be stopped: So it is in matter of consolation, there is the foundation and
fountain of it, though the stream may be troubled. And this should make us wary
so to walk, as not to put stops and checks in the way of conscience, especially
to labor for a sound judgment, and a full persuasion in things to be done.
For the more doubtful and scrupulous we are, the less firm and clear is the
testimony of our conscience, as appears, Romans 14. 22, 23.

Fourthly, We are to distinguish of the testimony of conscience, as alone and
4. The testimony of conscience is either alone or relating to Christ.
separate, or relating wholly to the blood of Christ, in whom alone all our
acceptance, and cause of comfort is contained. Whereas if a man should attend
to the testimony of conscience alone, though to his best actions, he would have
more cause to fear and tremble from that, then rejoice. Therefore the Scripture
attributes the purging of our conscience to the blood of Christ, there is no
man's conscience can be good and truly peaceable, that does not look to Christ,
that says not with John, Behold the lamb of God that takes away thy sin, as
well as behold the holy duties thou have lived in. Heb. 9. 14. How much rather
shall the blood of Christ purge your conscience from dead works? Let
conscience then always eye Christ; look to him as well as to our graces. For
the goodness of an evangelical conscience lies not in this, to testify thou
have not been such a sinner, or thou have not such failings; but though thou
have been such, yet repenting and believing through the blood of Christ, thy
conscience is not to condemn thee for them, because pardoned. Now the
conscience of a civil and pharisaical man, which comforts from works done, does
not at all relate to Christ; and by this thou may find the deceitfulness of
it, seeing that by Christ's blood alone it comes to be truly purified.

Use 1. Of Instruction. How few they are that have this right testimony of
conscience within them, they have seared stupid consciences, or they have
deluded ones, that make them trust in other things, then Christ's blood. Do not
most men rest in this, that their conscience tells them they are baptized,
they are made partakers of the Ordinances of God, and this is all the witness
they have? But the Apostle Peter lays an Axe to the root of this, 1 Pet. 3.
21. Baptism saves, but then by a rhetorical correction adds, Not the
putting away of the filth of the body, but an answer of a good conscience. It
is generally thought to be an allusion to a Covenant or contract (for so
Baptism is) wherein the person is asked, Do you take God for your God? Renounce
the Devil, and all the lusts of the flesh? Now if a man can unseignedly, and
with a good conscience answer that, he keeps to baptismal engagements, this
will save.

SERMON. LXXXVII.
A Believer may be assured of the Uprightness of his Heart in the Performance
of Duties. What is required to such an Assurance,

2 COR. 1. 12. That in simplicity and godly sincerity.
THe third part of the Text, as it stands divided, comes under our
consideration; and that is, the Declaration in particular, of what was spoken
in the General. The General was, The testimony of his conscience. Now he
shows the Specials, wherein this is manifested, and that is set down,
Positively, and Negatively, and Oppositely.

1. Positively, In simplicity, etc. 2. Negatively, Not with fleshly wisdom. 3.
Oppositely, But by the grace of God.
Before we come to the particulars, and open the Greek words, we must take
notice of the certainty and sure knowledge Paul had of his sincerity. For how
could Paul glory and rejoice in his sincerity, if he did not know it, yea so
know it, that his conscience with the Spirit of God did witness it to him? And
therefore this is one of those places, that is brought in the controversy
between Papists and us, about the certainty of our being in the state of grace,
which Bellarmine indeed would enervate. But his labor is in vain. For what can
be clearer, then that Paul had a certain knowledge of his upright heart, seeing
he did make this public testimony of it, and take so much joy therein? Neither
does Paul in this pretend to any extraordinary revelation, as if he had some
peculiar privilege in this above others, as when he was rapt up into the third
Heavens; but he avoucheth the testimony of his conscience, which must be in an
ordinary way. From this we observe,

That a Believer may have a certain knowledge, not only that he performs A
believer may be assured he performs duties with an upright heart.
those gracious duties God requires, but that he does them with an upright and
sincere heart.

Paul did not only know, that he was diligent in preaching of the Gospel, that
he was faithful in dispensing of the word of God, but also that all this was
done with faithful and sincere respects. We do not only know that we believe,
that we repent, but that we do these things in the uprightness of our souls.
Bellarmine urges this much, Though we do discharge the duties God requires,
yet how can we know, that we do them with an whole heart, with a sincere
spirit? Many hypocrites (say they) are sure. Yea (says he) among the
Protestants, one is assured of his way, and another of another Sect, but we are
assured that they are all deluded. So that he concludes, Seeing all the
Heretics of this age boast of this certainty, yet (says he) even in their
opinion many are deceived, and in ours all are. But we are to walk by the
Scripture Light in this case. And indeed this being a truth, the knowledge
whereof is obtained both by Scripture and experience, the savoury work of
grace, and sense of Christ's Spirit dwelling in us, does more to persuade of
this truth, then voluminous controversies. This Question is best answered by
diligent prayer, and an heavenly life; and therefore practical experimental
Christians can speak more to this point, then the most learned speculative
Doctors, unless they have a gracious broken heart, as well as a learned
profound head. That a believer may be assured of the truth of grace, appears
by several examples, and general assertions of Scriptures. Examples, as
Hezekiah, Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a
perfect heart, 2 King. 20. 3. In Job, who though under sad temptations both
from God and his dear friends, who charged upon him hypocrisy, yet he would
never let go the persuasion of his integrity. David, how often does he profess
his love of God with all his heart? Peter, when Christ asked him again and
again, he answered, Thou know Lord I love thee, John 21. 17. As for those
places, which affirm this truth, I shall name one or two, John 14. 17. Ye know
the Spirit, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. And verse. 20. At that
day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you. What is
clearer then? As where the Sun is there is light to see it: so where the
Spirit of God dwells and works in a man, there is an evident discovery of
it. 2 Cor. 2. 11, 12. What man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of
man within; even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God,
that we might know the things freely given to us of God. By this we see, that
as the soul by its rational powers does discover and feel the workings of
reason and understanding within it self; so also by those supernatural
principles of grace infused into it, it is able to discern and feel the divine
and heavenly motions of a supernatural life within him. The first Epistle of
John does in many places speak of this knowledge, whereby we perceive that God
is in us, and we in him. But I intend not to enlarge on this subject.

Let us explain this truth, and consider, What is required to cause this What
is required to a certain knowledge of our being in a state of grace. 1. A firm
assent to the truth of Gods promises and Word.
certain knowledge in us, that we are sincere and in a state of grace, and so
by consequent, that we are justified, elected, and shall assuredly be saved. And

First, There is required, A firm assent and faith of the truth of Gods
promises, which are in the general revealed in the Word; as such as these, He
that believes, has passed from death to life. By faith we have remission of
sins through the blood of Christ. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs
is the kingdom of Heaven. The promises also to such as do confess and forsake
their sins, we are strongly to assure our souls of. Yea, not only the
promises, but the whole truths revealed in Gods word, we are firmly to assent
to by a vigorous faith. For the lively actings of faith to its general objects,
do wonderfully conduce to the application of it to particular and special
objects. As men of quick animal actions, are thereby more enabled to rational;
for seeing what is in the understanding was first in the sense; the more
expedite they are, the more vigorous is the understanding.

Secondly, There is required, A particular application of Christ and the
promises to our selves by faith. For herein lies the efficacy of faith, when
with 2. A particular application of the promises to themselves.
Thomas it says, My Lord, my God: Or with Paul, Who loved me, and gave himself
for me. For as the seeing of meat, though never so excellent and wholesome does
not nourish, but the eating of it: So the beholding of Christ revealed in the
Word, as a Savior in the general, does not justify and pardon, but the
applying of him to be my Christ and my Savior. For this reason faith is
called, John 6. The eating of Christ's flesh, and drinking of Christ's blood. And
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper does require this particular applying act of
faith; and this is the foundation for our future knowledge; till Christ be
ours, we cannot know he is ours; till Christ be received by faith to dwell in
our hearts, we cannot perceive that he does dwell there. Happily then the
Apostle Peter exhorts us, 2 Pet. 1. 5. To adds to faith virtue; By that is
meant the efficacy and liveliness of faith in receiving of Christ. And then to
this we must add knowledge: Knowledge is to follow this efficacious
application of Christ. Now this is the greater work of our faith, as to our
justification. This is that which the Papists do so declaim against, and for
which Estius calls us Specialistas, Specialists. But certainly this is the
acting of faith that makes us rich, that brings Christ the treasure into our
soul, and it is this, which the Devil does so oppose in all the godly. Hence
are all those fiery darts of Satan, all those sad and black aggravations of
sin, whereby the soul, like that woman with the bloody flux, is afraid and
trembles to come directly to Christ. It is that applying act of faith, that
the Devil so diligently would keep thee off, whereas if thou did but taste of
this honey, as Jonathan; or rather plentifully fill thy self with it, thou
would with much spiritual fortitude pursue and conquer all thy spiritual
enemies. This was the blessed truth that our Reformers rescued out of Popery,
being enabled thereunto by the word of God as a Rule, and the experimental work
of grace upon their souls, as a sure witness to confirm them therein. But this
is not all. Therefore to obtain this knowledge, there is required an Internal
sense and feeling of the fit frame of our heart, whereby we perceive that we
are such who do believe, and do love God, who do repent of our sins upon
firm and pure grounds. For unless there be this inward discerning of what is
in us, how is it possible to arrive at any certainty? Now it is this that the
Popish adversaries do most batter, supposing it to be the weakest part in the
Wall. It is true (say they) we believe the Scripture that speaks generally,
Whosoever believes and repents, shall have his sins pardoned: But when you
come to the Assumption: But I believe, I repent, here you are subject to many
mistakes, here you may be deceived. And certainly all hypocrites are deluded in
this respect; They make false applications to themselves; through self-love
they deceive themselves, thinking they have good hearts, when they have them
not. But this does not infer, that the truly godly are therefore deceived; no
more then because an Heretic has great confidence that he is in the truth,
yet is deceived, it follows that therefore the orthodox man is also in an
error. Because men in a dream are deluded, does it follow that men cannot
tell, when they be indeed awake? We must know then, That as we have a certain
knowledge, by the bodily senses, we are certain we hear, we see: So the soul in
her immaterial operations, has a sense and feeling of them; We feel, we know,
we understand, we love, we delight. These internal motions of the soul are
perceived, as well as the things of sense; and to say, we may be decived here,
and no truth can be discovered, is to turn all knowledge into Scepticisme, and
to hold Nihil scitur; yea that that also is not known, That nothing is known.
And besides, it is directly against Scripture, No man knows the things of a
man, save the spirit of a man, 1 Cor. 2. 11.

This then being laid as a foundation, That a man's own spirit does feel and
percieve what are the motions thereof, it follows, That when a man does
uprightly and sincerely love God, and walk in his way, he does experimentally
discern this he knows, he believes, he knows he loves God. But What is
required to an experimental discerning of our graces. 1. An humble heart.
that this may be done, there is required,

First, An humble broken heart, and poverty of spirit, whereby we are emptied
of all our own righteousness, renouncing every thing that is ours, hungring
and thirsting after Christ and his righteousness. Every gracious heart that
comes to the knowledge of its sincerity, has this concomitant disposition,
there is an humble, lowly, broken spirit, it feels it self undone and lost.
It fears all that it has done, and therefore can rest no where, but on
Christ only. Now although many do deceive themselves, many do flatter and
delude their own souls, yet where there is this frame of heart, there will
never be any miscarriage.

Secondly, Besides this brokenness of heart, there is required, A regular 2. A
regular disposition in the soul.
and undistempered disposition in the soul. For though the sense cannot be
deceived about its proper object; hence is that saying, Non est disputandum de
gustu, We must not dispute about taste; yet if the palate be diseased, nothing
is more ordinary, than to judge that bitter which is sweet. And this falls
out sometimes to the choicest people of God; there are troublesome and
disquieting temptations upon them, they are in blackness and sadness. Now in
such a case, we are no more able to know what we are, than we can see our faces
in troubled waters. So that this due and prepared qualification of the soul,
must be always present in the judging of our selves; As in all faculties,
whether the intellective or visive, if they have any impediment in their
operation, they cannot produce their convenient operations. The understanding
in a mad man, and in a man fast asleep, is wholly hindered in its workings: So
may the senses be either by some hurt upon the sensitive powers, or by the
indisposition of the medium, or through the distance of the object. Thus it is
in the soul when sanctified; there may be many distempers, several impediments,
which may hinder it from passing a true judgment about its state; and
therefore the advice of Casuists in such cases is, not to seek for this
assurance and evidence, but to put forth acts of faith by mere dependence and
recumbance on the promises of the Gospel. Even as David and Job sometimes did:
For Job says, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15.

Thirdly, This frame of heart whereby we are enabled to know our condition 3.
An holy fear.
is always accompanied with a godly filial and holy fear. That fear which is
so often commanded in Scripture, and with which we are to work out our
salvation, Phil. 2. 12. It is true, there is a slavish, and servile fear,
tormenting us with daily doubts, and this is properly expelled by this
knowledge of our sincerity, and there is no greater enemy to an Evangelical and
Gospel life, which is in faith, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, then these
tormenting doubts about our selves. And therefore the Papists who teach and
encourage these doubtings, under the color of humility, do thereby drive us
from Christ. Yea Luther said, If there were no other cause, then this, we had
ground enough to depart from the Church of Rome. But though this Ishmael must
be cast out, yet not Isaac too. There is a lawful fear, whereby as children we
reverence God, are afraid of any frown from him, and do thereby diligently
attend to all those duties he has commanded; and this is necessary to beget a
true knowledge of our upright hearts, and by this that rash presumption of
Epicures, of impenitent and secure sins, is wholly excluded; for they do in
a presumptuous manner indulge themselves in all sins, having no holy fear in
the godly use of all those means God has commanded.

Fourthly, To enable the soul of a believer thus to know and be assured 4. The
help of Gods Spirit.
of its sincerity, there is above all required, The help of Gods Spirit. For
the Texts abovementioned do attribute it to the Spirit of God dwelling in us,
whereby we come to know what God has wrought in us. It Is the Spirit of God
which helps our infirmities in prayer, and does seal and witness unto us,
that we are the children of God. Therefore though a godly man's soul be as fully
bespangled with graces, as the firmament with stars; yet if the Spirit of God
enable not to discern of these, we are in daily fluctuations of spirit. As
Hagar had a fountain of water by her, but she was ready to perish with thirst,
till God opened her eyes to see it. And as the Prophets man could not behold
that great company which was on his side, till his eyes were enabled thereunto;
so neither do we know what are the gracious workings of Gods Spirit in us,
without this sealing witness of Gods Spirit. But of this more largely, when we
come to the 22th verse in this Chapter. Now when all these are concurrent
together, Does the godly soul with a certain knowledge conclude, that it is in
a state of grace, and so justified with God. Whether this be a knowledge of
faith, or of sense, or mixed of both, is disputed. But it seems to be the
later. For as faith in the assenting act is carried out to principles clearly
revealed in the Word. And then secondarily to conclusions by good and sure
consequence deduced from them: So is faith in the fiducial actings of it to the
promises, as laid down in the general; and then to the same, as particularly
applied; So that faith and experience concur to make up this certain
knowledge, a glorious and rare privilege. For because men do live so
dissolutely and carelessly, because they do so little exercise themselves in
holiness and close walking with God, therefore they think such a thing is
impossible. Yea, because the people of God are so sensible of their
infirmities, and constant weaknesses, they think it is no duty, but sinful
presumption, to believe any such thing concerning themselves. But in the next
place we are to show you, that it it is a duty which we ought to press after.

SERMON. LXXXVIII.
Of the Impediments which keep us from Assurance; Commands for it, and Cautions
about it.

2 COR. 1. 12. The testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and godly
sincerity, etc.
THe next thing to be pursued concerning the Doctrine already observed, viz.
That a believer may certainly know, that he does not only do the duties God
requires, but also that he does them with a sincere and single heart. The
manner as well as the matter is manifested to him) is to show our duty herein,
that we are bound by Gods command, not to rest, till we come to some assured
knowledge herein. Therefore of all the Questions in Divinity, thou art to study
to exercise thy self most in this, Whether do thou know, that thou art in a
state of grace, that thou art no hypocrite, no self-deluded wretch in the ways
of Religion, but that thou have sincerity and truth in the inward parts? How
much more advantageous would it be to Christians, if they studied the
resolution of this case more? It is strange that many can spend their time in
disputes about either unnecessary things, or too sublime for their capacities,
or such Questions, that they are not concerned in. And as for this, which is
the main fundamental one, as to their particulars, be wholly negligent about
it. Certainly a good resolution herein, is of so great importance, that we may
wonder, that we do not lay all other studies aside; yea bid all other
businesses stand alooff off, till the Spirit of God upon sure grounds, has
persuaded us herein. If your temporal estate were questioned; if all your
livelihood were called into question, and it began to be doubtful, whether the
estate you enjoy were your own by the right of the Laws, or no; especially if
others did solicit and endeavor to take it from you: Would not this make you
run and ride night and day, till you had obtained such firm evidences, that
all your adversaries could not invalidate? How then comes it about, that we
will thus desperately put the state of our souls to a venture, if I be
regenerated, I am regenerated; if but a temporary believer, I am no more, I
will put it to the event, let it fall out how it will? Oh the sad blindness
and heavy judgments of men in this particular; and yet thou that live thus
doubtfully, and wilt die thus doubtfully. How uncertain is thy life? What a
bubble and vapor art thou? Oh remember that the time is coming, that a godly
ability to answer thy self in this doubt and temptation, will be more worth,
then all the world, when thou art to be snatched from this world, to enjoy the
comforts thereof no more, when thou apprehendest thy self summoned by death to
stand at Gods Tribunal; where grace, and only grace through the blood of
Christ, will be a sure plea. What agonies, what perplexities, what confusions
will be upon thy soul? If thou criest out then, Oh I know not what I am, what
will become of me, whether I am going; Live I must not, die I dare not! Oh that
I could hear a voice from Heaven immediately witnessing unto me, that my
spiritual estate is safe and good! Be sure that of all the Questions in the
world, you will one day be put most to answer this, Not so much what knowledge
you had, what gifts and enlargements you had, what not, what remarkable
external duties you have done for God; but with what sincerity and singleness
of heart, all this has been performed? Therefore meditate on this lesson, as
it were, every day be studying of it, to know all the practical mysteries about
it. And as the Husbandman before he can sow his ground with corn must cut up
the roots and bushes, which are in the What are the hindrances which keep men
from looking after an assurance of their sincerity. 1. Self-fulness and
presumptuous security
way; so do thou. That thou may the better set thy self upon this duty of
pressing after sure knowledge in this great matter, remove first, All those
impediments and hindrances that keep thee from exercising thy self therein,
and they are these,

First, A self-fulnesse, and presumptuous security that thou art already in a
good estate. This is the condemnation and eternal ruin of many a man's soul, he
will not so much as put it to the Question, Whether he be in a state of grace
and salvation, or no; he will not so much as entertain one doubt about it? No,
this is the way to bring him in despair; by this means he may have trouble and
disquietness of conscience; he cannot live so jollily and securely as he does:
Therefore whatsoever Gods word, or the Ministry speaks, though never so
terribly about the deceitfulness of man's heart, that we delude our selves,
taking that which is like grace for true grace, they matter it not; they will
persuade themselves that their souls are in a good estate, and none in the
world shall make them question it. Of all the men in the world, such secure
confident spirits have the most cause to doubt and fear. Never to doubt, or
search into thy heart, and to compare thy self with the Rule, is a very ill
sign. To take all for granted thus concerning thy soul, and never to commune
with thy own heart, is a great argument that thou art rotten in the foundation.
Does not the Wiseman observe it, as a general Rule, Prove. 16. 2. The ways of a
man are clean in his own eyes, but the Lord pondereth the heart? Though thou
say with the Church of Laodicea, Thou art rich clothed, and want
nothing, yet God knows thou art poor, cursed and miserable. God knows
otherwise by thee, then thou do. We charge it upon the Church of Rome, that
she is incurable, because of this principle she holds, That she cannot err.
For if she would yield that, if she would grant happily for so many years they
have been grossly deceived, then there would be some principles to proceed upon
to reform them. So it is, if we meet with a man that confesses his heart is
deceitful, his condition may be very miserable, though he has applauded
himself thus many years; if I may be found out not to have laid a good
foundation about the work of grace, I would gladly be convinced of it; It is
the great desire of my soul, not to be deceived about the nature of grace in
me. There are fearful and sad instances of hypocrites and temporary believers,
therefore I would gladly be informed, Whether I came not too short as yet?
Whether there be not a more excellent way then I have attained unto? This man
is not far from the Kingdom of Heaven; this man is in a way to be secured;
But the self-righteous man, that supposes himself good, it is the first
principle with him, that he will never suffer to be questioned; this man is
remediless as to humane appearance, Such a presumptuous man in practicals, is
like an Heretic in doctrinals; and so after the first and second admonition,
we may even reject, knowing that he does willingly damn himself. Be sure then
to take heed of this rock, at which so many have split themselves.

A second cause that must be removed, is, A profane careless spirit; whereby
men do not at all matter their souls, nor in what relation they do stand in
toward 2. A profane careless spirit.
God. If their bodies be well, if their worldly affairs prosper, then they say,
Soul, take thy ease. But as for their spiritual condition, whether God be
reconciled, or an enemy, whether yet they have been ever taken off that natural
and cursed estate they were born in, they never look after it. Oh foolish and
brutish man! If the Spirit of God shall once convince thee of thy sinful and
dangerous estate, of the curses of the Law which may fall upon thee every
moment, then thou may have no rest day or night, till thou obtainest some
assurance herein.

The third cause is, The over-greedinesse and importunate minding of our
earthly 3. Carking carefulness.
businesses. We rise with the world in our heart, and go to bed with it in our
heart, so that we never set time apart seriously to think, how it is with us.
Hence come those constant delays and procrastinations, promising our selves we
will after such and such businesses are over, set our selves to the examination
of our ways; but still the work is not done, our days pass away, our hearts
grow more hardened and indisposed every day, till at last death unexpectedly
seizes upon us, and then we would gladly have oil, when it is too late, then
with Esai we cry out for a blessing with tears and bitterness, but we come too
late. How comfortable on the other side is it for a godly man dying, to say his
soul has been set in order long before, he has not his evidences now to
seek? The knowing of his heart, has been all his study in his life time,
Satan can object no new thing, which he has not already thought upon.

Lastly, There is another cause in the other extreme, which is to be removed,
4. Despairing and discouraging thoughts.
if we would arrive to this certainty, and that is, To shake off all despairing
and discouraging thoughts, as so many vipers fastened upon thee. This valley
must be exalted, as well as the other mountains levelled. Paper too much wetted
as well as foul, receives no characters: So the heart sinfully dejected and
disquieted, is indisposed for assurance, as well as the presumptuous one. For
this reason we need the Spirit of God to seal us, and to confirm us: yea we
need Gods Spirit more in this work of confirmation, then of illumination.
Darkness and ignorance is sooner removed out of the mind, than unbelief and
diffidence out of the heart. Do ye not see it thus often with the children of
God, who are very tender in respect of illumination, are very quick and
Eagle-eyed in respect of conviction, are wonderfully ingenuous to find out all
the secret pollution and guile of their souls. But then for assurance and
confirmation in the grace and favor of God toward them, they are exceedingly
fearful, and very weak. Therefore the believer must look upon slavish and
disquieting fears, as adversaries to his peace, as well as presumptuous and
secure thoughts.

These impediments being thus rolled out of the way, the next thing he has Of
Gods commands to get assurance.
to do, is to awe his foul with those Commands of God, that require us to get a
certain knowledge of our estate. For we see by the Popish objections, yea and
of many others against this way, as if it did nourish security, as if it were
the great wisdom of God to keep every man in this life uncertain about his
spiritual estate, that so he may be kept in humility and fear: (I say) by such
plausible objections as these are, a man has made a good progress, that can
despise them all, that is convinced it is his duty to press after this certain
knowledge; and also that God has promised to give his Spirit to work this in
us. And that therefore if we complain of our fears and uncertain doubts we are
to blame our selves, who like the people of Israel, do peevishly keep our
selves in this wilderness, if we consider those places, which speak so
universally, that God has given his Spirit to all those that are his sons,
whereby they are enabled to call him Father. Is it not disputed, Whether all
that are truly godly have not this certain knowledge, especially considering,
how the first Reformers went very high this way. Hence is that expression of
Calvin, which may startle the Reader, Lib. 3. Institut. cap. 2. Sect 16. Vere
fidelis non est, nisi qui solida persuasione, etc. He is not truly a believer,
who being not persuaded by a solid persuasion, that God is a propitious and
merciful Father to him, from whose benignity he promises himself all things,
who does not upon the confidence of the promises of Gods good will to him,
assuredly conclude of his salvation, which he repeateth again. But this will be
better considered at verse. 22.

For the commands to this duty, I shall only commend two places unto you, 2
Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith, prove your selves,
know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be (...), men of an unsound mind,
that have no spiritual skill and experience to know, what is of God in you, and
what of the Devil; what is of the Spirit, and what of the flesh and nature in
you. Here you see this duty is commanded, and that earnestly with ingemination;
and the Greek words do signify, that the truth of grace, and the life of
Christ in us, is not easily found out: We must take pains, and exactly
distinguish; the bottom may be copper, when the superficies be gold. There are
many resemblances of grace, which are not grace. That expression of Calvin's is
true, though so much abused by Papists, Reprobi simili fere modo afficiuntur,
etc. (Calvin. Institut. lib. 3. cap. 2do. Sect. 11.) That even some reprobates
are affected almost with the same experimental sense and feeling as the elect
are, and therefore they must have their senses exercised to discern between
good and evil. As the Gemmary by his skill can find the difference between true
metal and counterfeit.

The second Text is, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore the rather Brethren, give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure. Give all diligence] This
supposes, That the Christian who lives carelessly and negligently, who is not
servent in spirit, and vigorous in the actings of holiness, is subject to many
doubts and uncertain disputations about his estate. Now it would be a vain
exhortation, to bid us, Use all diligence for the attaining of that which is
impossible.

This may suffice to show it is our duty, and truly we may be the more
encouraged in the pursuance of this, if we do consider the blessed and happy
effects of The effects of our souls.
such a certain knowledge of our selves. For

1. Hereby we shall live. With a quiet, peaceable frame of heart. David does
often profess the great tranquillity of his soul, Ps. 4. That he will lay him
1. A quiet heart.
down and sleep, because the Lord takes care of him. And Paul, Romans 8. does
confidently triumph, That nothing shall separate him from the love of God in
Christ. This is an Heaven upon the Earth. Oh the blessed estate of that man
whose soul is always on this Mount (as it were) of transfiguration! This man
is always safe in the haven, while others are tossed up and down with various
temptations.

2. This peace does also breed joy and unspeakable comfort, which the Gospel
often does speak of. For want of this the people of God live not suitably to
Evangelical 2. Spiritual joy and comfort.
principles; They walk as if they were to be justified by the Law, as if they
were to look for righteousness by the Covenant of works: whereas we are to
consider, that the Spirit of the Gospel, is the Spirit of Adoption, and that
subdueth tormenting fears, and overcomes disturbing doubts, making him to
rejoice always in the Lord.

3. This joy causes Thankfulness, fills the heart and mouth with
Hallelujahs unto the Lord. How can a child of God be thankful for that which
he questioneth, 3. Thankfulness
whether it be in him or no? The wonderful effects of Gods grace converting of
thee, and discriminating thee from those millions of persons that on thy right
hand, and left hand fall into hell, should overwhelm thee by amazing thoughts
thereat. But all this goodness and free grace of God is neglected, not take
notice of, whilst thou sit in the darkness, and feel no light.

Lastly, This will be a great quickner of thee in the ways of holiness. This
will be wings and legs, and all to thee. The joy of the Lord is your strength,
Neh. 8. 10. If then thou complainest of thy barrenness, thy deadness and
lukewarmness in holy things; examine, whether this be not the root that lies
undiscernably under ground (as it were) that causes all thy unprofitableness?
The Devil he labors to cut these Conduit-pipes, that would convey all
consolation to thee. It Is against sense and experience to say, This certain
knowledge will breed laziness, and carnal confidence; as if the Suns beams
would cause coldness. No, it cannot be. Who labors more abundantly than
Paul? Who was more active in the ways of godliness, being like a spiritual
Joshua, subduing all the enemies of the Gospel before him? And did not the love
of Christ, which he felt in his bosom thus constrain him? Only take a Caution
or two to prevent mistakes.

1. This certain knowledge is never so glorious, that it removes all doubts
Caut. 1.
and temptations; neither is it always permanent and abiding in us. The people
of God have their nights, as well as days; and the Devil is not only watchful
to deprive believers of their graces, but also of their consolations. Therefore
be not discouraged, if thou find the flesh combat against the Spirit in the
way of comfort, as well as of duty.

The second Caution is, That although our constant and strict walking be not
the Caut. 2.
cause of our assurance, yet it is maintained and preserved in the lively
exercise of grace. To him that overcomes, I will give to eat of the hidden
manua, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written,
which none knows but ^e that has it. These are allegorical and allusive
expressions, to declare the assurance that God gives to his; but all this is,
To him that overcomes. If sin prevail over thee; if the world and the Devil
entice thee off from God, then expect not to have this merciful refreshment,
as thou usest to have. This assurance is like the manna that fell in the
wilderness, refreshing the Israelites in their extremities. It is the hidden
manna, alluding to that which was kept in the Ark that might not be seen. It is
the new name that none knows, but he that has it. So that it is the sincere
practice of godliness, that makes us to believe this truth; he that has it
cannot declare it to another, when profane scoffers' by derision bid us
demonstrate and prove that we have it. This cannot be no more than you can
persuade a man honey is sweet, unless he do eat of it. These Cautions observed,
then wrestle and strive with God, for the Spirit of God, that adopting and
sealing Spirit: Say, Lord, thou have given me grace, give me also the assurance
of it. How can I praise thee, how can I glorify thee, while unbelief does shut
up my mouth?

SERMON. LXXXIX.
Of the true Nature of Godly Simplicity and Singleness of Heart.

2 COR. 1. 12. That in simplicity and godly sincerity, etc.
HAving finished the general, we now come to the particular, wherein his
conscience did give this good testimony; and that is concerning his
conversation in the world. Of which in its time. Which is amplified (as you
heard) in the manner of it, Positively, Negatively and Oppositely. Positively,
and that is set down in two words, In simplicity, and Godly sincerity.

Of the first at this time, (...). The Vulgar Latin adds heart, In
singleness of heart, for so we find it used in other places, Ephesians. 6. 5.
Colos. 3. 22. But that is supposed in the word, though it be not expressed.
Grotius speaks of a Manuscript that reads (...), but the Context is clear
for this.

Now when he says, In simplicity, by that he means, he did nothing craftily,
crookedly, hypocritically, deceitfully, as Chrysostom interprets it in many
synonymous words. Varinus makes the contrary to (...), etc. almost the same
words Chrysostom has. The word is often used for bounty and liberality, as 2
Cor. 9. 11, 13. because those who have a single plain spirit, are hearty, ready
and free in all duties that are required. It differs from the next word
(...), because that does properly respect the aims and intentions of men in all
their ways; although we are not to be too exact in making a distinction
between them. This simplicity is as much as sine plicis, that which is smooth
and plain, that has not many folds and coverings, and so is opposite to that
which is in the Old Testament called an heart, and an heart, a man that has
two hearts. So that this is a most blessed temperature of the soul, when its
internals and externals are both alike; when its inwardly toward God, what it
outwardly pretends to be. From whence observe,

That godly simplicity and singleness of heart, does afford much comfort.
Godly simplicity and singleness of heart affords much comfort


The hypocritical and crafty self-seeking man, that makes use of God and holy
things for his own advantage and interest, has never any solid true comfort.
He is compared to the rush that grows in the mire, and if plucked from
thence, quickly withers, Job 8. 11. An hypocrite will not serve God, but
where his own advantages do induce him; for hypocrisy is large, and so
contrary both to simplicity and sincerity. The Apostle does excellently comfort
himself in this; and thereby appealeth to the consciences of the Thessalonians,
1 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Our exhortation was not of deceit or guile, neither used we
flattering words, or a cloak of covetousness, nor if men sought we glory. Oh
the admirable simplicity that here we find in Paul's spirit!

Now it is necessary to consider the nature of this. And

First, It flows from an heart sanctified and truly regenerated. No man Of
the uature of godly simplicity. 1. It flows from a sanctified heart.
but he that is godly, has this singleness of spirit. Jer. 17. 9. The heart
is deceitful above all things. The word signifies the crookedness of it: How
ready it is to supplant us. Jacob had his name from that root, because he
supplanted Esau about his birthright. This is the heart of man by nature, full
of concavities, secret recesses and holes (as it were) deceiving himself and
others; and therefore till grace does make pure, and we have truth in the
inward parts, all is but a lie in us: Our Religion is a lie, our goodness is a
lie, there is no solidity at all. It is true indeed, there is in some men a
natural ingenuous candor, they abhor dissimulation and hypocrisy; but yet
this is only one of Aristotle's virtues, which is indeed but a splendid vice.
For if the tree be not good the fruit cannot be: If the spring be bitter, so is
the stream; and so if a man be a thorn, no sweet grapes can grow upon him. This
then we are to do, to look to the bottom, to search to the original. Has the
Spirit of God made thee a new creature? then thou do become faithful and
true both to God and man; otherwise we see what the Scripture speaks of every
one by nature, that he is a liar, Romans 3. 4. Therefore till the heart be
purified by grace, there is no truth and soundness within.

Secondly, This simplicity and singleness of spirit does eye God, and looks
2. It looks upon Gods will as the only motive to obedience.
upon his will, as the motive of his duty. The presence of God, the omniscience
of God, whereby he tries and searches the heart, is frequently in his
meditation. It is the glory of God, the honor of God, that stirs up his
heart: It Is not glory from men, or pleasing of men, which does quicken him up.
For although we told you, the next word signifies purity of intentions, yet
one is so intimately connexed with the other, that they cannot be separated;
singleness then of heart is remarkably seen in those motives that move his
soul; they are arguments drawn from God. You see this fully comprehended in
that exhortation to servants, Colos. 3. 22. where they are commanded, To obey
their masters, not with eye service, as men pleasers, but in singleness of
heart, fearing God. They must look above Masters and Governors, even to God
himself. Now we are all servants to God; and therefore we ought the more
diligently to have singleness of spirit toward him, by how much he does
infinitely exceed all other masters. And this particular does likewise show,
that all the moral ingenuity and verity which some Heathens have been famous
for, was but a glistering Glowworm; for they had no eye to God, neither did
they respect him, but looked at their own glory and honor in all that they did.

Thirdly, Simplicity of heart is essentially consisting in the fixednesse of it
3. It is fixed upon God only.
upon God only, when the heart does in the chiefest manner close with God, and
center upon him, as the ultimate end through Christ. And therefore simplicity
of heart is the same with oneness of heart. When a man does not love God, and
the world too, serve God, and lusts also. For though our Savior say, This is
impossible, yet many whose whole souls are engaged to the world, and the things
of the world, do yet please themselves, as if they loved God also, which yet is
as impossible, as with one eye to look downwards, and another to look upwards.
That heart and heart which some Kings in the Old Testament are charged with,
was, because they did halt between God and Belial; They would not serve God
alone. Simplicity then is opposed to inconstancy and unsetlednesse of spirit,
when a man does not with full purpose of heart cleave to Christ, and take him
upon all his terms, but in some things is for him, and in some things is
against him: At some times he prays and calls upon God; at other times
again he gives all over. This is opposite to singleness of heart. The Apostle
James calls such an one, Chap. 1. 8. A double minded man, (...), a man with
with two souls, as it were. So that this very particular is greatly to be
heeded, it will penetrate and search to the very bottom of the soul. Most men
undo their souls in this point; they have but wishings and wouldings in
religious things; they have aguish workings of heart, sometimes hot, and
sometimes cold: They have not taken our Saviors counsel, To sit down, and
bethink themselves, what it will cost them to be the Disciples of Christ, what
lusts they can part with, what sufferings they can endure, what powerful and
fervent service they can do for God: And hence it is they are like a reed
shaken with every wind. Instability and inconstancy cannot in a predominant
manner consist with this simplicity of heart, no more than heat and cold in
gradu intenso. There is no godly man but bewaileth the unsetlednesse, the
unevenness of his heart, that he is not always as believing, as
heavenly-minded, as weaned from the world, as he is at sometimes; but this is
gradual only, his heart has for the main fixed on God, though it be thus
tossed up and down; even as the ship may be anchored fast to the earth, yet the
waves and winds may move it up and down, but they cannot remove it. Thus the
heart which has godly simplicity, is fundamentally fastened upon Christ,
although many temptations intruding may sometimes cause it to shake and totter.

Fourthly, Simplicity of heart is consistent in the uncompounded frame thereof.
4. It is not compounded.
It is not made up of several heterogeneals, as if there were metal of silver
and lead, or gold and copper, and so is the same with purity. Every hypocrite
has a mixed heart, it is compounded of several ingredients; for being it is
glewed to the creatures, and to several lusts, because these are many;
therefore he has not a simplicity, but multiplicity in his heart. Divines do
usually make simplicity to be one of Gods Attributes, because he is a most pure
act compounded of no parts: Therefore he has the highest simplicity in his
Essence. And the Angels, they are also called simple substances, because they
are next unto God. Yea the Philosophers call the Heavens, though a body, yet
simple, because not compounded of elements, as sublunary things are. The notion
then of the simplicity of the heart is seen in this, when it is not compounded,
it has not the mixture of other things with spiritual: and hence it does
appear, that no man in this life has perfect and absolute simplicity; none
has his graces wholly pure, because some corruption is mingled with our
duties. There is a composition of wine and water, of flesh and Spirit, of Grace
and Nature in the best, but yet it is not predominant in the godly. The tares
do not choke the wheat. The Iebusite does not drive out the Israelite. Only
this may serve to keep the godly humble and low in their own eyes; they have
not that purity and singleness of heart they ought to have, yea and earnestly
desire. Do thou ever go about any holy duty, wherein thou do not find
corruption presently intermingling it self? Does pure grace work always? How
much of flesh and self does interpose? But yet for the main thy heart has
simplicity.

Fifthly, Simplicity consists in an even, equal and uniforme way of
obedience. 5. It Is uniform in its obedience.
The course of a man's life is for the general of the same complexion, always
praying, always believing, always mortifying of sin, always heavenly
mindedness. I do not speak this, as if there were never any interruption,
sometimes natural, as in sleep; and otherwise, because the soul being finite,
cannot attend to many things at once; sometimes moral by sin, or at least
careless and dull affections, but the course of his life, or as the Scripture
calls it, The way of a man, that is, generally of the same consonancy: Whereas
Hypocrisy is full of uneven and unequal actions, sometimes mountains,
sometimes valleys. There are many Hyperbatons, (as it were) in the oration of
his life; his life does speak in different Dialects; he can say Sibboleth, and
Shibboleth too. Thus David describes the godly man, as Meditating and
delighting in the Law of God day and night. And the Apostle John speaks once
or twice, That those who are borne of God, sin not, neither can they: Not
because they have not diverse infirmities, but because the full purpose, and
habitual inclination of such a man's heart is uniformely to Gods commands.
Therefore you heard, that the opposite to (...), is (...). If you look upon
many examples of those, who did many things for God, yet wanted this
simplicity, you shall find a great difformity in their lives; their lives
speak contradiction, they are not the same men at one time, they are at
another. Thus Soul at first very zealous to promote the will of God; yea from
this he did put all the Witches to death, and yet at another time he himself
makes recourse to such. So Jehu, how active is he to destroy Baal's worship,
but yet he retains Ieroboam's worship? If it was good to destroy Ahab's
worship, because not commanded by God, was it not also good to demolish
Ieroboam's, seeing that also had no command from God? But where there is no
simplicity of heart, you may observe a great deal of unevenness, yea and
contradiction in that man's conversation.

Sixthly, Simplicity of heart does mainly lie in this, To have our outward 6.
Its outward and inwards are all the same.
and inwards all of the same nature. To be such cordially and internally to
God, as outwardly we appear to be. So that if you ask, What is this
simplicity? In the general we may say, the adequate conformity and agreement
between the heart and our profession. Out of the heart, we pray, we hear, we
profess. So that a godly man can more securely make that wish, than the
Heathen, who wished, that he had a window in his breast, that all men might see
what he thought, what lay in his heart; This was great confidence. For
certainly if God should take a man, as he did Ezekiel, and make a man look into
the secret corners of many men's souls, we should see every day more
abominations. A man of this godly simplicity cares not if other men knew his
heart, because God, whom he fears more than man, knows all the motions of
his soul. It is the complaint that God makes of some by the Prophet Isaiah,
Chap. 29. 13. This people draw nigh me with their mouth, and with their lips
they honor me, but remove their hearts far from me. This is to have a double
heart, such want this godly simplicity. But oh the lamentation and bitter
mourning that we may take up in this respect! Have not most of our
Congregations this double heart, and this double tongue? For what contrariety
is there between thy religious approaches, and thy ordinary actions? Are ye
not here to day, as if ye were an holy people, a repenting people, as if you
did own and acknowledge the Lord in all his commands? But what are you in your
shops, in your markets, yea it may be in alehouses, and such places, that do
foment iniquity? What gross double dealing is this with God? You have a tongue
to pray to God here, and then you have a tongue to curse and swear after. You
appear here to day for the service and honor of God, and then in the weekday
you serve the Devil and the world. What impudent hypocrisy is this? Will God
be thus grossly mocked by you? What does not God remember? Is he an Idol-god?
Oh yield your selves up to that exhortation of the Apostle, before Gods wrath
consume you, and you cannot escape, James, Chap. 4. 8. Cleanse your hands ye
sinners, and purify your hearts ye double-minded? Your hypocrisy and
dissimulation is so gross and visible, that did not the Devil exceedingly
blind you, you could not but take notice of it; it would rise up in your
consciences, and ^^ing like a Scorpion.

Seventhly, Simplicity of heart is seen in this, That it dare not hide or cover
7. It does not cover any sin.
any sin, or mince it, and by distinctions lessen it as much as may be. You
heard simplex is sine plicis: It is a metaphor from garments that have not
folds in them, you may see what they are. Saul did exceedingly discover the
guile of his heart, when he did so mince his sin to Samuel, and did pretend
sometimes necessity, and sometimes religious respects to God; whereas David,
though for a while he had too much of this double heart in him about Uriah's
matter, yet at last he confesses all, Psalm. 51. Against thee, against thee
only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. It was because the eye of
God was upon him, that he was so much troubled; it was because he had used so
much fraud and cunning in accomplishing his iniquity, that he was wounded at
the very heart; therefore says he, Create in me a right spirit, and thou
desire truth in the inward parts. When a man once comes to this simplicity
of heart, he will justify God, and condemn himself, he will confess to God,
hide nothing from him, deal plainly with him; not with Adam excuse or put it
off to others; he will say, I am the man, I charge my self with all that evil,
and all the aggravations of it, that the Scripture requires.

Eighthly, Simplicity of heart makes a man wonderful free and willing 8. It
makes a man free in the service of God.
in the service of God. It does not limit and stint his work to God sutably to
his own advantages, but his Modus diligendi Deum est sine modo, his measure is
to put no measure. Therefore all those who love not strictness, zeal, fervency
and activity for God, they discover much unsoundnesse of spirit. Were thy heart
single for God thou would strive forward, and forget all things that are
behind. This is the reason you heard, why the Greek word (...) is many times
used for bounty and liberality, because he who has a plain heart for God, he
does not walk by politic rules, and prescripts of humane moderation, but
conformeth to the rule with as much exactness and zeal as he can.

SERMON. XC.
A further Discovery of the true Nature of Godly Simplicity both toward God
and Man.

2 COR. 1. 12. That in simplicity and godly sincerity.
WE are treating upon this special grace of simplicity, which does afford More
propositions of the nature of simplicity. 1. It humbly submits to the truths of
God.
unspeakable comfort to him that enjoys it. There remain more particulars to
declare the nature of it. And

First, Where this simplicity is, there is an humble submission of the mind to
the truths of God revealed in believing of them, and an obediential resignation
of the will to the commands of God, without cavils and froward disputations. In
this particular, the grace of simplicity does triumph. Although to speak
properly simplicity and sincerity are not so much a distinct specifical grace,
as a qualification and modification of the powers of the soul, and their
operations. In these two channels of faith and obedience, doctrine and duty,
simplicity does greatly discover it self. We can neither believe soundly, or
walk holily without this. For the former, it is plain, that seeing the truths
of Christianity are made known to us by divine Revelation, and therefore are
above reason (though not contrary to it) there is no such requisite to believe,
as a simplicity of the mind, whereby we do acquiesce upon the authority of the
Word, never curiously disputing and cavilling, how it can be. This the Apostle
calls Captivating every thought, 2 Cor. 10. 5. And herein Christianity
differs from Philosophy; the later requires science by disputes and
discourses; the former requires an humble assent to the testimony, affirming
such a thing to be so. So that we may say, It Is the want of this simplicity of
the mind that makes so many absurd and damnable heresies in the Church. What
causes the Socinian, the Arminian, but the want of this humility of mind? It
is said to be the Emblem of Nazianzen, Theologia nostra est Pythagorica, Our
Divinity is pythagorical; as amongst Pythagoras his Disciples (...), was enough
to silence all disputes, So much more ought this amongst Christians to quiet
all disputations, The Lord has said it, Christ has spoken it, Thus it is
written. But how sadly may we lament, to see all Divinity turned into Quaerees,
and Utrum's, videtur's quod sic, and videtur's quod non? How is this holy
simplicity in believing laid aside, and ra^^onal scientifical inquisitions
advanced, as if now the just were to live by reason, not by faith; as if reason
were the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen?
Certainly this makes men so uncertain, so inconstant, they look not after
faith; which as the Schoolmen well say, is not only apprehensiva, but
quietativa, not only apprehensive, but quietative; it brings the soul to its
center, to its non ultra; whereas reason does but satisfy, till a man come
with a stronger; and one argument like the circles in the water begets another.
So that whereas it was Iulian's objection against the Christian Religion, as
low and contemptible, because it was (...), only believe; yet this indeed is
the glory of it; this setleth and composeth, when philosophical ratiocinations
did carry them into endless contentions. Therefore that is good counsel of
Austins, Noveris te esse fidelem, non rationalem. It is faith, not syllogisms,
that brings an established mind in Religion. It is true indeed, Christianity
has her use of Reason and Arguments, and there is an Habitus Theologiae,
whereby we do demonstrate the points of Divinity; but this is, when faith has
laid the foundation, Fides facit argumentum, non argumentum fidem, as it does
in the liberal Arts: Reason builds upon Faith, not Faith upon Reason. If
therefore thou complainest of the diversity of Sects, of the multitude of
opinions that swarm every where, there is no such way to escape splitting thy
soul at such rocks, as to pray for this godly simplicity of mind. I say holy
simplicity, not a foolish, popish, blind obedience, that is not faith. The fool
believes every thing: Faith has always an evidence, and knowledge of the
testimony, though the thing believed may be above the comprehension. But when
truths out of the Scripture are with sufficient evidence held out to thee, then
simplicity is required to yield firm assent thereunto, and not to dispute by
humane arguments, whether it can be so, or no. Therefore the wisdom which is
from above, Jam. 3. 17. is said to be (...), easily to be persuaded; As in
respect of the objects to be believed, and the instruments who propound it,
there is necessary, Piscatoria simplicitas, which is more than Aristotle's
subtilty, or his Minutiloquium, as Tertullian calls it. So there is such an
humble simplicity required on the subjects part, who are to receive these
divine truths. I am the larger on this, as being assured the best antidote
against all heresies, and the surest remedy to preserve from doctrinal
Apostasy, is this simplicity of mind. But

Secondly, This simplicity is no less signally seen in the Will, which is to
cast away its contumacy, stubbornness and propriety, resigning it self wholly
up to 2. It submits to the commandments of God.
Gods command. The Lord has commanded it, therefore I obey, not disputing with
flesh and blood, whether this will be for my advantage, honor or profit; but
the will of God boweth him into all ready compliance. It is the Apostles
advice, Phil. 2. 14. Do all things without mumurings and disputings, that ye
may be sincere. Here it is plain, that sincerity is manifested, when we
willingly do our duty, not murmuring and quarrelling at it. Even as we read of
Abraham, though commanded by God to sacrifice his own son with his own hands,
when he might have had so many fair arguments against it, yet he readily
applies himself to his duty; and so when commanded to come out of his own
country, and to go he did not know whether, yet he willingly obeys; this is
simplicity. And so it was with Paul, Galat. 1. who immediately obeyed the call
of God, Not consulting with flesh and blood; whereas Saul, because he did not
obey in simplicity, but waved the commands of God upon religious pretenses, his
rebellion was accounted a^ witchcraft, not believing that Obedience was better
than Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15. 22.

Thirdly, This simplicity is seen in an holy boldness to do our duty, to be 3.
It boldly reproves sin.
zealous for God, to reprove sin, though there be never so many Lions in the
way. It is true, the wisemen of the world call this simplicity indeed, making
it the same with folly. Thus most of our Christian duties, if fervently and
zealously performed, are nothing but folly and silliness to carnal policy. But
to appear for God, and to own his ways among a crooked and malicious people,
is an excellent mark of simplicity, whereas hypocrisy measuring all things by
its safety, honor and profit, becomes like the shadow to the body, su^eth it
self to every corrupt humor of others. But this plainness of heart makes us
with David, Psalm. 119. to speak of the Law even before Kings, and always to
obey God, rather than men. So much shrinking from thy duty, because of the fear
or favors of men is so much want of simplicity. Hence Varinus makes (...) the
same with (...), boldness and freedom. Oh then pray exceedingly for this
simplicity of spirit, that will make thee constant, bold and zealous for God!
How often may thy conscience convince thee, that sinful fear, or foolish
shame, or carnal affections have made thee not do th^se duties with singleness
of heart, as thou should have done? How many times have thou betrayed the
truth, by sinful silence? How many times have thou wounded thy spirit, by
holding thy tongue, whereas this holy simplicity would have imbo^dened thee? It
is true, there is Christian prudence required also, there must be the wisdom
of a Serpent, as well as the innocence of the Dove. Discretion is the salt to
season our Sacrifices, and there must be this salt, as well as the fire of
zeal; but we must look the Serpent does not eat up this Dove; that discretion
does not devour this simplicity.

Thus much of simplicity, as it relates immediately to God. Now because Of
simplicity toward men.
the Apostle uses the word largely, relating to his ministerial conversation,
as it did reach to men, we shall take in briefly the consideration of that
also. And

First, Godly simplicity makes a man inoffensive to men. This simplicity 1. It
makes a man blameless as to others.
makes a man harmless and unblameable, as to others. Christ's Disciples are
compared to Sheep, not to Bears for cruelty, or Foxes for craft in doing
mischief; therefore (...) is as much as (...). The Apostle says, I would have
you simple in malice, Romans 16. 19. The leven that was forbidden in the
Sacrifices did signify malice and sourness. So that where this simplicity is,
a man is wonderful harmless, is not injurious, does no wrong. The word used in
that place of Romans 16. 19. is (...), which though it properly come from (...),
yet some make it from (...), as if to say, without horns. The people of God are
meek and lowly, as it is said of Jacob, He was a plain man, but Esau rough and
hairy; which may relate to their manners, as well as bodily constitutions; not
but that they can be as bold as Lions in the cause of God. Simplicity is
consistent with zeal and courage for God. Moses was the meekest man upon earth,
yet in the case of Idolatry, and the peoples uncleanness, how forward was he to
have severe punishment inflicted on the offenders?

Secondly, This simplicity of spirit in reference to man is accompanied with
ingenuity, candor and truth. His heart and his words, his promises and his 2.
It is accompanied with ingenuity and truth.
hands go along together. And therefore (...), is made the same with (...), a
man of a transparent breast, that does abhor all lying, cosening, and a double
tongue. How careful is the Apostle toward the end of this Chapter (and
something this Text is relating to that) to clear himself from inconstancy and
falsehood, as if he were yea and nay? So that simplicity is accompanied with
verity in affections, and veracity in promises. There is a conformity between
the mind and words. The Jesuit by his principles of equivocation, calling it
prudens defentio, is far from this simplicity the Apostle here does rejoice
in. Aristotle, (lib. 4. Ethic. cap. 17.) makes this verity to be a moral
virtue, though he says the Greeks have no name for it, he places it in the
middle between two extremes, the one is (...), when a man does boast and brag
of such things in him, which are not indeed. Thus the Pharisee and the civil
man, yea Aristotle himself for all his moral Philosophy, were guilty of this
arrogance, attributing that to themselves, which was not in them. Simplicity
gives all to God, nothing to his own power. The other extreme is (...), when
men do dissemble the good things that are in them, will not own them. Aristotle
makes Socrates guilty of this. Now it is true, there may be much hypocrisy in
dispraising our selves; and we may affect humility, when thereby we exalt our
pride. So that the child of God which has this simplicity, is bound to
acknowledge the good things God has done for him, and in him; it is not pride
but thankfulness to do so. Paul did not arrogantly boast, when he professes
his simplicity; it was not pride to own his sincerity. And this is necessary
for the godly to be informed in; for they are so jealous and suspicious of
themselves, that they dare not say, they feel what they do feel. If Christ
should ask them as Peter, Love thou me? They would stand amazed, not knowing,
what to say, when yet at the same time all their trouble is, because they love
Christ no more, and because they do not arrive at such a pitch of holiness as
they desire. Know then, as Aristotle by the light of nature, so much more a
Christian by the light of grace may conclude, that it is a sin, contrary to
that simplicity that should be in us, not to acknowledge what God has done for
us. Thus Hezekiah pleaded the truth of his soul; and Paul here, and also in
many other places, professes his uprightness of heart, and abundant laboring
for the propagation of the Gospel; neither could they be charged with pride and
arrogance herein. By which we see, that as a man in the simplicity of his heart
is carried out to the whole service of God; so he does herein take notice of,
and acknowledge the grace of God toward him. Therefore it is our duty to
observe, and thankfully acknowledge the graces of God in us, provided always
we avoid those particulars, which Carthusian mentions, Lib. 2d. did. in a
verse, that do always pollute or puff up. Ex se, pro meritis, falso, plus
omnibus inflat.


1. That we do not think we have these good things by our own power and
ability. 2. That it is not for any merit, or desert of ours, that God gives us
grace, and passes others by. 3. That we do not falsely boast of such things, as
are not indeed in us. 4. That we do not Pharisaically prefer our selves above
others. These four things do overthrow the very foundation of many popish
principles.

From these things thus declared, there is, first an Use of Instruction, by way
of Corollary, viz. That godly simplicity is not natural simplicity, or mere
childishness. Use 1.
God for many ends causes some to be born natural fools and idiots, such are
not excluded from salvation. God may have his ways unknown to us of reaching
home to their hearts, and infusing grace into them. But this simplicity is that
which does consist in subduing the guile and hypocrisy that is in man's heart,
whereby we are prone to do the things of God for sinister respects, and thereby
lose our spiritual reward. Again, Much more does this Christian simplicity
differ from sinful and affected simplicity, when men by their laziness and
negligence attain not to any sound knowledge in Religion. How many simple old
persons are there, that have lived many years in this world, and yet know no
more than a child about the principles of Religion? Yea every wicked man is
often by Solomon called the simple one; and therefore wisdom does earnestly
invite them to forsake this folly. Thou that art apt to censure the generation
of such as fear God, as so many weak simple persons, they are very contemptible
in thy eyes. Oh remember, that all impiety is gross simplicity: You are the
Devils fools, for his bables you lose a crown of glory. In Hell, when it is too
late, you will then rage and rave to see what fools you have been, when you
shall see these despised ones received into glory, and you cast into eternal
torments.

Use 2. Of Admonition to all such, who seem to walk in the ways to Heaven, Use
2.
who are often in hearing, in praying, often in the religious duties God
requires: above all things look to the singleness of thy heart in these
things, thou will else have no glory from God, nor true comfort in thy own
conscience. As Solomon said, Whatsoever thou do, do with all thy might; so
whatsoever thou do, do it in plainness of heart, looking up to God only;
and remember, though men see not thy carnal motives, nor the crooked windings
of thy heart, yet the all-seeing eye of God, beholds the very atoms (as it
were) within thee: How great will thy confusion be, if at the day of judgment
God shall reject all thy glistering holiness, saying, you did it not to me; in
all these duties you served not me? Even as God complains of those
hypocritical Jews, Zech. 7. 5. When ye fasted and mourned in those months, did
ye it to me, even to me? This want of singleness of heart, respecting God
only, was that which made all their Religion abominable unto God.

SERMON. XCI.
Of the true Nature of Godly Sincerity.

2 COR. 1. 12. And godly sincerity.
THis is the second word, wherein is positively expressed, the manner of Paul's
conversation in the world. Although both the words tend to the same purpose,
yet simplicity does more respect the frame and inward constitution of the
heart: and sincerity does more denote the purity and integrity of our aims and
ends in holy things.

In the expression we may take notice,

1. Of the grace it self, viz. Sincerity. 2. The limitation, or qualification
of it, Godly sincerity.
The grace, or rather the gracious modification of Paul's life, is said to be
in (...) in sincerity. The word as Lexicographers observe, comes of (...) the
Sunne-beams, and (...), to judge. Now in them there are two things:

The (...), luster and light, and so it is the same with (...), that which is
clear, transparent and manifest. Thus 2 Pet. 3. 1. it is called, your sincere
mind.

2. In the Sunne-beams there is (...), heat, whereby heterogeneals are
separated, and homogeneals congregated; and then it is the same with (...),
unmixt, as the word sincere is pure honey, sine cera, without wax. So that in
this expression is denoted the purity of the heart in all its aims and
intentions, not mingling other things of a contrary nature with holy actions;
and then such an open, clear and diaphanous frame of soul, that it hides not,
or covers any thing, but delights to have all things open and naked to the
eyes of God.

Hence in the next place, you have the limitation or amplification, In the
sincerity of God; (...), we render it godly sincerity: Now this may be thus
understood:

1. By way of opposition, to that Natural, or Moral Truth, and Ingenuity, which
may be in men destitute of grace. The Romana fides was proverbial, because of
the truth and sincerity that was in all their dealings; but because they did
not know God, or look up to him, referring their actions to lower and more
inferior ends; therefore it was not godly sincerity. Thus many civil men have
an honest, upright heart to do truly and righteously in all things relating to
men, but they want the soul of all, which is to refer this to the glory of
God, and to eye him principally in their actions.

2. It may be called, The sincerity of God, effective, because it is that which
is wrought in us by God. The heart naturally is full of guile and hypocrisy,
never performing holy things upon holy motives. So that it is the grace of God,
which puts truth in the inward parts, and makes us Sheep of Foxes, Doves of
Kites.

3. It is the sincerity of God, by way of direction and command, because he
has commanded, that with a pure and upright heart, we are to serve him in all
our ways. And this our Translators seem to aim at, rendering it godly
sincerity, that is, such which is according to the rules of Gods word. And this
excludes that sincerity of conscience, which many heretical and deluded
persons may have in their zealous prosecution of their false ways. Paul had a
good conscience, and a sincere heart, while a Pharisee, that he did not go
against the dictates of his conscience; yea he thought himself bound to do
what he did: But this is not enough to godly sincerity, this is humane
sincerity, thou have a clear persuasion in thy own heart of the goodness of
thy ways; but if it be godly, it must be according to the rule of godliness,
and that is the Scripture. A man's own conscience or heart is not the supreme
rule of sincerity, but the Scripture. And this is very necessary to be
observed, because we are apt to rest in our hearts, the sincerity we feel
there, the comfort and quietness we have from thence, as if they were the
utmost rule we were to resolve all into; whereas it must not be, what say our
hearts, but what say the Scriptures informing and regulating our hearts?

4. It may be called sincerity of God, finaliter, because whatsoever a man
does, that is thus sincere, he does it to the glory of God; that is his mark,
if he falls short of that, if he finds his own glory, his own applause, his
own advantages interposing, this does exceedingly grieve and trouble him; he
accounts that as dross, and not gold, he says, This duty I have lost.

Lastly, It is called sincerity of God, objective, because he that is sincere,
does all things as in the presence of God, knowing that God beholds him, that
he tries the reins, and searches the hearts of all men. And this is
principally meant in this place (though the other be not excluded.) And so we
have Paul explaining himself in the next Chapter, verse. 17. As of sincerity, as
of God, in the sight of God, speak we in Christ.

These things explained, Observe,

That godly sincerity carries a man above all self-respects in religious
ways, Godly sincerity carries a man above all other things to God himself
even to God himself.

It is not man, either glory, or praise from him, but God alone that his heart
is fixed upon. As those that did run in a race (such is our Christianity) did
not matter the acclamations of spectators, but the judgment of him who was the
Moderator, to judge on whose side the victory was. Thus Paul, 1 Cor. 4. It is a
very small thing with me, that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment,
but he that judges me is the Lord. It is a miserable bondage to please men,
and to be like a looking-glass to every one, seeming to be what he is, that he
talks with: such a man is inconstant, hypocritical, changes the ways of
Religion often, according as humane advantages do intervene; whereas the
sincere man, like Christ himself, is the same yesterday, and to day, and for
ever. Like those fishes, Nazianzen in his contemplations, by the Sea side,
observed that keeping close to the rock were not moved, but the rest were cast
out, and are fetched in again according to the ebbing and flowing of the
waters: but he that walks with sincerity, as God is the same, the Scriptures
the same, godliness is always the same, so also is he the same. As the Pilot
has his eye always to the Star in the Heavens, not regarding the tempests,
or tos^ings of his ship. Thus it is with the sincere man.

To work this upon our hearts, let us consider, What it is in God that a
sincere heart looks upon.


First, What are those things in God, that the sincere man does thus fix
himself upon, living as if there were none in the world, but he and God alone.
And

First, The Omniscience of God, that all-seeing eye of his, whereby he knows
1. His Omniscience.
every secret turning, and winding of the soul, yea our thoughts afar off,
while they are but in the minting and womb, and thereby sees that in us, which
we cannot our selves. This is that, which is often in the thoughts of a sincere
man. This all searching knowledge of God, David largely celebrateth, Psalm. 139.
1, 2, 3, etc. Thus God commands Abraham, To walk before him, and be perfect,
Genesis 17. The consideration of Gods presence, that he is with us, that he
knows every thought, and every word, this will make us perfect and upright.
Had Gehezi thought that Elijahs spirit would have gone along with him, as it
were, and taken notice of the actions he did, he would not with such confidence
have come into the Prophets presence, as if all had been well. Oh then, how
vain is it to hide thy designs and intentions to men, to make protestations and
professions of thy integrity to men, if the all-seeing eye of God behold other
things in thee? What greater obligation can there be, to have all the motions
and turnings of thy heart cordial and faithful toward God, seeing no man can
more perfectly behold the outward gestures of thy body, then he does the inward
motions of thy soul? Oh say. God knows what I think, what my heart is upon,
what is the spring of every duty I do!

Secondly, Sincerity respects God, As he is the first cause, and the last 2.
His being the first cause and the last end.
end. The Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, of whom are all things,
and to whom are all things, Romans 11. 36. Now this twofold property in God, the
sincere man does greatly improve. First, As he is the Efficient cause, so that
he expects all sufficiency and power from the grace of God alone. The Scripture
dot frequently affirm, That it is by the grace of God alone, that we are able
to do any good thing; therefore the sincere man dares not sacrifice to his own
nets, dare not give any thing to his own power and free will, neither dare he
rob Christ of his glory, by setting up Angels and Saints, as Mediators, under
any nice distinctions whatsoever; he trembles to dispute against the grace of
God, lest he want the blessed effects of it in the greatest necessities. You
may observe David and Paul, who express such remarkable sincerity toward God,
that they go out of themselves, depend on God alone: and not only do they
acknowledge God the supreme giver of all the good they enjoy, but also they
make him the ultimate end, to whom they refer all things; remembering the
Apostles rule, 1 Cor. 10 31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the glory of God. This is a very hard lesson to do, a very difficult
duty to be performed; but yet the sincere man, he overlooketh all second causes
and instruments with his Eagles-eye; he gets up (as it were) into the mountain,
and leaves all his carnal interests below, as Abraham did his beasts and
servants, when he went to sacrifice Isaac. This single and pure intention of
Gods glory, is not so easily accomplished, as it is quickly and commonly
pretended. Oh how rare a thing is it to eat and drink, to study and preach,
that hereby God may be glorified? How closely does some carnal respect, or
vainglorious motive follow thee in the duty, as Asahel did Joab, which thou
can not make depart from thee, till thou thrust it (as it were) through the
fifth rib, till thou give it its mortal blow by mortification.

Thirdly, The sincere heart relates all to God, In regard of his Sovereignty
3. His sovereignty and dominion.
and dominion over him. Because God is the supreme Lord and Lawgiver, who only
can impose Laws upon the conscience; therefore in his obedience he does
principally look to the will and authority of the Lawgiver. This is a notable
character of since^ity, to obey, because thus says the Lord; it is his will,
and as the supreme orb does carry along with it the inferior orbs, though
against their particular inclination: Thus does the will of God, because
supreme, bring the creatures will into obedience, when corrupt inclinations do
propound a contrary way. It is the matter of our prayer which we are constantly
to pour forth unto God, That his will may be done, his will, not our will.
Therefore if sincerity have a throne in thy heart, thy sense will be as soft
wax to receive any stamp or impression from God; what God commands, though
against pleasures, profits, and all the inclinations of thy corrupt heart, thou
do readily submit unto. Thus thou offerest up thy self as an whole
burnt-offering unto God.

Lastly, This sincerity does respect the wisdom of God, in all those sharp,
and bitter providential temptations that a man may be exercised with, for his
4. The wisdom of God.
faithful service to God. The Scripture does frequently inform of this, what
cups of wormwood they must drink that will be Christ's Disciples, what crowns of
thorns they must endure upon their heads, who expect crowns of glory from him.
Now the heart that is sincere, does not cavil and murmur at Gods dispensations
herein, though so unpleasing to flesh and blood, but does wholly acquiesce in
the wisdom of God, filencing the impetuous motions of his Spirit; God is wiser
than I, he knows this is better for me, then I think it is. For certainly all
discontents do arise from this, we think God might have showed more love to us,
and more wisdom, if he did not suffer such and such things to come upon us:
Therefore afflictions and persecutions are the special Touchstone to discover
our sincerity. This fire will manifest whether we be gold or dross, these
winnowings whether chaffor wheat. The hypocrite wanting root, does commonly
begin to wither, when the Suns scorching heat does arise; and if they are at
any times afflicted for Christ, it is against their wills, so that with Simon,
they are compelled to carry the cross of Christ; but sincerity does not only
admire the wisdom of God in such dispensations, but justifies him, and
condemns its self. Thus you see, what are those high and sublime things a
sincere man looks at in all his religious ways: That whereas in a bodily
way, the beast looks to the ground, when man has an upright look toward
Heaven: So even every natural man has a soul bowed down only to earthly
respects, while the sincere heart ascends up to God himself. Therefore it is
that he does prudently escape all those ambushments that low inferior ends,
are apt to lay in his way, thereby to intercept him from arriving at God
himself. We cannot reckon all the inferior and unworthy ends that are apt to
interpose, no more than the creeping things in the Sea; only some few we may
instance in. As

1. Vainglory and Self-applause, that many times clippeth the wings of our
What are those inferior ends which interpose betwixt God our souls, which we
are apt to look upon. 1. Vainglory.
souls, that while we are moving to Heaven, this makes us fall to the ground.
This made the Pharisees lose the heavenly reward of all their religious duties.
And how often have the holiest of men complained of this Dalilah, this sweet
poison, this flattering enemy; Is it not the worm that devoureth the sweetest
flowers, and the ripest fruit? This makes death in the pot, even damnation in
excellent duties; therefore the sincere man does constantly watch and ward,
keeping a strict search into his heart, that no such thief enter in and steal
away his treasure.

A second inferior and base end, which would corrupt us in the service of God,
is The external greatness of honor, or the seeming profit of wealth. 2.
Honor and riches.
This dust has often blown into the eyes, that they have not been able to look
up. What glorious things did Jehu do for God? If you look upon the external
actions only? But his heart was not sincere in this, it was a temporal Kingdom
that he aimed at, and the earthly advancing of himself. And the third kind of
hearers, they did not apostatize, but the love of the world, and the
deceiveablenesse of riches; these things like weeds did grow up with the good
corn. It was Simon Magus his heinous transgression, to desire the Holy Ghost
for money. And has not this been as wickedly practiced sometimes to make use
of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, or at least the pretense of them for earthly
gain? To be religious for gain, to make a profession for earthly advantages,
what is this but to make use of God and his ways for money? And if you say,
These are base and unworthy ends indeed, this is to be a Judas, to sell Christ
for money, an Esau, to sell our birthright for pottage. Therefore you must
know, that if we could as the Peripateticks enjoyne, do virtuous actions for
virtues sake; yet this were too low an end for a sincere Christian; when men do
righteous actions for the public good; when men perform religious duties
merely to please and content their consciences. These that are good, as proxime
and secondary ends, being made the ultimate, do deprive the duties of their
true, proper sincere Christianity. This is to take John Baptist for Christ; or
as some did, to take Christ only for some great Prophet. This is to judge
sincerity and godliness a less thing than it is; to take a counterfeit, for a
precious pearl. And therefore the motive of duties in Popery, is wonderfully
short of true spiritual ones; even as their faith of true divine motives, as
they resolve their faith into the Authority of their Church, so their religious
duties into their own power and merit. Whereas to be holy, so as to rest in our
holiness, and to make that our utmost end, is to unthrone Christ, and to put
our graces in the room of Gods grace. So that we are not only by sincerity to
overlook all earthly objects, but even all duties and inherent graces, joining
with Christ only as the beloved of our souls. This sincerity is that which
makes the way to Heaven so narrow. This is the reason why many are called, but
few chosen. If the external performance of duties were enough, many thousands
would go to Heaven, more than do: but sincerity is that which makes every holy
duty so difficult.

SERMON. XCII.
A further Discovery of the Nature and Effects of Godly Sincerity.

2 COR. 1. 12. In godly sincerity.
GOdly Sincerity (you heard) did raise up the heart of a man above all low and
inferior ends, fixing it upon God only.

Now because I have spoken much of this upon other occasions, I shall
Propositions concerning godly sincerity.
briefly dispatch this subject at this time, laying down several Propositions,
which will partly be descriptive of the nature of this sincerity, and partly
manifestative of what are the effects of it. And

First, This sincerity does comprehend an Universality in it. Hypocrisy
deals in pieces and parcels, it does many things, and it omitteth many 1.
It Is universal.
things; whereas sincerity comprehends all the essential parts of Religion,
it is not defective in necessaries; though it has not perfection of degrees,
yet it has of parts: Therefore sincerity is the same with (...), compleatnesse
of all parts and limbs, when a man has every part of the body, that is his
(...), lot, or condition, or portion to have, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Hence Jam. 1. 4.
it is called entire, that ye may be entire, wanting nothing. It was the fault
that Christ found with the Church of Sardis, Revel. 3. 2. That he had not found
her works perfect before God, (...), filled up. There were many empty hollow
places and vacuities, as it were, wanting this grace, and that duty which would
have made her complete. Now there are several kinds of Universalities, wherein
this sincerity does discover it self. There is an universality of the Object
matter, about which it is exercised: It makes a man careful to perform the
greatest duties, and the less duties: It accounts nothing little, wherein
the command of God is concerned, that is a great God: It abstaineth from great
sins and little sins: It accounts no sin little, which cannot be purged
away, but by the blood of Christ. Again, it does faithfully respect all the
Commandments of God, such as are terminated upon God himself, or such as relate
to man. Paul expressed this sincerity, when he called it, A conscience void of
offense both toward God and man, Act. 24. 16. He knows true Religion cannot
be without righteousness; nor godly righteousness without the duties of
Religion. Furthermoee, there are duties of suffering for Christ, as well as of
doing for him: Sometimes it is far more unpleasing to flesh and blood to
suffer for Christ, then to be doing for him. But the sincere heart is prepared
for both, he does not capitulate with Christ about what he shall be put upon:
Therefore it is that he is willing to take up the cross, and to follow Christ;
he accepts of those duties, where self-denial, and self-mortification are
requisite, as those which may be more grateful and acceptable unto a man. Oh
how much easier is it to preach these things, and to hear these things, then to
practice them! As there is an universality of the Object, so also of the
Subject where this is; every part of the soul is sanctified. There is not
illumination without sanctification; gifts without grace: but the whole man is
rightly constituted. Hence we told you, sincerity is not properly a grace, but
it is the modification of grace, every grace is to be sincere, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
There is a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. So that
sincerity is a property, and an affection of every grace; it is not repentance,
unless sincere; it is not faith, except sincere. Again, There is an
Universality of time and place. A sincere man is godly in times of prosperity,
as well as of adversity; in times of health, as well as of sickness; on the
week day, as well as the Sabbath. And so for places, Paul says in the Text, it
was in the world, as well as at Corinth. At some times, in some places, and
with some company to pretend only for God, this discovers hypocrisy in the
bottom.

Secondly, Sincerity is herein remarkable, That it goes to the bottom and 2.
Sincerity goes to the bottom of sin.
root of sin. It does not only take away the external acts, and so make a
smooth skin, but it gives good vitals and inwards: especially it sets
against that rotten core, that is in every man, (viz.) a deceitful and false
heart toward God and man. It is known, what the Psalmist concludes of every
man, Psalm. 116. 11. which the Apostle makes use of, Romans 3. 4. Every man is a
liar; that is of himself, and in his own nature; otherwise David and Paul,
were not liars in delivering of this truth, neither are regenerate men liars,
so far as the Spirit of God does sanctify them. But naturally the hearts of
all men are deceitful, full of lies and falsehoods toward God, as if they
loved him, as if they repented, when yet self is the motive that sets all on
work: and no less false is it to man also. It is true indeed, commonly it is
interpreted by good Expositors, as if this speech did come from David in
unbelief, that it was the weakness of his faith, thinking as if Samuel, and
other Prophets had deceived him about the Kingdom. But in this sense, there
would have been a falsehood in the speech; neither would the Apostle then have
made that use of it, as he does. Besides, at the verse before, he says, I
believed, therefore have I spoken, which the Apostle also makes use of, 2 Cor.
4. 13. for freedom and boldness in the profession of our faith; therefore it
may very well be, that David from the strength of his faith now in his
persecutions (for that haste he speaks of, is to be understood of his flight,
and running from place to place) does encourage himself from the truth of God,
and is not dismayed to see Absalom, and all his people prove false and
perfidious: for the corrupt nature of man inclines him to no better. If then
the heart of a man be so naturally prone to be false toward God and man, to be
mercenary to seek our selves, to be hypocrites. This is the excellency of
sincerity, that it eats away the rotten flesh at the bottom. Hence

In the third place, It is because of this sincerity, that the way to Heaven 3.
Hence it is that it is so hard to be a Christian.
is such a straight, and narrow way: That Godliness is so rare a Jewel, That
many are called, but few are chosen; because though there be many duties, many
religious professions, yet little sincerity of spirit. Oh, if there were no
more required to go to Heaven, than to hear, pray, keep up an external form
of Religion, different from the course of the world, How easy and broad would
the way to Heaven be? Many thousands more would go to Heaven than do: But
this is that which makes it so difficult a thing to be saved; because no duty,
no religious performances are entertained, but rejected by God, which come not
from a sincere and true principle of grace within: It is not then praying, but
sincere praying: It is not hearing, but sincere hearing: Yea Martyrdom without
sincerity, is but the Devils Sacrifice: So that experience will teach thee to
set upon religious duties, from principles of sincerity, is a far more
difficult task, then thou ever thoughtst of; while going on in a formal,
customary way, Heaven could never be so difficultly obtained; neither could
those Texts of Scripture, which speak of the holy violence and agonies that
must be in the way to Heaven, were the externals of Religion enough; but it is
sincerity in these actings that makes the streights. When we set upon that,
then we see how far nature, education, custom, and formality may carry us, and
yet want the soul and life of all.

Therefore, Fourthly, Sincerity is the proper characteristical difference,
between 4. Sincerity is the proper difference betwixt a temporary professor,
and a true believer.
a temporary in Christianity, and a true convert. It is one of the greatest
practical Questions in Divinity that is, What is that, which differences
between the common graces of Gods Spirit, and the special? Or, What are the
bounds and limits, whereby we may know to distinguish between an enlightened
hypocrite, fervent in all external, religious duties, and he who is cordially,
and truly so? The Question is, Whether it be a specifical or gradual
difference? And what is that, which the truly godly does? And the foolish
Virgin, or foolish builder cannot do? And if we descend not to particulars, but
speak in the general, then we must say, Sincerity is the essential difference.
So that as rationality makes the essential difference between a man, and a
beast: so does sincerity between the truly godly, and the seeming so only.
This made the difference between Saul and David, between Peter and Judas,
between many Kings recorded in the Old Testament, who did very much in the
ways of the Lord; and those who did seek God with all their heart. So that by
this you see, how much it lies us upon to look after sincerity in duties, more
than duties; after sincerity in gifts and religious abilities, more than gifts:
for this makes the Christian. The other are but as the body and garments, this
is the soul. All thy glorious building must be pulled down, if this be not the
foundation. It is no matter what standing thy Discipleship to Christ is of, nor
how famous thy gifts and parts are, nor what an interest thou have in the
thoughts of Professors, nor what a stricter way of Church Order, thou may
seem to set upon, if sincerity be not the salt to season all. Oh then that
Christians would study more in this point, meditate about it, read about it,
knowing that this is all in all! If this be not the first stone laid in thy
spiritual building; when storms arise, thy building will fall, and thy fall
will be the greater, by how much the appearances of holiness have been the
greater. Therefore it is that sincerity is usually called by Divines the
Gospel-perfection, when many are said, To seek God with a perfect heart; the
meaning is not, as if there were no sins or imperfections cleaving to them;
but because they were upright and sincere: Though weak faith, yet if sincere
faith: Though imperfect love, yet if sincere love; this has a kind of
Gospel-perfection. Hence of all the deceits in the world, none is more
dangerous and pernicious, then when we take our selves for upright and sincere,
but are not.

Fifthly, Sincerity does carry a man on in religious ways from principles 5.
Sincerity carries us through duties with delight.
of voluntarinesse and delight within. Outward motives may make false hearts
toward God set upon many notable services; as we see in Iehu and Judas, etc.
But here was no voluntary and delightsome principle within. For a man will
never sincerely leave the sweetness of his lusts and profits he had in a
carnal way, till he find infinitely more sweetness, and delight in heavenly
things. So that this does necessarily accompany sincerity, that it makes a man
voluntary and willing, with joy and delight in the whole work of God; Psalm
110. 3. Thy people shall be willing (willingnesses) in the day of thy power. It
is true, even the most upright do sometimes find much deadness and
unwillingnesse to ho y things; there is a wearisomnesse and averseness they
sometimes feel; but this is an heavy burden to them: They cry out to God, to
quicken them, to draw them, to enliven them; whereas the insincere man is
carried out by external motives: Even as when the water makes the Mill run
round, that of it self would never move, because it wants life within.
Therefore that expression of Job is observeable, Job 27. 10. Will he delight
himself in the Almighty? Will he always call upon God? The insincere man
cannot delight in God, and therefore his duties are not constant and perpetual:
whereas this sincerity does fill the heart with internal principles of joy,
readiness and delight in the ways of God. Hence it is that the favor of God,
and the light of his countenance enjoyed by faith, do take him off from all
the delight he formerly had in other things. As Austin who was carried out with
a vehement and most flagrant desire after knowledge and learning, which made
him try all the several Sects of the Philosophers, as also to fall into the
Maniehee-heresie: When it pleased God to make a powerful, sincere and
effectual change upon his soul, then he said of all the sciences, formerly so
dear to him, Nunc prae illius amore vix veniunt in mentem. The love of God made
him scarce ever think of them. This makes grace natural (as it were) because
the principle is within.

Sixthly, Sincerity making a man thus to work from a principle of readiness
6. Sincerity makes a man find grace to be a real thing.
and delight within, Therefore it is that he finds grace to be a real lively
thing within him. Insincerity makes a man have only confused and general
apprehensions about grace: whereas uprightness gives a man a real taste and
experimental feeling of the same within him. A man without this real power of
grace, under the most glorious profession, is but as a pictured man, or a
painted fire. Who were more diligent in the external study of the Law, than
the Jews? How greatly did they glory in the knowledge thereof, as if they had
come out of the Fathers bosom? Yet observe what our Savior says, (John 5.
37.) to them, Ye have neither heard his voice, or seen his shape at any time:
That is, either they had not powerful, experimental discoveries of God upon
their souls: or though they had heard Gods voice many times in their
Ancestors, and had seen many apparitions of God by Angels, yet because
Christ's word did not abide in them, it is accounted, as if they never had any
knowledge at all. Hence grace is often compared to life. Now as a man that is
alive, feels and knows himself to be so: Thus, where this spiritual work
of grace is sincerely putting it self forth, there the soul has much reality
in the sense of it. It makes a man discourse and confer about that, of which
he has experience; as Paul, Galat. 2. 26. I no longer live, but Christ in me.
Many speak of grace, as some do of strance Countries, wherein they never
traveled. What they have by Books and Mapps that they discover. Thus it is
with many, they know nothing of Regeneration, of the New Creature, but what
they have by Books, or by hearing of Sermons, and therefore have not such a
real, evident and clear apprehension of Gods grace, as they should have. Now
it is sincerity that makes all things to be real, and in power, not in name
and words only. And from this real lively working of grace sincerely in us,
we come to have much assurance and comfort in our hearts, as Paul here in the
Text, his rejoicing was from the testimony of his conscience concerning his
sincerity. Therefore the hypocrite he never attaineth to any solid joy, or any
powerful assurance about the favor of God toward him. This experience of the
love of God sincerely and really working in the heart of Peter, as fire in the
bosom, made him again and again say to Christ, That he loved him. And thus
Austin in those real and affectionate workings of Gods grace upon him, made
him so bold as to say, (Lib. 10. Confess. cap. 6.) So Iansenius conjoyneth the
words, Non dubia, sed certa conscientia Domine, amo te, percussisti cor meum
verbo tuo, and amavi. O Lord, I am sure in my conscience that I love thee; Thou
have smitten me, and wounded my heart with thy Word, and therefore I love thee.
So that let a man go on in a formal, customary, empty way of Religion: Let
him pray, hear and profess Godliness, but all this while without sincerity,
and the power of it; and afterward God break his heart, new mould him, make
him a new creature, he will then find such a wonderful change, and see grace
to be such another powerful thing in his soul over once he thought; that he
will even stand amazed to see, what he is. Oh little did I know, did I feel
what now I do! When some few dropp^ of this precious ointment shall fall into
his soul, then the sweetness will be incredible, not only to others, but
also to himself, which he finds within him. Thus sincerity does cause real,
lively, and assured comfortable motions of the soul in heavenly things. Not
that the sincere are always on this Mount of transfiguration: No, they are in
a wilderness sometimes, as well as in a Canaan; but only this is the nature
of sincerity so to do. Thus it is in the Idea, though in the subject there are
many times diverse imperfections and weaknesses. To be sure no spiritual thing,
whether it be of grace or comfort in a Christian heart, can be carried on
without much combat and conflict.

SERMON. XCIII.
Of Fleshly Wisdom, with some Principles of it.

2 COR. 1. 12. Not with fleshly wisdom.
THe next particular considerable, is the manner of Paul's conversation in this
world, expressed negatively, Not with fleshly wisdom. This is made contrary to
that simplicity and sincerity he had mentioned before. Only the expression does
imply a twofold wisdom, the one heavenly, and from above; This the Apostle
does not deny, but at other times does assume to himself. There is a civil
prudence necessary in all Church Officers to feed and govern their flock. There
is also a spiritual wisdom, whereby we are able to understand, and to discover
the mysteries of God. These are an excellent gift of God. And therefore, 1 Cor.
1. 2, 3, 4. when the Apostle had renounced all excellency of speech, and man's
wisdom, as he calls it, yet verse. 6. he corrects his expression, saying,
Howbeit we speak wisdom, yet not the wisdom of this world. So then, Man's
wisdom, the wisdom of the world, is the same which is here called fleshly
wisdom. So that (I say) the expression does imply a division of wisdom into
heavenly or divine; The wisdom from above; and that which is carnal or
fleshly, the Apostle calls it sensual and devilish, Jam. 3. 15, 17.

Now this wisdom in the Text may be called fleshly,

1. Because of the root and original of it, which is the sinful corruption in
Why carnal wisdom called fleshly.
man. For flesh is many times taken for sinfulness, as well as for weakness.

2. It may be called fleshly, Because it forsakes the rules given in Gods
word, that is the proper fountain of wisdom, which alone is able to make us
wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. and walks according to the prescripts of
humane and sinful policy.

3. It may be called fleshly, Because the end and effects of it, are only to
advance man, and carnal interest; not that all glory and honor may be given to
Christ alone.

So that by this fleshly wisdom, we are to understand all crafty, false and
deceitful ways; yea and all that pride and swelling in humane learning and
oratory, which the false Apostles gloried in. From whence observe,

That the Ministers of the Gospel are to carry on their work without any
fleshly Ministers ought not to use fleshly wisdom.
wisdom, or sinful policy.

Gods truth does not need man's lie. The Gospel does not want for its
propagation, the craft and fraud of ungodly policy. Howsoever Politicians take
up many rules about worldly greatness; as, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit
regnare, etc. And with Plato, to say, That a lie is as necessary in a
Commonwealth, as physic to a diseased body. Yet as Christ himself, so all the
Ministers of Christ are to be without guile in their mouth. The Gospel of
Christ is preserved and propagated only by such heavenly and holy means, that
God will own, and give a blessing unto. Christ compares his Disciples to
Sheep, not to Foxes. It is true, there is a Serpentine wisdom commended by
Christ. And our Savior commissionating his Disciples to preach the Gospel,
bids them, To beware of men, Mat. 10. 17. but an offensive, or a deceitful
way of walking, that is not beseeming the Ministers of Christ. And therefore
Paul does frequently disclaim it, especially, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4, 5. There are
two false ways of propagating Religion, as Gerhard observes, (Cathol.
confess. part prim.) Media violentiae, and Media fraudulentiae. The means of
violence may be either in external, temporal punishments; or in tyrannical
unreasonable Church impositions, which later the Apostle does also renounce,
verse. 24. Both which ways the Antichristian party are notorious in. And there
are Media fraudulentiae, ways of hypocrisy and deceit, using subtle and
unjustifiable ways to bring about their religious designs. Now although it be
the Gospel that we would extol; though the holy truths, and pure worship of
Christ, yet we must not make use of fleshly wisdom herein, but walk by
Scripture-rules. For it is Gods grace, not man's policy, gives success to the
Gospel.

Of this latter we are to treat. And we are the more to consider this point,
for three Reasons: Why this truth is to be treated of. 1. Because professors
are charged with it.


First, Because it is the nature of all enemies to the truth and holiness of
Christ, to charge the godly and innocent defenders thereof with hypocrisy and
policy, that they do only seek themselves, that they drive on politic
designs under religious pretenses. That whereas it is the property of
heretical persons to broach new opinions, Alicujus temporalis commodi causa, as
Austin puts in the definition of an Heretic, these judging of others by
themselves, do think that even the faithful servants of God, do only seek
their own earthly greatness and advancement. Hence we see even our Savior
himself so diligent to remove this charge from him, I seek not my own glory,
but the glory of him, who sent me, John 8. 50. So John 7. 18. where our Savior
gives the character of a false teacher, of one that speaks of himself, that
he seeks his own glory: Thus the Popish party charge lies and calumnies upon
the Protestants, as if they had used all politic and crafty ways to
disseminate their Doctrines. Therefore Lessius the Jesuit, among his reasons,
why the Protestant Religion is not to be embraced, makes this one, That
Religion (says he) which uses lies and falsehoods to propagate it self, cannot
be of God; which he applies to the Protestant Churches. But as for the Major,
we grant it, as a sure truth: True Religion is only advanced by truth and
sincerity; whereas errors being in themselves lies, are increasing by the
father of lies. But then we say, the Church of Rome is notoriously guilty in
this way; from them first came that expression of Piae frauds, applied by some
to indulgences. It is the Church of Rome that has (Revel. 17. 5.) upon her
forehead written Mystery; she is the harlot, that like Solomon's, does wipe her
mouth, and speak of vows, pretending Religion, when she has been acting her
lewdness. But by how much the more the enemies of Gods Church, are apt to
charge the guides therein with policy and deceitfulness, the more are they to
watch to their ways, and to walk with all sincerity. For these accusations are
believed by many. And withal there is a generation of Atheistical, politic
men in the world, that hereby are hardened in their impiety, as if Religion
were but a politic devise of men, and therefore matter not any further than
their advantages are served thereby, Whose damnation sleeps not, if they do
not awaken betimes.

Secondly, The second Reason why this is to be attended, is, Because all
pretenders 2. Because all professors would be thought clear from it.
to any Religion in the world, they would all be thought to be sincere. None
will own and justify hypocrisy and guile to be lawful. Indeed the Jesuits
they go high this way, when they defend mental reservations, and make
equivocation, Prudens defensio rei, as Valentia. These are not only
deceitful, and use fleshly wisdom, but also plead for it, yet at other times
would be thought very free from all such carnal policy, and way of lying. As
Bellarmine in a Sermon of his, (Conc. 9. de^probitate doct. Eccles.) inveigheth
against Protestants, whom he calls Heretics, Although (says he) their
Doctrine were true, yet ought they to confirm it with lies? Nonne satius esset
millies obmutescere, quam semel mentiri? Were it not better suffer to be a
thousand times silent, then once to lie? What is the work of the Devil, if
this be not? Thus a great Champion of the Romish Church, which you would think
did all things in great candor and ingenuity: And yet in that very Sermon
reports forged lies against eminent men, continuing the same bitterness in
Conc. 10, 11, 12. as if his tongue were set on fire from hell. But there are
two famous places in the Scripture, which may abundantly confirm us of the
deceivable and false ways in the Roman Church. The first is, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
where they are said, To speak lies in hypocrisy, forbidding to marry, etc.
who are therefore said, To have seducing spirits, yea and a conscience seared
with an hot iron; that is, because they can so abominably dissemble both with
God and man. The second place is, 2 These. 2. 9. where the coming of that wicked
one is said to be after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders, in all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness. Here you see, that
fraud and impostures are (as it were) the true note of their false Church. But
though this be so, yet they would wash their Blackmoor skin, and charge that
crime upon those Churches, who departed from them. Seeing then that this
cousening, deceiving way is charged mutually by all parties upon one another,
with what integrity and fidelity does it behove those to walk, who are indeed
the faithful Ministers of Christ? But

Thirdly, The preaching of this truth is to take off those prejudices that do
too closely adhere even to such, who are come out of that spiritual Babylon. 3.
To take off prejudices from true believers.
There is a causlesse and sinful suspicion in people, that if the faithful
Pastors in Gods Church do endeavor a Reformation from the accustomed
superstitions, or evil and profane disorders, that through length of time have
taken full and quiet possession; they presently attribute this to carnal and
corrupt ends; they will not believe that these things are undertaken from pure
and holy ends; they will not be persuaded, that the motive to these things, is
pure respect to Gods glory: but that the Ministers of God have their carnal and
sinister respects in all this, either to get dominion, or to advance themselves
in one way or other. Now although it may not be denied, but that in perusing of
Ecclesiastical History; we may observe that carnal interest, and humane
respects were eminently dominative in Church Affairs, yet God forbid that any
should be given up to such a temptation, as to think that there is no truth or
fidelity in any. When Lot did but courteously and civilly reprove the Sodomites
for their high impieties; see how wickedly they interpret this, Genes. 19. 9.
He will needs be a judge over us. They construed his endeavor against sin to
be nothing but usurpation. Thus also Corah and his accomplices accounted all that
Moses and Aaron did, tyranny and pride, Numb. 16. 5. Ye take too much upon you,
seeing all the Congregation is holy, etc. Wherefore do ye lift up your selves
above the Congregation of the Lord. And we may see by many Apologies that Paul
makes, the Galatians and other Churches could hardly be persuaded of his
sincerity and love to them. If then thou shall once satisfy thy self with
this, that those Ministers of God, who endeavor to bring a people out of their
disorders, and to make them conformable to Scripture-directions, dare not look
to themselves herein: yea they go against themselves, and show no fleshly
wisdom at all; but rather if they consulted with that, they would let people
go quietly in the broad way to perdition, as they have done. If (I say) this
be once believed by thee, it will make thee with all alacrity and cheerfulness
to go along with them, and encourage them in their work. But it is the Devil
that moves upon that unruly sea of thy heart; he puts thee into many
vexations and commotions, whereas if the Spirit of God should rebuke both Satan
and thy own corruptions, thou would with clamnesse reflect upon thy self, yea
reprove thy self, saying, Why should I be offended at those ways which are
for the good of my soul, which make to the getting of knowledge, and to the
overcoming of those former lusts I have been entangled with, which would have
done me no good, but have destroyed my soul?

These things premised, let us instance in some principles of fleshly wisdom,
that men have used, and do use in the matters of Religion. Principles of
fleshly wisdom. 1. To defend errors from Scripture wrested.
And

First, This is the Proprium quarto modo, as it were of all heretical persons,
To cover their falsehoods with pretended Authority from the Scripture. Now this
is merely fleshly wisdom to regard the Scripture no further then by the words
and phrases thereof thou can protect thy errors. Not to go to the word of
God, as that Rule by which thou will stand, or fall, to give up thy heart and
soul, and all thy thoughts to be molded and framed by that; but having
aforehand swallowed down thy corrupt tenets, then to go to Scripture, to wrest
and compel it (as it were) to speak for thee. There is a great deal of fleshly
wisdom in managing of false ways, but it is never more heinous, yea and
sacrilegious, then when it does thus profanely and irreverently handle
Scripture. If we expostulate with the Socinian, he will grant the Scripture
words, he will tell you, he holds Christ to be a God, that by Christ's blood
we have remission of sins: but then come to ask him, In what sense Christ is
a God, and in what manner we have remission of sins by Christ's death? then
the poison of the Viper does break forth. So if we contend with the Pelagian,
Arminian, and others, about the injury they do to the Grace of Christ, they
will tell you, they are for Christ, they do own all the Texts of Scripture
that speak of grace. But then ask, what they mean by grace? And how far they
extend the efficacy of grace? then their deceit will appear. So that it it is
true of most Heretics, (...), They speak the same words, but do not think
the same things. Let then all fleshly wisdom be abhorred, whereby we go to the
Scripture only to apply the words thereof to our lies, and so would father
them upon the Spirit of God; not that we love the purity and holiness of the
Scriptures, but because we cannot be received with any approbation, unless we
bring our authority, pretended at least from that. Therefore it falls out
many times, as Tertullian observes, When such erroneous persons can no longer
hide themselves by Scripture-words, that they directly fall to accuse the
Scripture, either to deny it to be the word of God, or debasing of it, as but a
dead letter, that so their corrupt hearts may be more believed, than the
Scripture it self.

Secondly, A second principle of fleshly wisdom, is, To hide and conceal
those monstrous births we have brought forth, or else secretly and in a
clandestine 2. To hide our errors, or else secretly to infect others with them.
manner to acquaint others with them, that so many weak persons may be
infected before those who are able and skillful had any opportunity to gainsay
them. 2 Pet. 2. 1. The Apostle Peter speaks of some, Who should privily bring
in damnable heresies: Privily, because as the thief hates the light, seeing he
only comes to steal: so do those who vent their false errors delight in
secrecy, because the light will quickly manifest their falsehoods. As it is
with Moles, all the while they are under ground, you can hardly take them, but
if once above ground, then they are presently destroyed: Thus all the while
errors and falsehoods creep under ground, will not come to the light, they are
hardly discovered and stopped: but when once found out, then they are easily
overcome. Now all this is but fleshly wisdom, to appear no where but in the
dark, to be always hiding our selves under ground. Therefore they are said, 2 Timothy 3. 6. To creep into houses, as thieves do by night; they do all things
closely and secretly, not willing to be brought to the light: Whereas we have
our Savior professing the clean contrary concerning himself, John 18. 20. I
spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple,
whither the Jews resort, and in secret have I said nothing. Thus the Ministers
of Christ imitate him in an open public way. Not but that in times of
persecution, the Disciples of Christ have had their private meetings, and have
fled from the wrath of Magistrates, which the Apostle attributes to the faith
of the godly, not their fear, Heb. 11. 37. Only when it was a case of
confession, and their duty publicly to give testimony to the truths of God,
then no torments could make them decline it.

SERMON. XCIV.
Principles of Fleshly Wisdom used in the Propagation of the Gospel.

2 COR. 1. 12. Not with fleshly wisdom.
WE are describing the several particulars of fleshly wisdom, which men have
made in the matters of Religion, all which are renounced by the Apostle in this
Text. More principles of fleshly wisdom in propagating Religion. 1. To advance
those of their own way, and disgrace others


The first in order I shall now propound is, To advance those men who have been
of their way, by lies attributing glorious things to them, and as much
disparaging and falsely accusing all such who have been in a contrary way of
Religion to them. This has been the subtle policy and stratagem in the Church
of Rome. For no Church in the world has abounded more in fleshly wisdom then
she has done. How notoriously absurd and ridiculous are they in relating many
foolish miracles done by their Saints? Yea they attribute many wonderful
things to some as Saints, when there were never any such persons in the world,
as many learned Writers hold there were never such persons as St George, and St
Christopher, and yet what fabulous miracles are reported of them? And truly to
read the lives of their Popish Saints, would make a man nauseate their
Religion, they are written by such who did so much serve their affections, and
drive on their designs: Which made Canus, even a Papist, complain of it,
though he says he does, Dolenter dicere magis quam contumeliose, speak it
with grief rather than with reproach. The lives of Heathens (says he) [Canus
loc. Theolog. Lib. 11. cap. 6.] are written with more truth by Heathenish
Writers, then of Saints by Catholic Writers. Laertius has more faithfully
related the lives of the Philosophers, and Suetonius the lives of the Caesar's,
then ours have done the lives of Saints. Which makes him go on, and say, That
he who wrote that Book, which is called Aurea Legenda, was a man Perrei oris,
and Plumbei cordis: He that wrote the Golden Legend, was a man of an iron
Forehead, and a leaden-Heart. Now all this is nothing but fleshly wisdom, not
to regard the truth: But only what will make for advantage, whereas we may see
wonderful sincerity in the Apostles in this very matter; They did use no
fleshly wisdom at all, but do record their own infirmities as well as
miracles. Does not the Evangelist Matthew relate how he was a Publican? Is not
Peter's denial of his Master, in all the aggravations of it recorded? Are not
the strifes of the Disciples about primacy mentioned? Do we not read of Paul
and Barnabas their sharp contention? Did not Paul withstand Peter to the face,
because he was worthy to be reproved? Certainly the want of fleshly wisdom,
and carnal policy in the Apostles, doing all things with sincerity and
integrity, as well when it makes against them as for them, does plainly
evidence, that they were of God. Christ does not need the concealment of our
imperfections. The more unworthy the instruments are, the more is his glory in
bringing about his ends by them. Thus Austin was not ashamed to leave to the
world a public confession of his youthful vanities and follies. And Beza does
(...), expose himself to shame upon that very word, Matthew. 1. 19. where
showing that in Plutarch one Archilochus a Poet, for dishonest verses which he
had made, he did (...), expose himself to shame, Quod mihi aliquando accidit,
etc. Which was once my case (says he) while a young man, and not yet admitted
into the Church; which blot, I hope, I have washed away both by sayings and
deeds. He was a Papist while he made those wanton verses: Therefore they need
not upbraid him so for them, especially seeing he manifested his repentance for
them. Therefore Beza did say of his adversaries, Isti homines invident mihi
gratiam Dei. These men envy me the grace of God. As fleshly wisdom is seen
thus in an hyperbolical admiration of men of our own way, not at all taking
notice of their imperfections: so is it no less manifest in the dispraising,
disgraceing and falsely traducing those who are dissentients from us. This is
fleshly wisdom to disgrace and calumniate those who are against us by forged
lies. As the Heathens of old said, The Christians worshipped an Asses head, and
that at their love feasts all wantonness and uncleanness were committed. It
is Bellarmine's boast, That no Catholics are found to praise the Doctrine or
lives of Heretics, which is it self false. For to omit many instances,
Stapleton says of Calvin, though he subjoyneth enough to mar all, That he is
an Interpreter for the letter of the Scripture, Ita diligens, ita elegans, ita
suavis, etc. (In Antid. Evang. in Praefat.) So diligent, so elegant, so sweet
that many Papists did read him. Yea (says he) I have heard many wish that
those things which are disputed in his Commentaries against the Church, and its
faith, were taken out, and then they would be very greatly useful. But if it
were true, that no Papists did praise the Protestants; this is not for their
honor, but reproach; it being a duty to acknowledge the gifts and abilities
that are in men, though we abominate their errors and vices. So that it is
wholly fleshly wisdom in them thus to suppress the excellency of those who
are against them. Yea, if they stayed here, it were pardonable; but they do
most prodigiously vent, and publish horrible lies about Luther and Calvin, as
if they had been monsters of men for their impieties. But all this is wisdom
from the Devil, and God has turned all their cursing into blessing.

In the second place, It is fleshly wisdom to maintain any such pernicious 2.
To maintain false doctrines that overthrow humane society.
and deceitful Doctrines, as do maintain falsehood and deceit, and thereby as
much as lies in them, overthrow all humane societies. The Priscillianists of
old did maintain, That it was lawful to lie, and swear, and say any thing,
so that they kept the heart pure. And the Papists (I mean the Jesuited ones)
they come near them; for they do professedly dipute for the lawfullnesse of
Equivocation and Mental Reservation; yea they call it prudence. And as the
Pelagians of old, who privately to their Disciples, did plainly declare their
opinions, but in public spoke craftily and ambiguously, thereby to deceive
others, as if they were Orthodox, alleging Christ's example, who to the
multitude spoke in Parables, but opened them plainly to his Disciples: so would
these fasten upon Christ, and holy men recorded in Scripture, instances of
equivocation. But the Scripture commands us, To lay aside lying, speaking every
man the truth to his neighbor, Ephesians. 4. 25. And this is subjoyned as a
necessary consequent of putting on the new man. Austin wrote much against this
way of lying. And certainly seeing that words are appointed to signify our
mind to another; if we pervert them to the contrary end to deceive them, we do
overthrow the foundation of spiritual and civil societies. It is one thing
indeed not to reveal all the truth, when not required, or commanded, this may
sometimes be done; but to deny the truth, or equivocate, this does no ways
become those, who with sincerity, and not with fleshly wisdom, are to
propagate the Gospel. If you say, for all the Church of Rome has used such
carnal policy, yet she continues in her external prosperity, she is not
blasted and crossed in her designs: and therefore Bellarmine would take
advantages of the Protestants by this, If (says he) the Church of Rome be so
vile and impure as you say she is; if she use! all those unlawful and ungodly
ways to keep up her glory, then it is the greater argument, that her
constitution is of God, that all her craft and wickedness has not yet ruined
her. But to this doubt it is easily answered, That by the Scripture we know it
is foretold, that he must prevail for a long time in the Church: and therefore
their success, notwithstanding all their cruelty and craft, is not to be any
stumbling block to such who believe the Scriptures.

The third instance of fleshly wisdom to propagate Religion by, is, To 3. To
indulge men in sin, and to increase Disciples.
indulge men in their lusts and sins, that so the party which follows them,
may be the more numerous. This is fleshly wisdom in an high degree of impiety;
and yet in this also the Church of Rome has been notorious, when other
Churches have by their good Discipline cast out some offenders for scandalous
impieties; They have appealed to the Church of Rome in that case and she
craftily laying hold on the opportunity, hoping thereby to establish her
Supremacy, would like Absalom say to every one that came, that his cause was
good; and by this policy in indulging and encouraging such licentious
offenders, whom other Churches would not endure as members: At last with other
politic devises, she arrived to that amplitude of power, she now glories in.
We might instance in other subtle forgeries, as the corrupting or denying some
Canons made in the Council of Nice, thereby to translate the chief
Patriarchship to her self; a famous cheat, and discovered most palpably to the
shame of the Roman party, of which there is much in Ecclesiastical Authors;
as also the pretense of Constantines donation, a forged he like the rest. This
I shall insist upon, as greatly considerable, The indulging of people in
profaneness, as also in horrible ignorance, that so they may rule without
control. And how well were it if this fleshly wisdom were enclosed in the
Roman Conclave? Are there not too many in the Protestant Churches, that out of
a desire either to please men, or increase their earthly advantages promote a
promiscuous admission of all to the Lords Table, making no difference between
the clean and unclean. This I confess is the way to be applauded by the most:
This is that which will give best content to all: This is accounted wisdom and
moderation; but Wisdom is justified of her children; and the holy institution
of Christ's, will be owned by those who worship God in Spirit and truth: But
this fleshly wisoome whereby we please all, and indulge men in their lusts, is
seldom successful; but fire will come out of the Bramble, when it does not
out of the Fig Tree to consume: I mean even profane and wicked spirits are
many times stirred up by God to oppose such corrupt Teachers, when the godly
meddle not at all. For God does many times make use of the wickedness of one
ungodly man, to torment another. Yea Luther's first stirrings against the
abuses of Popery, were not so pure and sincere, as afterward when the light
and grace of God came more upon him. It is therefore a great duty incumbent
upon the Ministers of the Gospel, to walk sincerely by Christ's rule in their
pastoral exercises, avoiding this fleshly wisdom, which though it may seem
sometimes to prevent a mischief, yet as it did to David, does afterward
plunge in a greater calamity. And indeed going to carnal policy in
Church-administrations, is but like going to witches and wizards, forsaking
Gods way, which never brings a perfect cure.

Fourthly, Then is carnal wisdom used to propagate Religion, When by it we
propound carnal and selfish ends to our selves, not the glory of God, and 4. To
propound fleshly ends.
advancing the power and purity of his Ordinances. This is that which Paul does
principally disclaim, I seek not you but yours, says he in this Epistle, 2
Cor. 12. 14. And that they might be persuaded hereof, he would take no
maintenance of them, but made use of other Churches, that he might spare them;
yea sometimes working with his own hands. How far this is imitable by the
Ministers of the Gospel now, as many do upbraid them with this example of Paul,
will be clearly and fully evidenced (God assisting in its time) for we shall
meet with this part of Paul expressly mentioned and insisted on by him in this
Epistle. But it is worth the observation, that Paul by no way he took, could
escape the slander of a selfseeker. For if in that case he had burdened the
Church of Corinth, the false Apostles would have calumniated him, as using a
cloak of covetousness, and seeking himself: But now because he will not do so,
see how this is interpreted as a carnal design also; for so he brings in
their objection, verse. 16, Be it so, I did not burden you, but being crafty, I
took you with guile. This was suggested against Paul, they made this
construction of Paul's not burdening them, that he did this out of craft, that
they should think themselves the more engaged unto him; and so by this means,
he get the more dominion over them. Thus what shall Paul do, if he does not
take maintenance, it is his craft, and if he does, it is his craft? By this
instance we see, how much we are to avoid all fleshly wisdom, for do what we
will, it shall be charged upon us. Only when we have this sincerity of
conscience within to comfort and support us, this will be a means to make us
bear the slanders of enemies with greater alacrity. Now as we said, then we may
certainly conclude, we are guided by fleshly wisdom; when our aims in our
ministerial way is either glory, and applause, which was the poison of the
Pharisees duties; or earthly wealth and external pomp; which motives do easily
creep in, unless grace be the porter to keep the door of the soul. We see even
the Disciples themselves, and that twice contending about superiority; and once
this was done when our Savior was foretelling them of his sad sufferings, and
how they should be scattered. And truly this should much prevail with us to
walk by sincere rules, because nothing does more awe peoples hearts, nothing
does more erect a throne of fear and reverence in men's hearts, so much as
integrity. Even Herod did fear John, because he was a just man; he saw he was
not carried by carnal pinciples, and that made Herod reverence him, Mark 6. 20.
And thus it was with Christ himself also, this made the people so greatly flock
after him, because the hypocrise and self-seeking of the Pharisees began to be
made clear to them. And thus the integrity of our Reformers was precious:
whereas the luxury, pride and ambition of the Roman Clergy began to be
apparent. Yea before Luther's time, the Church generally groaned under them,
which made Berengarius call them Romanos Pompifices, and Pulpifices, as
regarding their pomp and belly more than their ministerial duty.

Lastly, (For the differences I promised to speak to between fleshly wisdom,
and heavenly wisdom, as also civil prudence, may be considered in the next
particular.) Fleshly wisdom is seen, In glorying and boasting of humane
eloquence and philosophical demonstrations. This some make to be a great part
of, if not the only sense of fleshly wisdom. And certainly this is that which
Paul renounceth, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 3, 4. the end whereof was, that their faith might
not stand in the wisdom of men, but the power of God. And therefore the
Thessalonians are commended, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. That they received the Gospel, not
as the word of men, but as of God, which effectually works in those that
believe. That there may be no use made of humane learning, much less that it
is not lawful to improve the gifts and abilities of learned men in our
Ministry, I think is scarcely in an absolute sense denied by any orthodox. But
then they give this Caution, That such things must not be done out of
ostentation, but edification, and conviction; neither must we so preach that
our auditors should be more affected with the oratory or learning, than the
matter, the gifts and parts of a Minister, more than the holy truths which are
delivered for information and conversion. And therefore as we the Ministers of
the Gospel are to take heed of all fleshly wisdom, especially this latter,
which is so subtle a thief, ready to steal away our treasure: So ought you the
hearers to take heed of all fleshly wisdom. For it is this only makes you go
away unconverted, unhumbled, unreformed, your conscience, your mind condemns
you for it, but only fleshly wisdom will not let you obey. As (I say) we are
to take heed of this universally; so especially that you do not regard the
parts, learning and oratory of a Minister more than holy matter. You must hear
from a sincere heart, you must come to our Ministry with godly simplicity, as
well as we are to preach so; and it is hard to say, whether is more difficult,
to preach without fleshly wisdom, or hear without it. Do you desire to know
nothing, but Jesus Christ crucified? Are ye not like children that look upon
Books, more to see the gayes and gaudy flourishes, than the matter contained
therein? Do ye not mind more what may tickle your ear, please your fancy, then
what may wound your heart? Aristotle even to his Lecture of moral Philosophy,
does require one who is purged from his lusts. How much rather is the word of
God to be received with a pure and mortified heart? Oh this flesnly wisdom
will prove cursed folly at last! In the flames of hell thou will cry out of
this, Oh wretch that I was, I thought to be wise for my self, and how
unspeakably am I undone thereby!

SERMON. XCV.
Of the Grace of God which Paul exalts above Fleshly Wisdom, and ascribes
all unto.

2 COR. 1. 12. But by the grace of God.
THe third particular, which qualifieth the Apostles conversation in this
world, comes in order to be treated on, which is set down Oppositely, But by
the grace of God. This is added; partly to exclude all pride and presumption in
himself. For having declared his integrity, lest it might be thought, that
though he did not confide in carnal wisdom, yet he might in his own integrity;
he adds, The grace of God; showing thereby, that he trusted in that alone.
And then partly it is spoken, in opposition to fleshly wisdom. For seeing it
might be demanded, If Paul did not use the wisdom of the world, How could it
come about, that he should have such success in his preaching, that the Gospel
should have such a full and glorious course by his Ministry? He resolves it
into the grace of God, that did go along with him: it was neither his gifts, or
his graces, but the power and grace of God, directing and protecting of him, in
his ministerial employment. Thus Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14. 26. are by the
brethren recommended to the grace of God for the work, which they fulfilled. So
that whereas the word Grace in the New Testament, has several significations;
the principal whereof is the favor and mere mercy of God without us. The less
principal, is the Effects thereof; and the Effects of this Grace, are either of
sanctification, or administration and service. We may comprehend all these in
the word [Grace;] but especially the latter, the effects of grace; and of those
effects, chiefly those ministerial gifts, with the success thereof, that Paul
was enriched with. What is this grace of God, says Chrysostom? It is (says
he) the wisdom and power God bestowed upon him, whereby through miracles and
other ways, especially, that coming without humane learning, and oratory of
the world, he did overcome the greatest Philosophers and Rhetoricians, whom the
world did admire. This was the grace of God upon Paul, which he also mentions
as the original of all the fruit of his labors, not attributing any thing to
himself, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I,
but the grace of God which was with me.

Now although by grace is meant principally the grace called, Gratiis data,
common ministerial gifts and favors of God, yet because it is opposed to
fleshly wisdom and carnal policy. There is also necessarily contained heavenly
wisdom, whereby Paul did avoid all sensual and deceitful ways, walking
closely according to the Word, the fountain of all spiritual wisdom. For as
the Scriptures are a far surer Rule, even to Civil Governors and
Magistrates, then Tacitus, Machiavel, or others, cried up by humane, worldly
wise men, even in their civil administrations: So much more is it a sure Star
for all the spiritual Officers of the Church to manage their affairs by, if
they do look for success. From the Scripture both Magistrates and Ministers
may learn wisdom for their respective administrations. Paul therefore, what
ever it be that goes on prosperously in his ministerial work, does not
attribute it either to his sincerity, much less to any humane policy, which he
renounceth, but wholly to the grace of God assisting of him, and going
constantly along with him. Observe,

That it is the property of those who are godly to take nothing to themselves,
The godly ascribe all to the grace of God.
but to give all to the grace of God.

You see here, though Paul was so eminent for godliness, and so admirable for
gifts, yet he makes the grace of God to be alone the sole Author of all
spiritual success. This subject the Apostle does very willingly enlarge
himself upon, wheresoever he has occasion: Hence in the forementioned place,
1 Corinthians. 15. 10. he says, By the grace of God I am what I am. The grace of
God made him an holy man; The grace of God made him an eminent Apostle; he had
nothing as a private Christian, or as an Officer, but by the grace of God; and
because many may have grace in a common way bestowed upon them, that yet abuse
it, as Judas; he adds, This grace was not in vain. Yet lest it should be
thought that it was his improvement of the grace bestowed, that made it so
effectual, he presently corrects his expression, Yet not I, but the grace of
God, which was with me. As it is not the pen, but the Writer that is a cause of
fair Characters.

Let us discover this Doctrine. And

First, We see the Apostle rejoicing in the sincerity of his heart, and yet 1.
A man may take comfort in his own holiness, and yet trust only in Gods grace.
acknowledging all to the grace of God, so that these two may well stand
together to take comfort from our holiness, yet to put our trust in nothing
but the grace of God. It is true, this is a very hard lesson to perform, there
is required much skill and prudence herein; for we are apt to run into
extremes: Either through unbelief and peevishness, we nourish doubts and
perplexing thoughts in our selves, not taking notice of the grace of God in us:
Or else, if we do behold it, and rejoice in it, we are presently in a secret
manner lifted up, and confident thereby. But we see by the Apostles practice,
both are consistent together: So that the people of God are diligently to
labor after this heavenly frame of heart. To be in doubts and fears about thy
condition, is to live in the jaws of hell, and to be presuming or carnally
confident of thy graces, is the next door to a sad and miserable downfall.

Secondly, It is not enough to acknowledge the grace of God in the general, but
so to set up grace as to give all to it. The Apostle makes an immediate 2. All
is to be given unto grace.
opposition between grace and works, Romans 11. 6. there cannot be a reconciling
of grace and works together. This has been often attempted, but as unhappily
as the building up the walls of Jericho again. The Pelagian, Arminian, the
Socinian and Papist, all these do acknowledge grace; but when we come to the
root of the matter, it is nothing at last, but the free will and works of a
man. It is his good use of grace, that does determine and make all things
effectual, not grace it self: And this is the rather to be noted, because
Stapleton would antidote against Calvin's poison, as he speaks from this
Text. For whereas Calvin taking notice of the Apostles glorying, in the
testimony of his conscience concernin his sincerity, does show, that Paul
hereby does not oppose that command, Let him that glories glory in the Lord,
because Paul gives all to the grace of God, and rests alone upon that. From
this, Stapleton would excuse the Papists also, because they acknowledge all
good works to come from grace: Their merits are founded only upon Christ's
merits. Even as it does not derogate from the power of God, that he uses
second causes in natural things, because they are subordinate to him, both in
their being and operation; but it does illustrate as his bounty, so his power
the more to make other things powerful: Thus says he, it is not injurious to
the grace and merits of Christ, if we attribute merit to our works, seeing
this comes only from Christ; but it argues his fulness and rich grace the
more, that communicates of it to us. So that (says he) to put trust in the
works of grace, as the proxim and immediate cause, but in the grace of God, as
the chief and universal cause, is no derogation to the honor and glory of
Christ. But that of the Apostle must be always remembered, If of grace, then
not of works, otherwise grace is no more grace. It is not grace, unless it be
grace every way: And therefore to make our works the second causes to trust
in, though it be not so high a wickedness as to exclude Christ thoroughly, yet
it does in part, and therefore as in the matter of worship, we admit of no
primary and secondary worship, no more than a primary and secondary God: So it
is in matter of trusting, we must depend only upon Christ, not but that
holiness and godly works are necessarily required, but not as causes under any
subtle distinctions whatsoever.

These two things premised, let us now consider, What is that grace which What
is that grace the Apostle exalts against fleshly wisdom. 1. That grace
whereby he was converted.
the Apostle does here exalt against all fleshly wisdom. And

First, As the groundwork of all, there is to be understood, That grace of
God, whereby he was called out of that pharisaical estate, and condition of
enmity against Christ, to be a faithful and ready servant to him. This
wonderful grace of God to him, does often melt the heart of Paul, he speaks
of it with aggravating particulars, as much as may be. Thus Galat. 1, 15. When
it pleased God, who called me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me, etc.
And therefore 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16. he acknowledged himself an instance, (Because
the chiefest of sinners,) of the long-suffering of Christ. In Paul's conversion
there were no preparations, no merits of congruity, there was no docible and
fitted dispositions: Insomuch that the adversaries to Gods grace do acknowledge
Paul's conversion to be an extraordinary thing. In the midst of his persecuting
sury, when God might have struck him dead with thunder and lightnings from
Heaven, and so send him quick (as it were) to Hell; God did visit him with his
grace, and give him another heart, to his own amazement, and of all those who
heard of it. So if you look upon Paul in a single capacity, as a private person
in the whole course of his life, he gives all to the grace of God.

Secondly, The grace of God, which Paul does also greatly exalt, is, In the
setting of him apart to be an Apostle, and an eminent Officer in the Church of
God. This crooked and rough timber, that was only fit for the fire, God does
not only polish and smooth by grace, but advances it to be an eminent part in
the building; notwithstanding all Paul's former unworthiness, God does not
only by his grace call him, but makes him an honorable vessel in his house.
This our Apostle does likewise with great enlargement, in many places take
great notice of. See how emphatically is he affected with this grace of God
toward him, Ephesians 3. 7, 8. Whereof I was made a Minister according to the
gift of the grace of God given unto me, -- unto me, who am less than the least
of all Saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles,
the unsearchable riches of Christ. Do not these words proclaim how greatly
his heart is affected with the grace of God, in setting him apart to be an
Officer in his Church, and to proclaim the Gospel to the Gentiles? Thus the
grace of Conversion, and the grace of Apostleship, are a twofold obligation
upon Paul, for ever to keep him humble, and lowly in his own eyes.

Thirdly, The grace of God exalted by Paul, is seen, In the inabling of 2. That
grace whereby he was made an Apostle.
him in his ministerial work, and going along with him in an effectual manner.
That whereas he had so many adversaries, the false Apostles, who gloried in
humane wisdom, and all external enticements of the flesh of man; yet for all
that, that his seeming folly should conquer their towering wisdom, that his
contemptiblenesse should surmount their eminency; This argued that it was not
Paul, but the grace of God with him, that was thus effectual. Even as it was
not little David in his own power, but in the name of the Lord, that did
destroy that vaunting Goliath.

Now as there were many choice ingredients that did make up that precious 3.
That grace whereby he was enabled and prospered in his Ministry
ointment, which was to be poured on the head of the Highpriest: So there are
also many choice and gracious qualifications, with the Concomitants thereof,
required in those who are Pastors over people, especially in the Apostles, who
were Pastors over Pastors, as well as people. As

First, It was the gracious work of God, To make Paul to be sincere, As, 1. It
was the grace of God that made Paul sincere.
and to walk in all plainness and integrity of heart, whereas we see many in
the broaching of their false ways, are filled with great deceit and subtilty.
The Apostle charge upon such, who deliver false Doctrines, Ephesians. 4. 14. By
cunning craftiness and sleight of men, they lie in wait to deceive. Those that
are false Prophets in the Church of God, they have (...), and (...), and (...),
A strange slighty juggling, and even bewitching of men, but it is from the grace
of God, that those who are his true Ministers are sincere and upright: They
have an agreement between their heart and tongue. It was the speech of one
reading Lectures in the Popish Schools, Sic dico, quando sum in Scholis, sed
penes nos sit; aliter sentio. I speak thus when I am in the Schools, but to
tell you a secret, I think otherwise. It was also a boast of another
(Fredericus Staphylus) That he had so many years been a professor of
Divinity in the Schools, and yet no hearer was able to tell what judgment he
was of. (Gerhardi Cathol. Confessio lib. 1. par. 2. cap. 19.) Now this craft
and dissimulation in the old Dragon and his seed, is no wonder; but the
Ministers of Christ, as they believe with their heart, so they make confession
with their mouths, and dare not but reveal the whole counsel of God. It was
horrible impudence in Melanthus the Grecian, who having got a Kingdom by fraud
and deceit, did in honor thereof, as if it were pleasing to their gods,
appoint Festivals, calling them (...), as much as coustning and deceiving,
inculcating that of the Poet, Dolus an virtus, quis in host requirat. (Capel.
Histor. An. Mund. 2872.) Certainly the Church of Rome, and many other Heretics
have gone by no better Rule, counting gain godliness, counting lying and
dissembling godliness, when they conceived, that it made for their end. As if
they were of that Kings mind Darius Hystaspes, that to lie and speak truth,
were all one: For he that spoke truth did so to obtain his desires, and so he
that lied did no more; and therefore both truth and a lie were all one. (Vide
Laurent. Vul. Jisuit. cap. 1. page 30.) But oh how abominable is this, and
contrary to the Spirit of Christ! The grace of God in such who are his
faithful Ministers, makes them not to turn into such false and crooked ways,
though the preaching of the truths of Christ brings much hatred and
opposition, though they know they are unwelcome and despised, and that for
their very message sake, yet they consult not with fleshly wisdom, but do the
work of God zealously and with much faithfulness. And truly the Ministers of
God are much to pray for this grace of God upon them, that they may be above
all humane feats, all sinful compliances, and be afraid of nothing, but that
they should sin, and not preach the Gospel with that boldness as they ought
to do. That great commendation which the spies gave Christ, upon a wicked
design, is to be endeavored after by every faithful Minister of Christ, Luke
20. 20. Master, we know that thou say and teach rightly, neither
acceptest thou the person of any, but teach the way of God truly. So that
you see this sincerity in the Ministers of God, is the special effect of Gods
grace toward them.

And therefore let us make an Use of Admonition to all such as desire to serve
God in the way of the Ministry, that above all things they would pray to God
for this grace. To have thy ministerial conversation with much wisdom and
learning, with great applause and glory in the world, is nothing so
advantageous as this integrity of spirit. This is above parts, above gifts,
above books, and all learning. It is said of Barnabas, Act. 11. 24. He was a
good man; full of the holy Ghost, and of faith, and much people was added to
the Lord: This followed as a blessed effect upon the former. If we Ministers
had more mighty workings of Gods Spirit in us, we should find more mighty
workings of his Spirit with us.

SERMON. XCVI.
Wherein the Grace of God appeared toward Paul in his Ministerial Labors.

2 COR. 1. 12. But by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
world.
WE are enumerating the particulars of that grace, which the Apostle does
especially acknowledge in his ministerial course. We proceed therefore, and

First, The faithfulness of Paul to his Apostolical trust, fixing his heart
What were those graces which the Apostle acknowledged in his Ministry 1.
Faithfulness
upon that, and using no other means, then what are proportionable and
commensurate to such a noble end, was wholly of the grace of God toward him.
It is required of Stewards, that they be found faithful, says this Apostle, 1
Cor. 4. 2. and with this grace God had honored him. Insomuch that we do not
find in Paul any halting, any carnal compliance, which might contradict the
holy end of his Apostolical Office. Those are two noble expressions, 2 Corinthians.
10. 8. Our authority the Lord has given us for edification, and not for
destruction. The other is, 2 Cor. 13. 8. For we can do nothing against the
truth, but for the truth. In these Texts we have expressed the end of all
ministerial power, it is for edification: And therefore if any through the Word
preached be more hardened in their sins, and made more obdurate in their evil
ways, this is besides the intention of the Word. As when the Sun blinds a
man's eyes through the dazelling thereof, this is accidental; the proper and
natural effect, being to illuminate, all spiritual authority is for
edification. And in the other Text, you have the power of grace upon Paul's
heart, so affecting of him, that he cannot do any thing against the truth.
Neither doctrinally or practically would he indulge to any evil way; but
thereby the end of his Ministry should be frustrated. Now this is a special
work of Gods grace so to sanctify, and keep tender our hearts, that we take
heed of every thing that may obstruct the happy course of the Gospel: Whereas
the Jesuitical party will wander out into many by and extravagant ways, to
accomplish their designs. Jansenius a learned Papist (Jansen. Sanctus
Augustinus liber proaemialis, page 9.) speaks of one man, who not daring to
do something out of favor to another, which he knew was contrary to the
principles of morality; neither affirmed by any Authors; as probable, had this
answer from a Jesuited Doctor, Aude, and nos efficiemus probabile, Be bold to
do it and we will make it probable. Here we see, their power is many times
against the truth. But Paul was so kept by the grace of God, that not only
deliberately he did not any thing which might retard the progress of the
Gospel; but also nor so much as by infirmity, or any sudden surprizal, as we
see Peter did, and therefore Paul did withstand him to the face. This therefore
is a blessed work of Gods grace, when a Minister is kept so faithfully to the
end of his Office, that neither in life or doctrine, will he do any thing,
that may be contrary to it.

Secondly, The grace of God extended itself mercifully to Paul, In that he was
kept low and humble under all those signal favors and prerogatives that 2.
Humility.
God has bestowed upoh him. Was not every thing in Paal almost extraordinary
and miraculous, and yet who is kept lower in his own eyes, who is more emptied
of himself, looking upon what he had been, more than what he was? So that it
was of Gods grace to Paul, to make him acknowledge Gods grace not to trust in
himself. And thus it is always in the Church of God; one special work of Gods
grace, is to make us sensible of it, to give all to it, to go out of our
selves: and thus Gods fullness is most seen in our emptiness. We see the
Jews went about wholly to establish their own righteousness. The Stoic
Philosophers, who did so admire virtue, were thereby advancers of themselves:
They looked upon virtue as their own work, that they were not beholding to God
for it. Therefore Seneca makes this the cause and foundation of all
happiness, Fidere sibiipsi, to trust in himself. And the Pelagian, though
Christian, yet his Doctrine drives wholly to self-advancement. So that though
he would acknowledge the necessity of that prayer, Forgive us our sins (yet
so as when we had sinned, otherwise they pleaded perfection, and that a man
might be without sin) yet for the ensuing Petition, Lead us not into
temptation, etc. They would not understand it of spiritual temptations and
occasions to sin, as if we needed to pray to God for grace to prevent future
sins, our own will and strength was sufficient for that; but of external
miseries, such as not to fall off an horse, or to be killed by a thief: These
were the temptations only we prayed against in this Petition. But where the
grace of God is effectually working, there it makes a man apprehensive of the
necessity of it; and that to every action all the day long: and truly this is
from God; when the Minister of the Gospel shall go out of all parts, learning
and studies whatsoever, acknowledging it is the grace of God alone that inableth
him in his work: happily this would make the presence of God more powerful
with us, if we did own his grace more.

Thirdly, The grace of God with Paul in his ministerial employment, was, 3.
Guidance and direction in his preaching and meditations.
The directing of him in meditations, and guiding of him to such thoughts and
words as might most prevail upon those that hear him. For this we must know,
that where Gods presence is with a Minister, there he is directed to preach on
such subject matter, rather than other which God will bless to a most happy
and effectual issue. This made Paul say excellently, 2 Cor. 5. 6. Not that we
are sufficient to think any thing of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God,
who has made us able Ministers of the New Testament. Here you see Paul
acknowledging, that we are not able to think one thought in our ministerial way
advantageous for the edification of others without the grace of God. As in
prayer, we know not what to pray, or how to pray, without the Spirit of God
inabling: So neither in preaching, we know not what to preach, or how to
preach, unless the Lord guide us. That is observable, Eccles. 12. 9, 10.
Because the preacher was wise, he taught the people knowledge, he gave good
heed, and sought out, and set in order many proverbs. The preacher sought to
find out acceptable words. By this we see, that there is special wisdom to
search out fit matter and fit words, which cannot be obtained without God the
fountain of wisdom. So that herein the Minister of God is to exercise himself
daily in prayer to God, that he would teach him how to preach, and what to
preach, that he may not sow chaff in stead of wheat, and cockles in stead of
barley, that he may be so directed, as to pitch upon those arguments, those
expressions which will be most effectually working upon the souls of those that
do hear.

Fourthly, The grace of God was wonderfully manifest in Paul., By the spirit 4
His patience, self-denial, zeal and courage.
of self-denial, patience, zeal, and courage which was in him, while
accomplishing his work. Indeed Paul is like a pleasant and choice Garden,
wherein are so many precious flowers, that we know not which to pluck first.
Thus Paul was so eminently bespangled with all the graces of Gods Spirit, that
we know not which to commend first. His self-denial was admirable, when he
complained, All sought their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ. This
argued how much he did abhor such courses, Phil. 3. 21. when he was so
solicitous to bring off deluded souls from the false Apostles who reigned over
them. It was not his honor or glory that he looked at, if so be they would own
Christ and his ways in truth; let him be rejected, he mattered it not. This he
plainly professes, 2 Cor. 13. 7. I pray God ye do no evil, not that we should
be approved, but that you should do that which is honest, though we be
accounted as reprobates. It is plain therefore that it was their good, their
salvation and glory, not his own that he aimed at. His patience also was no
less remarkable, when he could quietly go through all the reproaches and
calumnies that the false Apostles did charge upon him, especially his patience
was even miraculous in those sufferings he was exercised with, for the Gospels
sake. He that informed others, they had need of patience; how much more had he,
being put to so many combats as he was? Yet under all this he fainted not, he
forsook not Christ, and his cause; yea he rejoiced in his sufferings, and
looked upon them as so many marks of honor. 2 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
you have a long Catalogue of the manifold bitter trials he was put upon; yet he
was gold in this fire, he was wheat in this winnowing; he does not complain of
the cause of Christ he had espoused, as Zipporah to Moses, Thou art a bloody
husband; yea in all these things, He is more than a conqueror, as Romans 8. 37.
For the greatest Conquerours do for the most part receive some loss; but these
tribulations were so far from making him a loser, that he was thereby a
gainer. The grace of God was wonderfully in Paul, to make him so zealous for
the Churches of Christ as he was; he learned of Christ himself to have the zeal
of the Lords house to eat him up, 2 Cor. 11. 29. Who is offended, and I burn
not? There was nothing in the Church of God that fell out, which might be a
stumbling block to any believer, which might any ways tend to make such an one
fall; but his heart was affected therein, as if it had been his own cause.
Therefore in the forementioned Chapter, 2 Cor. 11, 28. he acknowledges the
care of all the Churches to be upon him; and this made him so compassionately
sympathizing with every member thereof. Thus Paul is like a spiritual Atlas,
bearing up the Churches of God; not that he owneth himself in this, any further
than to acknowledge the grace of God thereby to him. Now this zeal did
necessarily imply public affections, whereby Paul was enlarged in his soul
toward the glory of God, and the good of others; which heavenly constitution
does necessarily suppose the grace of God: Man naturally making himself the
utmost end of all his actions: and his own self-love, like Phaeaoh's lean kine,
does devour and swallow up all that is before it. Is not that passage of his
public affection matter of amazement? Romans 9. 2, 3. where he professes his
great heaviness, and continual sorrow of heart for the Israelites? Yea this did
so far possess him, that he says, I could wish my self acoursed from Christ
for their sake. Such an high expression, that it has troubled Interprete^s,
how to explain it, and make it lawful; as if in public affections, as well as
private, that were true, Difficile est amare and sapere, It is hard to love,
and to be wise also. Now this is a blessed effect of Gods grace upon the hearts
of those who preach the Gospel, when they prefer Jerusalem above all their
joy; when they preach not to live upon the Gospel, and to be maintained by the
Gospel, but rather use these, as steps whereby they may ascend higher. That as
the body is for the soul, not the soul for the body; so they make personal
accommodations for the public, not public for the personal. Lastly, That I
may not weary you out, the courage and spiritual fortitude that Paul did upon
all occasions demonstrate, does plainly demonstrate the grace of God toward
him. The ministerial Office is compared to a soldiers employment, 2 Timothy 2. 3,
4. where Timothy is commanded to endure hardness as a soldier of Christ: And
because he is set apart for this spiritual warfare, therefore he must not
entangle himself with the affairs of this life; and herein Paul did show
himself an excellent pattern. Was not he an excellent soldier, when Phil. 4.
11, 12. he had learned in whatsoever estate, to be content; he knew how to
abound, and how to want, every where, and in all things. He must needs have
spiritual fortitude that could thus endure hot and cold. No wonder then if at
the close of his life, he has this comfortable testimony from his conscience,
That he had fought a good fight, 2 Timothy 4. 7. This is that which makes the
ministerial work so difficult; we are to conflict with the lusts of men; we are
to demolish the Kingdom of Satan; all our work, if faithfully discharged,
breeds nothing but the malice and opposition of ungodly men. And that this is
wholly the gift of God, appears, 2 Timothy 1. 7. God has not given us the
spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind; of power, that
subdueth all worldly fear, and man-pleasing; yet lest this power should make us
too harsh and austere, there is love to mollify and sweeten it. For Dilige and
loquere quod vis, said Austin, Love, and then reprove as much as you will. But
lest love should make us foolish, and too indulgent, there is added a sound
mind, as salt to season this Sacrifice. These are the qualifications of a
Minister; but who gives these? From whence does this good and perfect gift
come? Even from the Father of lights, Jam. 1. 17.

Fifthly, The grace of God proclaimed by Paul, was, In the heavenly 5. His
heavenly wisdom.
wisdom that he did use in the managing of his Office. For although he
disclaimeth fleshly wisdom, yet he attributes to himself true heavenly
wisdom, he considered his auditors, what they were able to bear; he did not
put new wine into old bottles; he had serpentine wisdom, though Dove-like
innocence. Wisdom and discretion is the eye in the body of all our holy
actions. Zeal without knowledge makes a man like Samson, when his eyes are
pulled out; though he pull down the house upon the Philistims, yet he himself
is also destroyed thereby. 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2. I could not speak unto you, as
spiritual, but as carnal. I fed you with milk, and not with meat. Argus was not
fuller of eyes, then a Minister is to be of wisdom and circumspection, to know
the dispositions, capacities and temptations of the people to whom he
preaches. But above all the Ministers wisdom is seen in laying a good and
sure foundation. This grace of God to him, Paul does acknowledge, 1 Cor. 3. 10.
According to the grace of God given to me, as a wise master builder I have laid
a foundation. For if we be not in justification built upon Christ, and in
practice carried beyond morality, yea and religious duties to a principle of
regeneration within; All other building, though never so glorious, and
applauded in the world, is but like an house built upon the sand, whose fall
will be great, when tempests shall arise. It was from this wisdom that Paul
said, I became all things to all men, that I might save some, 1 Cor. 9. 22. Not
in that sense as the Jesuit is said, to become all things to all men, for that
is to save one, not to save, but rather destroy others: he did not sinfully
comply with men's sins, but he did prudently accommodate himself to men's
weaknesses, not defiling himself thereby, that to he might (...) them out of
their weaknesses.

Lastly, The grace of God acknowledged by Paul, is, The success he had 6. His
success in his Ministry
in his ministerial labors. For though Paul was enabled to do many miracles
to cure many diseased bodies* yet he could not open the eyes, or change the
heart of any one man; whenever therefore an effectual door was opened to him,
in any place; this was Gods work, not Paul's, 1 Cor. 3. For though Paul
planted, and Apollo watered, yet it is God that gives the increase. Alas, it
is not for a Minister to think his parts, his gifts, his learning, his
diligent and zealous preaching shall bring men off from their wicked ways. For
though the Minister is to do his duty, yet his success is of Gods grace only:
And therefore wonder not, if Paul triumph over all the learned and potent
enemies of the Gospel, if Paul's contemptiblenesse overcome the Grecians
wisdom and excellency; for it is not Paul, but the grace of God with him that
does these wondrous things.

Use of Admonition, to us who are the Ministers of God, as we would have our
studies, our labors, our ministerial employments have success, to go out of
our parts and studies, and to importune the grace of God more. Thou art apt to
think such expressions, such moving compassionate exhortations, such quick and
penetrating arguments, will make men leave all their sins, and follow Christ,
but look up to Gods grace more; and take heed of any thing that may provoke
God to withwithdraw his gracious presence from thy studies and ministerial
labors.

Use 2. Of Instruction. Whence it is that the faithful Ministry of God has
been upheld in all ages, when the Governors of the world have frowned on them,
when endeavors have been to root it out, as a bitter plant not to be endured,
when they themselves have been poor and weak, having neither outward
greatness, or earthly policy to maintain them; This is wholly from the grace
of God. As the Arc was not overwhelmed in the waters, though it had no Pilot
to guide it, because God took care of it.

SERMON. XCVII.
Of a Good and Godly Conversation in the World.

2 COR. 1. 12. We have had our conversation in the world.
WE are come now to the thing testified it self, which is this, We have had our
conversation in the world. So that herein is expressed the ground of his
comfort, and that in two particulars:

1. It was his conversation, (...). This word is used to signify the way, as
the Scripture calls it, or the life, and constant customary practice of man.
Sometimes (...) is added to it, not that it can be our conversation, unless it
be universal, and every where so. But for further aggravation, as 1 Pet. 1. 15.
But as he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation. If a man be holy at some times, or in some fits, but not
constantly, he does not resemble God, for God is holy in all his ways. In
every action, and all times, God does manifest his holiness, he is a God, and
changes not, is always like himself: Thus it ought to be with the godly: No
company, no condition, no temptations should make them change that holy way of
life, they are to exercise themselves in. Hence also 2 Pet. 3. 11. we have it
rendered in the plural number, (...), What manner of persons ought we to be in
godly conversations; signifying, that the day of judgment powerfully believed,
would have a strong influence upon every thought, word or action, that there
cannot be any kind of godliness, though never so contrary to flesh and blood,
but we should be thereby provoked to the accomplishment thereof. Varinus makes
the synonimous words to (...), and (...), that which is our perpetual exercise
and life, as it were. Indeed there is the word (...) rendered conversation,
Phil. 3. 20. and so (...) is used, Act. 23. 1. as also Philip. 1. 27. Let your
conversation be as becomes the Gospel; but (...) in Philip. 3. 20. is observed
to signify rather our freedom and prerogative, which we have as Citizens of
Jerusalem. Our privileges are in that spiritual corporation; which indeed does
also by consequence denote, that our lives and conversations ought to be
answerable to such glorious advantages.

The second word expressive, is, In the world. It is not at one place, or in
some company only, that Paul does thus sincerely behave himself, but in the
world, every where, in all places where he comes, Locum, non animum, he may
change his place, and his company, but never his godly life.

Whereas then we see, Paul gathering his comfort not from some particular
actions done at some time, or in some place, but from the whole carriage, and
constant deportment of himself. We may observe,

That it is not so much some good actions done at some times, as the It is
universal holiness which is the ground of comfort.
universal carriage of our selves in holy things, that does bring solid
comfort.

This Doctrine is of special use. For who will not be godly? Who may not be
thought to belong to the Kingdom of Heaven? If you look upon them, in some
fits, while under some dangers, while some sudden pangs are upon them; but God
will judge thee, not according to these particulars, but the whole course of
thy life. It is true, sometimes thou have prayed, sometimes thy heart has been
smitten under the guilt of thy sins; but how quickly have these passed over
again? These are not thy daily exercise: The harmony of thy life is not holy
and godly. There are innumerable instances of men, who in some streights and
imminent dangers have appeared penitent and reformed, but all has been forced
and compelled, as it were; their constant, habitual inclination was otherwise.
Did not Pharaoh in some extremities cry out, He had sinned, and desired Moses
to pray for him? Did not Ahab under Gods judgments humble himself in
sackcloth? Yea was it not the complaint of the Prophets concerning the people
of the Israel, That in their tribulations they did call upon God? But then
afterward would return to their proper course again, Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36,
37. When he slew them, then they sought him, they returned and enquired early
after God. These words declare much activity and solicitude in them, for a
while at least to become reconciled with God: But then what follows? They did
flatter with their mouth, for their heart was not right with him, neither were
they steadfast in his Covenant. And before at verse. 8. they are said, To be a
generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not steadfast
with God. So that the Israelites are a perpetual instance to confirm this
Doctrine, that it is not so much to be regarded how holy and repenting we may
appear sometimes, but what we are constantly, that is to be regarded.

To clear this, take notice,

First, That the Scripture speaks of a twofold conversation, and the one
directly There is a twofold conversation, the one natural.
contrary to the other, whose ends also are contrary.

The first of these is, A wicked, carnal, and natural one, which all live in,
till God by his gracious power deliver us from it. What is every man's
conversation till grace change him, but a continual road of evil actions? he
goes from one sin to another, he is always like himself, as the worm is
ever creeping upon the ground, you never see it flying like a bird up to the
clouds. This is called (...), Our former conversation, Ephesians. 4. 22. which is
corrupt according the deceitful lusts thereof. The first conversation then of
every one by nature, is that of the old man, original and actual sins
conjoined together into one body, as it were; so that he is a mass, or lump
of sin: This is daily corrupted by deceitful lusts: That as worms are
continually eating into the Tree, till they have destroyed it: Thus are lusts
constantly breeding in a man, even till they have devoured him. Now, says the
Apostle, This must be put off; we must leave this former life, and take up a
new one. Oh how few are there that can say, They have put off their former
conversation! As they were profane, proud, earthly, so they are still: They
cannot say, It was indeed their former drinking, their former swearing, but it
is their present praying, their present humiliation of themselves: Their latter
conversation differs from the former, as much as the day does from the night
that went before it. This is also called a vain conversation received by
tradition from our fathers, 1 Pet. 1. 18. It is a vain one: for all the life we
live, till regenerated, is spent in vain; we attain not to the true and proper
end of living. Thy eating, thy drinking, thy buying and selling is all in vain;
by none of these things will thou please God, and so arrive at last at eternal
glory: Yea it were well, if it were only vain missing its end, but it is
meritorious of eternal flames in hell. This conversation is said to be
traditional by our fathers. If the Apostle speak of Gentiles, then it is true,
that children follow the evil, and ungodly examples of their parents; they will
not seem to be better and wiser than they are; if of the Jews, which is more
probable, then it relates to those superstitious exercises of Religion, which
their fathers added to the command of God. And although they rested and gloried
in these, as thereby highly honoring of God, yet all was but a vain worship, a
vain Religion. So then a man's evil conversation, is not only to be extended to
his vices and sins, but also to his religious duties, when either not
instituted, or if commanded, yet not performed in that spiritual manner, which
the Law of God does require. So that a man's conversation in his praying, in his
coming to Church, in his religious deportments, must be altered, as well as
profane ways. Thou must leave off thy former way of praying, thy former way
of hearing.

The second kind of conversation mentioned in the Scripture, is, A godly The
other is an heavenly and godly conversation.
and an heavenly one. So that although we live upon the earth, yet our
principles, aims, and ends, carry us up to the enjoyment of God. This is called
a good conversation, Jam. 3. 13. where all divine faith and spiritual wisdom is
said to be demonstrated by a good conversation. It is not Doctrine, faith,
profession, or gifts that men look at, but the conversation, that speaks a
Christian, that speaks a Minister more than ten thousand excellent
discourses; Plus oculis quam auribus creditur, said Seneca. So that a good
conversation is more demonstrative of godliness, then good gifts, good parts,
a good faith. Thy prayers are good, thy conference and discourse is good; Is
thy conversation also? Hence Paul exhorts Timothy as a Minister to be a
(...), An example (1 Timothy 4. 12.) to believers in word, in conversation. In
word, that is, in his Doctrine and preaching. In conversation, that is, in the
exercise of all holy duties. So that you see a man is above all things to look
to his convesation that it be good. For as this is a special means to edify
and build up others; so none can take comfort from the choicest abilities, the
most fervent duties, the purest Church-wayes, unless there be a good
conversation to uphold him. Hence you see Paul does not run to his
Apostolical Office, to his great miracles, to the wonderful revelations and
gifts bestowed upon him, but to his conversation in the world, as if that were
a greater conviction of all adversaries, then the most glorious
Church-prerogatives or privileges that can be. Hence a godly conversation is a
special means to convert others. The Apostle speaks fully to this concerning
godly women, who have Heathen, or wicked, and ungodly husbands, that they
should look to their duty, That they may without the Word be wone by the
conversation of their wives, while they behold your chaste conversation coupled
with fear, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2. he says, Without the Word; not but that the Word is
the only ordinary means of conversion; but because their conversation may be
an occasion and introductory means to bring them to the Word. As Austin said,
He should not have believed the Scriptures, but for the Church, because that
was the introductory motive, though the Scriptures themselves were the cause of
his faith. By this we see how much regard we are to have to our conversation,
for by it many may be converted, or be subverted. What a woeful thing will it
be, if thou by thy life have given a just occasion to drive men off from
godliness; They were coming on, but thy conversation drove them back. It is
true, when wicked men do wickedly from their own corrupt hearts, take an
occasion to be offended at Gods ways, as some did when they heard Christ
preach, saying, It was an hard saying, who can bear it? And from thence took an
occasion never to follow Christ more, John 6. 60. then the guilt of such men
lies at their own door; They are offended where there is no just cause; it is
Scandalum acceptum, not datum. But if thou do by any sinful and
unwarrantable practices alienate men from Religion, make them think the worse
of godliness for thy doings, then remember that dreadful sentence of our
Savior, Woe be to that man by whom offenses come, Matthew. 18. 7. This is
likewise called, (...), Your good conversation in Christ. A
Scripture-conversation is a conversation in Christ, that is partly by the rule
and guidance of Christ. We live not according to the course of the world, not
according to the lusts of men, but as Christ has commanded, so we live; and
then partly, because by Christ's blood we do obtain this life, he has redeemed
us from our former evil ways, he has purchased a liberty for us: and then
partly, because our life is terminated in Christ, and we do objectively
propound him in all our ways, as Paul says, Galat. 2. 20. I live, yet not I;
but Christ lives in me; Christ is the principle or author, Christ is the
means and way, Christ is the finisher and end of this life.

In the next place, let us consider; What goes to make a man's conversation
What is required to a good conversation.
godly, that we may say, it is not some sudden motions, or transitory workings,
but his conversation that is according to the Gospel. For if some particular
good actions at some times were enough to make a man godly, then the way to
Heaven would be no longer a narrow, but a broad way. Now in this description
you must not expect a metaphysical or punctual decision, of how many actions
go to make a man's conversation: So that if he come up to such a number, yet if
he want one more, then it cannot be called his conversation: but we must
understand it morally and in a large sense. Briefly therefore to a man's
conversation there is required as the foundation of all.

First, A principle of regeneration, to be made a new creature. There must be
spiritual life, before there can be spiritual motions and actions. So that 1.
Principles of grace.
if men are brought sometimes to what is holy, by external motives, because
they have godly parents, godly Magistrates, godly Governonrs, as Joash all the
while Jehoiada the Priest, and his Uncle lived: This cannot be called a man's
conversation; there is not a new nature within, but outward motives prevail
with him, and thereupon as they ebb or flow, so is there a variation and change
in his practices.

Secondly, There must be a predominancy in his heart and affections to what is
holy. Christ must be his treasure, he must love him more than any 2. A
predominancy in the heart to Christ.
thing in the world, then father, or mother, or life it self. For if the soul
be not thus principally fixed on him, when that which is dearer, and more
loved, does suggest it self, then they leave Christ. This is plainly seen,
Matthew. 13. in those hearers who believed for a while, and brought forth some
fruit, but then when persecutions did arise they fell off, then these seeming
vines became thorns.

Thirdly, There must be an actual improvement of those habitual principles 3.
Actual Improvements of grace.
of grace that are within. For though a man have never so much grace within,
yet if it be not improved by outward exercise, we cannot call it a godly
conversation: and therefore it is a vain thing for men to appeal to the
goodness of their heart, and their good meanings; for the conversation is more
to be believed than all these. There must then be these streams as well as the
fountain; we must show our faith (as you heard) by a godly conversation; so
that this relates most to the exercise of grace, though it presuppose the
fountain and root within.

Lastly, To our conversation, There are required pure and heavenly motives, 4.
Pure and heavenly motives.
that we do holy duties for holiness sake; That we follow Christ for Christ's
sake, not for loaves. The old Rule is, A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia;
He that does a godly duty, because godly, will do all godly duties. As the
fire, because it burns naturally, it burns in one country as well as
another: Thus a Christian, because carried out purely and naturally (as it
were) to the things of God, does own them every where, in all places, in all
companies. That which is godliness at one place, and in one company, is
godliness in another. Only we must necessarily take along one Caution, lest
we condemn all the generation of the godly for hypocrites. A man's conversation
is godly, though in many things he fails by common infirmities, though in all
things he comes short of that perfection which is required of him: Yea, though
for a season through prevailing temptations he fall into, and lie in some
grievous sins. David's conversation may be called godly, he was a man after
Gods own heart. And Peter's conversation may be godly, though he had such a
foul fall: So that infirmities, yea sometimes gross sins fallen into through
urging temptations, cannot be said to make a man's conversation wicked, when the
general inclination of the soul is set for that which is good. It is true, he
that does customarily and habitually sin, he is not borne of God; neither can
a regenerate man sin so, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Every swoon or
fainting is not death, yet such having the seed of grace within, will as Trees
that seemed to be dead all winter, because there is life in the root, at last
revive and flourish when the spring of Gods grace shall draw it forth. This is
necessary; lest the Doctrine of a godly conversation seem only an Idaea, like
Tullies Orator, and that it cannot be found any where in the world.

In the last place, let us see what profitable Uses may be drawn from this
truth. Whose conversation is not holy notwithstanding some good things in it.
And

First, Of Instruction, who are to inform themselves, their conversation is
not holy, notwithstanding some good things may sometimes be found in their
lives. And

1. Such who in fear of death only, and in times of sad dangers do call upon
the Lord, and cry out of their sins. Is this your conversation? Do ye ever
thus, but in some times of exigency? It is greatly disputed, Whether a
deathbed repentance can ever be sincere? The Socinians are too rigid, denying
the salvation of such persons, because they have no time to show forth good
works in their conversation. But as this may be too rigid, so on the other
side, Austin, and others put it greatly to the doubt, Non dico damnabitur, sed
nec dico salvabitur, then is the conversation holy, when in all conditions,
rich or poor, sick or well, living or dying, thou do diligently seek the
face of God.

2. Such cannot plead for an holy conversation in the world, Who are only such
in some companies, and in some places. Many of the Nations became Jews for
fear of them. Thus if thou because the company thou art with is religious, or
in the place where thou live, godliness is owned with credit, then thou will
also do as they do, talk as they talk: This is not thy conversation. Paul
was godly in all the places of the world, even at Rome, and where he was in the
greatest danger. Lot was righteous in wicked Sodom. It is not with a godly
man, as they say of some Trees, in one Country they bring pleasant and
wholesome fruit, but if transplanted into another soil poisonous and
destructive: So he in some places speaks for godliness, and in other places
to laugh and deride it. This is not thy conversation.

3. Neither can such pretend to a godly conversation, Who only with Herod do
sometimes gladly, or with Saul obey in some things, but rebel in other. If it
were godliness for godliness sake, then thou would zealously set upon all
the duties of godliness, great as well as little, self-denying, as well as
more grateful and pleasing. Yea the more godliness, still the more desire and
delight after it. If a drop be so precious, what would more plentiful
drinkings of it? By what reason I am godly thus far, Iam bound to proceed
further.

In the next place, let it be an Use of Exhortation, to look to godliness in
your conversation; it lies there as well as in your hearts, in duties, in
professions. By this the Gospel is adorned, by this Religion is honored, by
this many others may be brought home to God, and glorify him for beholding thy
pure, holy and unblameable conversation. It is a sign grace has deep rooting
in thy heart and affections, when it is made palpable and visible in operations:
It Is by these fruits that we must judge of trees. The hypocrite would be
applauded as much as the godly. Gifts and parts would be exalted, as grace,
were not our conversations to be the true touchstone herein; but above all
things look to the purity of thy intentions in thy whole life, that alone
makes regular and uniforme; without this thou will cry Hosanna to Christ at
one time, and crucify him another. It Is observable, that though a multitude
did leave their own Towns and houses, outwardly showing much affection toward
him, yet our Savior charge them with carnal motives in all that they did,
John 6. 26. Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye seek me not, because ye saw the
miracles, bus because ye did eat of the loaves, and were satisfied. Verily,
verily] This sacred asseveration Christ uses in matters of high concernment;
and here it is, because the Capernaites did not perceive this carnal frame in
themselves, therefore does he express it the more vehemently. Thus Austin
complained in his time, Vix quaeritur Jesus propter Jesum, Jesus is scarcely
sought for Jesus sake. So difficult is it to be sincere in our conversation.

SERMON. XCVIII.
Of Gods Presence with the Ministry, how it renders the People inexcusable.

2 COR. 1. 12. And more abundantly to you-wards.
WE are now arrived at the close and last particular of this verse, wherein is
contained the ground of Paul's comfort, from the testimony of his conscience.
As the former particulars did declare his conversation, with the manner of it,
universally without restriction or limitation to times, persons, or places, so
this last clause is added to affect the Corinthians the more, who listened too
much to false Apostles, from his peculiar conversation to them, it was more
abundantly toward them, then to any other in the world. Not that Paul was
less sincere, or less faithful in other places; but only there were more
outward effects and demonstrations of it toward them, then to others. So that
the Greek word (...), does denote the abundance and overflowing evidences of
the power of God in his Ministry toward them. And this comparative may be
taken both intensively, his carriage toward them was fuller of love and
compassion, fuller of care and diligence to them then others, because they were
in greater danger, and under more temptations. As also extensively, there he
had labored more, continued longer, and the power of God had been more
successful in his Ministry amongst them. In the Greek it is (...), which some
render amongst you; for (...), as Beza shows the phrase used so out of
Demosthenes. Others render it toward you, for (...), and so the Apostle has
this expression, 2 Cor. 2. 4. That ye might know the love which I have more
abundantly toward you. The like is also applied to Titus, in reference to
them, his inward affection was more abundantly toward them, 2 Cor. 7. 15. If
you ask, Wherein this greater abundance of Paul's sincere conversation was seen
to the Corinthians, more than to others? Expositors give in several
particulars. Chrysostom, and others following him, make it to be in this, that
he preached the Gospel freely to them. Here says he, (...), He went beyond his
bounds, condescending to their infirmity. Now concerning this fact of Paul's
receiving no maintenance from these Corinthians, though he did from others; and
pleads he might also by right take off them, alleging the plain Ordinance
and Institution of Christ, 1 Cor. 9. 13. Even so has the Lord ordained, that
they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. There is a twofold
controversy, the former is started by the Papists, who from hence held the
Doctrine of Counsels, as also of supererogation, that a man may do more than he
is commanded, as they say Paul did in this case. The later is from others, who
from hence decry the maintenance of Ministers, and that they are with Paul to
continue in some vocation, to maintain themselves and family with; but because
here it is supposed only, and afterward in the Epistle it is professedly owned
by the Apostle, and insisted upon, we shall refer it, till God give
opportunity to consider it in its proper place. 2 Cor. 11. 7, 8, 9. Others they
understand this greater abundance in respect of the length of that time, he
continued amongst them. For ye may read that Act. 18. 10, 11. Paul continued
there a year and an half at Corinth, which was a great space of time,
considering how his Apostolical Office required of him the visiting of other
Churches, and planting also the Gospel, where yet it was not received. They had
therefore time enough to see his whole deportment, to observe that he was no
fraudulent impostor, that he did all things for their own good, not seeking
himself. 3. Some refer it to the great success and wonderful power, that
God did put forth in, and with his Ministry; for so God tells him that vision
he had there, Act. 18. 9, 10, Be not afraid Paul, for I am with thee, no man
shall hurt thee, for I have much people in this City. So that this was a great
conviction that Paul's Ministry should work such a mighty change among a people
so proud, so rich, so glorying in parts and humane learning, as they did: This
was the hand of God. Lastly, It may refer to his love toward them, which he
seems to express to them more than others, and therefore speaks of it, 2
Cor. 2. 4. yea he reproves them for their ingratitude herein, 2 Cor. 12. 15. I
will very gladly be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the
less I be loved. Now the reason why Paul was thus affectionately carried out
toward them more than others, was because of the dangerous temptations they
were in by false Apostles; these came with enticing words, pretending much
love, and also observed strictly every passage of Paul's life; so that it
behoved him, as to walk with more circumspection, so also to express his
hearty love toward them, seeing they were in such a weak and uncertain
condition. Even as Aristotle observes, The affections of parents are most
carried to those who are the weakest, and most infirm. And thus much for
explication. From the words we observe,

That the more evidences and demonstrations a people have had of Gods presence
The more evidently Gods presence has been with the Ministry, the more
inexcusable is the unprofitableness of the people under it.
with the Ministry, the more inexcusable will they be, if they do not profit
thereby.

The longer you have enjoyed the means of grace, and the more powerfully God
has manifested his presence therein: If still thou persist in thy rebellion
and opposition to God, the greater will thy condemnation be. The Apostle does
much press this upon the Corinthians, as a special means to preserve them from
revolting, 2 Corinthians. 13. Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me,
which to you-ward is not weak, but mighty in you; and thereupon bids them,
Examine themselves, whether they be in the faith, or whether Christ be in them,
or not. And if so, they must needs acknowledge this to be the fruit of his
Ministry. Oh it is an high aggravation of a man's wilfulness to sin, when he
cannot but be convinced, that the Minister does his duty, he discharges his
Office, he has informed me fully of my dangerous estate, yet for all that he
will go on in disobedience! We read of the Apostles pressing this likewise, 1 Corinthians. 4. 15. with much earnestness, Though you have ten thousand
instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers. He was the first that
through the grace of God, begot them a new from their former impieties. So that
the more good a people have received by a Minister, the more they stand obliged
still to follow his Doctrine. Our Apostle deals in this Argument also with
the Galatians, Chap. 3. 2, 3, 4. This would I learn of you, received ye the
Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? He appealeth to
what they had found experimentally by the preaching of the Gospel upon their
own souls: and would they who had thus begun in the spirit, end in the
flesh? Our Savior also tells the Jews concerning John, They did once
rejoice in his light for a season, John 5. 35. At the first, while his
preaching and life was new, before he came thoroughly to convince them of their
hypocrisy and wickedness; and then when they saw his preaching was against
them, and that he was not a man for their carnal interest; they who once
rejoiced in him afterward reproached him, and said, He had a Devil.

But let us amplify this point in several particulars.

First, The longer time a people have enjoyed a faithful Ministry, the 1. The
longer time a people have enjoyed the means of grace, they will be more
inexcusable, if they answer not Gods expectations.
more inexcusable will they be, if they answer not Gods expectation. A great
part of the world sits in darkness, and have nothing of this spiritual
light arising upon them; They have had no Prophet amongst them, to warn and
admonish every man to forsake his evil way. If therefore God has fixed
Pastors and Teachers amongst us, who continually inform us of our duties: How
great will our condemnation be, if we shut our eyes against light? Though thou
do not account the years, yet God does; he takes notice of the precise
time, that he has been calling and inviting of thee, to come in, and submit
unto him. We see this notably in that Parable, Luke 13. 7. Then said the Master
to his Vine-dresser, Behold these three years I come seeking fruit on this
fig tree, and find none. It is but three years, and yet this is accounted a
great matter; their unprofitablenesse, though they had but three years trial
was so heinous, that there is a command to cut down the tree, as that which
cumbreth the ground. What cause then have thou to fear lest such a sentence
pass upon thee, who have not only for three years, but many threes been
dressed and pruned, and yet continuest barren? How should you number every
Lord's Day? How should you account and set down every Sermon? For though you
let them pass, yet God will not. Thus we have God complaining concerning the
people of Israel, mentioning the exact time, they had been froward and
rebellious against him under his gracious dispensations, Psalm. 95. 10. which is
also also alleged by the Apostle, Hebr. 3. 9, 17. They saw Gods works forty
years in the wilderness. What a long time was here to convince them, to humble
them under all these wonderful works which God did before their eyes, yet God
complains, that these forty years, they did only grieve God by their sins
and provocations? And is not this the sad case of too many? May not God say
forty, yea fifty and threescore years; Ye have grieved him every Sabbath Day,
because not reformed or changed by the Word? Remember this therefore, the
longer that the Ministers of God have continued with you, the more is all
excuse taken off from you, if ye repent not.

Secondly, The more faithful and diligent the Ministers of God have been 2.
The more faithful the Minister is, the more in excusable will the people be.
by public preaching and otherwise, to convert you from all your evil doings,
the greater will your account be, if ye be negligent about your souls. Indeed
people may have a Ministry, but because a lazy corrupt one, because a
superstitious or profane one; men are encouraged more thereby in their
wickedness. And although this will not free a people, they shall not think to
escape by laying the fault upon their blind guides; for rather than their
bodies should starve, they would break through stony walls, and go far before
they would be famished: So if people were sensible of their souls undoing by
such a Ministry; if they lived where the famine of the Word is, they would
wander from sea to sea; and from the North even to the East, to look the word
of God, as you have it, Amos, Chap. 8. 12. Though I say, the people will not be
acquitted, they shall die and be damned in their sins; yet God will require
their blood of such Idol-shepherds, Ezekiel. 33. 8, 9. But as it follows there,
If they be faithful shepherds, if they do warn every wicked man, and yet
they will go on in their evil way, then such faithful Ministers have
delivered their own souls, and the peoples blood will lie upon their own
head. The more pains then, and the greater labor that the Ministers of God
have taken to reduce men from their evil ways, and yet thou continuest
unreformed, the greater will thy confusion be: Their study, their Sermons,
their prayers, their sweat, their weariness, will all witness against thee at
that day. We may see this notably fulfilled in Christ himself, that great
shepherd of our souls, Matthew. 11. 20. It is there said, Then began he to
upbraid those Cities, wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they
repented not. Woe to thee Corazin, woe to thee Bethsaida, etc. And thou
Capernaum which art exalted unto Heaven. -- By this we see, the more abundantly
Christ had discovered his willingness for their salvation, and they refused
him, the greater woe did belong to them; yea it would be worse with them at the
Day of Judgment, than the Sodomites, the vilest of men, whom God destroyed
with such a sudden and terrible destruction.

Thirdly, The more success that the Ministry has had, where thou live, the
3. Where the Ministry is more succesfull, the impenitent are more inexcusable.
greater change and conversion it has made, and yet thou continue the same
profane person thou wast, the greater is thy guilt. When it shall be a
converting Word to others, but not to thee; an enlightening Word to others, but
not to thee: Oh do thou tremble under thy condition, lest God has given thee
up to a spiritual judgment, that no preaching, no Ministry, no, if Angels
should come from Heaven, or men raised from the dead, yet they should do no
good upon thee. If there be but one man, or woman in a Parish, that can bless
God for the good their souls have got by the hearing of the Word; this person
will arise at the Day of Judgment against thee, then God will say, Why was it
not a converting Word to thee, as well as him? Why did thy neighbors hear and
tremble, reform and tremble, but thou did not?

Now the success of a faithful Ministry may be seen in these particulars.
Wherein the success of a faithful Ministry is seen.


1. To enlighten thee, to instruct and teach thee in the ways of God. For this
end they are called Lights and Teachers. Observe then, if there be not many
that have got knowledge in the truths of God, when thou art ignorant how many
by thee do know the principles of Religion; the Ministry has been instrumental
to awaken them: so that those who were ignorant do now understand: this will
condemn thee, who live in thy sottish ignorance.

2. The success of the Ministry is seen, In the conversion and reforming of
men from their evil ways. To turn swine into sheep, weeds into flowers, as we
read of three thousand converted by one Sermon that Peter made. If then, God
has blessed our labors in this kind, though it should be but to one man in
the Congregation, this will be a testimony against you. Was not he once
profane, as thou art? Did not he follow all excess of riot, as thou do?
Did not he deride and scorn at the power of godliness, as thou do? but now
he is wholly altered, now he dare not do the things he once did: Now he cries
out, Oh such a Sermon struck to my very heart, such a passage was like a
thunderbolt! Why then is it that thou do not follow such a man, and do as he
does? He would not be the same worldling, the same profane person he was once
for a world. Oh remember this man's conversion, this man's change will be a
testimony against thee!

3. The success of the Ministry is not only to give spiritual life at first,
but to quicken up, to edify and to cause to grow up more and more in
godliness; that you may not be a people always in low principles, that you
may not be babes always, but be more spiritual, and greater proficients in
godliness than formerly. Thus our Savior prayed, Joh. 17. for the Disciples
already converted, that they might be more sanctified. And here again is
condemning matter to those who stand at a stay; yea it may be go back, and fall
off from their first love. Oh lay this to heart? See thou not how such and
such, that did but lately look toward Heaven, have overgone thee? they have
more knowledge, more grace, more life and vigor than thou have. Certainly this
makes thy case the sadder; they are planted by the same waters thou art, hear
the same Sermons, receive the same Ordinances, and yet are far more fruitful
than thou art.

4. Another particular wherein the successful efficacy of the Ministry does
appear, is, To antidote against errors, to preserve from giddiness and
wantonness in matters of Religion. This great effect of the Ministry the
Apostle takes notice of, Ephesians. 4. 14. where it is said, God gave gifts to
men, Apostles and Pastors to his Church, that henceforth we be no more
children, tossed up and down with every wind of doctrine. This implies, that
before the Ministry came, they were tossed up and down; but now it must be no
more so. This also will speak terrible guilt to some; who are fallen off from
the wholesome truths of God, who have left their own stedfastness, being carried
away with the error of the wicked. For those who have been preserved and
confirmed by the Ministry, will be a testimony against such Apostates.

Lastly, The word of God preached, though it may not thoroughly reform, yet it
does sometimes restrain men from sin. Sometimes it makes them with Felix
tremble; at other times with Agrippa, almost to become a Christian. Oh let such
remember those times. You have felt the word of God like fire in your bowels;
you have found it to be like a two-edged sword within. Know that all those
relentings and troubled agonies of soul, will be a condemnation one day. The
Word preached has more abundantly worked upon you than others, though it has
not yet obtained a full and perfect change upon thee. Thus you see, wheresoever
the word of God has appeared more abundantly in any one particular in that
respect, the greater is the aggravation of those men's sins, who have not
thereby been reformed.

Let us proceed to the Uses. And

1. This may aggravate the sin of all those who are now departed from the
Ministry and the Ordinances, who are so arrogantly puffed up with a supposed
perfection, that they think they need not either hear or pray, as if all
fullness did dwell in them. Now to these men we propound this Question, How came
you at first to that light, to that knowledge you have? How came you at first
out of your profaneness? Whence was it that your consciences were awakened
once? Was not all this at first by the Ministry! If there be any good in you,
did you not receive it from these streams of God? Why then is it that you
depart from us? Why is it that you despise what once you embraced? Certainly
our Ministry has had more of Gods power and presence to you-wards, then to
many ignorant profane persons: but this makes your sin greater.

Use 2. To instruct us, how inexcusable all they are, who live now under
Gospel Light, and yet are not reclaimed from their evil ways. For though one
particular Ministry may have more of life and power than another, yet
wheresoever Christ is faithfully preached, there is the strongest argument that
can be used to bring you to God. All that do now refuse us preaching, refuse
Christ speaking from Heaven, as the Apostle argues, Heb. 12. 25. This is more
than to refuse Moses, or the Prophets, yea then Angels, as Heb. 2. 3. And
therefore the Apostle propounds this Question, How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation, which at first began to be spoken by the Lord, and
afterward was confirmed by others, God bearing them witness by signs and
many wonders? So that now the things of Religion cannot be more abundantly
confirmed to you than they are; you are not to expect more powerful means to
convert you, than have been used; and this will make Hell seven times hotter
for all ungodly and profane persons, who are so under these
Gospel-dispensations.

SERMON. XCIX.
Of the convincing Nature of Godliness in Ministers, and private Christians.

2 COR. 1. 13. For we write no other things unto you, then what you read or
acknowledge, and I trust that you shall acknowledge even to the end.
THe Apostle having formerly asserted the sincerity and holy simplicity of his
conversation, and that more abundantly to the Corinthians; lest this should be
a vain, boasting of himself, and that in giving testimony of himself, that
would not be valid, or sufficient: He does in this verse appeal to the very
consciences of the Corinthians likewise. So that not only the testimony of his
own conscience, but of their consciences also, must needs justify him. And
indeed this is a good demonstration of that uprightness which is within us,
when we can appeal to the consciences of others. For although men, especially
such as are prejudiced and alienated from us, may suffocate and smother as much
as lie in them, that they have any such convictions of our integrity, yet
secretly their consciences cannot but bear witness to us. The matter then
wherein he does appeal, as it were, to their own consciences, is set down in
the beginning of the verse, For we write no other things unto you, etc. There
is one expression in this passage, that has much perplexed Interpreters, and
made them go different ways; it is, that we write no other things unto you,
then what you do, (...), read; so we translate it, and likewise many others.
Now this is wondered at by some, yea by Calvin accounted, Nimis fligidum, ne
dicam ineptum, says he, in loc. It is too frigid and absurd, to make this the
sense, I write to you no other things, then what you read, etc. For who doubted
of that? And how could any man read otherwise than he wrote, says Musculus?
Estius also does confess, that the rendering the word (...), Ye read, did cause
great perplexity to Expositors; and therefore shows, that Theophylact, when
he could not satisfy himself about that sense of the word, did run to
another. Yet there are learned men, that endeavor to make a good sense of it,
though it be translated [Ye read:] For Beza, though he takes notice of what
Calvin says against it, yet follows this translation, and would make this
Paul's meaning, That he did not write cunningly, artificially what they did
read in the plain letter of the words that he did write, he had no
equivocations, nor intended any delusions by his words. Cajetan in loc. he
makes this expression to refer to the former Epistle, and also to this part
of the second which we are now upon, We write no more now, then what ye have
read formerly. Therefore some render it in the preterperfect tense. Others they
make the general sense to be this, Our words, and our actions do agree, we
write no more than what may be read, and acknowledged by all. Though these
interpretations may pass very well; yet because the expression is not so full
and proper to say, We write no other things, then what you read, I shall rather
go with those, who say, the word (...), though it many times signifies to
read, yet it does also, to take notice of, to know, to remember, etc. Indeed I
find it not in this sense used in the New Testament, but constantly for to
read; yet Varinus, he makes it to signify as well (...), To know, to call to
mind, to remember, to be convinced of a thing. So that the meaning is, We write
to you no other things, then what you know, what you remember, yea what ye are
experimentally convinced of. And thus it differs from the word (...), which
follows, and signifies more. For a man may know, and remember, yea and be
convinced of many things, which yet through some corruption within, he will not
acknowledge: for that is, when we do with a ready and willing consent approve
and own such a thing. The Pharisees were often convinced about Christ's
Doctrine, yet they would not acknowledge it. But the Apostle attributes both
these to the Corinthians: for the (...), rendered [Or] Erasmus suspects it
crept in for (...), which things. Vorstius prefers that reading, which is
(...), and so paraphraseth, If so be you do acknowledge; but there is no
necessity of this.

From the words thus explained, we observe,

That a godly convincing life in a Christian, especially in a Minister, is A
godly convincing life is of great advantage, specially in a Minister.
of special advantage for many excellent effects.

Every Christian, and much more every Minister, are by their lives and examples
so to convince, that others may acknowledge, verily God is with them, verily
the Spirit of Christ dwells in them. This is no more, then what our Savior
expresses, Let your light so shine before men, Mat. 5. 16. that they may see
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Some make this
exhortation given to Christians in the general: Others to the Ministers of the
Gospel in particular. However by this we see, that God cannot bear mere titles,
names and opinions, unless there be an holy life accompanying of them; he
says, That they may see your good works, not titles, not professions, not your
ceremonious, and instituted worship, but good works; good works then are
necessary; but such as flow from men enlightened by the Gospel Truth. Many
mistake about good works, not knowing what the nature of them is; and then
Christ shows the end of these good works, That they may glorify your Father
which is in Heaven; not that they may glorify you, and honor you. We are not
to do good things for applause and esteem; neither does he say, that ye may
merit a reward in Heaven. Vainglory and merit, with self-confidence, are the
end why pharisaical men cause their light to shine before others; but the
Evangelical Christian, he does it, That God may be glorified.

But let us cause the light of this Doctrine also to shine before you. And

First, We are to know, That godliness and exact holiness has a convincing
1. Godliness has a convincing and converting effect with it.
and converting effect with it. The sincere practice of it does awe and conquer
the conscience, even of the vilest men. Godliness is the image of God. Now when
God created man, in that he gave him dominion over all the beasts of the field,
they stood in awe of him: And thus where the image of God is repaired, there it
has a convincing work upon the conscience of the most beastly men. Thus it is
said of Herod, though a King, who had command over John Baptists life, as the
event showed, yet he feared John, because he was a just man, Mark 6. 20. As the
luster of the Sunne-beams do dazzle the Owls and the Bats eyes: Thus does the
lively expression of holiness even amaze the most profligate sinners; neither
is this the less true, though wicked men rage, blaspheme and raise all manner
of calumnies against such who walk uprightly, for in the midst of this madness
their conscience is still awed and convinced. So that this does discover the
excellency of a godly life, that it breeds a reverential awe, it makes the
consciences of men secretly to own such, and to wish that they were as such,
and that their latter end might be like theirs.

Secondly, Although a godly life be thus necessary in every Christian, and
especially 2. The efficacy of the Ministry depends not upon the piety of the
Minister.
in a Minister, yet the efficacy of the Ministry, and sacramental
administrations, does not depend upon the holy life of a Minister, no more than
the Papists say, it does upon a Ministers intention. This was a Donatistical
error of old, so much opposed by Austin, that the wickedness of a Ministers
life, did frustrate the work of the Sacraments. Certainly Christ's promise is
made to the Office, and to the right administration of the Ordinances; neither
can the evil life of the Minister make void Gods promise of presence to his own
Ordinances, where people come in a prepared and holy manner. This our Savior
seems fully to confirm, Mat. 23. 23. where he directed his hearers, To hear
the Pharisees and Scribes, because sitting in Moses his chair, and to observe
what those teachers should bid them observe and do; but (says he) do not after
their works, for they say, and do not. This Text does confute two sorts of men;
first, Those of the Roman party, who make use of this against the Protestants,
as if it were their sin to depart from their Bishops and Pastors, though it
be granted they superadded many superstitious and corrupt doctrines, which we
would easily yield unto: if as the Pharisees sat in Moses his chair; so they
did in Christ's chair. For this phrase denotes two things: 1. A lawful Call
and Office. 2. True and sound Doctrine; our Savior did not mean they were to
do every thing the Pharisees said. For at another time he bid them, Beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees, which was their doctrine, Mat. 16. 6. But his
universal expression is to be limited to the subject matter, while they did
teach what Moses commanded. But we deny that the Roman Bishops have Christ's
chair, either in respect of their Office, or their doctrine. Again the second
error which this Text does confute, is the extremity of those, who because of
some corruption in the Ministers, do wholly cry down the Ministry it self, or
out of their opposition to what is bad, will not receive that which is wholesome
and good. Our Savior being to reprove the Pharisees in a most sharp way, as
hypocrites and blind guides, knowing how apt people are to run from one
extremity to another; does therefore advise them, that so far as they keep to
Moses his doctrine, so far they are to be attended unto, though by their ill
lives they destroy all. Thus hungry men will eat the meat provided for them at
the feast, not considering whether the Masters of the feast do eat or no: Yea
though they do not, yet they will not forbear; or as Chrysostom, Men that dig
for gold, will gladly take their fullness of that, although the ground that
yields it, be barren and unfruitful in respect of grass and flowers: But I
cannot say all that is to be said on this point. Therefore

In the third place, Though the efficacy of Ordinences depends not upon the
godliness of him that does administer, yet all such dispensers can have no
comfort from 3. Yet such Ministers as are not godly, cannot expect comfort from
God, nor acceptance with him.
God; neither may they expect acceptance from him, while they live in their
iniquities. Mat. 7. 22. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we
not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out Devils? Yet you read of
that terrible denunciation toward them, Depart from me, I know ye not. It is a
very sad thing to consider how much Christians will rest on titles and names,
upon Ordinances and external duties, thinking these will carry them to Heaven,
though otherwise full of impiety. The Apostle James argues against this
position that faith without a holy conversation will save, as if it were a
Doctrine plausibly received. Certainly in Austin's time it was so universally
entertained, that a right faith would save, though separated from a godly life,
that he does warily, though sincerely sit himself against it. As it is thus
with Christians, so also with Ministers and Officers of the Church, how apt are
they to be confident, and to be pussed up, because if they have a true Call,
Church Government and Order according to Christ's Institution? not so diligently
attending to the strict and holy practice of godliness, as they ought to do.
The Apostle speaks notably to this point, 1 Cor. 5. 6, 7. where he taxes
them for their boasting in many Church Priviledges, when impiety was not
censured amongst them, Your glorifying is not good; They gloried in their
teachers, they magnified their abilities and gifts; but says the Apostle, This
is not good: All this is vanity as long as wicked men are suffered amongst you.
So that you see, neither parts or gifts, nor divine Institutions and Officers
in the Church of God, without godly and holy lives are matter of any true and
solid comfort. Therefore we cannot pass by that serious and holy observation
which Musculus has upon this passage of Paul's encouraging himself, not from
his Apostolical office, not from his miraculous and extraordinary gifts, but
his sincere conversation. The Catholical corruption of the Church came in, when
this pestilence had infected the Officers of the Church, that they did not
think it so much material, how they had their conversation in the world, so
that they kept faithful to the Roman Sea. And would to God (as he goes on)
these vanities did not prevail in those Churches, which are freed from
Antichristianism; and this poisonous root (says he) is not a little watered of
those, who cannot speak of the dispensation of the mysteries of God, unless
they often inculcate, that it is not so material how the Minister lives, so
that Christ's Institutions are exactly observed. Thus he, adding more also to
this point. This is enough to show, That the Reformed Churches are not to rest
upon their Reformed Doctrine, Reformed Discipline, unless also the lives of all
in their respective places be commensurated to the rule of God.

In the fourth place, When we speak of a convincing holy life, that may be
understood two ways, either, 1. Potentially, such as is apt to convince, and
of its 4. A godly life is convincing, either potentially or actually.
own nature tends thereunto. Or, 2. Actually and eventually, which does so
convince, as that it draws out an acknowledgement, when they do (...) and
(...). This distinction is to be observed; for the former many times is without
the later. Even as the Sun is in it self most visible, and yet to a blind man
it does not enlighten him: so it many times falls out, that godly Ministers
and godly Christians do live convincing lives; so that they will be a testimony
at the day of judgment against all impenitent sinners, and yet the world will
not acknowledge this. It is plain in Christ; whose life could be every way way
more convincing than his? What sin could they charge upon him? He was not
even as the best Ministers of God are, so subject to infirmities, to rashness,
to passions, to worldliness, or any other evil; and yet for all that his
Ministry and life did not so actually convince many of his hearers, as that
they did acknowledge him to be the Son of God, the true Messiah, and Savior
of the world. Some indeed did acknowledge him, but the Pharisees and Sadduces,
these said, He was an impostor, a blasphemer, and therefore they put him to
death, as judging him a false Prophet. Thus you see that there may be a
convincing life, and yet for all that men will be obstinate and malicious,
hardening themselves against the duties required of them. What are the causes
that make godly lives often not convincing.


Now it is good to take notice of some of those causes that keep men from being
convinced that such Ministers, or such people walk in the ways of the Lord,
and therefore we are to walk in their steps: As

1. Prejudice and prepossessed principles already received, whereby we stop the
ear like the Adder, and will not hear the voice of the best charmer and wisest.
Thus 1. Prejudice.
it was with many of the Jews, they had a tradition that no good, no Prophet
could arise out of Galilee; They expected a Messiah that in a temporal pompous
manner should deliver them from all external bondage, and therefore they would
not be convinced by any thing that Christ did, or said.

2. Corrupt and earthly affections, when our hearts are set upon any worldly or
2. Corrupt affections.
self-interest; This will keep us from being convinced, though Angels should
come and preach to us. Thus the Pharisees they were moved by self-respects, if
they should yield to Christ, their applause, their gain would quickly perish.
And no doubt such clay as this lies upon the eyes of many men, that seeing,
they do not see; knowing, they will not be convinced.

3. Mistake about the nature and way of godliness, may keep many off from
being 3. Mistake about the way and nature of godliness.
convinced. I shall instance only in two principles.

1. When men do judge nothing Godliness, but what is exactly perfect: And
therefore if they see Ministers or Christians subject to any infirmities, this
hardens them in their impieties, they see such men have failings. If this were
a good principle, no godly man in the world (except Christ, in whom all
fullness did dwell) had a convincing life. Was there any Prophet, or an Apostle
that had not some failings, that did not pray for the pardon of sin; If we
say we have no sin (says John in the name of the most holy) we deceive our
selves, and have no truth in us, 1 John 1. 8.

2. Another false principle that keeps from convincing, is, When we think
godliness lies in the actual abdication and renouncing of all earthly, worldly
things. It is true, in our afflictions we are to have these things, as if we
had them not. There is to be an habitual preparation of heart, to leave all,
when Christ shall command. It is true, We cannot serve God and Mammon; the love
of the Father, and the love of the world cannot consist together; but the love
of God, and the use and possession of these things may. Now by this error many
Papists are not convinced of the holiness that is in reformed Churches. Why so?
Oh, say they, you have no Monasteries; you have no public places for religious
persons; you have no votaries, that part with their earthly substance, and vow
a life of poverty, your Ministers marry, and have children. Thus the Papist is
not convinced, because he mistaketh about godliness; and not only they, but
many deluded persons amongst us, are offended, because Ministers take
maintenance, provide for their families; as if this were against godliness,
whereas the neglect of this would be to offend to God.

Use of Exhortation, to all Ministers and private Christians, to study for
convincing lives. The more power and conviction is therein, the greater is
Religion honored, the more is God glorified; the easier is the conversion of
others, and the more is the mouth of profane men stopped. Consider not only
what is lawful, but what is convincing; especially take heed of such actions,
or a life that is the contrary; scandalizing, offending, and causing Religion
to be the worse thought of by thy means.

SERMON. C.
It Is Perseverance that is the Crown of Holiness.

2 COR. 1. 13. And I trust that you shall acknowledge even to the end.
THe Apostle having declared, that he had his testimonials, not only from his
own conscience, but theirs also: he further adds, that he trusts this will
hold and continue. For it is nothing to have hopeful beginnings, and
afterward to revolt from all again. Blossoms without fruit will not answer
Gods expectation.

Now this his hope is expressed in this last clause of the verse, I trust you
shall acknowledge, even to the end. To the end] that is, say some, fully and
perfectly, opposite to that (...), in part, mentioned in the next verse; or
else as it is used several times for the end and utmost of a thing; as Christ
is said, John 13. 1. To love his to the end. And 1 Thessal. 2. 16. Wrath is
said to come upon the Jews, (...), that is, to the end, as some expound it, who
are against the Jews National conversion. But it may be understood of the
heaviness and quality of the judgments which are inflicted upon them, being
so great that they cannot be more. Or else it may be interpreted of that end,
which God has appointed for the judgments which are to come upon them, till
which end be accomplished, there is no possibility of escaping that wrath,
which is upon them. When the Apostle says, He trusts they shall acknowledge to
the end, some understand it wholly of Paul, as if his meaning was, My
conversation has hitherto been acknowledged by you to be sincere and upright,
and I trust in God, that by his grace he will so preserve me, that you shall
never see otherwise by me. I hope, by the assistance of God, always to keep up
this integrity of life. Others understand it of the Corinthians, I hope as you
do acknowledge us, so notwithstanding all the calumnies and subtle endeavors
of the false Apostles to draw you away from me, yet you will persevere and
continue in your right judgment concerning me.

We may very well take in both together; for the latter does necessarily
suppose the former; they could not continue in their acknowledgement of his
integrity, unless Paul also did persist in his uprightness.

Now in that Paul says, He trusts (viz.) in God, that he shall be thus
preserved: you see the humble and holy frame of his heart; he does not put
confidence in his own strength, in his own gifts and graces, but alone in God;
which might teach us, That though never so godly, yet we are to depend upon God
alone for our perseverance in the way to Heaven. But we have already spoken to
this in the general, That it is the property of the godly to acknowledge the
grace of God toward them in all things. We shall therefore pitch upon another,
which flows from both the interpretations joined together, viz.

That hopeful beginnings in the ways of Religion, are not enough without An
hopeful beginning in holiness, is not enough without perseverance.
a faithful perseverance therein.

It is not enough for a man that runs a race, to set out at first with all
speed and swiftness, unless also he hold out to the end. Neither does it
avail a Traveller to get up betimes, and to begin his journey with all haste,
if afterward he loiter, or come back again. Now this falls out too often
very sadly in our course of Christianity; many that were once first, are now
last: Yea are now nothing at all, but turned clear out of the narrow way, into
the broad way that leads to Hell and destruction. Thus the Apostle upbraideth
the Galatians, Galat. 3. 3. For ginning in the Spirit, and ending in ^he flesh;
are you so foolish, says he? It is the greatest folly that can be. For hereby
all our former zeal, all our bypast activity for God is forgotten, all is in
vain, Have ye suffered so many things in vain? as it follows in the next
verse. And again, it is extreme folly, because we part with God for sin;
with Heaven for Hell, with honey for gall; we lose our sweetness and fatness,
to become briars and brambles, that are fit for nothing but to be burnt.

To enlarge this, consider,

First, That a man who does first set upon the way of Religion, who will 1. A
man that would set upon an holy life, must first look to his foundation.
become a Disciple of Christ, must above all things look to his foundation
well. He must have a special care that he lays a good beginning, otherwise
though he may make a glorious show for a while, his fall at last will be very
great and terrible. Therefore our Savior knowing the hypocrisy and
inconstancy of man's heart, does much press this point, and that to such
hearers, who did show exceeding great zeal and forwardness in following after
him. witness the Parable of the several kinds of grounds that received the
good seed, Matthew. 13. and Luke 8. The difference between the good and bad lay
in this, that one had a good and honest heart, wherein the word of God had deep
rooting; The other had only a superficial work, and therefore when hardship
came, could not endure. So likewise the Parable of the foolish and wise
builders, Luke 6. 47. is expressly to this purpose, that none should please
themselves in hearing of the Word, in public duties and profession; but look
to their foundation, to observe what all their duties and expressions are built
upon. For what is built only upon a Rock will endure, when storms and tempests
shall arise. It is necessary to instance in some of those particulars that will
thus qualify our beginnings. For as in diseases, yea and in sins, the Rule
is, To look to the beginnings; So in another sense, it is good counsel to
observe, what was the first beginning that ever brought you into the ways of
God. How came you to leave off what was formerly done by you, and to appear in
a contrary way? For in some sense we may say here, not dimidium, but principium
est plus toto. And

First, We are to look to our motives, whether they were temporal, external
upon some outward advantages; or whether holy and spiritual. Christ had many
followers, because of the loaves. There are many that know Christ after the
flesh; that come with the petition of Zebedee's children, Grant that we may sit
in thy Kingdom, one on the right hand, and another on the left, thinking
Christ's Kingdom would be outward and glorious. Now such as these will never
continue: It is but painting, and near the fire it will melt: It is but the
morning-dew, when the Sun arises it will vanish away. Oh then above all
things look to thy motives! Consider what it was that brought thee off from thy
former ways? Was it from beholding a spiritual excellency in Christ and holy
things? Was it for godliness sake? Then because Christ is the same, and
godliness is the same, thou will also be the same; but if to get the favor of
men, to get wealth, to obtain paces of credit and profit, then thou art but a
meteor compounded of terrestrial materials, and so wilt be tossed up and down,
as any wind drives thee.

A second thing necessary to look to in thy beginnings, is to see, That the
workings of Gods Spirit make impressions deep enough, that it have full
rooting. For Matthew. 13. and in many other places, we read of many common gifts
of Gods Spirit bestowed upon men, whereby they may make very hopeful
beginnings; they may be furnished with excellent gifts and abilities, so as to
be able to work miracles; they may taste of the good word of God, they may be
enlightened, they may believe, they may receive the Word with joy; and are not
these great and rare things? How few are there that attain to thus much? They
have not that common illumination, nor those transitory affections, whereby we
may say, they do for a season rejoice in the light. When therefore we begin to
take the first step to Heaven, we are to consider whether we have any more than
the common breathings and inspirations of Gods Spirit, whether we have more
than gifts or abilities, more than some bodily ravishments or ecstasies. For all
these do not necessarily infer the new creature, o^ a divine nature within
us. Indeed we could not have these things without the assistance of Gods
Spirit; and therefore when carnal and natural men are partakers of these, they
admire them, they take these for grace, they never had such workings upon their
souls before; there is a vast difference in themselves, as they find, between
what they were once, and what they now feel; and this makes them very secure
and confident; but because a good foundation, was not at first laid, therefore
many of such a frame of spirit going no further, do greatly apostatize, and are
more taken with their opinions, experiences and apprehensions, than Christ
dwelling in them; they are affected with them, and not renouncing all, go out
of every thing, that Christ may be exalted, and they debased.

Thirdly, And I will instance in no more, It behooves those who are beginners
in Christianity, deliberately and seriously to consider how much it will c^st
t^ be godly. They are not only to look to their motives, but to the nature of
such duties as they must be continually exercised in. For when a man finds
that the way of godliness is a more self-denying, mortified way, a more opposed
and persecuted way than he expected; this makes him to be offended, and he is
ready with Judas to betray Christ for a piece of silver; or with Esau, to sell
his birthright for a mess of pottage. Our Savior speaks fully to this, Luke
14. 28, 29, 31, 32. where pressing those who are to be his Disciples to these
great and difficult duties of hating father and mother, and life it self for
him; Yea to take up his cross, and to follow him: No more for ever to own any
object, as the chiefest delight of his soul, but Christ; he illustrateth this
by two similitudes, one of a builder, who if he be wise, will consider what
expenses he is able to bear, before he sets upon it, lest his folly be known
to all: And another of a King going to war, who will first consider what his
strength is; and whether he be able to meet his adversary or no. Thus it ought
to be with every one that will profess the name of Christ: How come you to to
do it? Have you seriously considered what it is to be a Christian indeed? Can
you hate all, leave all, if Christ require? Can you part with your lusts, your
pleasures and profits? If you could have these, and Christ too, then the way to
Heaven would not be so difficult, then many would be saved. But this is that
which makes so many apostasies, so many revoltings and scandals in the way of
Religion, that men come on a sudden into the profession of Christ, either for
education only, or the national example, or some external encouragements; and
then when they meet with harder brunts than they looked for; when they see
Christ will have them to be godly in good earnest, to be self-denying indeed,
else they shall not be owned by him, then they discover [that Insipientis est
dicere, non putabam,] the language of the unwise, I did not look for this, I
will go back into Egypt again, rather than endure in this wilderness. Thus you
see that a man's beginnings in Religion is all in all: It is not so much to ask,
Does he pray, does he hear, does he walk otherwise then he did? But what was
the cause of this? How comes it about that he does so?

Hence the second particular to clear this truth is, That true, solid, and
sincere 2. Sincere beginnings are the cause of perseverance.
beginnings are the cause of our perseverance and continuance in what is holy.
Wheresoever a principle of supernatural life is infused, Whosoever is borne of
God; The man who has the fear of God put into his inward parts, this man will
be preserved, that nothing shall either totally or finally separate that soul
and Christ: So that good and true beginnings, will be sure to have holy and
comfortable endings. That place shall suffice for the present, John 10. 27, 28,
29, 30. My sheep hear my voice, -- and I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand, etc. To
say they may by their own negligence throw themselves out of Gods hand, is to
thwart the comfort intended there for true believers. For if the Devil, or
wicked men could not make them to perish, yet if they should do it themselves,
if the grace of God did not keep back their own corrupt inclinations, as well
as keep off the Devil, they should remain in continual perplexing fears and
uncertainties. Where then the foundation-stones of this spiritual building are
truly and soundly laid, there no tempests can wholly overwhelm, though they may
cause terrible shakings; and therefore perseverance is not the condition upon
which the truth of grace depends, but it is the effect of it; that is, we are
not to say (as Arminians do) If you persevere in believing, if you continue in
loving of God, then this will make your grace effectual; then this will make
you to be sincere and not hypocrites. For if so, then till we die, we cannot
have any true ground of comfort, because we know not how irrecoverably we may
fall off from Christ, before that time come. And this is to thwart the general
torrent of the Scripture, who calls upon the people of God, To rejoice, and
to have peace with God, as a Father; and to encourage our selves from the
present state of grace we are in, so that we shall never be deprived thereof.
Perseverance then does not make our grace to be true, but true grace makes us
to persevere, as the wheel runs round (which is Austin's comparison) not
that it may be round, but because it is round. It is true, our Savior says,
John 8. 31. If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples indeed; not
that this made them so, but because this would declare and manifest them to be
so.

Thirdly, Therefore it is not enough for the grace of God once to put us into
3. Therefore the grace of God is not only necessary to begin, but also to
continue holiness in us.
a state of holiness, and then to leave us to our selves; but it is necessary
that we should have his constant quickening grace, to enable us to hold out to
the end. Christ is not only the Author, but the finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.
2. And therefore we have the godly so often praying, that God would keep them,
that he would teach them, that he would increase their says, that he would not
lead them into temptation; which necessarily suppose, that the same grace of
God, which began the foundation, must also build up all, and finish whatsoever
is begun. It is not then from our selves, or from the nature of grace, as if it
were not amissible: Adam, and the apostate Angels are a clear instance to the
contrary; but from the assistance and help of Christ without us.

Lastly, Though perseverance to the end be thus the promised effect of Gods
grace, yet that does not exclude, but include an holy fear, lost we that stand
4. Perseverance promised, does not exclude, but include fear, watchfulness,
and diligence.
should fall; a diligent working out of our salvation with fear and trembling;
a constant watching over our hearts, and a daily keeping down of our body, lest
after we have appeared so long in the ways of Christ, we afterward turn
aside into the Devils paths. For there are sad instances in Scripture of such,
who in outward appearance were eminent in the Church of God (as Judas was) but
having not a sure bottom, and neglecting such means, which Christ required of
them, they became sad scandals in the Church of God, for their fall was great.

Use of Exhortation, Not to rest upon what we have been. What though so many
years thou have appeared a Disciple of Christ? For if the foundation was not
well laid at first, one time or other there will be a breaking upon thee. What
moved thee, what prevailed over thee to become a Disciple of Christ at first,
and be moved hereunto? because if thou continuest not in the good way thou
did begin in,

1. Thy revoltings will do more hurt, then ever thy hopeful beginnings will do
good. Thy later end will more offend God, more scandalize Religion, than ever
thy former zeal could exalt it. Oh what a sad thing is it to be a destroyer of
what thou did once build up!

2. Remember the folly (as you heard) that is in doing so. For godliness is
the same, Christ is the same, Heaven is as good as it was at first: Why then
should it not be so to thee? What art thou weary of gold for dross and dirt?
Is it better to lie roaring in hell, than to be blessing and praising of God to
all eternity?

3. This makes thy condemnation greater. Those profane wretches that never
set their face toward Heaven, that have continued in that wickedness, which of
old they were accustomed unto, these will meet with more easy punishment then
thou shall. The Apostle Peter speaks terribly to such a man, 2 Pet. 2. 20. If
when they have escaped the pollutions of the world, they are again entangled
and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning. Better
never have known the way of godliness, better never have set thy hand to the
plough, then to look back again to thy former lusts.

4. The anger of God even in this life, does break out most dreadfully upon
such, blasting their parts, cursing them, that no fruit should grow more upon
them; giving them up to abominable lusts, and to such an obstinate, senseless
heart, that they are never able to recover again, as appears, Heb. 6. 6. Oh
pitiful and wretched, who are thus cast out from God, and the good thoughts
of those that fear God!

SERMON. CI.
Of the mutability and changeableness there is in the Affections of the best
Churches, to their spiritual Guides and Officers.

2 COR. 1. 14. As also you have acknowledged us in part, that we are your
rejoicing, even as ye also are ours, in the day of the Lord Jesus.
THe former part of this verse contains a reason, why his hope is so steadfast
concerning their perseverance in acknowledgement of him, viz. from what has
been past, what they have done already, they had acknowledged him, and
therefore hops they will. Hence Chrysostom reads this passage, before the
last clause in the former verse: He makes those words [I trust you shall
acknowledge even to the end] to follow these words. But why does the Apostle
say, You have acknowledged us in part? Chrysostom attributes it to his modesty
and humility. For being to say, That they did acknowledge him to be their
rejoicing: Lest this should seem pride and arrogance, he adds, in part.
Others as Grotius relates it to the persons acknowledging, in this sense, that
part of them, some of them did so. They were not all carried away with the
delusions of talse Apostles: Some did keep their integrity and sound judgment.
And thus it is used, Romans 11. 18. Hardness of heart is happened in part to
Israel, which is not to be understood of the hardness of heart, for the Jews
were wholly delivered up to that; but of part of them, yea the far greater
part; yet somes Jews were converted, and did believe in Christ; but it is far
more probable to interpret it of the acknowledgement it self. Though they did
not so fully as at first acknowledge him, yet since his former Epistle to them,
and diligent information of them, they began in some measure to recover out of
their error, and so in part entertained better thoughts of him, than before.
So that it is like that expression, I know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 12. though
there it be (...), or rather like that, 2 Cor. 2. 5. where Paul says, He has
not grieved me, but in part; and Romans 15. 15. I have written more boldly to you
in part; and Romans 15. 24. That I may in part be filled with you; in which
places it is (...). This expression then does not relate to the first time of
the Corinthians acknowledgement of Paul, which was in their conversion from
their Heathenism, for then they did wholly and universally receive him; but to
the time of their repentance and recovery out of those decays in their
affections toward him, which by the false Apostles had been procured, they
began to be something awakened, they saw they had foolishly given ear to other
teachers; and now being thus in their recovery, Paul to encourage them that
they may acknowledge him, (...), both to the end, and fully and perfectly, not
in part only, does take notice of this acknowledgement. We see then here the
inconstancy and unsetledness of these Corinthians; at first none but Paul; he
was their father, afterward through the eloquence and humane persuasions of
false teachers, they began to despise Paul, to leave him, to admire others. But
when Paul by his Epistle had severely and thoroughly dealt with them, informing
them of several errors and vices that were amongst them, then they begin to
apply themselves to him again; and this indeed was the good hand of God, that
they did not wholly apostatize, but their withering love to Paul did begin to
flourish again. From whence observe,

That the best Churches are full of mutability and changeablenesses, of
affections The best Churches are full of changes in their affections to their
spiritual guides, though never so faithful.
to their spiritual guides and officers, though never so faithful.

What fault could these Corinthians find with Paul? Was he not the first
instrument used by God to bring them out of that miserable darkness they sat
in? Did not they find the mighty power of God going along with his ministerial
labors? Did not their own experience inform them of the great good they had
got by him? Yet we see that afterward the plausible eloquence and subtle
crafty insinuations of false teachers had brought Paul wholly out of request,
he was contemprible. They began to question his Apostleship, and to argue
against his office. Thus you see what levity and fickleness may be even in good
men. This was Paul's case with other Churches likewise, which makes him so
apologetical in commending his office and call, because they compelled him
thereunto, he was forced thereunto; it was not his own credit and glory that he
stood upon; he could be contented to be despised by them; but his Office he was
bound to vindicate. For this was for their own good, their own souls might
perish, if they miscarried herein. Let us instance only in the Church of the
Galatians, Paul is put to an amazement about them, Galatians 1. 4. I marvel
you are so soon removed from him that called you, unto another Gospel. So soon
removed.] How quickly may false teachers demolish that which the faithful
Officers of Christ have been many years with much zeal and diligence building
up? Tares sown by envious persons will quickly come and overgrow the wheat.
Hereupon Chap. 3. he shows their folly by many convincing and piercing
arguments in falling off thus from him; and Chap. 4. 15. puts them in mind,
that they had other thoughts of him once. Paul was once a blessed man, and his
preaching blessed preaching; Where is the blessedness you once spoke of? Yea he
says, their affections were so vehement and hyperbolical, That they would have
plucked out their eyes (their dearest and tenderest part) and have given them
him, if this could have done him good: yet how quickly did these boiling
affections turn into ice? They will receive other men's doctrines rather than
his. And if we see the Apostles of Christ that had their call immediately from
him, that were furnished with a large measure of the Spirit, and enabled to do
such wonderful miracles before their eyes, may come to be contemned and
vilified, and that by their own people, who had once so highly honored them:
No wonder if ordinary Pastors and Officers do often meet with such
entertainment in the world. Yea, was it not thus with Christ himself? Did not
he find the gross mutability of the people, when one while they honor him,
crying Hosanna, and at another time, Crucify him? If they do thus to the green
tree, will they not much rather to the dry? And shall the servant be above his
master?

To enlarge this, Consider, 1. It is an imbred corruption for all inferiors to
be mutable to their inferiors


First, That it is an imbred corruption in all inferiors, to be mutable and
changeable to their Superiors. Wise men do observe this mobility in the
people, even to their best Governors, so unthankful and ungrateful are
people by nature. Is not this plain in Moses? What a faithful Governor had he
been to the people of Israel; like a tender father, he even carried them in his
arms; God had honored him exceedingly before their eyes, working many
miraculous mercies for them by his means; yet how often did they murmr
against him? which was a great sin, because as Moses tells them, Exodus 16.
8. Your murmurings are not against us, but the Lord. Yea they are ready to fall
off from Moses, and to make themselves a Captain, that they may go again into
Egypt. Thus the people also dealt with David, when they were in bitterness of
spirit for the loss of their wives, they spoke of stoning David. Among the
Heathens there are plentiful examples of this unthankful mutability; Camillus
and Themistocles, with others; which made the latter say, when they had cast
him off, after all the good service he had none for them, That they did with
him, as beasts do, in a storm run to a tree to shelter themselves, and when
that is over, they fall a browzing on it, and breaking the boughs thereof. How
many of their famous Worthies have the Heathens banished most ingratefully, and
then in their necessities entreated them to come again? Which made one wise
Roman say, when persuaded to enter upon some public design for the common
good, but dangerous, deny, saying, Why should wise men venture themselves for
fools? The Athenians were impetuous to put Socrates to death, and after he was
dead, then they were grieved and impatient, till they had destroyed those that
were the Authors of it. Now if it be thus in civil affairs, no wonder if there
be more changeableness, and more ingratitude in Church Matters. For in the
faithful discharge of our spiritual office, there we directly oppose the
natural inclination and love of men to their sinful pleasures; we deal chiefly
with the inward man, and the matter we propound for the Doctrine of it to be
believed, is wholly transcendent to their humane apprehensions, and the
goodness of it is altogether supernatural; Yea contra-natural, take man in his
sinful naturals. Hence it is that spiritual governing is far more difficult
than civil; men being more willing to receive what makes for their bodily good
and welfare, then for their souls and spiritual estate.

Secondly, This inclination to changeableness and mutability in matters of 2.
This inclination to this changeablenes has more temptations in great than
small places.
Religion, has greater temptations in rich and famous Cities, than in villages
and small parochial places. Now Corinth (as you heard) was a famous and rich
City, eminent for trading, yea and for earning and gifts. Hence Paul does in
none of his Epistles, so much debase the wisdom of the world, endeavoring to
exalt Christ above all things, as in his Epistles to these Corinthians; and it
seems they did a bound with many excellent gifts and abilities, as the
Apostle many times witnesses. Now this was their snare and temptation; this
made them proud of their knowledge; this made them admire gifts more than
grace; this caused them to make parties and factions; some cried up one
teacher, some another: So that their wealth and gifts did prove a great
temptation to them; and by this means Paul came to be undervalued. Thus it
falls out many times in great and populous places, where are variety of
Ministers, and of gifts, and a people raised up in knowledge and wealth; it is
very hard for them to keep in a constant, real esteem of sound and soul-saving
truths; but with the people of Israel, to be weary of Manna, to desire even
garlic and onyons above it. The Gospel was at first preached and planted in
Cities, and their Churches were first constituted, it being a long time ere the
little villages in the Country did receive the Christian faith. Hence to this
day (say some) we call Heathens Pagans, a pagis, from villages, because they
did last of all receive the Christian faith. But then they have this advantage,
that they are freed from those many temptations that are in the Churches of
Cities; for they having not many Officers, nor hearing variety of gifts, are
not so tempted to be always lusting after some new thing, as in the
forementioned places; yet for all this they have the same corrupt inclination;
and if they have not the temptation brought to them, they will seek out for the
temptations: and hence many villages are quickly poisoned with corrupt and
erroneous ways. For the Devil he goes up and down roaring, to seek whom he
may devour, whether in Cities or villages.

Now let us consider of the Causes which make such a change and alteration,
What are the causes of this changeablenes
and that many times in those who are very good, or at least apparently so. And

1. This arises from the fickleness and inconstancy that is in many men.
There are few that profess Religion, that do obtain to a sound mind, that are
well 1. Inconstancy and fickleness.
rooted in the first principles of Religion; They content themselves with
general and confused apprehensions, and therefore can speak of those things,
which yet they have no clear understanding about. Now how can such straws and
feathers as these, but be blown away with every wind of doctrine? It is the
Apostles expression, Ephesians. 4. 14. implying, that it is childishness, levity,
want of a serious, weighty and solid judgment, that makes us leave the
faithful Ministers of God, and greedily run after false teachers.

2. An overhasty and unadvised receiving of the Ministers of the Gospel, before
we well consider what we do. For thou who receivest a man to be the Pastor 2.
An overhasty receiving of the Ministers.
of thy soul, thou must not look that he should come down to thee, but thou to
him: I mean, you must not expect that he should comply with you in your lusts,
in your sins, in your superstitions. But on the contrary, that you will
readily submit to whatsoever he shall from the word of God make known to you.
It is unreasonable to look that a Minister should go from his Commission; he
has not a magisterial, but ministerial Authority; he cannot make virtue, vice;
or vice, virtue; he cannot make the way to Heaven broader than it is; he may
not dispense Ordinances, otherwise than according to the order of Christ: and
if so, judge whether is more reasonable, that you yield your selves to Christ's
commands, or we comply with your unlawful ways? Certainly we cannot come off
to your principles; we shall be damned, if we do. If I please men (viz. in
sinful things) I should not be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. said Paul.
And we must with Elihu profess, Job 32. 21, 22. We know not to give flattering
titles, in so doing God our maker would soon take us away. If it be thus with
us, that we are bound up; and you on the contrary are commanded to come out of
all evil ways, and receive the good word of God from out hands, then it ought
not to be any offense or staggering unto you, if you find us out of Gods word,
enjoining those things which the corrupt nature of man is against. But this
many times makes a great change in a people; they expected that the Ministers
of God should comply with their ends, their lusts, and then they would never
alter their affections from them; but when it proves otherwise, then they did
never so much advance and exalt, as they will afterward condemn and vilify.
This was plain in John's hearers; his strict life and unusual conversation made
them come into the wilderness to see him; they rejoiced to see such a Prophet
that was of their own, and therefore they flocked after him, John 5. 35. They
did for a while rejoice in his light; but when they saw he gave testimony to
Christ, and would not be a Prophet to serve their ends, then they railed on
him, and said, He had a Devil.

3. Curiosity, and an itching affection after new things, does make us very
changeable. An ill stomach must have variety of sauces; and what we are used 3.
Curiosity.
to, is apt to breed contempt. It is a brand upon the Athenians, Act. 17. 21.
That they spent their time in nothing else, but to tell or hear, (...), some
new thing. This is a dangerous disease in a man's soul, not to love and delight
in sound and known truths, but to affect things that were never heard of
before; some new Religion, some new expression, some new notion. Oh pray to God
against such a sinful distemper (...) it has been the undoing of many souls.
Do you lik the Sun the worse, because every day it rises upon you? It is the
same Sun, and yet you are not weary of it: no more ought ye to be of divine
and holy truths.

4. Sometimes mistakes about the Doctrine they deliver, makes them change 4.
Mistakes about the Doctrine delivered.
their affections. Some speeches are hard speeches, they take offense at some
expressions; and this has altered many, when the fault was in their
understandings, not in the Doctrine delivered. Thus it was with Christ himself,
Joh. 6. 34, 35. when he said, My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed. Many of his Disciples said, This was an hard saying, who can bear it?
and from that time many went back from him, and walked no more with him.

5. A faithful and conscionable discharge of their duties, in reproving,
admonishing 5. A faithful discharge of the Ministers office.
or setting up the pure ways of Christ, do many times cause men to fly off,
and from friends sometimes to become enemies and opposers. This did in part so
enrage the Galatians, which made Paul say, Am I become your enemy, because I
tell you the truth? Gal. 4. 16. What made the Israelites of old oppose and
persecute the holy Prophets of God? Was it not because they reproved them for
their sins and false worship, and endeavored the restoring of his Ordinances
accorning to his own primitive and pure institution? This makes men
acknowledge their Ministers but in part; some things they will praise, but
other things as much dispraise; and all is, because we are unwilling the
Officers of Christ should faithfully and sincerely discharge their duty.

Lastly, Many times the members of Christ's Church are alienated from their
Pastors, 6. The importunity of deceivers.
by the importunity of such men, who lie in wait to deceive. All the mischief
that was done to Paul in this point, it was by false teachers: Nothing hindered
so much the comfortable progress of his Ministry, as the subtle stratagems of
such wolves in sheeps clothing, they hod a more pleasing taking way with them;
they had their (...), Romans 16. 18. their sweet fair speeches; their insinuating
orations, and by this means these glistering serpents crept into them. Again,
they pretend much love and compassion to them, it grieveth them to see how Paul
seduceth them, how self-seeking and severe he is; as for them they have tender
bowels toward them; and thus by this loving pretense they catch them in their
snares. Thus Paul, Gal. 4. 17. They zealously affect you, but not well; yea
they would exclude us, that ye might affect them. Thus you see what their
design was, to take them off wholly from Paul, to exclude him, that so they
might have all the love and honor. Thus you see causes that may make people
abate or decay in their affections to their spiritual guides.

Let the Use be, 1. Of Instruction to the Ministers of God, To expect such
ingratitude in the world, to look for such ebbings and flowings of men's
affections in the faithful discharge of their Ministry, every man is a liar,
every man is a reed shaken with the wind, if they be not thoroughly consolidated
by grace: Only do thou look thou give no just occasion of such a change,
either by thy negligence in the Ministry, or indiscreet rash actions; and then
if they will leave thee, thou have no more to say, than Christ himself, Will ye
also go away? John 6. 67.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, To you that are people, Is there such a mutable
disposition in your nature, so much inconstancy, curiosity and love to your
selves, as to make you hate what you once loved? Then take heed to your selves,
watch against such a disposition. It is an excellent sign to love and delight
in old known truths, and not to be weary of them; yea the more thou hear,
the longer thou live under a Ministry, the more thy heart is affected with it.

SERMON. CII.
Of the mutual rejoicing which ought to be betwixt Minister and People.

1 COR. 1. 14. That we are your rejoicing, as ye also are ours.
THis is the Second particular in the Text, and does contain the Specification
wherein this acknowledgment of the Corinthians did consist, viz. That he was
their Rejoicing. However some false teachers had endeavored to take off their
affections from him, yet they had acknowledged him to be their Father, and
Master, by whom they were faithfully instructed in the ways of Godliness; and
for this they did bless God, and rejoice that they had such a Teacher; which
was so great a mercy, that few did enjoy the like. Now the Apostle adds, That
this rejoicing was mutual; he did as well rejoice in such apt and obedient
Scholars. Chrysostom observes this Addition to be a great Expression of
Paul's Modesty and Humility, for that the Corinthians should glory and rejoice
in such an eminent Teacher as Paul was; It is no wonder but that he should
rejoice in them, who were so inconstant, and so uncertain in their affections
to him; yea, who were to be blamed so much in Doctrinalls, and practicalls:
This may make us admire. But (says Chrysostom, This Paul does for humility
sake, that he might not procure envy, us if he thought two arrogantly of
himself, therefore he assumeth them into a co-partnership with his glory and
rejoicing, The Original word (...) lies already bear opened: There is nothing
difficult in the words, only when Paul and the Corinthians are thus said to be
one another rejoicing, we are to understand, that the Act is here put for the
Object of it, as often in the Scripture. Thus rejoicing is put for the Object,
Matter, and Cause of our rejoicing; and if you say, We are to rejoice in God
only, in the Lord, not in men, that is true, We are to rejoice in God, only
as the Author of all our good; yet we may in men, as they are instruments used
by God to communicate his benefits to us. Thus a people may rejoice in a
faithful Minister, not principally and originally, but secondarily, as the
Instrument which God has made very successful to their souls.

The Observation then is,

That it is a most happy and blessed thing, when Minister and people can, It is
a happy thing when Minister and people can rejoice in one another.
upon just and holy grounds rejoice mutually in each other.

When the people can bless God for the Ministerial gifts and graces bestowed
upon their Pastor; and he again can praise God, that he has a willing,
teachable, and obedient people, ready to receive the Ordinances of Christ in
the power and purity of them. This is a rare privilege, Oh there are but few
Churches, of which the Ministers may say, as Paul to the Colossians, Chap. 2.
That he does rejoice in beholding their order, and faith in Christ, To meet
with a people that are neither ignorant, heretical, nor profane, but willing
to walk according to Christ's rule, and his order; this is to see heaven upon
earth: The Apostle finds such matter of joy, not only in those Corinthians,
but in many other Churches; For as he had more Labors, more Oppositions, more
Persecutions than others, so also God gave him more joy and comefort in
beholding the spiritual success of his Labors; for this was the only
comefort of his spiritual heart, to see men embrace Christ, and to live worthy
of the Gospel, it was not his own Glory, Honor, and greatness, that he aimed
at; which is an excellent example to us Ministers of the Gospel, that our
Matter of joy should not be any earthly riches, or wealth, any great fame, or
worldly esteem, but that we are to win people to Christ alone, not our selves;
Thus the Apostle calls the Philipians his joy and crown, Phil. 4. 1. and 1
These. 2. 19, 20. speaking of his ardent affections to see their face, by way of
interrogation, the more emphatically to express himself, he says, What is our
hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye? And then adds
positively the same thing, for, or rather, surely, certainly, ye are our
rejoicing, (...) is not a note of reasoning, for then the Apostle would prove
Idem for Idem, as they say, but of Affirmation, and asseveration, Ye are our
crown of rejoicing. Grotius says, It is an allusion to Kings, who on their
solemn festival days have not an ordinary, but extraordinary Crown to wear,
for the greater pomp and glory: Such extraordinary honor would the
Thessalonians be to Christ, at the great day.

But let us consider this in the general, and then amplify it respectively, to
Minister, and people. And

First, The Relation of Pastor and people is by divine Institution. Christ
himself has appointed the Office it self, and the application of it to 1. The
relation betwixt Pastor and people is by divine Institution.
this or that man through the desire of the Church; so that, as Churches are of
Gods gathering: They are his creature, in a more special manner than the world
is; so likewise are the Officers, and spiritual Guides to teach them, 1 Cor.
12. 28. God has set in his Church Apostles and Teachers. Thus Act 20. 28. The
Holy Ghost is said to set them Overseers over their flock. ^eeing therefore
that this relation is built on a Divine Foundation, no wonder if managed
according to Divine Rules, that it is the cause of exceeding great joy. These
Relations are respectively for supernatural and spiritual ends, and effects:
The Minister is for illumination, Conversion, Edification; for the destroying
of the power and Kingdom of Satan, as also the establishing and promoting the
Kingdom of grace in the hearts of the people: The people also, they are to be
matter of encouragement to him; they are to be helpful and assistant in their
way, that Godliness may flourish, that the ends of the Ministry may not be
frustrated. The Apostle sometimes takes notice of the great usefulness, and
serviceableness even of some women in that kind; For, though Ministers be
compared to Light, to the Sun, and Stars, yet in this there is a difference.
The Stars give Light and Influence into these sublunary things, but receive no
benefit at all from them again; but the Ministers of the Church, even though as
eminent as Paul; yet they acknowledge the manifold benefits, and that in a
spiritual way, which they may receive from their people again: now then, how
happy is it when there is a reciprocal and circular helping of each other, when
spiritual guides do convert, edify, and quicken up their people; and again the
people do assist, help, and quicken up their Officers; certainly, as spiritual
delights are greater than any bodily ones, because the objects are more
excellent and useful; so should this mutual rejoicing in our spiritual joy
surpass all the delight that we take in our natural and civil relation, neither
the delight of a Wife in her Husband, or of a Child in his Father, should be
equal to the joy of a people in Faithful Officers: And so, e contra; the
Reason is evident, because the effects of this Relation are spiritual,
heavenly, and so infinitely transcending all earthly comeforts; and therefore
such who find no matter of rejoicing herein, it is because they are carnal,
sensual; they abide under the Dominion of their lusts, they never found the
Ministry spiritual and powerful to them; They never had the experience of the
blessed effects thereof upon their hearts, and then, How can they rejoice in i^?

3. Seeing that this mutual assistance is appointed by God as a special means to
destroy the Kingdom of Satan: Hence it is, that he does most assault this 2.
Therefore does the Devil endeavor to make differences betwixt Minister and
beople.
endeavoring to make discords, and differences between Minister, and people,
That so both the benefit and comefort of such unity might be frustrated.

It is true, the Devil delights to sow his Tares in every field; therefore in
civil estates, in domestical relations, he throws his Firebrands, and loves
to see all in Passions, and discontents; but especially his design is against
those spiritual relations, because the well mannaging of them does more
immediately oppose his throne of darkness. For this end he stirred up so many
falls Prophets and Teachers, whose works was to divide between the people and
their faithful guides. And can we think, the Apostles would have written so
Apologetically in many places, condescended so much in the ways of Humility,
and diligence, to win their affections, but that he knew by such Dissentions,
the Devil would enlarge his Dominions? Hence it is, that Calvin upon that place
of 2 Cor. 2. 11. Lest satan should get an advantage of us, though he take
notice of their exposition, who refer it to the Incestuous person; as if Satan's
design was upon that occasion to have him swallowed up with excessive sorrow,
yet he does in a great part relate it, to the Dissension that the Devil
endeavored to make between them and Paul: for if Paul was for the confirming
of their love to that person now repenting; but the Corinthians, under a
pretense of zeal against sin, should be against him: This would have caused sad
Divisions, and so thereby Satan would have prevailed. It is observed, as one of
Julians devilish designs against Christianity, to make a difference between
the Christians and their godly Pastors; and therefore he did craftily and
secretly pour all the oil he could into such flames, to make them greater: and
truly the Instances of such differences, even in the Reformed Churches do give
too full a testimony of the Devils labor herein. Should we speak of the
Churches troubles at Franckford, though exiled, and under Persecution, The
sharpest whereof was between the Flock and their Shepherd; yea, of the hot
contention between Geneva and Calvin, and in many other Churches, we may easily
be persuaded, that there is scarce any one thing, wherein the Devil goes more
about as a roaring Lion to deceive them, than to break the slaves of beauty,
and bands between Shepherd and Sheep, which should make both Minister and
people the more watchful and diligent; and also much in Prayer, that God would
disapoint all such purposes of Satan, and his Instruments. This may suffice in
the General.

Let us now proceed to the respective particulars: and first, How and why may a
people rejoice in their Pastor. 1. As the instruments whereby God has
instructed and converted them.


In what sense, and how a people may rejoice in their faithful Guides.

And first, They are to rejoye in them as those instruments which God has used
to bring spiritual light unto their mind, and heavenly heat into their heart.

For this it is the Apostle does so much insist upon, to convince the
Corinthians, That if ever they did believe, if ever they felt any thing of the
saving efficacy of Gods spirit upon their hearts, it was by his Ministry; and
therefore they would be unthankful to God, if they did not take notice of Gods
special blessing to them by his means. It is true, 1 Cor. 3. we see there the
Apostle zealously beating down their factions and Contentions, which they
raised by setting up one Officer, and Teacher to the despising of another; and
thereupon exalts Christ only: But yet, though Christ be the principal only,
and he alone gives the increase, yet he grants the Necessity of the Ministry
withal; Paul must Plant, Apollo must water, and these are Ministers by whom
they believed, Ver. 5. Although then it be our duty to lift up our hearts to
God alone, as he in whom and by whom all spiritual success does arise to us;
yet we are to rejoice in such instruments as God uses. For if we may be glad
of such Instruments that cause our temporal comforts and supports: If the
Child may rejoice in the father, if an indigent man in him who is potent, and
bountiful; no wonder then, if we do cry out, How welcome are the feet of those
who bring glad tidings of peace, Romans 10. 15. How beautiful are the very feet
of such? So that it plainly demonstrateth all such to be delivered up to the
spirit of slumber and profaneness, or of Error and Heresy, who do not find
this cause to rejoice in them, as Gods Instruments to their Souls.

2. We are to rejoice in them because of their works sake, and the Faithful 2.
For their works sake.
discharge of their duties.

And the more powerful they are herein, the greater ought our joy to be; Thus
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man account of us as the Ambassadors of God,
and Stewards of Christ. Thus the Apostle also commands 1 Thessal. 11. 13. To
esteem very highly of those who are over them, and admonish them, and that for
their works sake. Though they do admonish and reprove you, which is as
unpleasing to a sin, as salt to a sore; yet you are to esteem highly of them,
This requires not only external respect, but cordial and Internal, and this
must be for their works sake. Many times a people may glory in the Abilities,
in the Learning and admirable gifts of their Teachers, thinking that thereby
they surpass other Congregations; This is a vainglorious thing, too often seen
in great Cities; but the Apostle says, it must be for their works sake,
because they do faithfully and powerfully lead you into the paths of Eternal
Life. Thus, as David esteemed the word of God above gold and silver, because
thereby he was forewarned from sin; The spiritual, and holy commands of God not
enduring any sin, made him thus in love with it; So it should also be with our
people, they should delight and rejoice in the Ministry, because it is
efficacious against sin, because it enlighteneth, it converteth, it destroys
the works of the Devil; so that this particular discovers the Profaneness and
impiety of such men, who rejoice most in such Ministers as are either lazy and
negligent, or that are dissolute, and carnally humouring men in their evil
ways: These they boast in, and rejoice in; they account none like them. Thus
God of old complained of the people of Israel, that they loved such who did sow
pillowes under their arms, and encouraged the hearts of those that were
wicked; but made those sad, whom the Lord would not have made sad, Ezekiel. 13.
10, 22. How miserable are such a people who rejoice in the greatest judgment
that can befall them? Rejoice not in this, but weep and mourn rather, when
those who should deal faithfully with thee, do flatter and seduce thee, daubing
with untempered mortar: For God will destroy both such Prophets and such a
People.

Thirdly, We are to rejoice in the spiritual success and prosperity of their
work. 3. In the spiritual success of the Minister.


It is very sad to hear those complaints in the Scripture, Who has believed
our report? and All the day long have we stretched out our hands unto a
rebellious people: To have much rain fall upon the ground, and nothing but
briars and thorns coming up thereupon. When therefore we shall find that God
makes the Ministry a savor of life, and not of death, unto many; this ought
greatly to rejoice us, when thou find it to be a mighty word upon thy own
heart, or upon the hearts of others, wherein we ought to be exceeding glad.
For, Is there any greater mercy can befall thee, than to have the Word thus a
converting and saving Word to thee? Thou may admire thy Pleasures, thy
profit, thy lusts, and judge them sweet; But know, that the Saving efficacy of
the Ministry upon thy soul will be the blessedness indeed that shall endure for
ever; and therefore, when you hear men praise a Ministry, admire that; examine
what is the spiritual good they have found thereby, what Reformation, what a
change has it made? The Apostle tells these very Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5. 6.
that their glorying was not good: why so? because they did not purge out the
old leaven: They did not cast out that wicked person from amongst them; now all
this while they gloryed in their able Teachers, they magnified the wisdom and
Eloquence of many that preached amongst them; but says he, your glorying is
not good: where is the holy Order, the godly Discipline, the spiritual
Reformation, that you should have attained unto by the Gifts and Ministry of
your Teachers? This alone will cause us truly and solidly to rejoice.

Use of Instruction: How impossible is it for men upon true and spiritual
grounds to rejoice in the Ministry, unless they have felt some special efficacy
upon it in their hearts? They may glory in the parts, in the Eloquence, in the
abilities of men, but not for the spiritual success of the work. In Popery
they will have their people glory in their Church Officers because of the
external pomp and stateliness they live in, and so they become reverenced for
their outward glory: But this is wholly unsuitable with the Scripture-glory,
and the Scripture-rejoycing: for this alone will make thee praise God, if thou
have found his Ministers to be the happy Instruments of grace and peace to thy
soul.

SERMON. CIII.
Of the Rejoicing a faithful Minister has in an Obedient people.

2 COR. 1. 14. That we are your rejoyeing, as you also are ours, in the day of
the Lord Jesus.
THere remains the Second part of the Doctrine to be dispatched, which is,

The Ministers rejoicing upon good grounds in his people.

For you heard how happy and blessed a thing it was when there was cause for a
mutual and reciprocal rejoicing in one another, between Minister and People.
For God many times, upon wise ends, does divide those who should be conjoined:
sometimes he sends faithful Ambassadors to a froward and rebellious people,
as God in Ezekiel, that the people were briars and thorns to him, and that he
did dwell among scorpions; yet he must not be afraid, or dismayed at their
looks, though they were a rebellious house, Chap. 2. 6. Now what comefort
could Ezekiel have from such a people? They were so many briars and thorns
scratching and tearing of him; so many scorpions that had stings: and what
danger was it to dwell with such? Sometimes again there may be a godly and holy
people, highly prising the means of grace; and yet God set over them dumb or
wicked Pastors, that are Idols, and no shepherds. Now when this is so, their is
little rejoicing in one another: and if Jehoash, the King of Israel, 2 Kings
13. 9. compared an unequal War to an unequal and unfit Marriage, the thistle
in Lebanon with the Cedar in Lebanon, which proved destructive immediately; for
the wild beast in Lebanon came, and trod down the Thistle: How much more now
is this true in this spiritual relation? When an Ignorant or profane Minister
is over a gracious people, then the Thistle is married to the Cedar, but but
this cannot hold long; for the Devil, which is like the wild beast, the
roaring Lion, he will come, and devour all; so that, what the Apostle speaks,
2 Cor. 6. 14. may well be applied here, Be not unequally yoaked: what communion
has light with darkness? It is then very uncomfortable, when a Godly people
has an unfaithful Minister, or a faithful Minister an ungodly and a froward
people; This will make him sadly to bewail his condition, crying out with Isay,
Woe unto me, for I dwell among men of polluted lips, Isay chap. 6. 12. This
makes him like Lot to torment his righteous soul by seeing and hearing the
wickedness of those he dwells amongst, 2 Pet. 2. 8. This is a bitter and sad
Persecution: as it were, thou do not only persecute a Minister by the
malicious opposition, and violent courses against him, but even thy ungodly
life, that thou will not be reformed, that thou will not hear and humbly
receive the word of God; this makes them grieved, and wearied in their work;
This is a perfecution of their righteous souls, as Jeremy said, chap. 13. 17.
If you will not here it, my soul shall weep in secret places, for your pride.
Thus the wickedness and ungodly ways of a stubborn people are the very
heartbreaking of a godly Minister; while they deride, and scorn, his soul
mourns for them; while they revile, and reproach him maliciously, he gives
himself to prayer for them; Even as it is with some tender Father, who has a
Son grievously distracted, and bereaved of his wits, while he rages, and
raveth at his Father, while he miscalleth him and strikes at him; The Father
stands by sadly affected, weeping, and praying for his child, that he might be
brought to his sound mind again. Thus does a godly tender Pastor mourn over a
wicked, scornful, and rebellious People.

But let us proceed to show Wherein a faithful Minister of Christ has cause
Wherein a faithful Pastor has cause to rejoice over his people. 1. When they
are tractable and teachable.
to rejoice over his people:

And first, When they are a teachable and learning people, very tractable, and
ready to receive Instruction. This is a great joy and Encouragement: There are
many, who, as they are sottishly ignorant in matters of Religion, so they will
continue obstinately therein: They are not desirous and harkening after
knowledge; that say with those in Job 21. 14. unto God, Depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Now it is for want of a true knowledge of
God, that iniquity and profaneness does abound every where; as Hos. 4. 1. Is it
not better, and more comfortable to be a Shepherd to the bruit beasts, than to
such men; for the Shepherd drives his sheep into what Pasture he pleases, and
orders them according to his desire: but these, though brutish in knowledge,
yet are devilish in wilfulness and obstinacy, and therefore, as they ignorant,
so they will live and die, and go to Hell in it, go from darkness here to
darkness hereafter. It is a very great comfort to preach to a knowing people,
to men of understanding, and that are desirous to be more and more and more
instructed: There is great hope of such a peoples conversion, afterward, as
you see by that expression, Isa. 6. 10. Lest they understand with their heart,
and be converted. What good does the light at nown day to a blind man? This
makes Preaching in vain, and Hearing in vain.

Now, that you may be matter of rejoicing to your Minister in this respect,
Motives to knowledge in spiritual things. 1. Consider the Necessity of it.
consider these things;

First, The necessity of knowledge in holy things: There is no salvation without
it, 1 Timothy 2. 4. God would have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the truth; If they will be saved, they must first come to the
knowledge of the truth. Thou that art sottishly ignorant of the Principles of
Christianity, there is no way for thy salvation; such Ignorance as well as
Profaneness will necessarily damn, Isa. 26. 11. It is a people of no
understanding; therefore he that made them, will not have mercy on them. This
very Text breaks the staff of your confidence; for you are ready to say,
Alas, we are poor ignorant people, we know nothing, What then will this help
you? No, God that made you, will not have mercy on you. It is true, we pity
poor old blind men, because they are blind against their will, They would use
any means to have their sight: but you that are Ignorant, are no ways to be
pitied, for it is affected and wilful, your eyes might be opened, and you
will not: Oh how sad is it to preach to stones, to preach to posts, for so we
do, while to the grossly ignorant. Therefore as one said, when asked what was
the benefit of Learning; says he, ne lapis sedeat super lupidem, that when a
man is grown up, he may not in the Counsel-House sit as a stone upon a stone;
implying, that a man without knowledge was no better than a senseless stone: and
truly this good would you have by getting knowledge, that in the Congregation
thou may not sit a block upon a block. How grievous is it to have
Idol-hearers, that have eyes but see not, and ears but hear not? Know then, to
be an ignorant people is matter of grief to a godly Minister; for such carry
about with them, the visible mark as it were, of condemnation.

Secondly, That ye may be a knowing people, Consider, not only the necessity,
but the usefulness and profitableness of Christian knowledge: By this we come 2.
The usefulness of it.
to know how to please God, how to be saved, how to enjoy eternal life. All are
convinced of the necessity of knowledge of earthly things, They must know how to
plow and sow. Do you not set your children to know a Trade, do you not say,
They must do something that they may live, implying they are outwardly undone,
if they know not these things? Oh foolish and unwise! Must men know how to live
here, and not know how to live hereafter? Must men know how to keep of poverty,
and not how to keep off damnation? Why then do you not lay aside all things, to
get some competent knowledge of Christian Principles, without which you cannot
get any good by Sermons, by acraments; without which ye cannot tell how to
live, or how to die? And never complain, saying, Thou art two old, or thy
memory is bad, It is plain, thou have no heart to it, no zeal and affection for
it. For how many as unlikely as thou art have by diligence got knowledge, even
to the admiration of others? And God, he uses to bless those, and to increase
their gifts, that are serious in their desires after these things: But the
truth is, The world has thy heart, Lusts have thy heart; If thou did follow
the wise man's Counsel, to seek for it more than gold or silver, more then any
precious treasure, thou would not be such a blind wretch as thou art; Then,
says Solomon, thou shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God, Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5. If then thou dyest in thy ignorance, and
without instruction, which is threatened as a dread full judgment, Prove. 11. 23.
blame thy own corrupt, lazy, and wicked heart: now this universal ignorance is
the more abominable, because we enjoy the plentiful means of knowledge we have
constant Preaching, we have the Word read, and Ordinances administered in our
known tongue. How intolerable then is it, if generally people be still as
ignorant as if the Bible were not translated, and all Church Administrations
dispensed in an unknown tongue?

Secondly, Then are people matter of rejoicing to a ministry, when they are
believing of the word of God, and receiving it as Gods word, thereby 2. When
people believe and receive the Word as Gods Word.
awing their hearts, and captivating the whole man thereunto. For knowledge is
not enough. How many know, and can remember places of Scripture, can understand
most Sermons? But they do not believe those things to be true, neither are they
ingrafted in their hearts by faith, saying, This is Gods word, how can I go
against it? this is the word of God, and not man, that condemns this sin,
commands that duty. Woe then be unto me if I gainsay it, for this the Apostle
does exceedingly commend the Thessalonians, 1 These. 2. 13. ye he is so affected
with it, that he did thank God without ceasing in his respect, even because
they received the word of God, which they heard of Paul, not as the word of
men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually works in
those that believe. How comfortable a thing is this, for a Minister to see his
people receiving the truths he preaches of Gods word? They hear and tremble,
they believe and tremble; so that without this says, as it is impossible to
please God, so it is to get any good by the Ministry. As its not the seeing of
meat, but the eating of it, and digesting, that does nourish: so neither is it
the hearing and knowing, but the believing of it that makes a powerful change
upon a people.

Thirdly, Then a people rejoice a faithful Minister, when to knowledge 3. When
they are converted by the Word.
and Faith there is added that complete efficacy of the Word, as to regenerate
us, and make us to become new creatures. Even men who yet will lie roaring for
ever in Hell, may have great knowledge, and some faith; yet, because not
regenerated, not delivered fully from their bondage of sin they lived in, do
therefore come short of Eternal glory. Now this is the most noble effect of
the Preaching of the Word, that it becomes spiritual seed, to give men a new
spiritual life, as well to feed, to nourish them therein, James, chap. 4. 18.
Of his own will begat he us, with the word of truth. and John. 17. Sanctify
them by thy word. When therefore the Ministers of God do not only become
Instructers, but Fathers, as the Apostle says he was to these Corinthians:
this is matter of great joy, Though ye have ten thousand Instructors, yet not
many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel, 1 Corinthians. chap. 4. 15. This then is a foundation of much indearing comfort, when
a people can own their Minister to be a Father to them, and he them for his
spiritual children; when by his Ministry they are able to say, I was
enlightened, I was converted, I was sanctified. Surely, if Aristotle say, We
can never recompense the Gods, nor our natural Fathers; neither are we able to
requite our spiritual Fathers. Although as in nature it is observed, that love,
though it be fire, yet it does descend, not ascend; so it is in spiritual
relations. Such Ministers who have been instrumental to the conversion of any,
do far more rejoice in such a people, then they can in the Minister. Hence the
Apostle speaks most affectionately, in an overflowing manner, 2 Cor. 6. 11,
12, 13. O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged, ye
are not streightened in us, but in your own bowels; now, for a recompense in
the same (I speak, as unto children) be ye also enlarged. Here you see Paul's
heart was more enlarged to them than theirs to his. This then is an unspeakable
mercy, when we shall be able to say with the prophet, (though in another sense)
Behold I, and the children which thou have given me, Isa. chap. 8. 18. Or, as
it is said of Christ, after all his sufferings for us, He shall see of the
travail of his soul, and be satisfied. He shall see his seed, and the pleasure
of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, Isa. 53. 10, 11.

Fourthly, Then are they rejoicing to a Minister, when they are a ready 4. When
they are ready to all duties.
and willing people in all Gospel Duties: when they are his living Sermons, his
walking Sermons; when they endeavor to adorn the Gospel by their conversation,
when there are no profane persons, no bitter roots growing up amongst them, but
a Garden without weeds, a floor of pure wheat without chaff; a net of good fish
only; a field of wheat without tares. It is true, there is no such people, no
such Church to be exspected in this life: But the less weeds, the fewer
brambles, the greater joy to the Husbandman. What a glorious commendation does
the Apostle give this Church, 2 Cor. 2, 3. when he calls them his Epistle to
be read and known of all men? Yea he says, They are manifestly declared to be
the Epistle of Christ. O what unspeakable gladness of heart would it be to a
Minister to be able to make such an holy boast of his people, That they are his
Sermons to be read, and known of all men? we may know what he preaches by the
lives of his people. The Apostle instanceth in one Duty, viz. their Liberality
to the poor Saints of God, 2 Cor. 9. 13. For thereby they did glorify God, by
their professed Subjection to the Gospel. This is blessed, when a people in all
Gospel Duties will not cavil, and be contentious, but declare their professed
subjection thereunto.

5. When they are a people willing and ready to submit to the whole Order of 5.
When they are ready to submit to the whole order of Christ.
Christ. To re^orm all corruptions and abuses; as also, with much Repentance to
manifest their sorrow for any negligence and remission herein. These very
Corinthians, as they were matter of joy, so also of much trouble, of much
trouble, of much sorrow, and Humiliation. Hence he speaks remarkeably, 2 Cor.
12. 20. I fear least when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and
that I shall not be found unto you, such as ye would; and least when I come
again, my God humble me among you, and that I shall bewail many which have
sinned already, and have not repented of their uncleanness. By this you see,
that though the Apostle had much rejoicing from them, yet he had also much
Humiliation: Many did not repent, and therefore put him to more severity than
he would. Now then that Paul may not contradict himself, They could not be his
rejoicing, and mourning also. Therefore we must either hereby gather that the
Corinthians were unconstant, sometimes hopfull and reforming, and afterward
again relapsing: or else this is spoken not in respect of all, but some of
them, who did grossly fail in their duty. For if we consult with 2 Cor. 17.
there we shall see the Apostle wonderfully affected with the joy that he had by
seeing the good effect of his former Epistle upon them; for thereby they did
set upon Church Order, they purged out the old leaven, they manifested much
godly sorrow, indignation and zeal, and every way endeavored to approve
themselves unto Paul, and this did so exceedingly rejoice him, that he says,
Verse. 4. Great is my glorying of you, I am filled with comefort, I am exceeding
joyful in all our tribulation. In the midst of all his troubles this rejoiced
his heart, that they did themselves assist to the casting out of wicked
persons, and were exceeding sorrowful for their former negligence herein. Thus
then, when a people are ready to observe all the Orders, and Instituions of
Christ, this is matter of great joy. But because many Churches have received
but half Christ, as it were; hence also their Ministers have received but half
joy: Some Protestant Churches received the Doctrine of Christ, but not the
Discipline: Some were for Orthodoxy in judgment, but not purity in lives; Some
were willing to cast of the Antichristian yoke, but then would not submit to
the rod of Christ: And by this means many faithful Pastors have gone to the
grave with great grief of heart. Oh it is a sad thing when people are so
wilful, as to necessitate a Minister to remove from them, because they will
not receive the whole Order of Christ, so that he is limited in his Ministerial
Administrations, and cannot do all he desires. Thus these Corinthians failed
also about holy Order, in reference to the Lords Supper, which makes him begin
his discourse about it after this manner, Shall I praise you in this? I praise
you not, 1 Cor. 11. 22. There are many other particulars, which rejoice a
Faithful Minister, as when they continue from not falling off from the truth,
either by false Teachers, or afflictions, (which is so great a matter, that the
Apostle says, 1 These. 3. 8. We live, if ye stand fast in the Lord) likewise,
when they are a growing people, and do not continue as babes, but are carried
unto perfection, and do not stand still, but walk in the truth, (...) I have no
greater joy, than to see my children walk in the truth, so 2 Epist. Ver. 4.

Lastly, When they live in accord and Love: when they think the same things,
and speak the same things, Phil 2. 2. Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like
minded, and let nothing be done through strife, and vain glory: But these may
suffice.

Use of Instruction: How much it lies a people upon so to live, and so to
walk, that they may rejoice the Ministers of God: To take heed of that
ignorance, of that Impiety and wickedness which may grieve them; and so they
shall give an account with heaviness, and not with joy, at the great Day.
Though for the present these things are a fable, or a scorn to thee, yet
remember, all the Sermons and Admonitions thou have had, all the pains and
studies taken for the Salvation of thy soul, will one day witness against thee.
This will make us with sadness and trembling to think what account can we give
of such persons at that great Day: we that have prayed for you, preached to
you, mourned for you, must then be your Accusers; we cannot help it: The Lord
will require your souls at our hands, and then must we say, O Lord, such a
sinner, and such a sinner, we have reproved him, we have declared thy will to
him, but he would have his lusts though he were damned for them, he regards
his sins more than heaven, and eternal life. Let us conclude all with that
sad and serious place; and oh that it might never out of your heart, but be
with you sitting and walking, rising and going to bed, Heb. 13. 17. Obey them
that rule over you, and submit your selves, etc. In which Text is much
excellent matter, but I shall touch at it only. First, There is the Sanction
and establishment of a Ministry and Pastors over a people; For they are
commanded to obey such. Where are they then that cry down a ministry, think it
needless, at least no Institution of Christ? Secondly, Here is established the
dignity of Ministers, partly by their Titles, (...), they are Guides, Leaders,
such as are set over you; and partly in the duty enjoined the people, which is
to obey, and submit. The first signifies obedience, the other reverence and
submission, so that they are to yield to the wholesome Counsels of their
Pastors, and that with honor to them. 3. Here is the office of a Pastor to
watch for the peoples souls, so that, if the Honor tempt, here is the Duty and
danger which may deterr. 4. There is the duty of the people, as you heard, to
obey and submit. 5. Here is a Reason of it, They are to give an account of your
souls; we are Stewards, and to see that one sheep be not lost. So that the
Ministers office is more dangerous, because he must account for himself and
many others also; which made Chrysostom wonder, if any Guide or Officer of a
Church could be saved; but that he speaks, says Estius, because of the many
evil and negligent ones; otherwise, such as Chrysostom himself would be saved.
Neither is this Text to discourage good and Faithful Pastors, but rather to
comefort them, because God will, in a special manner be with them, and bless
their Labors. Now the Apostle shows, that this is a special means to
discourage them, if by their wickedness people so walk, as that they shall
render their account with grief. For certainly, if the more they have
converted, the greater their accidental joy will be, then the more are damned
(though not by their fault) the greater will their grief be. And that we might
not think it a light matter thus to discourage and grieve a Minister, either in
his Pastoral labors for their souls, (as some relate the words) or when, at
the day of Judgment, he is to give an account (as others) he adds, this is
not profitable to you, that is, you will find the loss of this, you will smart
for it; God will reward them for their Labors, though ye be damned. Thus God
will be avenged for your ingratitude herein. But what people think of these
things?

SERMON. CIV.
Of the great changes that will be in the Day of Christ's coming.

2 COR. 1. 14. In the day of the Lord Jesus.
WE now come to consider the time, when this mutual rejoicing of Paul, and the
Corinthians in one another, will be most remarkable, and that is said to be, In
the day of the Lord Jesus. For although he speaks in the present tense, We
are, and you are our rejoicing; yet that is chiefly to be referred to the last
day. It is true, for the present he had much joy in them, and they in him; but
this was as the gleaning in respect of the Harvest afterward. Beza, because
the Apostle says (...), we are, and not (...), we shall be, does render it not
in die, but ad diem; as if the sense were, You are kept to be our rejoicing
against that day.

In what sense, Paul is called the Corinthians joy or boast, you have heard,
viz. instrumentally, not principally. Therefore Estius stretches too far,
more than ordinarily he uses to do; when from that expression used by Paul to
the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 20. Ye are our glory and joy; he would justify
their practice in Popery, who in their prayers call the Virgin Mary, their
life, and hope. For notwithstonding all their subtle distinctions, that is to
derogate from the Mediatorship of Christ.

But to our purpose. This rejoicing in one another, is chiefly to be put forth
at the day of Christ. And if you ask, How can we then rejoice in any thing, but
God only? Is not the blessedness of Heaven described by this, that we see God,
that we enjoy him? So that to rejoice in any thing else besides God, seems to
be like desiring a candle, when we have the light of the Sun. How can a
Minister for example rejoice, in the conversion of such and such persons, when
he has an infinite object of joy, even God himself to delight in? Can any
thing be added to that which is infinite?

To this it is answered, that there is an essential and an accidental joy in
Heaven. The essential one lies in beholding the face of God to all eternity,
and this cannot be increased or diminished: But then there is an accidental
joy, which arises from particular occasions or motives; and though Heaven and
eternal happiness does not consist in this, yet it does accidentally make us to
rejoice in more things. Thus the Angels, though they do see the face of God,
and thereby are completely happy, yet they are said, To rejoice upon the
conversion of a sinner. And thus the faithful Pastors of Gods Church, the more
have been converted by their spiritual labors, the greater will their joy
accidentally be. Not that this degree of joy or glory is merited by any, as
some have thought: for this also is of the mere gift of God.

The time when this solemn rejoicing shall be, is said to be the day of the
Lord Jesus; and as some Copies have it, Of our Lord Jesus. It is usual in
Scripture to call the day of the Lord, that wherein he does work some great
mercy and deliverance for his people, or that wherein he does inflict some
eminent and famous judgments upon the enemies of his Church. So that there is
the day of his mercy, and the day of his judgment. Now because of the end of
the world, then Christ will in a full and complete manner recompense his
people, and punish all the ungodly; therefore that is in a more remarkable
manner called, The day of Christ. It is true, there are some learned men, that
besides the day of Christ's first coming, which was not to destroy, but save;
and the day of his second coming, they make a middle one, and that is the day
wherein God did punish the Jews, and utterly destroy the Temple and City,
bringing wrath upon them to the full for their crucifying of Christ, and their
other sins. And of this they would understand our Saviors discourse, Matthew.
24. and in many other places, where they are commanded to watch, and to pray,
or to be patient and joyful, because the day of the Lord is at hand. That day
(say they) when God would destroy Jerusalem, and deliver the believing Jews
from the unbelieving and persecuting ones. Thus Grotius the late Annotator,
etc. But because this is to go against the common rode of Interpreters, we must
not have some specious colors, but strong reasons to make us depart from the
beaten way. To be sure here, as in many other places, by the day of Christ is
meant that last day of his, when he shall come as a King and Judge, to give to
every one according to his ways. From whence observe,

That Christ has a solemn day, wherein wonderful and great changes will
Christ has a solemn day, wherein great changes will be made.
be made.

Though for the present Paul's joy, and the Corinthians in one another, was not
very conspicuous and glorious; yet at that solemn day, then this glory would be
no longer eclipsed, but break forth in a mavelous manner.

Concerning this day, that there is such an one, as also the properties of it,
elsewhere is spoken of, in a Sermon on Act. 17. 31. and I shall not therefore
meddle in that. My work shall be to instance in some of those remarkable
changes, which this solemn day will then make, and how we are to live in
reference thereunto. And

First, Let us take up that for which the Apostle mentions it here in the
Text, 1. There will be a great change, as to the comforts of a godly Minister
and people.
There will be an happy, and a glorious change, as to the comforts of a godly
Minister, and a converted people. Oh the unspeakable gladness of heart that
then shall be! When the Minister shall see the success of his labor; when he
shall be able to say, Behold my five have gained ten: Behold I, and the
children whom thou have given me. These are the redeemed ones from the bondage
of sin and Satan; and then the Lord shall give that comfortable acclamation,
Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into thy Masters joy, Matthew.
25. 23. Oh what tongue can express, what heart can conceive, the joy that such
a Minister shall have! This day, I say this day, may make him despise all the
reproaches, all the injuries and contumelies that wicked men shall put upon
him, while they call thee such and such names. Hearken to those titles, Come
thou good and faithful servant. The thoughts also of this day would
exceedingly quicken us up in our studies, in our ministerial labors, so to
preach, so to study, so to watch over your souls, as those that have this
solemn day in their hearts. Again, this day will make a wonderful change, as
to a godly people: How shall they then rejoice in that Minister, and in those
Sermons which have been powerful to convert them, and to bring them to that
place of glory? Their hearts will then be enlarged: Oh blessed be God, blessed
be the time that ever you were a Pastor to us, that ever such and such a Sermon
was preached! When you shall see a blind Minister, and a blind people both
going to hell together, and you delivered, and that by such a Ministry you
enjoyed in your life time: This will fill your hearts up with your rejoicing.
Though now a faithful Minister and godly people in their Church-ways may meet
with much opposition, much difficulty and discouragement; yet lift up your
heads, for your redemption draws nigh. How pleasant will it be when you are
come to the haven, to think of the dangerous storms and tempests you were once
in? But this day will make as great, but a sad change, as to all wicked men,
who have been as weeds in Gods garden, who though watered and tilled, yet bring
forth no fruit. Oh the terror of this day to you! Though now no Sermon moves
thee; thou sit and sleep while Gods word is preached; though now thou
go from the Assemblies to thy sports and pleasures of sin, and there is no
more matter made of it: But woe, and a thousand times woe to thee at this day of
Christ, when we Ministers, and you people shall be brought face to face; then
we shall be your accusers, then every Sermon will accuse you, then every
Lord's Day will rise up, and witness against you. Oh be not so sottish as to
think, all things will continue as they do! Remember there is a day that will
make the most profane, the proudest, and the most stupid hearer to be awakened.

Secondly, At that day there will be a mighty change upon the profane man
wallowing 2. A great change in the profane sinners.
in his sins, and following the pleasures thereof. Then he that pleases
himself in these lusts, will call to the mountains to cover him, and hide him
from the presence of God. What a difference will there be between the man
priding himself in his sinful ways, and when he shall hear that sentence
pronounced against him, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels? In which sentence every word almost is terrible,
Depart from me; they must be separated from God, who is the fountain of life
and joy. Chrysostom thought this privative part more terrible than the
positive. To depart from God, never to have his favor, is worse than those
eternal scorching flames of hell. What if for the present such persons of
honourand greatness bid thee come to them, if God shall bid thee depart from
him? Oh remember, when sin bids thee come, when the world bids thee come, one
day God will bid thee depart! Again, that title and property given to such
forlorn damned men is terrible, yea cursed, cursed by God, and who then can
bless? Cursed] How much better, if thou had never bin born, then to be in
the number of these cursed ones? What if now thou blessest thy self, and others
bless thee, thou will then be pronounced cursed? Further, the place into which
they must depart, is terrible beyond all expression, into fire, and everlasting
fire. Fire] Is not that most dreadfulll? Do not your hearts ache and tremble? Do
not your ears tingle at the naming of this punishment? But if it be fire, it
may be quickly over, the pain may be presently gone, it may quickly consume to
ashes. No, it is everlasting fire; after thousands and millions of years, it is
still the same, as hot to burn as at the first moment. If God had said, thou
shall lie roaring in hell flames till a thousand years are over, for such and
such a sin not repented of, might not this have prevailed with every man, to
leave the most pleasant, and the most profitable sin that is? How much more
when it is everlasting, when there is no end? Oh the change thou will then find
upon thy self! Then thou will cry out saying, Was my hours pleasure, my moments
profit equal to these eternal torments? Now say, Whether it is better to sin,
then to be damned? Are thy lusts equivalent to all the torments of hell?
Lastly, That is no little aggravation, Prepared for the Devil and his Angels]
You see what companions you must have: As much as you now defy the Devil, you
and he must lie down in the same flames. The Devils will have no worse place
than thou have. Now if this be so, What a mighty alteration is here made? The
man that like Dives fared deliciously every day, would have a drop of water to
cool his tongue, and cannot. Oh that the Spirit of God would convince and
assure you of these things! Say, now I am merry, proud, confident: Now I follow
my lusts, my pleasures; but will not the day of judgment then make a change?
Will not there be a sad difference between my present estate, and that then?

Thirdly, As to the godly man there will be a most happy and blessed change. 3.
A great change to the godly.
To see a Lazarus wiping his sores, taken up into Ambraham's bosom: What a
blessed change is here? The godly man has his exercises from many
considerations. The world derideth and opposes him; afflictions from God crush
him, and press him down: The Devil because he shall not have an hell hereafter,
labors he may have an hell here; and from within, there are lusts, there are
molesting motions to sin, which make him cry out, Oh miserable man that I am!
But when this day shall come, what man, though he had the tongue of Angels, is
able to declare his happiness? This man that was scorned, is now blessed, and
honored by all the wicked damned ones of the world. Now they cry, Oh that our
case were like his! Oh that our souls were as his shall be! Now the Devil is
trampled under feet, and thrown into the Abyss, into the deep, where he was so
unwilling to go, to receive the full of his torments. Now the spiritual war
within, is put to a period, and he does all the good, in as perfect and full a
manner as he can desire to do; his will and his power have the same bounds; he
can do what he would, and he can will all that God would have him to will. We
read of blessed changes in this world, of Joseph from a poor prisoner in the
dungeon, and in danger of his life, to be exalted in the highest place of
honor in Egypt, next to Pharaoh himself. Of Mordechai, who was designed to
death, and immediately made the man whom God would honor. Of David, from
following the sheep, and afterward driven as a Bird from the mountain, to be
made a great King. Yet none of these come up in the least manner to this great
change. Hence it is called, The day of redemption, Matthew. 24. The day of
refreshing and restoring of all things, Act. 3. 19. (for we must not limit that
time to the destruction of the Jews only, as some do) Yea the godly are to look
for, and hasten his coming, 2 Pet. 3. 12. as being the marriage time between
Christ and his Church, Therefore the Spirit and the bride say, Come, Revel. 22.
17. It is for want of a lively meditation about this, that the godly at any
time sink under any temptations. Is there any evil thou art exercised with,
that this day will not deliver thee from? Is it not a day of redemption, never
to be in bondage any more, either to sin or misery? Especially the Church
under afflictions and persecutions, is to fetch all her comfort from thence:
God will turn her sackcloth into robes of honor, her dungeons into heavenly
mansions. Should not then the Church sit expecting his victorious coming more
affectionately, then Sisera's mother, Judge. 5. 28. did his return? saying, Why
is his chariot so long a coming? Why tarry the wheels of his chariots? Luther
speaking of this hopeful expectation that ought to be in the godly of Christ's
coming, endeavored to affect his hearers from the condition they were in at
that time. The Popish party did triumph over the Reformed, boasting, That
Caesar was coming with a great Army, that he would presently and speedily
vanquish all the Lutherans. Now (says he) as you see they rejoice, and fill
themselves with hopes of the Emperors coming, so should the Church under all
her pressures with the coming of Christ.

Fourthly, There will be a mighty change, as to men's judgments and
apprehensions 4. A great change in men's judgments and apprehensions of sin
and holiness.
over what they have now. There is never a wicked man would for an hour go on
in his sins, if he could have such thoughts, as he will have at that day. Oh
that we could look upon sin, as we will then look upon it! when God shall bid
us Depart into everlasting fire. And certainly, if part of that terror did
work so much upon Judas, that he throws away his silver, cries out, He had
sinned in betraying of innocent blood. No wonder if when all the gall of Gods
wrath be poured into a man's conscience, he then cries out of his sins,
gnasheth the teeth at them, remembers them with horror, which were once so
full of sweetness and delight. Go on then presumptuously thou profane wretch,
believe no Scripture, deride at all good counsel: Say, Give me my sins, though
I be damned; yet remember this persuasion will not hold always; there will
come a day when thou will as much loath and abhor these lusts, as ever once
thou did love them. Oh that men could now behold their sins with that horror
and indignation, as they will when they shall stand trembling at Gods tribunal.
Again, men will have other thoughts, 1. About the ways of Godliness. 2. About
Godly men. And, 3. About Christ. For false principles and mis-judging about
these, is that which makes so many damn themselves.

To begin with the first, about Godliness; they think it is an hinderance to
man; if he were not so just and conscionable, he might swallow down many a
sweet morsel which he lets go. Thus men are ready to think they fare the worse
for godliness. Oh but when thou shall see, what that Heaven, what that glory
and happiness is, which at that day godliness will give thee full possession
of, how quickly will thy thoughts alter? Then thou will cry out, Oh it is a
man's riches to be godly, it is a man's wisdom to be godly, a man's profit to be
godly, though he did there by lose all this present world!

Again, We are prejudiced against Godliness, because it is not in honor and
repute. None of the great men, of the wise men, do much regard it: Men of great
estates and birth, think godliness below their greatness; that it is a
dishonor, a stain to their reputation to walk precisely and singularly to the
wicked course of the world. But in this also that day will make a mighty
change; when you shall see, that then godliness is only enquired after. Then
the Question will be, How have thou lived? How have thou kept thy self
unspotted from sin? Then thou would give thousands of worlds for
godliness. That holiness and purity thou now laughest at, it will at that day
be only in request. At that day there is no difference between Kings and
peasants, between the noble and base, between the rich and poor; but either
wicked or godly, sheep or goats, that makes all the distinction. If Alexander
plead, he conquered the world: If Craesui plead the multitude of riches: If one
says, he is an Emperor, another he is a Nobleman, a Gentleman, these are
absurd pleas at that day. Art thou a godly, an holy man? This only will carry
it. Oh then remember, you will have other thoughts of godliness, than now you
have! It will be more in request and honorable esteem, than now it is.
Whosoever he be that does evil, though the great Potentates of the world, the
Judge will then say, Depart, I know you not.

Lastly, We are prejudiced against Godliness, because we think it is too
strict, it requires too much of us: It will not allow us those pleasures and
delights we might have. Oh but at that day, such a thought will presently
vanish; all the labor of my life thou will say, is not worthy to one minute of
this glory; could I have been a Martyr every day, it would not have been
equivalent to this present happiness!

SERMON, CV.
A further Discovery of the great Changes that will be wrought at the Day of
Christ's second coming.

2 COR. 1. 14. In the day of the Lord Jesus.
AT this great day (you heard) there would be a wonderful change upon the
thoughts and persuasions of men, to what they are now. It is not so much, what
thy affections and apprehensions are for the present, There will be a great
change in wicked men's thoughts
but what they be at that day. Especially in three things this Change will be
seen,

1. About Godliness, which has been dispatched. 2. About Good men. 3. About
Christ.
We come therefore to the second, and that is the wonderful change 2. Of good
men, as
that wicked men shall then have in reference to those who live godly, and dare
not conform themselves to the course of this world. As

First, Such who separate themselves from the evil ways of the world, 1. That
they are fools.
They are matter of reproach and scorn; They are judged the fools, and the
simple ones, by all that live near them; But at that day, you will have other
thoughts, you will then admire their happiness, call your selves the fools and
deluded ones, wishing that it might fare so with you, as it does with them. It
is said of those noble Worthies, Heb. 11. 38. That they had trial of cruel
mockings. Yea David, though a King, Psalm. 69. 12. complains, He was the song
of the drunkards. Thus you see what thoughts men of the world have of such who
fear God; as Michal did David, They despise them in their heart. But oh the
wonderful alteration that day will cause, when thou shall see those who were
despised by thee, honored by God: Those whom thou did reproach, to be
blessed by God: What a confusion will this be to thee? Then you will cry out,
We fools and mad men, judged their ways folly and matter of scorn; but with
what unspeakable glory does God honor them?

Secondly, Another false persuasion they have about godly men, is, That 2.
Hypocrites.
they are Hypocrites, that all they do is not out of love to God, but for
ostentation sake. That it is not the glory of God, but their own glory and
advantage, that they seek after. Paul was so often charged with corrupt ends in
his Ministry, that he is compelled to make his Apologetical Defense to clear
himself. Yea Christ himself was judged by the Pharisees to be an Impostor, and
that he came of himself, doing his own will, and seeking his own glory, which
made him so earnestly deny it, John 6. 38. John 8. 50. This is a sore evil upon
the sons of men, that because they have an enmity and hatred against the
godly, yet they cannot put this forth upon godliness, as godliness, therefore
they represent the godly in such colors, and lay such things to their charge,
that they may seem to have just cause to vent their malice against them. But
at that day their sincerity and integrity will appear; then all the world shall
see, that their hearts were upright, their aims and intentions sincere; that
what reproof, what holy endeavors they used for the recovering of men out
from their sins, was not out of hatred, or any other ill principle, as wicked
men are now apt to judge, but out of pure love and desire for their souls
good. Let not then evil and ungodly men, take upon them to judge the hearts of
others, that is the prerogative of God alone; neither do thou judge before the
great day of judgment. Take heed of calling such Hypocrites and dissemblers;
of calling such Pharisaical and conceited, whom it may be God will own at that
day, for his jewels, for his faithful ones. If there be any Judas, who
follows Christ because of the Bag; If there be any who believe in Christ,
yet love the glory of men more than of God, they shall bear their burden. The
portion of Hypocrites in Hell, is a double portion: But let not all the
Apostles be censured for a Judas; Let not all be judged Hypocrites, because he
was so. Remember that this day is a revelation of all things: all the hidden
purposes and counsels of men's hearts shall then be made manifest. The Apostle
gives this exhortation to such as judged him, 1 Corinthians. 4. 5. he shows
them, how little he regarded man's judgment, for it is the Lord that judges.
Therefore they are not to judge any thing before the time, until the Lord
come, who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of men's hearts, and then shall every man have praise of
God. Is not this a full place, to make thee afraid of all censures and hard
speeches against such who profess godliness, Let them alone to the Lord;
there is a day, when all the thoughts of their hearts, all the purposes and
intentions of the soul in holy duties shall be made manifest; it shall then be
discovered, who was faithful, and who was insincere, and will thou anticipate
this day? Little do thou think how much such as fear God in truth, do
bewail that partial hypocrisy and insincerity which is within them; how
greatly they fear, lest they should deceive themselves, and do holy duties
for false ends, and not out of pure respect to God himself; Such then shall
have praise of God, and their integrity manifested before Angels and men.

Thirdly, There will be a change of men's thoughts as to the godly, In 3. In
respect to their outward estate.
respect of their external estate and condition. They have for the most part
the evil things of the world, when the wicked enjoy the glorious things
thereof. Are not afflictions, troubles and miseries, as inseparably following
the people of God, as the shadow does the body? Does not our Savior fore-warn
his Disciples of the great trouble that they shall meet with in the world? Does
not Paul himself say, 1 Corinthians. 15. 19. If we have hope in this life only, we
are of all men most miserable? Of all men] Because other men will follow the
pleasures and profits of the world: Other men will suck out the honey that is
to be had in the creatures; They will escape all misery and persecution, by
becoming any thing in Religion, and thereby save themselves out of danger; but
as for the godly they are as sheep appointed for the slaughter all the day
long: Their tender conscience, and fear to sin against God, puts them
into many losses and disadvantages, which the men of the world can embrace. Now
it being thus with them, this does exceedingly prejudice men against godly men.
Their outward condition is many times dangerous; they seem to be cast off even
by God himself, as if he did not love them, or own them for his; and this
keeps off many from walking in the paths of holiness. If the applause,
honor, and great things of the world did accompany the power of godliness,
then all would strive to enter in at such a broad gate; but because it is with
them, as with Christ, they appear with no external glory and loveliness upon
them. Hence it is that of all men they will not own such, or join to such.
But this great day will make you have other thoughts of their condition; when
you shall see their sackcloth taken off, and robes of honor put upon them;
when you shall see these Lazarusses with no more sores on them, or desiring
crummes from the Table, but placed in Abraham's bosom. This will make you then
to wish, Oh that we had endured the same hardship, gone through the same
wilderness, seeing they have now arrived at such a blessed Land, as they are!

In the third and last place, The thoughts and apprehensions of men about
Christ, 3. Their thoughts will be changed as to Christ. 1. They will then
behold him the chiefest good.
will be greatly changed at that day, from what they have at present; in two
particulars especially,

First, When Christ is offered now to us, and we may be made partakers of him,
yet we refuse him, we will not receive him, we had rather have our lusts than
Christ; we love father, mother, and life it self, more than Christ. Such low
thoughts have we of him now: But oh the time is coming, when Christ, and only
Christ will be in request! At that day he is happy who shall have an interest
in Christ. Those Gadarens that entreated Christ to depart out of their coasts,
regarding their hoggs more than he; with what confusion will they behold him at
that day? We shall then see there is good reason for that Doctrine, He that
loves father, more than me: or he that loves life it self more than me, is
not worthy of me, Matthew. 10. 37. For happily flesh and blood may for the
present say, This is an hard saying, who can bear it? To love Christ more than
father that begat me, and maintains me; from whom happily I may expect great
and large gifts: Or better than life, which is above all earthly mercies. Will
Christ be as good as these to me? Shall I not lose by loving him more than
these? But if a man consider what Christ is? How he will appear at that day?
How happy are they who can claim an interest in him? Then they will see
reason, why Christ should be preferred above all. Now we are for Barabbas
rather than Christ: Now Christ knocks at the door to come in, and we will not
open to him: But who is there then that would not cry out, Oh let Christ
justify me, let him sanctify me, let him save me! Thus the stone that is now
refused, will be the head cornerstone.

Secondly, Many deceive themselves in their thoughts about Christ, apprehending
2. As a Judge, as well as a Savior.
only love and willingness in him to save. They never think of Christ, but
as a Savior: Though never so polluted by sin, yet they call him, their good
Savior, their blessed Savior; but at this day, thou will then have other
thoughts: Thou will then see, he can damn as well save; he can be a Lion as
well as a Lamb. This merciful Savior will be a severe and just Judge. Thus
(Revelat. 6. 16, 17.) you have the great men, and rich men of the earth, hiding
themselves in Dens, and calling to the Mountains and Rocks to fall upon them,
and hide them from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is
come, and who shall be able to stand? Thus you see, that your thoughts about
Christ at that day, will be wholly changed: You that think only of mercy,
that speak only of mercy, that look only upon Christ as a Savior: What
trembling will this be to you, when you shall see him come as a Judge with ten
thousand of Angels, when you shall hear him pronounce his terrible sentence
upon ungodly men, then how will your hearts melt within you? Then you will
begin to say within your selves, Oh that we had not made an Idol-Christ, that
we had not fancied a Christ to our selves! This is not such a Christ as we
looked for! This is not such a Christ as we expected! Even as the Jews looked
for another Messiah, then was indeed to come, which proved their destruction:
So also many do fancy to themselves such a Savior, made up only of mercy at
that great day. And therefore whereas they promise to themselves peace, they
will meet with horror and desolation. And thus much for those particulars. The
next general Proposition is,

That there will be a wonderful change upon men's thoughts in reference to
There will be at the great day a great change as to Gods providence.
Gods dispensations, and his providence in this world.

Gods proceedings here below have been the subject of many Heathens disputes.
Yea David and Jeremiah were ready to stagger and fall with the consideration of
Gods various dealings in this world; especially that particular went deep into
them, why God should let the wicked live in all prosperity, and at hearts ease,
and in the mean while, the godly go bowed down, not able to lift up their
heads? Now this Question will never be fully answered, till that great day; and
therefore it is called, The day of restoring of all things, Acts 3. 21. which
word signifies, that here in this world many things seem to be out of order;
it is ill with a godly man, well with a wicked man; but then God will put every
one in his proper place: The wicked shall be, where he ought to be, and the
godly where he is to be. Then we shall no longer cry out, How unsearchable are
his ways, and past finding out? For then God will clear all his proceedings
which have been in this world. Then we shall know, why this was so, and that
so: Why God did help at such a time, and not before. Then all the proceedings
of God, whether in a way of judgment or mercy that do astonish us, shall be
opened; all the wisdom, goodness and righteousness of God shall then be
manifested to the whole world. Thue we shall see a wonderful alteration.

The next Proposition, and last shall be this,

At that day there will be a vast and unspeakable change made upon some Lastly,
There will be a special change made upon some sinners, as the jolly, secret and
self-righteous.
sinners especially.

Though we told you all sinners would have other thoughts, and look upon
themselves in another manner than they do now; yet to some sinners this day
will bring a remarkable, but a terrible alteration As

First, The rich and jolly sinner, who lives in all manner of pleasures
without any molestation at all: Here will be a dreadful change to him, to go
from his down-bed to the flames in Hell: To be fetched from his merry
companions, to be for ever tormented by the Devils. The Parable of Dives and
Lazarus, Luke 16. 20. does egregiously demonstrate this; Dives is taken from
his delicate fare, and great abundance, plunged in such a want of all mercies,
that he cannot have one drop of water, to assuage his torment. Abraham also
tells of his change, verse. 25. Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst
thy good things, but now thou art tormented What thunder and lightning should
this be to every such jolly sinner? Why do thou not say to thy self, now
thou art jolly and merry; but will this hold always, will there never be any
change?

Secondly, The secret close sinner, he who carries himself in all plausible
ways of piety, but then continues in private secret sins; Now this day will
especially be for the bringing to light all such hidden ways of dishonesty.
Solomon concludes his Book with this, Eccles. 12. 14. God will bring every
secret thing to light, whether good or evil. This day will be a terrible day
for all such as hide, and keep close their sins: There is nothing done in
secret but will then be made manifest to the whole world. How terrible will
this day be to the secret unclean person, to the secret thies, to the secret
unjust man? Know to thy terror at that day, they will be no more secret. As
they say of letters written with some juice, they cannot be read till they be
brought to the fire, and then what was hardly discernable, is very legible:
Thus it will be at that day; The sins no man knows by thee, those evil
ways the world cannot charge upon thee, will then be made known to all.

Lastly, All Pharisaical and self-righteous persons, all those who are strongly
persuaded of their good condition, but upon false grounds: This will be very
terrible to such. Many men live so profanely, and die so wickedly, that they
cannot but expect damnation, they must look for no other: but there is a
generation of persons (Oh how many of them!) that do applaud themselves in
their own good hearts: They doubt not of Gods favor; they conclude, whenever
they die, it shall be well with them. To such as these there will be a
dreadful change. What thou that did not doubt, or fear thy condition, no
not to the last gasp to fall from these great hopes into eternal despair, What
a change is here made? Our Savior did most fully represent such persons in the
Parable of the foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25. 11, 12. Did not they go out
confidently to meet the bridegroom? Did not they cry boldly, Lord, Lord, open
to us? And yet when they came to the last, they wanted oil. Oh the multitude
of those persons who want oil, yet live confidently, and die confidently,
making no question, but that the Lord will open to let them in! So in another
Parable in the same Chapter, verse. 44. Those persons whom the judge shall bid
Depart into everlasting fire, for the omission of such duties, as were required
of them; They stand and plead with the Judge, they will not believe themselves
such sinners; They will not grant they ever offended so, When saw we thee an
hungry, and fed thee not, etc? Oh take heed of this selfe-fulnesse, of living
and dying in such strong presumptions of Gods love, for hell and damnation will
be so much the more terrible, by how much thou did make sure of Heaven in thy
own expectation.

The Use from this Doctrine must needs be full of power and efficacy to move
us. Imagine a wicked man sentenced at that Tribunal, taking his leave of all
comforts, wishing he had never been borne, crying out to the mountains and
hills to cover him, and then say, Did this man once believe it would be thus
with him? Did this man ever think there would be such a change? Now is it not
Gods mercy to fore-warne thee of this day? Neither Devil, or the world, neither
God or man can be accused, but thy own wilfulness in sinning. When thou art
commanded to depart into everlasting fire, never to enjoy a drop of comfort
more, How must thou justify God, the Ministers, and thy own godly friends,
taking confusion to thy self? Shall we not hear thee speaking to God, O
glorious and infinite God, thou have been merciful and patient to me! Thou
gave me time to repent! Thou did fore-warne of this torment! I must
justify thee! Then we shall hear him speaking to Christ, Oh blessed and
glorious Mediator, though not so to me, How great was thy love in dying for
sinners? How much was I convinced, that it was my duty to depart from my
sins, but my lusts would not let me? Afterward he shall justify the
Ministers and godly friends, How often was I admonished? I remember what you
said to me; I was convinced, I had no reason to do as I did, it was my own
rebellious heart that has undone me.

Lastly, He speaks to the glorified Saints, Oh happy and thrice happy are ye!
How unspeakably glorious and comfortable is your condition? I remember the holy
life, the godly examples you gave me, but my wretched lusts would not let me
follow you, and now I must see your faces no more. Farewell all joy, all
comfort; brimstone, fire, torments, and hell flames are to be my portion for
ever! Where is thy reason? Where is thy faith that does not make thee watch and
pray against this day? Why do thou not with Hierome think that every moment
thou hear that Trumpet sounding in thy ears, Arise, and come to judgment?
Oh be diligent in doing the Lord: For blessed is that sarvant whom his Master
shall find him so doing! Whereas if thou art doing the Devils work, he will
at that day come and demand thee, he is mine, I challenge him for my own;
though I never died for him, though I was never crucified for him, yet he
obeyed me rather than Christ; therefore I require my own. Call then to any of
the creatures, and thy friends, and see if they can help thee; when God shall
say, Depart ye cursed: Will any say, Lord, he shall not go, I will deliver
him, I will rescue him, I will make an atonement for him? No, but he must for
ever perish, and none can help him.

SERMON. CVI.
Of the Encouragements a Minister has from the hopes of doing good to a people.

2 COR. 1. 15. And in this confidence I was minded to come unto you before,
that you might have a second benefit.
AT this Verse the Apostle takes an happy occasion for a transition to his
Apology, or defense against that crime charged upon him, by the false Teachers;
Non saltat, says Cajetan, he does not leap, falling upon this matter abruptly,
but the transition is very genuine. Paul, it seems, had promised to come to
those Corinthians, but for weighty reasons he deferred his coming hitherto. The
false Teachers, they waiting for all advantages to calumniate him, did upon
this accuse him with levity and inconstancy, that with him was yea and nay,
that he did purpose according to carnal respects, accommodating himself to
time, and outward advantages. Now the Apostle is very zealous and vehement in
vindicating of himself herein. It is true, Piscator does begin this
Apologetical Discourse at the 12th Ver. but it seems more genuine to make the
beginning of it at this verse. Estius does well observe, that while Paul was
speaking in the commendation and praise of his Conversation, he did use the
plural number, joining others with him, to avoid envy; but when he comes to
this Apologetical part, being charged with a heinous crime, he uses the
singular Number, and speaks of himself only.

In the words we may take notice:

First, Of Paul's Resolution.

2. The Motive of it.

3. The Time.

4. The End:

And 5. The Manner, how it was to be executed.

In the Verse following his Resolution is set down in these words: I was minded
to come unto you; (...), it signifies such a Resolution, and purpose, that was
made upon good advice and deliberation; It was not a rash, sudden, or
presumptuous Decree, but made upon good grounds, though afterward he had cause
to change his mind. From this word (...), some say the word Bulla is derived,
as being his wise decree and purpose; but seldom is there either wisdom or
righteousness therein.

2. There is the motive in this confidence, viz. which was mentioned before of
their mutual rejoicing in one another, whereby he was persuaded, that he might
do much good amongst them: we have spoken of the word already. This he
speaks, to show that the motive of his coming to them was wholly out of love
and desire to do them good.

3. The Time when, and that is, (...), before, some make it a trajection, as if
it did belong to his mind and purpose; he had before determined others to his
coming to him, as if this coming should have been long before; but there is no
great matter in either construction, though Beza and Grotius go the former way.
If you say, Did the Apostle then change his mind? did he alter his purpose? if
so, would not this call in question all his Apostolical Doctrine? To this we
are to answer in the prosecution of his Apology at the 23d verse; he there
plainly tells them what was the cause that made him forbear his coming, not
any levity or inconstancy in him, but their sinfulness: It was, that he might
not execute that Apostolical severity amongst them, as they deserved, of
which, in its time.

Lastly, There is the End of his coming, which is wholly spiritual, That you
might have a second benefit; It was for their good, not his own. Let us
consider the Motive in this confidence, of your kindness and love, as also, of
my doing good to you. I purposed to come to you.

Observe;

That where a Faithful Minister has good hopes and confidence of doing good
Where a Faithful Minister has hopes of doing good, he has good encouragement
to remain.
to a people, there is great encouragement of abiding with such.

Thus it was with these very Corinthians: God, in a Vision to Paul, Act. 18.
10. commanded him to stay at Corinth, and not be afraid, which he did a year
and half, longer then usually he did any where; and the reason is, Because
there was much people in that City to be gathered to God. Oh how rejoicing is
it to a Faithful Minister, when he seeeth God has converting work, edifying
work for him to do amongst such a people? Thus you have also Paul resolved upon
his tarrying at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 16. 9. and why so? A great and effectual door
is opened to me. He did see a likelihood of much spiritual good to be done, and
this made him willing to abide there. To affect our hearts with this truth,
consider,

First, That all people, both by nature and custom have a door fast bolted
against the entrance of the Word. So that, it is as great a miracle, for
Christ, by the 1. All people naturally have a door bolted against Christ.
preaching of the Gospel to enter into the hearts of Hearers, as it was, when
he came in to his Disciples, the doors being shut; yea here is a door upon a
door, a bolt upon a bolt. There is first their native corruption, and by this
they are dead in sin; So that our Preaching is like hooting into the ear of a
dead man, should not the spirit of God change and prepare the hearts of
Hearers. This is the inward door; and then there is an outward door, which is
Custom and Continuance in sinning, and this also hardens against the
Ministry. Therefore people are to tremble under this contrariety to their own
spiritual good. Remember, that as you have a door shut now against the Gospel,
so God will one day have a door shut against you in the Kingdom of Heaven: so
that, although you shall cry Lord, Lord, open to us, yet it cannot be granted
you, Luke 13, 25. As much entreating as we make to you now to receive the Lord
Christ, so much will you one day use that Christ would receive you. Now we
knock, and cry, and importune that you open the doors of your heart; and then
you shall howl and cry to Christ to open the doors and gates of Heaven.

Secondly, Because men are thus shut up against the Word; hence it is, that
neither any tractableness, or supposed probity in any people, nor the admirable
2. It Is the grace of God^ alone that can open this door.
gifts, and efficacious parts of a Ministry: but the powerful grace of God
alone is that which does open the doors of men's hearts. Not any tractableness
in people, therefore the Socinian, and Arminian Doctrine is with indignation to
be excluded, who speak of a probitas naturalis, and ingenium docile; a natural
teachableness in some persons, which does prepare them for the Gospel, and that
is the reason why some are converted by the word, and not others: yea, they are
not afraid to offer violence to that Text; which does so evidently witness
against them, Act. 13. 48. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed.
The word, (...), they would wrest to signify some inward Disposition, and
Qualification, men that had fitted themselves: But certainly, If God so often
tell the Israelites, that he gave them not that rich Land of Canaan because of
their Righteousness, or, for that they were better than others; can we think,
Heaven and Salvation, which was typified by that Canaan, shall be obtained by
our own worth? Nay, experience tells us, that sometimes the most profane
have received the Gospel, when others more civilized and moralized have been
great enemies to it. If any have Humility and Meckness, which is necessary for
the success of the Gospel, in his heart, that is the gift of God, it flows
not from nature. Neither Secondly, is it any thing in the excellent gifts of
any men, though they could preach with the tongue of Angels. Though the
Apostles were designed by Christ to be leaven to leaven the whole World, to be
salt to season all people, yet too many here as the favor of death; and some
were the more enraged, and made more obstinate in fin, by how much the more
affectionate he was to do them good. Yet the Ministry, though of it self it
cannot roll away this stone, or open this door of men's hearts, is not therefore
useless: God has appointed to convert by it. We must not out of Pride refuse
to wash in this Jordan, as Naaman at first did, thinking other waters as good;
I mean, to think, that stayiug at home, and reading of good Books, is as
profitable; because this is to neglect the instituted means by God; and it is
just, that it thou do not seek God, where he is to be found, that thou shall
never find him there where thou seek him. Though this be so, yet it is God
that opens the door of men's hearts; Paul said, An effectual door was opened,
in a passive fear: he does not say, I have opened it. Hence Christ speaks
from heaven to the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3. 7, 8. I have set before thee
an open door, and no man can shut it. When Christ will open the hearts of
people, as he did Lydia's all the rage and violence of the Devil cannot hinder
it. How many men are wrought upon, that, of all in the world you would not have
exspected it? who would have thought such bears should be turned into sheep?
Thus God sometimes continues a Ministry to a people, which does a world of
good: when there are many persecutors, many enemies, men that have used all
their fraud and power to remove it, and could not any more stir it, then they
could mountains. While God has converting or saving work to do by a Minister,
though it be but for one soul, though all the rest should maliciously conspire
against him, yet they do imagine things in vain. Observe that I place already
mentioned, 1 Cor. 16. 9. An effectual door was opened, and their were many
Adversaries. There was a large door opened for all that. It is true, we have
that Expression even in the same Chapter, Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the
door and knock, and if any man open unto me, etc. But that place only implies
our duty, what we are bound to do, not our ability. He that knocks must also
open the door, although the will is not forced in this, but God has
insuperable power over it, whereby he can make it of unwilling willing.

3. It may fall out sometimes that God calls a man to preach to a people
concerning whom their is none or little hope of doing any good. Now such who
are thus 3. Sometimes Ministers are called to a people of small hopes.
called must continue in their slation, obeying the will of God, though they
see they labor in vain. This was Isayes case, Chapter 6. when he is commanded by
his preaching to make the eyes of the people blind, their hearts heavy. It was
also Ezekiels case, Cha. 3. 7. But the house of Israel will not hearken unto
thee, for they will not hearken unto me, for all the house of Israel are
impudent and hard hearted, so Cha. 2. 7. Thou shall speak my words to them,
whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear. Thus a Minister, lawfully
called to a people, must not presently think of departing from them, because of
the little hope that he has to do good, but must patiently and constantly wait
upon the Lord in his way. The case of a Ministers removeal from a people is of
great difficulty and tenderness: The causes of his departure may be either
Internal, which God only knows; as, Whether it be a pure Zeal to Gods glory,
or some carnal and sinister respect: or External, and those externally may be
either by some powerful and cogent Providence of God, as some think, in the
Plague; or personal Persecution of the Minister, or by the command of
Superiors, or for want of Maintenance, or where he cannot have his health; or
hy a voluntary dismission of the people; or Lastly, when there is a manifest
Opposition generally against the Ministry, so that the madness and malice of
the people force him away. Thus our Savior commands, Matthew. 10. 14.
Whosoever shall not reteive you, when ye depart out of that city, shake off the
dust of the feet: Thereby to signify, say some, so God would at last cast off
such a people, with as much abhorrency, as we do the dust of our feet: or else,
thereby to declare, that all the labor and pains they had been at, should one
day give in Testimony against them. Thus we read Act. 13. 21. Paul and Barnabas
shook off the dust off their feet against the persecuting and unbelieving Jews.
And Verse 46. Paul speaks boldly to them, Seeing ye put the word of God from
you, and judge your selves unworthy of Eternal life, lo we turn to the
Gentiles. Thus You see there may be weighty Causes of a Ministers Removeal. For
they are two rigid, who think the Union between Pastor and people is
indissoluble, like that of marriage: Yet among all the Causes, nothing is so
clear, as when a when a people, by their wickedness and Opposition do persecute
and drive him away; or when they are too refractory to the Orders of Christ,
that he cannot with a good conscience exercise all Ministerial duties amongst
them. But, though this be so, The frowardness and unprofitableness of a people
must not immediately make them take up such Resolutions; they must show much
Constancy and self-denial, using all means to recover them. For seeing it is
God that gives the increase, though we plant and water, and his time is
unknown to us, it may fall out, that a people, who give no hope for the
present, may afterward appear more curable; and the seed that is now sown,
thou for the present it may seem buried, yet afterward it may grow up.
Therefore we are to imitate God himself, who uses much Patience and
Forbearance even to the vilest men, thereby to allure them to Repentance. This
counsel also Pasl gives Timothy, as a Minister of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 2. 25. In
meekness instructing those that oppose, if peradventure God will give them
Repentance to the acknowledging of the truth. Though then hopes of doing good
to a people is a great Encouragement to co continue with them, yet a people
that appear incurable for the present, are not to be immediately abandoned,
because the times of success are in Gods hand; and sometimes Persecutors are at
last made Lovers, and imbracers of the truth. Besides, we see the Prophet
quieting his heart with this, though he had no success in his Ministry, that he
had his reward with God, Isay 49. 5. Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I
be glorious in the eyes of God. Such as are despised and contemned in the eyes
of men, shall be glorious in the eyes of God.

4. This confidence, and hope of doing good must not depend upon a man's own
apprehensions, but must be guided by the word of God. So deceitful and corrupt
4. A Ministers hope of doing good should be guided by the Word.
is the heart of a man, that many times it flattereth it self, and when a man
seeks his own advantage, yet he may persuade himself, that it is confidence,
and hope of doing good, Therefore to know when their is more hope of doing good
in one place than in another, must not be decided by selfish and private
desires, but by general Rules fetched out of Gods Word, and indeed, because all
success of Ministerial Labors lies wholly upon the good Grace of God, and the
Word is blessed sometimes to one people, not so likely; and at another time not
to a people more likely. Therefore the will of God is very difficultly
discovered in such cases; which shows, with how much sincerity and fervency
God is to be sought unto at such times. Now the Reasons are palpable, Why
Confidence in a Minister to do good to a people should be a matter not only
Reasons why a Ministers hope of doing good should be matter of of joy to him.
1. The End of his Ministry is accomplished.
of continuance, but of studying, and diligent improving all his Ministerial
Labors with the greater joy.

First, Because the End of his Ministry is hereby accomplished. When the
Disciples had fished all the day, and caught nothing, they were disheartened;
but when Christ bid them throw the net in again, and they brought up a
multitude, this made them rejoice, even to amazement. If the Husbandman is at
much cost and pains about his ground, and that bring forth nothing but briars
and thorns, Is not that a disheartening? If a Physician see that no Potions,
no Medicines he gives, ever do any good, will not that make him weary of his
employment? How much more, if a Minister labor in vain, Preach in vain,
Admonish in vain, and still people grow more ohdurate in their sins? Does not
this teach them, with Jonah, even to run from their work?

Secondly, There is great matter of rejoicing where this hope is, because
Success in the Ministry is above all Successes. Herein the Souls of men are
concerned. In this is contained our everlasting Happiness. Oh that men should
be no more sollicitous in this than they are. How few do examine what fruit the
Word preached has upon them; whether it be a sustaining Word, or an hardening;
Whether it be the savor of life, or the savor of death? That Ark which
brought so much blessing to Obedmelech, and his Family; to the Philistines was
cause of grievous Plagues. And thus the same Sermons that are life to one, may
be darkness to others; that are light to one, may be darkness to another. If
then the Minister shall see his work like to prosper in the end it is sent for,
here is greater cause to rejoice, then in any outward blessing whatsoever; for
this is of everlasting consequence.

Let the Use be of Exhortation to you to be a people of good Confidence, that
our Ministerial Labors shall not be in vain; That we do not in vain preach to
you, or pray for you. Can there be a greater grief to the Minister, yea and
provocation of God, than to be like that ground the Scripture speaks of, Heb.
6. 8? Which drinking in rain often, yet bringing forth nothing but briars and
thorns, is rejected; and whose end is to be burned. And is not this the sad
case of most of those trees that stand in the Lords Garden? Do not many grow
more ignorant, more profane, more hardened? Oh what hope can a Minister have
about such a man? May we not see sad symptoms of Gods wrath upon your souls?
many such desperate Patients have the spiritual Physicians of men's souls to
deal with. But take heed of showing thy self an hopeless man to a faithful
Minister, one to whom no admonition, no reproof, will ever do good. For,

First, Those sighs and troubles that thou put test such spiritual Guides unto
are in a special manner taken notice of by God. It is true, we see Jeremiah so
grieved, and offended sometimes at the wicked carriage of the people he
prophesied unto, that he prays against his persecutors; yea God commanded
him, saying, Pray not for this people for their good, Jerem. 14. 11. But we
have not an extraordinary Spirit; neither dare we pray against any hopeless
people; yet remember, all their ^ighs, all their grief will one day witness
against thee. Certainly, if the ears of God be open to the Curses of an hired
Man, whose wages are kept from him, how much more will God hear the sad
complaints of those Ministers who are faithful, poured out because of a
peoples rebellion, and incurableness?

2. Consider this, That your discouraging them by your evil ways makes them
the more unfit and heartless in their studies and Labors. Why does rain fall
on the rock, say they? Why do we wash blackamoors? and so some expound that
place, Heb. 13. 17. That they may give their account with joy, and not with
grief, for that is unprofitable for you, in this sense, by grieving and
disheartening of them, they cannot be so active in their Ministry, they will
grow more heartless therein, and that will be your damage. Oh its a terrible
thing, when this heaviness and dullness of a Minister arises from the
discouragements he has from the wicked lives of a people: and therefore Calvin
upon that place speaks excellently, That people should take notice of God
punishing them for their ingratitude. When their Ministers abate in zealous and
lively watching over their souls, we are apt many times to complain of such a
dull and liveless Ministry; yet how little do people think, that many times
they give the cause, so that its Gods punishment upon them, in that very thing:
yea, though Ministers be never so faithful and godly, yet as Calvin observes,
they cannot go on in their Ministerial work with that vigor and alacrity they
ought to do, when their hearts are bound up with sorrow and discouragements
about their people. All cannot attain to Paul's excellency, who could have
enlarged bowels to that people, who had streightened ones toward him.

SERMON. CVII.
Of the Necessity of a constant Ministry, not only for the constituting, but to
an establishing the Church.

2 COR. 1. 15. That you might have a second benefit.
IN these words we have the End of Paul's purpose to come to them: It was wholly
spiritual. It was not for any advantage, any earthly respects, but but wholly
for their good, to increase and confirm their graces. The End is expressed in
these words, That ye might have a second benefit: (...), which some, as
Chrysostom, interpret, for (...); yea their are some who would have that to be
the word in the Original. It is no doubt, but that much (...), or joy did
follow upon this (...). All spiritual effects and heavenly exercises are apt to
breed much joy. Hence none have true joy but those that are godly, and so by
consequence none are blessed but they; for Joy is a great ingredient to
Happiness. Hence Aristotle makes (...) to come of (...) and (...), exceedingly
to rejoice; yet is more consonant to other places of Scripture, to read it
(...), thus Romans 1. 11. He desired to see them, that he might impart to them
some spiritual benefit. The word (...) is chiefly used in the New Testament for
the free grace of God toward us, in reference to our Eternal Happiness: so
that, the very name ought to be sweet and precious to such, who labor under
the sense of their unworthiness, and see no power or works of their own any
ways able to save them. It is of grace, therefore that does not only exclude
merit, but supposes thee unworthy for such mercies of thy own self. It is
sometimes in Scripture applied to such Alms as were freely given for the use
of distressed Churches, 2 Cor. 8. which is therefore called Grace, partly
because it is of Gods special goodness to give us such a free and liberal
Disposition, as the first Verse in that Chapter implies, I do you to wit
(says Paul) of the grace of God bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia: and
that was to be liberal to the other afflicted Saints: and partly because it
comes from the bountiful disposition of a man to such as are in want. In this
Text it is to be applied to spiritual bounty, that is, to be willing and ready
in all serviceableness to promote the spiritual good of others; for there are
spiritual alms, as well as temporal, which lies in reproof, in Admonition,
and frequent Exhortation to what is good. Now this Grace or Benefit is said to
be (...), which some translate, iterated, and repeated, though it be more than
the Second, or third time. Chrysostom refers it to his Epistles, and his
presence: for by both these he communicated spiritual benefit unto them. But it
is most probably and generally referred to his first and second coming: whether
Paul did come a third time to those Corinthians is disputed by Commentators,
because of some passages in the 12 and 13 Chapters of this Epistle: of which in
its time. It is enough, that by the first grace or benefit, we mean the first
work upon them by Paul's Ministry, when they were converted from their Paganism,
and planted a Church of Christ. And the second benefit was, to confirm them in
the same Faith, and also to quicken them up unto further degrees of Holiness:
and this was the second Benefit Paul desired to impart unto them. For it
appears, that though this Church of Corinth was a garden planted by Paul, yet
many weeds, and some poisonous ones began to grow up amongst them; There were
both in Doctrine and Manners many things amiss, which needed Paul's presence to
reform. Observe

That it is not enough to be a Church planted, and gathered from out of the
world at first, but there needs a constant and daily Ministry to be tilling
and dressing A constant Ministry is necessary to every Church.
of it.

That Garden which God planted, and put Adam into, yet was to be daily dressed;
and so it is still with the best Churches, even those that are of the
Apostolical Plantation, yet needed the Apostles care and diligent visitations,
which was one main cause of writing those several Epistles to several Churches.
They were not written to convert them, or make them Churches, but to admonish,
instruct, or confirm and comfort, as occasion did require; and upon this ground
it is, that though the office of Apostles and Prophets, as also the gift of
miracles are now ceased, because the Church is now planted, yet the office of
Pastors, and the Ordinances Christ has instituted, are perpetual, and must be
continued to the end of the world. So that the opinion of the Socininians about
the Ministry, as it were, only a thing of order, and not of Divine Institution,
is grossly repugnant to Gods Word; as also their Doctrine about Baptism, That it
was but a temporary Ceremony, instituted for the beginning of the Church, is
full of falsehood. Churches though constituted, yet must be daily watered:
neither is it enough for a people once to be brought home to the Faith, but
they need a second and a third, yea a continual benefit. For though the Apostle
happily did come but the second time to these Corinthians, yet he appointed
Officers in an ordinary residence amongst them, as well as in other Churches,
which were continually to watch over them.

The particulars wherein the Ministry is necessary for perfecting work, as well
as foundation work, for progress as well as ingress, for consummation as well
as And that for these Ends 1. To inform against Errors.
imitation, are these;

First, To inform against those Errors which false Teachers do easily insinuate
into the hearts of people. No sooner has God sowed his field with precious
wheat, but the envious one comes, and sows his tares. As the April showers,
that make grass and flowers to come, cause also weeds to grow: Thus at the same
time God is building the Church, the Devil and his instruments are raising
their Babel. No sooner have the Ministers of God with Isaac dug up Wells,
but the Philistines have been ready to throw their earth and mud therein. If
then Errors and damnable Heresies may so quickly infect a Church, formerly
pure; no wonder if there be such necessity of Pastors, and Guides, who are to
lead the people into all truth by their Ministry, as the spirit of God does by
his efficacy. You may observe in most of Paul's Epistles, which are like
watering of the Garden, after it is planted, How much care and inspection is
used against those false Teachers? how greatly he labors to antidote them
against false Doctrines: so that, it is a wonder, that any who read Paul's
Epistles, and observe his diligence and zeal therein, can look upon Errors as
almost innocence, and deserving pity rather than indulgence. Gal. 1. 6. I
marvel you are so soon removed from him that called you, to another Gospel,
etc. So soon, Those Galatians that had received such wonderful gifts by the
Preaching of the Gospel, yet even to the admiration of Paul are suddenly
carried aside into false ways. This then is a continual benefit by a faithful
and sound Ministry, that we be not as Children, tossed up and down with every
wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. That we be soundly fortifyed against all the
deceiveable ways of Errors; and truly this is a special mercy, to have a
Ministry sanctified to that end, and blessed to that purpose, to keep thee in a
sound and right judgment. Therefore is it that the Devil places his engines
against the Ministry, to batter that down: for, if the wall be broken down, the
city may be easily taken: if the hedge be trampled down, the corn will
presently be spoiled.

Secondly, Ministerial labors are necessary to a constituted Church, in
respect of 2. To reform the corruptions that are in men's lives.
all the effectual means it is to use against those corruptions, and abuses in
men's manners which may soon break forth. And thus it was with this Church of
Corinth; Their lives were greatly corrupted, there were many disorders, They
did not walk with such an holly respect to the Rule as they ought to do: some
fell into gross sins of wantonness, and had not yet repented, or manifested
any true humiliation; others they were carried away with pride and envy,
whereby many parties and Factions were made amongst them. Now, where there were
so many diseases did they not need a Physician? when the School was thus
disordered was not a rod requisite? Although the Churches of God have glorious
Titles, yet they seldom exactly answer to them in their lives. They are called
Believers, but how apt to misbelieve, to be carried away with the slighly
cunning of heretical men? They are called Saints, but how apt to be carnal,
passionate, worldly; yea and sometimes to be overtaken with grosser sins? Now
they that are thus overtaken, do they not need those that are spiritual Gal. 6.
1. to restore them again? By the spiritual here some understand the Officers
and Guides of the Church, who, as they were to cast out obstinate and
impenitent sinners, so to receive them again upon their humiliation, in the
spirit of meekness, to Church Communion.

Thirdly, Ministerial Labors are necessary in an iterated and repeated manner,
3. To comfort the godly.
for consolation and encouragement. The people of God have a two fold occasion
of their sadness and discouragement; the former whereof is, From their sins
and faillings; they are wholly strangers to their and hearts, but discover that
vileness and loathsomeness in themselves, which the world can not, which God
only knows; and sometimes this fire is enraged qy the oil that the Devil
pours on, he has his fiery darts, he has his buffetings. Now, when any of
the children of God sit in this darkness, how necessary, how welcome are the
feet of those who bring the glad tidings of the Gospel! Had not even Christ
himself in the midst of his sorrow an Angel sent to comefort him? The
Incestuous person, was not he ready to be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow,
and therefore Paul exhorts the Corinthians, 2 Cor, 2. 7. to forgive him, and
to comfort him. Hence God does reprove those negligent Shepherds, Ezekiel, 34. 4.
that grossly failed in this duty, The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither
have ye healed that which was sick, or bound up that which was broken. For this
end also God does give his Officers a tongue of the learned, as the Prophet
Isay calls it, Chap. 50. 4. which is, to speak a word in season, to him that
is of an humble spirit, and wearied soul. Little do any know the necessity of
such comfortable Physicians, but such who like the man of Jerecho lie wounded
with the sense of their own guilt, and Gods displeasure against them. For alas,
in our temptations we are not able to give true comefort to our selves, it is
well if we be enabled through grace to receive it from others. In muddied
waters a man cannot discern his own face; so neither in such black temptations
is a Christian able to see how it stands between God and his own soul.
Therefore as the Spirit of God does efficiently both convince of sin and
comfort, so does the Ministry instrumentally, being applied thereunto by the
Spirit of God. A Second occasion of comfort, is in regard of the outward
persecutions and troubles which do accompany the powerful Profession of the
Gospel: so that, in respect of external considerations, they are of all men
most miserable; Are not they therefore to have such as may comfort and
strengthen them in their warfare? Hence Paul's Epistles do abound with many
consolations, as so many cordialls: Peter also in his Epistles does give
notable encouragements not to faint under the afflictions they meet with for
the Gospells sake; yea to rejoice in it, and to account themselves happy
because of it. This comfort is always necessary; but because the ^dly are
never free from the persecution of the hand, or of the tongue, the Ministers of
God, they are to follow Christ in this: as he informed his Disciples of the
hatred they should meet with in the world, so he comfort them, he commands
them to be of good courage, he had overcome the world.

Fourthly, The labor of the Ministry is again and again to be put forth to a
4. To edify and strengthen them.
people, though under the profession of Christ; because of their growth and
edification in the ways of holiness. And this indeed is one of the principal
effects of the Ministry upon a people already converted. They that say or think
they need no Ministry, no Preaching, may with that Novatian take a ladder, and
go themselves up into heaven. It is as if a Graden should say, it needs no
rain; a field of corn, it needs not the clouds, to be without which, is in
Scripture, a great judgment. This God threateneth, Isay chap. 6. 6. I will also
command my clouds to rain no more rain upon it. Thus some men wilfully put
themselves into that condition, to live without a Ministry, as a Mercy, which
God makes a grievous Curse. That growth in Christianity is a principal end of
the Ministry appears Ephesians. 4. 12. For the perfecting of the Saints, for the
edifying of the body of Christ, till we come to a full stature. Insomuch that
all Ministers and all hearers have work enough to do. None can say, we have
Preached enough, or heard enough, because none believe enough, none love
enough, none are heavenly enough.

Several ways the best Hearers may grow;

First, In the amplitude of their knowledge. They may know more things in How
believers may and are to grow. 1. In knowledge.
Christianity than they did: for seeing we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. this
light in our mind may still increase more and more; not indeed in more
necessaries and Fundamentalls, for then none could be saved, because still
ignorant of some Fundamental or other; but in the Additionalls and
Superstructures, which have also a special use and efficacy to carry on the
work of Salvation. Even a Godly man may live in many Errors, in many sins,
and not know them to be so; as we see in many Ages, when clearer light has
discovered that to be Superstition, and a dishonor to God, which was accounted
once the great, onour due unto him. When God dispelled the Egyptian darkness of
Popery from of the face of the face of the Church, their Image Worship, their
Indulgences, their vowed Obedience and poverty, which were admired as such
eminent acts of Religion, were manifested to be contemptible, as having no
foundation upon the Scripture, and also very injurious to the Offices of
Christ; and in how many things do the best of men still continue ignorant? and
therefore with David (though he had more understadding than his teachers) are
to pray, that God would open their eyes, that they might understand the
wonderful things of Gods law, Psalm. 119. 18, David's eyes were opened, yet they
must be opened more; all the scales are not fallen from his eyes: and therefore
the Apostle prays for those Ephesians whose understandings were already
enlightened, Ephesians. 1. 17. that their eyes might yet be more opened: and that
God would give unto them the spirit of wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge
of him.

2. By the Ministry they are to grow in the efficacy and experimental power of
2. In the experimental power of their knowledge.
their knowledge. For these two differ exceedingly; men may grow much in
speculative knowledge, understand controversies in Divinity, and dispute much
about the Doctrines of the times that are agitated; but unless a man grow in
the savoury power of it, he is but a tinkling cymbal: if he do notgrow in the
love of the truth, if that knowledge does not make him more pure, more
sanctified, more reformed, this will turn to his greater condemnation.
Therefore Tit. 1. 1. Its called the acknowledging of the truth, which is after
godliness. Savanarola, Hom. 3. p. 29. brings a destruction of Divinity out of
Aquinas to this purpose, a man may know a thing, says he, either per modum
studii, or per modum inclinationis: men may know many things by way of study in
Divinity, and yet not have the least knowledge of them by way of inclination to
love and delight in them. May not a man have obtained much discoursive knowledge
about Christ, in respect of his Person and Offices, as to be able to confute
Arrians and Socinians, yet be far from that heavenly inclination which Paul
found in himself, to know nothing but Christ crucified, and to judge all things
dung and dross in comparison of this knowledge? That knowledge then which does
bring a savoury taste, and experimental inclination to the good things we know,
that is to be embraced, that we are to grow in more every day. He that knows
a Country or a City by a Map, cannot be so affected as he that has really seen
it.

3. We may by the Ministry have a continued benefit in respect of the firmness
3. In Faith
and strength of our faith. It is noted sometimes of the Disciples, that upon
some miracle that was wrought by our Savior, that then they believed. Not but
that they did so before, only their Faith was then more strengthened, and
confirmed; and truly this firmness of Faith, this steadfastness of it, is a
precious Antidote against all fickle and skeptical Opinions: Men do not grow in
Faith but fancy; and that makes inconstancy in Religion. How can a man be a
Martyr for Christ's truth? now can he lose all he has, rather than deny it,
unless he have this quieting and satisfying work of Faith upon the soul? Hence
Faith is called, Heb. 11. 1. The substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen. Those two words substance and evidence do denote
the great power that Faith ought to have upon the soul. Again, this firmness of
Faith is not only seen in dogmatical Assent, but in in fiducial Application of
the Promises to our selves, in which sense it is said twice or thrice, The just
shall live by his faith. Such are the weak actings of our Faith, so strong are
our temptations, so supernatural and mysterious is this way of believing, that
all have cause to cry out with the Apostles, Lord increase our faith.

Lastly, The best hearers need the Ministry for increase in Godliness, to grow
in grace more. Thus the Apostle, writeing to those whom he supposes as
converted 4. In Grace.
already, yet exhorts to put off the old man, and put on the new. To be
renewed in the spirit of their mind, Epes. 4. 23. 24. And our Savior prays
for the Apostles even in that Prayer wherein he acknowledges that they had
believed, and received the word of God. That they were not of the world, John
17. 17 That God would sanctify them by his word, which is to be understood of
the progress therein. There is no Doctrine so practically opposite to the
Scripture as that of Perfection; for every where the Godly are commanded to
grow, to be mortifying the body of sin, to be perfecting holiness; which were
ridiculous Exhortations, if we had already attained Perfection. Hence we are
compared to those who run in a race, and therefore till death, do not come to
our prize. Thus where the Minister may have little to do in respect of
Conversion, it may have very much to do in respect of Edification. And the
Godly are to Examine, whether every Sabbath day the Minister does not come with
a new benefit, a new advantage to them: look for a new grace and favor in
every new Sermon. And so we proceed to the Use, which is, of Instruction,

What all people should look at under the Ministry; Spiritual advantages,
spiritual light, spiritual heat, spiritual quickenings. As where Christ went up
and down he healed their diseased people, so where the word of God is preached,
it should heal soul-diseases. Thou art not to have the Pride, the passions, the
worldly cares as thou usest to have: but, oh how rare are such Hearers! who
aims at this? who prays for this in every Sermon he hears? Oh fear least
some spiritual judgment upon thee deprive thee of this benefit. If an Israelite
had looked upon the Brazen serpent, and yet not be healed: If a diseased person
had stepped first in order into the Pool of Bethesda, and yet not have been
recovered; they would have been greatly troubled to see their hopes frustrated.
No less ought it to make thee grieve and tremble, if thou find that one Sermon
passes away after another, yet there is no spiritual benefit accrewing to thy
soul thereby. But why do we speak of spiritual Edification? in how many is not
the groundwork of Conversion laid? how can they have the second benefit, who
have not obtained the first? How can they be nourished and grow, who have not
yet the Principles of Life infused into them?

Two great things are then to be done by our Ministry through the grace of God.

The First, To Regenerate:

The Second is, To grow and increase in the work of Grace.

If the foundation stone of this building be not laid, thou art yet in thy
ruins and rubbish, thou art yet in thy sins: Thou art to pray, and to desire
all others to pray, that God would have mercy upon thy soul, that he would take
away thy stony heart, that he would heal thy blind eyes, and open thy deaf
ears. But if God has brought thee into this spiritual estate, know there is a
necessity to grow in grace, as well as to be in grace: and, that for progress
herein God has appointed his Ministry, and the Ordinances, Cry out then and
say, Lord, not the First time, but the Second and Third, yet all my life long
make me to partake of this Heavenly Benefit.

SERMON. CVIII.
All Christians, especially Ministers, ought to lay out themselves wholly for
Gods Glory, and others good.

2 COR. 1. 16. And to pass by you into Macedonia, and to come again out of
Macedonia unto you, and of you to be brought on my way toward Judea.
THis Text contains the manner how Paul was to fulfill his purpose of coming
to them, which was first to go to Macedonia; and upon a short abiding there,
then again, to come back to them, and to make a longer continuance with them.
For the state of the Church of Macedonia was not so corrupt, as this of
Corinth, and therefore needed not so long a residence of Paul there, as in this
place. For our holy Apostle had his whole heart carried out in the service of
God, and therefore did order his journeys and continuance in any place,
according as Gods glory, and the advantage of the Church might require it. So
that when Paul speaks here of his travails, and sets down as it were his
several journeys, in all these he did not consult with flesh and blood, or look
upon carnal advantages; but his aim in all is, to promote the Kingdom of Christ.

There is one great difficulty which Commentators are exercised with concerning
this Text, and that is, How to reconcile this passage with that which is 1 Cor.
16. 5, 6, 7. where he says, He would come to them after he had passed through
Macedonia, and that he would not now see them by the way, whereas here he
says, he will, though afterward he would come and abide with them: So that
here seems to be a contrariety in his purposes. Some, as Aquinas, and others,
think therefore that this purpose in the Text, was either made in a former
Epistle, which is now lost, or sent by a messenger to them: And that afterward
Paul for urging reasons did alter his resolution. And that this is spoken of in
the former Epistle, which they say is the second, though with us it be the
first. Hence it is affirmed by some, that the Apostle wrote three Epistles to
these Corinthians, though we have but two. But it is the judgment of the most
able Divines, That no part of the Canonical Scripture is lost. They grant many
books are now wanting, which some holy men did write, but of that which was by
God appointed to be the Canon and Rule of our faith and manners none is
perished. And indeed to hold that opinion, would open a door for many
atheistical arguments; at least it would gratify the Popish party, who
thinks, if there were no Scripture, yet the Church and her traditions would
be a star bright enough to guide us unto Heaven. Others there are that grant
in the former Epistle Paul had a contrary resolution to this in the Text, and
that it is no dishonor to him to change his mind; for they distinguish between
matters of Doctrine, and matters of Fact. In matters of Doctrine they were
always guided by the Spirit of God: But in matters of Fact, sometimes they did
purpose according to humane considerations, but prudential and rational; yet in
the event were overruled to other things, then they purposed, by some new
dispensations of Gods providence. Neither is this to be blamed, no not in wise
men. For the Rule is, Sapientis est mut^re consilium, new emergencies which the
wisdom of man could not foresee, may cause new resolutions. Now it is plain,
that either Paul did wholly change his purpose, or else he did not fulfill it
as soon as was expected by the Corinthians, which made them so calumniate him
for inconstancy and levity. And this answer may very well be justified; yet
Musculus does at large show, how both these purposes may be reconciled, and
that there is no contrariety in them, which is too long here to insert.

Let us come to observe some practical and profitable instructions from this
Text, and from the general scope that Paul had in all this labor and travail,
which was to advance the glory of God, to promote the good of the Church,
rejoicing like a Giant to run his race. We may observe,

That it is the duty of all Christians, and especially of Ministers to lay out
It Is the duty of all Christians, especially Ministers to lay out themselves for
the glory of God.
themselves for the glory of God, and good of others.

Was not Paul admirable in this? See how he takes one journey upon another,
travaileth from one Church to another; and all this is, that Christ might be
exalted. Both godly Christians and especially Ministers of the Gospel, are to
follow Christ in this, who went up and down preaching the Kingdom of God, and
doing good whithersoever he came. All his life was spent in doing the will of
the Lord.

First, Let us consider it as the duty of all Christians in their several
places and 1. For all Christians.
relations; and herein these things are considerable.

First, There is none, though in never so mean a condition, but has several 1.
There is none but have talents to be improved.
talents committed to him, which are to be employed for the honor of God, and
the good of others. The known Parable of the Talents does sufficiently confirm
this. For though there be a great difference, some have five, and some have
ten, and others but one or two, yet none are to sit idle: And therefore in that
Parable, Matthew. 25. 24. the instance of an unprofitable servant is made in him,
who had but one Talent: we would have thought it would have gone worse with
those who had more Talents; they were under many obligations, it would be very
difficult to improve all. Does not evperience teach us, that where a man has
many relations, and several trusts committed to him, how hard it is to be
faithful in all? Yet here in this Parable, he only is found unprofitable, and
is adjudged unto a terrible doom, that had but one talent, and was negligent
therein. Would not Christ teach us by this, that none should slight their mean
and low estate, thinking that such are poor and inconsiderable creatures, as
they are, alas, they can do nothing for God? It is for Magistrates and
Ministers, for rich men, or men in place, and of interest to lay out
themselves; but God does not look they should do any thing. Oh take heed of
this temptation! If thou do but set thy self to consider in this matter,
thou may find thy self in capacity to promote the glory of God, and to
further the Gospel of Christ in many particulars that thou art now negligent
in. This is our great sin, that none are contented with the several relations
and conditions they are in. One thinks, if he were in such a man's estate, he
could serve God better than he does. The private Christian thinks a Minister
can do it better: A Minister thinks a private Christian has not the
temptations and sad ears that he has. As Luther speaks (Comment. in Genesis
cap. 17.) of himself, how he thought other men's callings happier than his, who
endured so much envy and hatred for the Gospel, They live without vexations;
their labor is sweet, but I am exercised (says he) with great dangers. But we
must take heed of impatiency, and know we may all serve God, and so be at last
saved in our respective lawful callings. We would think the hands or feet were
in a worse condition than the tongue, for they are worn out with labor;
whereas the tongue does taste of sweet and pleasant things, and is not w^aried
with pain, and yet these partake of the same happiness with the body, as the
eyes or tongue do.

Secondly, This you also are to understand, that all the lawful actions in 2.
All lawful actions may be improved for Gods glory.
your several callings may be improved for Gods honor, as well as those that
are in their nature religious, and immediately applied to himself. Our plowing
and sowing, our marrying and bringing up of children, if done according to
Scripture-rules, please God in their way, as well as religious duties: It may
be holy plowing, holy sowing, holy buying and selling, as well as holy praying
and holy preaching. It is the Apostles command, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat,
or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. In Popery there was
an horrible mistake about this, which was the cause of bringing in much
superstition; which made Luther, as appears in his Comments on Genesis, so
often speak of the good pleasure that God takes in the civil actions of our
calling, when done out of obedience to Gods command. And indeed men are hardly
persuaded, that the doing of such things in our relations, are serving of God;
whereas all such things done from good principles, and to right ends, are
holiness as well as other duties. Holiness to the Lord, is to be written upon
all thy natural, civil and moral actions, as well as religious. It is true,
here lies the difficulty, to do these ordinary actions of our calling upon
holy grounds; to eat, to drink, to labor, that God may be exalted, and not to
make riches, gain, and outward blessedness the utmost end of all doings in this
kind. So that till a man be regenerated, he is but a worm crawling upon the
ground, he cannot do any thing but upon humane motives. And it is no wonder,
for such men in all their religious duties are but carnal and earthly; whether
they pray or hear, it is not for the glory of God: Custom, formality, and
self-respects, are the Locusts and Caterpillars, that do devour our hopeful
buds. Therefore

In the third place, It behooves every Christian often to meditate about the
ultimate 3. Christians should often meditate upon the ultimate end of all their
actions.
end of all his actions. As the Heathen would have a man say to himself, Cui
bono, for what good is this I do? So much more should believers propound this
to themselves; I labor, I take pains, I rise early, I go to bed late; but to
what end is all this? What is it that my soul does principally aim at in all
these things? If we had asked Paul, saying, Paul, Why will you go to Macedonia?
He would have said, to promote Christ's Kingdom, to have been beneficial to men's
souls. And then again, Why to Corinth? It was to carry on the work of the
Gospel there. Many did begin to fall off, so that it was necessary there should
be information and admonition. And further, Why do you go to Jerusalem? It is
to refresh the bowels of the poor Saints there. By which you see, that as the
Heliotropium, that flower of the Sun, does follow the Sun, and opens and
shuts according to the presence of the Sun, and its absence. Thus does the
heart of Paul wholly move after God; divine considerations are the Loadstone
that drew out his heart. And indeed in all moral actions, the end is first to
be concluded. Hence Aristotle in his Ethics begins with the end of humane
actions. What is the white that all men are to shoot at? What is the mark they
are to level at? Whereupon some Divines likewise concluding, that Divinity is
practical and not speculative merely, that therefore the most approved and
genuine method in all Systems of Divinity, is, first to begin with that end,
which all men ought to aim at in their whole life, and that is known to be the
glory of God, and the salvation of our souls. Now when a man has fixed his
end, and resolves upon that, he does all things proportionably and sutably
thereunto. Hence when a man acts according to a Divine Rule: If you ask him,
Why do you take such pains? Why do you ride up and down, and travail so much?
Why do you study and devour books? His answer will be, It is for Gods glory,
and the salvation of my soul. Till therefore a man has centered his soul upon
the right end, till his heart be constantly upon that, he either propounds
cursed and wicked ends to himself, or at the best he makes intermedious ends
ultimate, that which is the secondary to be the principal. For it is lawful to
take pains, to be diligent in our calling, that our family may be provided for,
our children be brought up; it were an unnatural and great sin to be
negligent herein; but then you must remember, to make this a comma, not a
colon: This must be your Inn, not your home, you must look beyond all these,
even to God and your souls. This truth is so necessary, that though we should
preach six hundred Sermons about it, to quicken you up in the meditation
thereof, it would not be useless: But I am not now to insist upon it. The sum
is this, He that would both in soul and body, in health, wealth, parts, and all
he has, be employed for God, must often make this Question to his soul, Oh my
soul, what is thy end in all these things! What moves thee to be thus diligent
in thy ways? What is it that is set most upon thy heart all the day long? For
although we cannot continually have actual thoughts upon our chief end, yet we
are to have an habitual and virtual inclination, from whence all is to come,
that we do. Even as a perfect Grammarian speaks always true Latin, from the
habit within him, though happily he does not actually think upon every rule in
his Grammar.

In the next place we told you, This acting and working for God in our whole 2.
Especially it belongs to Ministers.
life and callings, is more eminently to be fulfilled in the Ministers of the
Gospel. The name of a Bishop is a name of labor, and not honor. The Ministry
is, Negotiorum negotium, the work of all works; which made Paul say, Who is
sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16. All the title and names they have,
denote diligence; labor, solicitude and constant perseverance in the work of
the Lord against all the cruel oppositions that the Devil and wicked men do
raise against them. Hence Timothy is commanded, To endure hardship as a good
soldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4. and that he may discharge this
faithfully, He must not entangle himself in the affairs of the world. All which
shows, that in a peculiar manner they are by their Ministry to dispossess
Satan of his Kingdom: They are clouds to refresh the dry ground, and to make it
fruitful. They are salt to season those who are corrupted by sin. But you
may say, What qualification is requisite, that both private Christians and
Ministers may lay themselves wholly out in their respective ways for God? For
though Paul instance here only of his own travails, yet the end of this is
general, and belongs not only to all Ministers, but all Christians. We are to
do in our way, what Paul did in his way: We may in the Apostles consider some
things as commanded them in their proper personal capacity: Some things again
as Ministers which belong to all Officers in the Church: Some things again as
commanded them under the notion of believers, and what they do in such a
capacity, we all are to imitate them in. It was not the Apostles duties only to
watch and pray, to take heed their hearts be not overcharged with the cares of
this world; to strive to enter in at the straight gate, but it is every
believers duty; we have all the same end, though not the same way. What Paul
aimed at, by preaching, by travailing from one Country to another, the very
same thing art thou to aim at in thy buying and selling, in thy trading from
one place to another.

Now amongst the several qualifications to enable us thereunto, there is
required, What is required to enable us to do all things for Gods glory. 1 A
converted soul.


1. A renewed Nature. We must be made new creatures, else the first stone is
not yet laid in this foundation. Paul never was busy in this spiritual
merchandising for God, till he was converted; while some men have their lusts
their god; others their god; others the world their god; others honor and
greatness their god: They cannot but toil and moil, go far and near, only to
satisfy these spiritual Idols, that they worship in their hearts. Oh but when
God shall make this iron to swim, shall convert this earth into fire, then he
begins to improve that first Commandment, and to do all things in pursuance
thereof, even to have no other gods, but God alone.

2. There is required a public Affection, whereby we prefer Gods glory, and
the spiritual good of others, above all our particular concernments. If 2 A
public spirit.
Paul could even desire to be an Anathema for Israel's spiritual good, Romans 9.
3. How much more then would he readily part with riches, honor, and his own
ease to have procured it? When we read in profane Histories, and see how much
some of their Worthies have denied their profits, pleasures and lusts to
promote the public good, we may admire that public spirit God gave them; yet
Austin observes truly, That corrupt aims and ends did prevail in all they did.
How much more then may we behold the glorious work of Gods Spirit upon many
Christians, in this very particular of giving them public affections, that had
rather with Jonah be cast into the Sea, then see the Church sink wherein they
are? If it be our duty, To lay down our lives for the brethren, 1 John 3. 16.
is it any wonder, if we do the less things for the good of others?

3. There must be Heavenly mindedness. Cold does congregate heterogeneal 3.
Heavenlyn indedness.
things together; the Earth is an heavy element, and falls downward. If
therefore a man would be active and diligent for God and his Church, he must be
of an heavenly frame; he must be able to say with David, Whom have I in Heaven
but thee, and in earth in comparison of thee? Psalm. 73. 25. As fire
assimilateth all things into its self: Thus does the godly man endeavor that
all his relations may be godly, all his friends, all the world if it could be.
Hence it is that every godly man, because of this heavenly affection, is in
some measure, though not equal to Paul, to say, 2 Cor. 11. 28, 29. The care of
all the Churches is upon me: who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended,
and I burn not? It is said to be a kind of proverbial speech in the primitive
times, If an elect (that is, a believer) has sinned, his neighbor has
sinned; implying the great care Christians took of one another soul, that if
any did sin, they were to consider whether other men's sins were not made
theirs some way or other.

Lastly, Fervency and zeal is a choice ingredient in this precious ointment. If
you observe who ever did much in their places for God, or his Church; you 4.
Fervency and zeal.
will find they were always men of zeal. Hence Romans 12. 11. you have those
duties excellently put together, Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit,
serving the Lord. Every Sacrifice must have this fire, that it may be offered
up to God. It is the sluggard that has this field grown over with briars and
thorns; want of zeal makes a man stand like an unprofitable tree, that
cumbreth the ground. It was Paul's zeal made him do and suffer so much for the
good of the Church. Thus zeal also will inflame thee, and make thy heart which
naturally is like a cold stone within thee, to burn like fire; and then, as
Solomon speaks in another case, It is an impossible to keep in thy
godliness, as to bind up the wind, or to conceal the ointment thou bear
about with thee. Zeal will make thee work for God, speak for God. These and the
like qualifications will make us put this Doctrine into daily practice, viz. To
improve all we are, and all we have for Gods glory, and the good of others.

Let the Use be, To examine our selves in this point: Is all we do in reference
to God? Do we live and move to glorify God? May we not charge our base and
unworthy hearts with much laziness, much formality; much worldliness, whereby
we are hindered from spending our selves, and being spent in his service? Do we
not live, as if we had no other business in this world, then to eat and drink,
to buy and sell? And yet again, Who looks upon himself as running in a race,
and so will not give over till he come to the prize? And truly if we but
consider the infinite comfort that is in doing of Gods work, above the worlds,
and the Devils; this would be a sharp goade in our sides, to make us forward
therein.

SERMON. CIX.
Of the Office of Apostle, and particular Pastors; and of the Peoples esteem
of their Minister.

2 COR. 1. 16. And to pass by you into Macedonia, and to come again out of
Macedonia unto you, and of you to be brought on my way toward Judea.
WE proceed to a second Observation from this relation made by Paul of the
manner how he intended to perform his promise of visiting of them. For it is
plain, that Paul by this instance does declare, that he had an universal
commission to oversee all those Churches in several places and countries which
he had planted. And therefore in this particular his Office was distinct from
ordinary Pastors, which were appointed for particular Cities and Churches, who
were to have their ordinary residence with them, and so were in a peculiar
manner to give an account for their souls, as their proper charge. God then did
not, or does not require of ordinary Pastors, that they should like Paul
travail from country to country for the propagating of the Gospel, but in a
diligent and faithful manner to watch over their own flock at home. From
whence observe, The office of the Apostle and ordinary Pastors differs, in that
the one had an universal, the other a particular charge.


That the Office of an Apostle, and an ordinary Pastor, were among other things
distinguished in this, that the one had an universal charge over all Churches;
the other was limited to a particular flock.

I say, [Among other things] for there were several particulars wherein
Apostles and Pastors are diversified, as their immediate call, their ocular
testimony and witness of Christ; their power to work miracles; their
infallibility in Doctrines: All which are not now to be looked for in an
ordinary Pastor. Only that which I am to take notice of, is their illimited and
universal power, which the Apostles had; they were supreme Governors in the
Church; yet even their Authority was but ministerial, not magisterial.
Therefore their name declares they were but as Ambassadors sent, and so were
not to do any thing in their own name, but the name of Christ who sent them.

The opening of this Doctrine may serve for information and practical
improvement. And

First, We are to take notice that the Apostles had an universal commission, to
go 1. The Apostles had commission to preach to all Nations.
and preach to all Nations, to disciple them, to plant Churches; And therefore
they were in constant travails up and down; for they were the leaven, to leaven
the whole world. They were like the Sun whose light and heat have influence
upon the whole earth. It is true, they divided their labors, some going into
one part, and some into another, so that thereby the word of God prevailed more
powerfully, than the Emperors sword. Christ indeed says, He was sent only to
the l^st sheep of Israel; but the Apostles were sent to all the lost men of the
word; and that grace of God which before was enclosed within the borders of
Judea, was upon Christ's ascension publicly offered to all Nations. This was
that mystery, which the Apostles at first perceived not; but when thoroughly
instructed, then they began to call nothing, or man unclean. It was then
necessary, for the carrying on of this universal and illimited grace of God, to
have such Officers, that should also be universal and illimited; that should go
up and down preaching the Gospel of Christ; the goodness of God herein
mercifully appearing, that no Nation though never so barbarous, and in such
remote parts of the world, were shut out from this glorious light.

Secondly, The Office of the Apostles, though thus differing from all other
Offices, 2. Yet the office of the Apostles did virtually contain all other.
yet it did virtually and eminently contain all; therefore they could do what
the Pastor and Teacher did. Hence Peter calls himself an Elder, 1 Pet. 5. 1. And
John the Apostle (for we take it for granted, it was he that was the Penman of
them) in his two last Epistles styleth himself only Elder So that the Apostles
they did preach, they did administer Sacraments; and thus what any other
Officer did, they also could do. Even as Philosophers say, the vegetative and
sensitive soul, is contained in the rational after a more eminent manner.

Thirdly, The Apostles therefore had in their Office, that which was ordinary,
3. The Apostles had in their office something ordinary, and something
extraordinary.
and that which was extraordinary. In their extraordinary they had no
successors; in this particular of universal inspection and oversight to
Churches, they had none. This Question indeed is greatly disputed by Saravia,
and others that adhere to his opinion, who affirm, That though the Apostles had
many extraordinary and personal privileges, yet their Office was perpetual,
even as that of the Pastors. There being (say they) the same perpetual grounds
for one as well as the other. But that does not appear probable. The first
constitution and planting of Churches, requiring that peculiar Office, which
planted Churches do not: Even as miracles were then required, but not now; and
if any Nation were in these later days to be converted, there would be
required no more an Apostle to do this, then miracles to confirm his Doctrine.
As it was with the people of Israel, while they were at first to be an imbodied
people, and before they were fully planted in the Land of Canaan; they had
extraordinary Officers, and the Lord wrought wonderful miracles amongst them,
but he did not so afterward.

Fourthly, But the Office of an ordinary Pastor, is to watch over his flock, to
keep constant residence amongst them. Even the best Popish Writers do
determine, That a Pastors residence with his people is Jure Divino. It is true,
there are some cases, when they may for a while be absent from them, viz. when
they are called to consult in Synods and Councils about the public advantage
of the Churches of God, to stop the gangrene of error, or any profaneness
endangering the whole body; but a voluntary absence from a people is a great
sin, and inconsistent with all those ministerial duties that God does require
of them. How can they feed them? How can they admonish them? How can they
rebuke them, and reprove, as occasion shall serve, unless present with them?
That distinction per se, vel per alium, will not hold at the day of judgment.
It is not another man's diligence, another man's care that will save thee. Now
when we say, his residence is necessary, we mean not his mere personal and
bodily presence only. For if men be lazy and negligent, their presence is an
absence. The Scripture speaks of Idol-shepherds, such have eyes, and see not;
ears, and hear not; such have mouths, and speak not. Now these whether absent
or present, it is much alike. Therefore this residence requires a faithful and
diligent discharge of that weighty work, constant preaching, a faithful
dispensing of Ordinances: And besides this public Ministry, as occasion does
require, a more personal and private dealing with their flock, that so no man
might perish. We read of our Savior, Joh. 4. that he did not despise a poor
ignorant woman, but though weary, and wanting bread, yet attended to her
conversion, saying, It was his meat and drink to do his Fathers will. People
are not to interpret such private endeavors of their Ministers, as too much
busie-medling or affectation of dominion. Yea it is your duty to go unto your
Pastors of your own accord, to enquire about the salvation of your souls; no
man needs to teach you this, in respect of your bodies or estates, to go to
Physicians and Lawyers. Certainly were not these things more unto men, than
their souls, they would have as much recourse to their Ministers. Consider that
place, and set it upon your hearts, Mal. 2. 7. The Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger
of the Lord of Hosts. You see here our Office, and your duty. Oh then, were men
in more holy fear about their souls! What if I have not knowledge enough to
salvation? What if I mistake godliness, thinking it to be that which it is not?
What if I delude and flatter my own soul? Oh let me go to those that are the
wise Physicians of my soul! Let me enquire so diligently, so exactly, that
whatsoever I am deceived in, it may not be in matter of my soul!

Fifthly, Though a Paster is thus ordinarily to reside with his own flock, and
5. Though a Pastor is ordinarily to reside amongst his flock, yet he is a
Minister of the whole Church of God.
above all things to attend thereunto, yet he is in some sense a Minister of
the whole Church of God, and so is a debtour to the public good thereof. We
must in every Minister distinguish of the habitual and aptitudinal disposition
that is in him by his Office, and the actual relation, or exercise thereof. It
is true, that a Minister is not primo and per se, made a Minister of the
Catholic visible Church, as some learned men think; for then his principal and
proper duty would be to attend upon the whole flock of Christ, and not this or
that particular one; yet though he be not Pastor Ecclesiae universalis, as the
Pope does arrogantly assume to himself, yet he is Pastor in Ecclesia
universali, though he be not a Pastor of the universal Church, yet he is a
Pastor in the universal Church. Hence when he preaches or administreth
Sacraments in other Churches than his own, he does it not as a private man, but
as a Pastor in the Church, though not as a Pastor of that particular Church.
The reason why a Minister may put forth ministerial acts, though not to his own
people, arises from that habitual disposition, which he is put into by his
Office. So that to be a Pastor of a people is not like that predicamental
relation ad esse, which Logicians speak of; as if when a people (suppose)
should be all consumed by the plague suddenly, that then a Pastors office does
wholly cease, not only to them, but to all other Churches; but it is rather
under a transcendental relation, having an aptitudinal respect to the whole
Church of God. But I am not here to dilate on this, it is enough at present to
know, that a Pastor is not so limited to his own flock, as if he did not owe
much also to other Churches; yea he is many ways to advantage others also, by
occasional preaching, by public assistance in solemn Assemblies, by writing
and many other ways. Thus they are to be like some full fountains which are
able not only to water the proper channel it emptieth it self into, but to
overflow sometimes, as Jordan did to the refreshing of others. So that although
a Minister is bound to prefer his own flock first, and principally to attend to
them, as his own charge, yet what by prayer, direction and counsel, and what
with many other edifying ways, he is wholly to lay out himself for the good of
others, and to be as precious ointment which cannot be hidden, but does refresh
standers by and strangers, as well as those that bear it about; or as music
does not only delight those for whom it is purposely provided, and who are at
the charge of it, but even others that are at a distance, or mere strangers.

Is it thus then, that Pastors are personally to attend to their flock? Then
let it be an Use of Exhortation, to you that are the people, readily to submit
unto, and entertain them in all their ministerial labors. If we are to preach,
you are to hear; if we are to reprove, to admonish, to instruct, then it is your
duty to be willing in all these things. Why then is it that many are so
unwilling, so froward and opposite to the Ministers of God in their faithful
discharge of their Office? Are we from house to house, from person to person,
as occasion may require, thus to promote your souls good? Why are people so
averse to this? They are not willing to be disquieted, they would be let alone
in their ignorance and profaneness. Thus we take more pains than we have
thanks for: They would like us better, if we would meddle less, if every man
were left alone to his own self. But though happily you may say to other
private Pastors, What have you to do to instruct us, to meddle with us, look to
your own selves? Yet you cannot say thus to those whom God has set over you;
they must admonish, reprove, instruct, whether you love them or not, for so
doing. So that it argues horrible negligence in people, when the more lazy,
the more careless a Ministry is, they like it the better; They love no zeal, no
diligence, no forwardness in such as watch over them. And whereas the Devil
goes up and down like a rearing Lion, to seek whom he may devour; yet these
are angry at the shepherds of their souls, who would deliver them out of his
paws. If you were but sensible in what thraldom you are in to your lusts, how
difficult to get any bolts or fetters off from you, as also how many
oppositions are in the way to Heaven; how hardly even a righteous man is saved,
then you would say, all ministerial labors are too little to provoke thee in
this way.

The second Use is of Admonition to the Ministers of the Gospel, that they
would look upon Paul as a special president to follow. How ought it to quicken
us up against all dullness, laziness and wearisomness in our work, when we have
such an example as Paul before us? How often may we blush and mourn, to see our
selves fall so short of Paul's diligence, zeal and courage in the ways of God?
For though we are not called with him to pass from country to country, from
Church to Church, to advance the kingdom of Christ, yet within our sphere we
are to imitate him; and as we see here in the Text, where there was the less
need of his presence, to continue the less while, as in Macedonia; and where
there was the greater necessity of his pains and labor, to continue the longer
while. Thus ought we to discern of men's conditions, to consider who needs
more instruction, and more reproof than others, and so accordingly to apply our
selves. Oh how happy is it when prudence and zeal meet both together in the
Officers of the Church! This is to be Luther and Melancthon joined in one
person.

We come to the last particular observable in these words, and that is the
consequent event, rather than the final cause of this his journey unto them,
which is to be brought on his way toward Judea. You have this also mentioned in
his former Epistle, 1 Cor. 16. 6. as being an expression of love, which he did
much regard; and verse. 11. he speaks of Timotheus, that he should conduct
him. The original is (...). To be lead on forward with respect in his way: and
we have it often instanced in Romans 15. 24. I trust to see you in my journey,
and to be brought on my way by you. We read also of this loving respect showed
to Paul and Barnabas by the Church, Act. 15. 3. and especially Act. 21. 5. The
Disciples brought Paul and all his companions on their way with wives and
children. This showed their affectionate love toward them. Yea that is an
observable expression of John Epist. 3. 6. Whom if thou bring on their journey
after a godly sort, thou shall do well. In the original it is, Worthy of God;
thereby implying, that it was more than a mere civil expression, or courteous
act of humanity. They did look at God in those eminent servants whom they did
thus respect.

Now in this expression there are two things implied,

1. Their cordial affections to them as friends. This going along with them,
did demonstrate how much they loved their company, that they were unwilling
ever to be taken from them.

2. It was a matter of honor and respect to their Officers; it showed they
esteemed of them more, than of the great and noblemen of the world; yea they
looked upon it as their own honor, that they had such an Apostle. From whence
observe,

That where the Ministry has wrought spiritually upon a people, it works
Where the Ministry has wrought spiritually, the Minister is esteemed highly.
great love and honor to those that were the instruments thereof.

Not that the Ministers of God are to look so much at external reverence, and
civil respect, but chiefly to the heart-affection of a people, and their souls
inward esteem of them. Paul speaks of this respect he had from the Galatians
upon the first work of his Ministry upon them, though they did abate afterward
of this love, Gal. 4. 14. You received me as an Angel of God, yea as Jesus
Christ. I bear them record, that if it had been possible, they would have
plucked out their own eyes, and have given them to Paul. What hyperbolical
expressions of love are here spoken of? But all this is, where the Ministry
has had its spiritual efficacy; otherwise you cannot discern a man better
never to have reaped any good by the preaching of the Gospel, than that he
never knew yet what a converting, a quickening Sermon meant: for if he had, he
would never be so malicious, so opposite to the Ministers of the Gospel, as he
is; he never gets good by them; and therefore it is no wonder, that he has
no higher thoughts of them. But if through their Ministry he has been
converted, he has been edified in godliness, then how dear and precious are
their thoughts of such?

Use of Admonition, Try thy affections to the Ministry, by the profit thou
reapest by it. Is it any wonder to hear an ignorant person, a profane persons
revile or oppose the preachers of the Gospel? How can it be otherwise? They
never found any soul-saving benefit by their pains. Hence the Apostle to
convince such Christians as were staggering, and beginning to fall off from the
truth, and their affections to him, calls to mind what good they once were
made partakers of by his labors, If ever they were converted, if ever they
received the Spirit of God, it was through his ministry. Therefore thrive and
profit by their labors, and then despise them, if thou can.

SERMON. CX.
Of the sinfulness of Levity, and unconstancy in the Children of God.

2 COR. 1. 17. When I therefore was thus minded, did I use lightness? or the
things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me there
should be yea, yea, nay, nay?
IN this Verse the Apostle makes his apologetical Defense against such
calumnies that were cast upon him, either for the changing of his purpose to
come to them, or deferring it longer than they expected. And for the more
efficacious convincing of them, he propounds his Discourse interrogatively, Did
I use lightness? Do I purpose according to the flesh?

So that in the words we have,

1. The (...), the Crime, Cause, or Charge supposed. 2. Their Accusation upon
it.
The Charge supposed is, That he was thus minded to come to them, (...),
because it was done out of deliberhtion, and serious advice. Though some Copies
read (...), as denoting only an act of his will. Now this purpose Paul did not
fulfill, he changed his mind, and did not come according to expectation:
Whereupon his adversaries charged two crimes upon him, which usually make men
sinfully alter their minds.

1. Levity and Inconstancy, Rashness and Temerity; as if he did not regard
what he said. The Greek word is (...) from (...) the heart, because of its
lightness and agility. 2. Carnal and corrupt designs, they make men also often
alter their resolutions, and that he does remove in the ensuing words.
I shall take notice of the first at this time; we may consider how diligent
the Apostle is to free himself from all Levity and Inconstancy, because his
enemies would extend this to his Doctrine also, as appears in the following
Discourse. He that is not to be trusted (say they) in his ordinary promises; he
that is uncertain and inconstant there, will also be in his preaching and
Doctrine; but the Apostle does with all vehemence, yea with a solemn oath
purge himself from this calumny. From whence observe,

That lightness and inconstancy is a great sin and reproach in any person,
Lightness and inconstancy is a great sin and reproach to all, much more to
Ministers.
but especially in the Ministers of the Gospel.

As it relates to them, I shall (God assisting) treat of it, at the clause of
the verse. For the present I shall handle it in the general, as a necessary
truth to be made use of by all believers. And whereas this inconstancy may be
discovered either in our civil and moral conversation, or in our religious and
holy concernments.

I shall begin with the first. Let us consider the sinfulness of inconstancy
in civil Of the sinfulness of inconstancy in civil respects. As 1. When we are
not consistent with our selves in our assertions.
respects, which may be manifested in these particulars:

First, When we are not consistent with our selves in our assertions and
affirmations. This is a great dishonor to God and our selves, when we will say
and unsay things, affirm one thing at one time, and the contrary at another:
And in this case Inconstancy is the same with lying. Thus it argues a light
vain heart, to talk one thing one time, and another thing another time. Hence
the Rule is, Oportet mendacem esse memorem. A liar must have a good memory; and
as others say, A liar must have a good pair of legs, that he may run away;
for he will quickly be discerned, if he stay long in one place. Now we may not
wonder, if Paul would not be thought guilty of a lie. For the way of lying is
inconsistent with the state of grace, as Colos. 3. 9. Lie not one to another,
seeing ye put off the old man with his deeds, and have put on the new man.
Observe the Apostles argument, you that are made new creatures, you that have
the Image of God repaired in you, how can you lie to one another? Hence you
have David praying for the grace of God herein, Psalm. 119. 29. Remove from me
the way of lying. And, verse. 163. I hate and abhor lying, but thy Law do I
love. Mark the opposition, no man can love God and his Word, but he must
abhor lying. But how little do people generally take heed to themselves
herein? They think not their graceless and unregenerated hearts may be
discovered by such inconstant lying words, as well at by gross enormities. Oh
therefore look upon it as a very heinous sin, not to be a person of gravity,
consistency and harmony in thy words. Can there be a greater reproach then to
say of a man, he will say and unsay, there is no heed to be given to his words?
We are not to believe all things they say: if this were only thy dishonor, it
were not so much matter, but it comes from a corrupt heart within. Now the
people of God above all persons are to look to their words in this respect,
because with Paul they have their enemies to observe them. And we see how
profane persons are apt to charge them with this, that though they will not
swear, yet they will lie. This indeed they do, because of their enmity and
malice to such as fear God; but be thou sure to give no occasion herein for
them to blaspheme. We see this holy Apostle in a solemn, sacred manner,
sometimes calling God to witness, That he speaks the truth, and lies not, 2
Cor. 11. 31 Gal. 1. 20.

Secondly, This inconstancy and mutability in civil respects, is discovered 2.
In our promises.
in our promises; Yea, when it becomes a crimson sin, then it is manifested
in our promissory oaths, lightly and perfidiously breaking of them. Now as to
abstain from all lying, and to speak the truth to every man, is made a property
of a godly man: So also it is a character of a godly man, to keep his promise,
to be faithful to that, though it should be to his own damage, Psalm. 15. 4. He
that swears to his own hurt, and changes not. Though his Word and promises
prove afterward prejudicial to him, yet he prefers truth above all earthly
respects whatsoever. It is true, Divines have a Rule, In malis promissis
rescinde fidem, A sinful promise is not to be kept; for that would be to add
iniquity unto iniquity, and to double thy sin. But in things that may be
inconvenient to thee, thou art not to use lightness, and easily break thy
word. Thus then it is a character of a godly man to look to his promises, to be
very careful to observe them: It Is unjustice to break them, because by a
promise thou becomest a debtor to another. And do you see Paul so careful,
lest he should be thought to be yea and nay? And art thou careless about thy
word? Oh you must know, that true Religion and godliness does not consist in
the duties of the first Table, but of the second likewise. Do not think that
this is godliness enough to pray, to perform holy duties, to be often in
religious Ordinances: No, but thou art to abound in all truth and faithfulness
toward man, to avoid all lying, all falsehood in promises, and so to have truth
both toward God and man. But how apt are our hearts to deceive us in this
kind? Some think their righteousness toward man, because their words are as
good as oaths, that therefore they shall go to Heaven, though they be not
forward in religious duties; they have no family worship of God; they do not
walk singularly to the course of the world; and others again, they are ready to
think that their religious duties, their forwardness and zeal therein; though
they regard not words and promises, though they neglect the duties of
righteousness, yet their condition will be good enough. Oh but remember this
passage of Paul for ever, Be not hasty to promise, labor not to forget what
thou have promised, which will be if thou have a conscientious regard unto thy
self herein. For when thou do not think it matter of conscience, when thou
think godliness is not much concerned herein, no wonder then if thou art so
often found faulty herein. The Scripture is very frequent in pressing these
duties of truth and righteousness between man and man.

Thirdly, This mutability in civil affairs is seen in our affections, our love
3. In our affections.
and respect to men. It is a man's duty to be a faithful friend to such whom he
has cause to respect; and therefore of a friend suddenly to become an enemy,
for one while to love, and another while to hate, this is to be yea and nay.
Men may be unfaithful two ways:

1. When all the love and respect they profess is in hypocrisy. Their tongues
and their hearts do no ways agree. Joab's Ave, and Judas his Salve, when they
intended destruction, is famous even to a Proverb. David often complains of
such deceitful men: but then there are unfaithful men, who once did love, and
were real for the time in their respects; but then

2. Upon carnal sinful grounds alter their affections again. Such perfidious
and inconstant dealings are abominable to God and man. It is one great part of
David's complaint that makes him so solemnly cry unto God for help, even
because the faithful fail from among the children of men, Psalm. 12. 1. It is
true, a man of no godliness may be a faithful friend; there are great
instances of such friends amongst Heathens; and the wisest Writers amongst
them, have serious Discourses about Friendship. But godliness only does rightly
order and regulate this faithful friendship. That is a Rule to be abhorred by
all men, Ama tanquam aliquando osurus; yet it may have its use, considering how
wicked and uncertain men are: But true Religion inclines a man to a settled and
fixed way of love, to those that are fit subjects thereof. The Scripture
speaks of a love to all men, and of a brotherly love, which is upon more
peculiar and holy respects. Now truly, if we speak in a moral sense only, we
may take up Solomon's complaint, Prove. 20. 6. Most men will proclaim their own
goodness; but a faithful man, who can find? Men will talk, and boast, and
profess much love and kindness; but as it was in David's time, so it will be
in all ages, Psalm. 5. 9. For there is no faithfulness in their mouth, their
inward part is very wickedness, they flatter with their tongue. Hence is that
Rule, (...). But why is there such hypocrisy, dissimulation and falsehood in
men's hearts and tongues? It is because there is so little true godliness; for
that makes a man sincere, and of a single heart, both toward God, and toward
man. If then Paul was so afraid of being thought a light and inconstant man any
was; this shows what gravity, constancy and faithfulness of spirit we ought
to walk even to men in the world, godliness and Religion teaches us these
things, whereas to be double-hearted, double-tongued, cannot consist with a man
that is made a new creature. Labor then to inform thy self of the extent of
Religion, how far godliness will put forth its self, not only in religious
duties toward God, but righteous, just and faithful actions toward man. Now
that we may have such plain and faithful spirits, consider the aggravation of
this sin in our civil actions, to be yea and nay, to be inconstant and
changeable. And

First, This is directly contrary to the glorious nature of God, whose image Of
the aggravations of this sin. 1. It Is contrary to the nature of God
ought to be stamped upon us; we are to be like God in our holiness. Now how
often does the Scripture proclaim this glorious property of God, that he is
unchangeable, that he is faithful in his Word and promises? And truly this is
the comfortable support of our selves, for it is not any worth in us, but Gods
faithfulness in his promises that preserves us to eternal glory. Thus he is
called a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19. so faithful is he that has called
us, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 24. If God were not faithful in his promises, even when we
have unfaithful hearts, how miserable would our end be? It Is Gods
faithfulness, not our own we are to depend upon. Now the children of God they
are to have this Image of God established upon them, to be faithful as he is
faithful. There is no yea, or nay with God. See this notably affirmed, Numb.
23. 19. God is not a man that he should lie, neither the son of man, that he
should repent; has he said, and shall not he do it? So 1 Samuel 15. 29. The
strength of Israel will not lie or repent, for he is not a man that he should
repent. The Scripture makes it a necessary property to a man to lie, and to
repent, unless he be assisted by grace. For such is the weakness and
ignorance of his understanding, that he cannot foresee things, and therefore
must necessarily alter his resolutions; and then so corrupt is his heart, that
as there are several objects to entice him, so accordingly he transformeth
himself; but God is infinitely wise and infinitely holy, and therefore there is
no shadow of change in him. Oh then be in love with this glorious Attribute of
God, and according to a creatures capacity do thou imitate it! Show forth the
Image of God in this thing, that thou art even a man, and wilt not lie, wilt
not sinfully change thy words and promises. I say sinfully, because we are so
apt to be ignorant, to mis-judge of things, to be deceived in what we resolve
of, that many times it is our wisdom and duty to be of another mind, and to
take up contrary resolutions, to what once we pitched upon, of which more in
its time.

Secondly, Endeavor after such constancy in words and life, because as it is
2. It Is a reproach to men
a great sin against God; so it is an heavy reproach and scandal to Religion.
It thou should study to do the Devil service, and to promote his Kingdom, so
as to have Religion stink in the nostrils of all men, thou can not take a
more compendious way then to lie, to deceive, to be unjust, to make no
conscience of words and promises. This is to betray godliness to the scorn of
all wicked men. You see that even the most holy men that are, that walk in a
most tender conscientious regard to all their words and works, yet cannot escape
the censure of men in the world, that they are hypocrites, that they are liars,
that they have no truth in them. Oh then what a woe will be pronounced to thee,
who should give just occasion for such men to blaspheme the holy calling,
wherewith we are called? When one by his apostasy and inconstancy had betrayed
the true Religion of Christ, he was afterward troubled in heart for it; he
could have no rest in his spirit, thought himself unworthy of any
Church Communion; and therefore cried out, Calcate me insipidum salem, Trample
upon me as unsavory salt. If then thou would have Religion honored, the
Gospel well spoken of; look to thy self in these things, let no lie, no
falsehood, no deceit be found in thy words and dealings. For if there be,
presently Religion is wounded, then the carnal ones rejoice; this is their
godliness, this is their Religion. Certainly a godly heart cannot but bleed
exceedingly, if at any time he has in this way been so overtaken, as to make
men think the worse of godliness; wherers on the other side to be true,
righteous and faithful in all thy ways, as it is an ornament to Religion; so
it makes thee have an awe and a reverence in the consciences of the most
profligate persons. Thus because John was a just man, therefore even Herod the
King did reverence him, Mark 6. 20. John was both just and holy, and this
wrought reverence.

Thirdly, It is a great sin to be thus rash and inconstant, because hereby a
3. Hereby a man makes himself unfit for Gods service.
man makes himself unfit for Gods service, either in Church or Commonwealth.
such an unfaithful man can never do any good, but be scorned and reproached;
as one Bishop was called Euripus in antiquity, for his inconstancy and
mutability; and this was the great reason, why Paul does with so much
earnestness and affection take this calumny off from himself; for this would
be a special means to bring his person and Doctrine into contempt: if there had
been just cause to judge him such a mutable man, Paul's preaching would never
have done good more; as we hear him saying at another time, Gal. 2. 18. If I
build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a transgressour. Thus
it always falls out, that a man of mutable and inconstant principles, he can
never be serviceable to God; for this debaseth him before men, this makes him
vile and contemptible, and thereby like a broken vessel that is of no use.

Fourthly, It is a great sin to be thus inconstant in our words, because it is
an 4. It Is an abuse of our tongue.
abuse of our tongue, which the Scripture calls a man's glory (though some
apply it to the soul) now for thy glory to be a shame, to have thy tongue
accounted a lying tongue, a double tongue; a false tongue; This is an
aggravation of thy wickedness.

Lastly, As God does threaten to punish lying and deceitful tongues, so he
does 5. God threatens lying, but encourages sincerity.
graciously encourage all such as are of sincerity in all their words and
works. A lying tongue is one of the seven abominations which God hates, Prove.
6. 17. as on the other side, How mercifully does God encourage some, Isa. 63.
8. for he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie, so he
was their Savior. So that if all these particulars be laid together, we may
see how necessary it is to add righteousness to our Religion, to be as Christ,
Whose lips were without guile in respect of God and man. Oh this will afford
thee great comfort; this will assure thee that thy Religion was not hypocrisy.
It Is easier performing multitude of duties then to walk thus uprightly toward
men; they may be done with more ease to flesh and blood, yea they may be the
fuel to thy hearts-pride and self-applause; but this tends really to
mortify sin within thee, and to cause thee to have respect to all Gods
commandments.

SERMON. CXI.
Of the sinfulness of Inconstancy, and lightness in matters of Religion.

2 COR. 1. 17. When I therefore was thus minded, did I use lightness?
WE have treated of lightness and Inconstarcy, as it was expressed in civil
things, whether in our words, Promises, or dealings between man and man. This
you heard was both a sin toward God, and a reproach to religion, yea
unrighteousness and falsehood in these outward affairs are so great sins,
that many times they make the greatest wound in our consciences; and Experience
confirms it, That when a man is converted to God, and made sensible of sin,
the sins of his unrighteousness does most trouble his conscience; It is
longest e're he get the pardon of these in his own soul: and the Reason may be,
because such unfaithfulness in words and dealings are condemned by the natural
light of our conscience; Even Heathens have been able to judge such things great
sins. Now what is done against natural light that makes a greater gash in
the conscience. Hence the Omission of those Duties which are merely known by
supernatural light is not so grievous to us, as when an humble brokenhearted
sinner is called upon to believe in Christ, to rest his soul upon him for
justification. How hardly is such a contrite spirit brought to judge that
unbelief herein is a great and heinous sin; that God is provoked hereby; That,
as much as lies in us we make Christ of none effect: So that, when such a
wounded conscience can complain of its former unrighteous, unjust, and sinful
ways it once lived in, yet it does not at the same time bewail that great sin
of unbelief, its frowardness, and slavishness, that it does not receive Christ
as a Savior; yea, it rather judges it a duty to keep off from a Promise, and
to question; whether Christ will receive such a wretched sinner as he feels
himself to be. By which we see, what cause the people of God have to take heed
of sin in this kind; for how hardly are they healed! how long may it be ere
thy conscience may be pacified thorough the blood of Christ.

But I proceed to a Second kind of Inconstancy, which is of a greater guilt,
Of the sinfulness of Inconstancy in spiritual things: as in 1. Faith.
because expressed in matters of greater concernment, and relation even to God
himself. To be yea and nay, off and on, in matters of Religion, this
proclaims our wretchedness. And

First, There is an inconstancy in our Faith. When we do lightly and
uncertainly receive the truths of God, so that we are ready for one Faith one
week. and another Faith, another week: This is a very dangerous frame of soul,
when a man is not of a sound judgment, neither has laid a good foundation in
Christian Religion, but, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. 4. is like a child
tossed up and down with every wind of doctrine. Such are called by the Apostle
Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 16. unlearned and unstable. In the number of these light and
inconstant persons, we may reckon the Galatians, when he charge them with
their sudden Apostasy, Gal. 1. 6. I marvel that you are so soon removed from
him that called you unto another Gospel. They were ready for another Gospel,
for other Teachers, who formerly had received the Apostle as an Angel of God,
yea, as Jesus Christ. This lightness also was manifested in some of Christ's
Disciples, John 6. 60, 61. who upon their misunderstanding of some passages in
our Saviors Sermon, judging them hard, and absurd, from that time went back
from him, and walked no more with him. And truly are not these times a sad
instance of the lightness and uncertainty of many men in the Doctrine of their
Faith? In how many men's Religion may you find Yea and Nay? How many are
destroying that which once they did build? Now nothing is more contrary to the
nature of Faith than this inconstancy. For, if we do consider what the Nature
of Faith is, we shall find, that it does so autoritatively bring the
understanding into obedience of the Divine truth, that it dare not give way to
doubtings, and plausible Objections of deceitful men any more. The Apostle,
Heb. 11. 1. gives us a full description of Faith, as to this matter of
quieting and satisfying the soul, for he says, Its the substance of things
hoped for; and ehe evidence of things not seen. (...), which is opposed to
(...), that which has but a mere apearancy, as Meteors, or rather, as colors
in the Rainbow; and truly, many men's Faith has no subsistency at all, it is
only in their fancy. Hence it is, that there is almost a ^cepticisme introduced
into Religion, as was once into Philosophy. But Faith does consolidate the
soul, and establish it upon Scripture-grounds, which are sure and unmovable.
The other word is (...), which is applied to a Demonstration, that does even
necessitate the understanding to give assent to it, so that it has no power to
refuse it. Thus also it is when the soul believes, The spirit of God through
the word so convinces the heart, that no demonstration in Sciences nor objects
to sense can be more potent to persuade. Oh then take heed of Inconstancy in
Principles of Faith. This will argue thou art built upon a sandy foundation,
that thou do believe such Doctrines only upon humane Motives, and deceitful
grounds. Hence it is, that the Apostle does exhort to a full persuasion of
mind, even in those points that were more controversal, and disputeable, Romans
14. 5. How much more then are we to be persuaded fully in our mind concerning
those truths that are fundamental, and do so immediately concern our Salvation?
This uncertainty then, this Yea and Nay, in matters of Faith arises from a
mere humane faith, whereby we are carried out to believe these things, upon no
better grounds, than the Turk does his Alcoran, Education, custom, and
Universality. This is the whole reason of our Faith; whereas a Divine Faith is
wrought by the Spirit of God, as the efficient; it is that which lifts up the
heart to receive the Word as Gods word. Though Men have never such parts and
understanding in the sense of the Scripture, yet they cannot believe it, unless
enabled thereunto by the Spirit of God. And again, Divine Faith has also a
divine Motive, the Authority and Testimony of God revealed in the Scripture, so
that we believe not because man says so, but because it is the Lord that
speaks. Thus the Thessalonians, chap. 2, 13. are commended, that they
received the Word, not as the word of men, but as it was indeed, the word of
God. Now then, when a man's Faith is wrought by Gods Spirit, and established
upon Divine Authority, then it becomes more immovable than the Heaven, and
Earth, for, as God is always the same, his word is always the same, so is
Divine Faith. This then all are to labor for, is even a full persuasion in
their own mind, about the truths of Religion, to take heed of inconstancy and
instability herein. We see the Martyrs could not by any terrible menaces, or
fair Promises, be drawn of from the truths of God they had embraced; and was it
not because they had a powerful assurance of the truth of them from Divine
Motives, such as could not fail?

2. In matter of our Conversion and Repentance for our sins it is very sad 2.
In our Conversion and Repentance.
and dreadful to show Inconstancy. To be Yea and Nay in this respect,
sometimes to mourn and complain of them, and at another time to wallow our
selves in the mire again; how terrible is this? But yet how frequently does it
fall out so: what is this but to mock God, and dally with our souls? In times
of afflictions, or under quick convictions of Conscience, to be then afraid of
sin; then to bewail sin, then to resolve against sin: but when this fear is
over, then to embrace our Dalilah again. There are few sinners but they come
under this crime of Inconstancy in this respect; for many do not always
continue in an obstinate, senseless way; they find some thawings, and meltings
of heart, with Pharaoh, and therefore cry out, that God is righteous, and they
are sinners; and they resolve to let their Lusts go, as Pharaoh did the people
of Israel; but they quickly change their Resolutions again. Such therefore as
find these Yeas and Nays, these ebbings and flowings, let them seriously
consider, what an high provocation this Inconstancy is, of God against their
souls. This unsteadfastness was often complained of by the Prophets, in the
people of Israel; They were as so many Grasshoppers, that leap up on high from
the ground, but then settle on it presently again. In their afflictions they
cried out of their Idols, they called upon God; but then proved like a
deceitful bow: and is not this an Epidemical sin? What is more ordinary than
to be soul-sick, to be conscience-smitten under some Sermons, or some sad
afflictions, and fears, but in all these things to have Reubens Curse upon
their souls, unstable like water, upon which you make any impression, but it
receives none? Its one of Solomon's wonderful things, that leave no footsteps
to be observed, A ship in the Sea, none can tell which way it passed. Thus it
is with many, they sin, and they repent; and they repent, and sin; insomuch,
that when you see them overcome with their old lusts, and passions, would you
think they were ever the men, that prayed so, that resolved so? you cannot see
the least footsteps of any such Repentance. Now, that all may be afraid of such
lightness, Motives against this Inconstancy. 1. There is the same Reason at all
times against sin.
and uncertainty, it is good to consider these Particulars.

First, If there be reason at any time for thee to look upon thy sins, as
bitter and terrible, the same will hold at all times. Oh the time has been,
when in thy thoughts such sins thou have committed were intolerable, the
memory of them was as gall and wormwood. Thou did cry out, take them away,
or that the Lord would pardon them. Now do but consider, Is there not the same
reason still to think so? Is sin grown any better? Is it less damning? Is it
less sinful to God then it was formerly? Know then, sin is not altered, that
is, has as terrible guilt as ever; but thou art changed; those convictions,
those powerful Operations of the Spirit of God are not happily now upon thee;
they are witdrawn, and thou art left to thy own natural corrupt self. Remember
then thy self, saying, The time was, no serpent or toad was more odious to me
than my sins: the time was, when night and day they were a burden and torment
to me; but now they grieve me not, they trouble me not; sin is not changed, but
I am changed.

2. Consider this, For thee to sin after such convictions and terrors, does
admit 2. Sins after Convictions are the greater.
of the greater aggravation; because it is done against sense, and experience
of the bitterness thereof: its committed against more experimental and
practical knowledge, which makes any sin to be exceeding sinful. Those
senseless wicked men, who run into all excess of impiety, and have no troubles
of heart, they know not what they do, they cannot tell, whether it be a bitter
and evil thing or no to depart from God. They indeed hear the Word of God, and
the Ministers of God say, that though sin be sweet, yet at last it will bite
like an adder, and sting like a serpent: they hear them say, that the evil of
sin is far greater than the evil of any punishment and torment; but they think
them words only; they never had any experience or taste of any sech bitterness:
But it is otherwise with thee; thou have had wounds in thy heart, the terrors
of God have fallen upon thee. The Law has appeared in its accusing and
condemning power; therefore thou art the more inexcusable who wilt run into
this fire, when thou have been burnt with it; yea, with this taste, there has
been practical light, and experimental knowleg; and therefore thy sin is the
greater: a general knowledge of any thing is but confused and weak in respect of
a practical and experimental one. Hence wicked men are said not to know God,
because they have only a general knowledge, they do not practically improve
this, so as to love God, to fear him, and obey him. If then thou have been in
the pains and torments of sin, and yet wilt venture on the committing of it,
who will pity thee? If a man should be brought out of Hell torments, to live
here upon earth, and yet would commit sin again, would any have compassion on
such a man, if afterward he should be damned. Thus it is with that man, who
has the beginnings of Hell already upon him: its Gods mercy that he gives
thee such a taste of Hell in thy conscience, that thou may fly from sin: But
if, for all this, thou will be worse than a fool, that no experience will teach
thee, then how just is it with God to deliver thee up irrecoverably unto
Eternal wrath?

3. This Inconstancy is nothing but a mocking of God, and dallying in 3. This
Inconstancy is a mocking of God, and a dallying in soul-matters.
soul-matters. What a Thunderbolt should this be in thy heart, to think, I have
but mocked God, as much as lies in me, though he will not be mocked? I have
been but an Hypocrite, and dissembler with them; my Repentance was a lie, my
Tears were a lie; for I am the same man again that I was. The Scripture indeed
makes every man a liar; but to be a liar in thy Repentance, a liar in thy
sorrow for sin, This is the most abominable and detestable of all. Take heed
then of having an heart and a heart, as the Scripture calls it, in these
things: An heart to cry out of sin, and an heart to receive and embrace it
again.

Hence, In the 4th place, Because of this Hypocrisy, and false-dealing with 4.
It may justly cause God for ever to forsake thee.
God, it may be just with him for ever to forsake thee: so as to deliver thee
up to an impenitent heart, never to have the least fear, or sorrow about sin
any more. Pharaoh, that sometimes had relentings upon him, yet at last was so
hardened that he never melted more; and the nearer he grew to his destruction,
the more stupid he was. Thus the people of Israel, who had so often dealt
unfaithfully with God, in a seeming manner, repenting, but afterward turning
back to their lusts again, were at last delivered up to blind eyes, to deaf
ears, to hard hearts, never to understand and to be converted, as we have it
Isa. 6. 9, 10. As Aguish Fits holding very long, at last end in a Consumption:
Thus thou who have often had troubles, and workings of heart about sin; yet
falling often into them again, may become forsaken for ever, as Saul was; the
Lord never meeting thee more in any Ordinance.

The Last Particular, wherein lightness and Inconstancy is a great sin, as it
3. This Inconstancy is a great sin in Promises and Resolutions.
relates to spiritual things, is, In the Promises, and Resolutions, or Vows
that may be made to God. I shall not treat of a Religious Vow, or a Promise by
Oath, at this time: only I shall insist upon such Promises and Purposes as we
may make unto God at any time; as First, In times of great Afflictions and
streights: when the fear of death or any other judgment is upon us, how ready
are we to make Promises both to men and God, that if ever he will recover us,
if ever he will give health again, then we will walk more carefully, abstain
from the sins we were addicted unto, as Pharaoh cried out, Take away this
judgment, this once: Thus we say, if God will try me once more, then what a
Reformed man will I be? But if God spare thee, then how quickly are such holy
Purposes forgotten? Now you are to know, this is a great aggravation of thy sin
to promise thus to God, to purpose thus before God, and then to deal falsely.
Yet what slight and formal thoughts have people concerning such Promises? But
one day thou will find the heynousness of thy false heart herein. A second
time, when we are to make Promises to God, is at the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper? where the consciences of men are so far awed, that they engage
themselves to God, and renew their Covenant with him, to walk with more care
and fear than ever before. But how much Yea and Nay is therein many
Communicants? Who would think thou should be so careless and negligent man,
after such solemn Stipulations made with God? Oh how little are these Promises
thought of, that we frequently make to God? And if it be ^o sinful to break a
Promise made to man, how much more to God? Thou have not lied to man, said
Peter to Ananias, Act. 5. 4. And Satan is said to fill his heart, to make him
do so. To how many may we say, alter such Promises made to God, but broken, why
has Satan filled thy heart to lie unto God? It is Solomon's Advice concerning
Vows and Promises made to God, That we should not be hasty and rash in such
things, Eccles. 5. 2. with this Reason, For God is in heaven, and thou in
earth. He is an Insuate glorious God; and thou a poor worm upon the earth.
Surely this negligence in people generally to fulfill their Promises made to
God should be more seriously bewailed than it is. Your Baptismy, The Lords
Supper, they are Covenants made with God; there is a renewed Promise made to
God in Sacramental Administrations, that we will be the Lords, that we will not
live to the world, or sin, but to God alone. Now, take heed of perfidiousness
in this particular. Thou take Gods Name in vain, in this case; and he will
not hold such guiltless: Yea, there is never a Prayer that we pray unto God,
but there is implicitly a Promise made to God, that if he will grant our
Requests, we will gloryfie his name by an holy and godly life. Take heed then
of being judged out of thy own mouth: God, at that Day of Judgment, will bring
thy own words, thy own Promises against thee. Oh be able to say with Paul, in
the Text, even to God himself, When I thus purposed to reform, to become a new
man, did I then use lightness? did I purpose according to the flesh?

SERMON. CXII.
Of walking according to the flesh.

2 COR. 1. 17. Or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the
flesh?
IN these words the Apostle does remove the Second sinful Cause from himself
that uses to make men change their purposes, and that is, A respect to carnal
Considerations. Men that look only to their Profits, to their Greatness and
Honor, such must needs be mutable and inconstant, like the Camelion, turning
into the color of every object they come nigh; which Aristotle attributes to
fear in that creature, if there be any such thing. And thus when men purpose
and design, but fear of losing some carnal Advantages their hearts are set
upon, causes them to be Yea and Nay, to resolve, and then to unresolve; to
promise, and then to break promises. For, as in Speculatives, Conclusions are
according to the nature of Principles from when they flow; so, in all
Practicalls, our Actions are colored according to the Ends we propound to our
selves.

Now the corrupt Principle, which Paul does here disavow, is, To purpose things
according to the flesh; (...). This is spoken oppositely to the willing of
things according to the Principles of Godliness revealed in the Word; or, as in
other places to the Spirit; for, to walk in the flesh, and to walk in the
Spirit, Romans 8. are made immediately opposite to one another. Of the Phrase
according to the flesh, which is taken for 1. The humane Nature.


Now this Phrase, According to the flesh, has a Threefold signification in
Scripture:

First, it signifies That which is done according to the mere humane nature
without any corruption. Thus Christ is said, Romans 1. 3. to be born of the seed
of David, according to the flesh. That Opposition does evidently demonstrate
against Socinians, that there is another nature in him, which is, his Godhead,
so 1 Pet. 3. 18. he is said to be put to death in the flesh.

2. This Expression does sometimes singnifie The External Privileges, whether
civil or Ecclesiastical, and the glorious Respects that may accompany 2.
External Privileges.
them. Thus the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 16. We know no man after the flesh, no not
Christ himself: That is, We do not attend to any External or sensible
Considerations that may be had from Christ; but our hearts are wholly carried
out in a way of believing on him, even as our Savior says, Luke 8. 21. My
Mother, and my brethren, are they which hear the word of God, and do it. Thus
some are said to glory, and to have confidence in the flesh, which Paul
renounceth, Phil. 3. 4. and that was in the Privileges of the Church of
Israel. So that any external thing in Religion, though it be vouchsafed as a
Privilege by God, yet it is but flesh, in respect of the gracious works of Gods
Spirit. Thus there is a Jew and Circumcision in the flesh, and a Jew and
Circumcision in the Spirit, which is good to be observed; for of too many men's
Religion may you apply that which is spoken in another case, it is flesh, and
not spirit. This we are to press much upon you, that in prayer, in Ordinances,
in all approaches to God, you be a spiritual people, not carnal, resting upon
Externals only.

3. This Expression, according to the flesh, is most frequently for a corrupt
3. Corrupt Principles.
Principle within us, according to which we direct and order our course. Thus
flesh, in the Scripture, signifies the whole man, as it is corrupt,
comprehending in it, not only the Sensitive and inferior part of a man, but
his Rational also; hence Col. 2. 18. We have a fleshly mind. and Gal 5.
Idolatries, Heresies, which are in the mind, are said to be the fruit of the
flesh. It is true, Ephesians. 2. 3. there seems to be a Distinction, because it
is said, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind; but even there
the mind is flesh; and the meaning of the Apostle is, to distinguish of
sins: some whereof arise from the Sensitive Appetite, as Drunkenness,
Uncleanness: others from the Understanding, as desire of Vainglory, Idolatry,
Heresy, etc. all which are the flesh in a large comprehension. Now, in this
sense the Apostle takes it here, He did not purpose according to the flesh,
that is, according to corrupt and sinful Principles within him, but in all
such things was guided by the Spirit of God, determining upon those things
wherein he might most promote Gods honor, and the Churches good. We see this
Apostle, 2 Cor. 10. 3. speaking very affectionately in this point against those
Corinthians, who accused him, as walking according to the flesh; which he
denies; saying, That though he walk in the flesh, yet he does (...) after it:
he did not use carnal weapons, such as humane wisdom, ex^ worth, and
greatness, with carnal Policy, to destroy what opposed it self against the
Gospel.

From the Words thus explained, Observe,

That a purposing, and walking according to sinful, Carnal Principles, Walking
by carnal Principals makes men unstable and inconstant.
must needs make a man very instable, and mutable.

The Apostle in this defense does plainly suppose, that this is an ordinary
cause to make men inconstant in all their ways; hope of getting, and fear of
losing, does cause a continual ebbing and flowing in our affections: where
(...) have not one immovable Principle fixed and settled to walk by, there
must be frequent variations: for new lusts do beget new actions; and the
creature being driven up and down with uncertainties, so they must be that
adhere thereunto. A man cannot stand steadfastly upon a round running bowl, or
upon slippery ice: and such are all the Creatures: Insomuch, that he that would
be, as is said of Christ, The same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, must
take the word of God for his Rule, which is unchangeable, invariable, and
abides for ever. To discover this Truth more fully, let us instance in some
particulars, of the Principles of flesh, which all by nature, according to
their reipective temptations, are prone to follow. Principles of flesh. 1.
Covetousness


And first, Earthly Profit, and Worldy advantages, are a sweet bait of the
flesh, which allure many. Insomuch, that they resolve and purpose upon no other
thing, than what is accommodated thereunto; and therefore are pro and contra,
for, and against, even as this Principle of earthly Profit does move them.
These make the world their God, Mammon their God, and as the Godly submits
all his Purposes and Resolutions to Gods will: this he intends, if God will;
this he supposes to do, if God permit: so does a man inflamed to this carnal
Principle of Profit, order all things with subordination thereunto; this he
will do, if his Profit require it; This he will do, if his Profit command it.
the Papacy of Rome may notoriously be charged with this Principle of flesh, in
all their designs, which are only to advance the Popes Crown, and to nourish
the Moncks bellies. The Apostle speaks of some who accounted gain godliness,
2 Timothy 6. 5. Such ought to be so odious to us, that the Apostle commands us to
turn away from them. The same Apostle at another time does, even with weeping,
speak of others, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19. Wonder not then, if
those who walk by this Principle of the flesh, they will get profit and wealth
though they lose God, Heaven, and their own souls: that they those souls as
well as their bodies seem to be of the dust, if they are driven away, as the
dust before every wind, having no consistency atall. Did not this desire of
profit make Judas turn such an Apostate, of a Disciple of Christ, to be a
perfidious Traitor? Did not the Love of this present world make Demas to
forsake Paul? So that you see, all those must necessarily be unconstant in
Religion, who have no better Principle to move them than eartly Respects and
Advantages. These are like Esau, called therefore a profane Person, Heb. 12.
16. because, for a morsel of meat, he sold his Birthright. This argues a man
to be profane, when he has an higher esteem of Money, of Riches and Wealth,
than of Religious things. Oh, say rather, Let money perish than my soul perish;
let wealth and profit go, rather than peace and quietness of a good conscience.

A Second Principle of the flesh, which makes men inconstant, is An 2.
Ambition.
inordinate desire of Greatness and Honor above others. They that walk by
this, must be black and white; now say, and than deny, according as those are
affected from whom they exspect Advancement. This secret Ambition is
accompanied with a vehement heat, and drought of the soul, making a man
restless, till their desires be accomplished. Neither may we think the Heathens
only to be blamed for these proud affectations. We see even the Apostles twice
contending about Primacy and Superiority; which is the greater wonder, if we
consider the meanness of their own condition they were in, as also of Christ
their Master; and yet, more wonder it is, if we remember how frequently our
Savior did inform them of Persecutions, and saddest Calamities for his sake.
We read likewise of Diotrephes, 3 John 9. who loved to have the pre-eminence,
and would not own, no not the Apostle John himself. Now, those that walk by
such Principles of pride and ambition, they must needs be like a materia prima,
ready to receive any form. They flatter, they dissemble; they commend, they
dispraise; and thus debased they are, that afterward they may be exalted. Now
nothing is more odious and abominable to a sincere man, than such mutability
and uncertainty. Hence Christians of old were called the just and holdfast men.
It was not thus with John Baptist, of whom, says our Savior, What went ye out
to see? a read shaken with the wind. No, he did faithfully and constantly
discharge his duty, without any fear of men; But how many may we go out to see,
as reeds shaken with every wind? And as the reed must grow in some mire, so
must such mutable persons have some carnal respect to encourage them. Those
that climb up to high places are apt to have their heads grow giddy, and to be
unsteadfast; so that, when men lay this as a foundation, I will have
Preferment, I will have Honor and greatness; though it damn me; this man
walks upon slippery ice, and no wonder if he often fall.

3. Another carnal Principle, which makes Inconstancy in all our ways, 3.
Pleasing of men.
is, Pleasing of men. When a man makes this his Rule he must change often, and
be as a shadow, which moves whoily according to the motion of the body,
stoopeth when that stoopeth, and is upright when that is upright. The Apostle
does notably disclaim such a sinful distemper, saying, Galat. 1. 10. If I
should please men, I could not be the servant of Christ. Man is a mutable
creature, subject to different apprehensions, to different affections, loving
one thing one day, and hating it at another. Then must they also, who would
please men, be prepared for all forms and postures: insomuch, that a man
cannot live in greater bondage and slavery, tan to be (...), a peoples ape; or
to study the humouring of those we have to deal with. If thou art guilty of
this man-pleasing, thou art never able to do thy duty; thou can not reprove
and punish sin; thou can not be just and righteous in thy place. Our Savior
said to his Disciples, How can you belive, which receive glory of one another?
John 5. 44. and do not seek the glory of God only? Certainly, till we study to
please God alone in our lives, and aim at his glory, who is always the same,
we must be unstable as water, and be a liar to every man. We read of some who
did believe in Christ, yet dared not to make Profession thereof, for fear of
the Jews: Here was a desire to please men rather than God. But can the good
word, and favor of men deliver thee from the wrath of God in thy conscience?
and eternal torments hereafter? When Judas pleased the Chief Priests, in
betraying of Christ; could they comfort him in the Agonies of his conscience?
yea, when he bewailed his sin: They say, What is that to us? look thou to that,
Mat. 17. 4. Such miserable tormentors instead of comforters will all those men
be, whom thou have pleased, to displease God.

5. Time-serving is a Principle, which whosoever walks by, must be as 4.
Time-serving.
a Weathercock that is turned with every wind. The people of Israel are
remarkable for this Inconstancy under wicked and Idolatrous Kings: then they
erected Altars, they adorned Images: and then immediately under Religious and
Reforming Kings they would destroy the Idols, and deface the Images they had
set up. It is true, all change and alteration in Religion is not to be blamed,
yea, sometimes it is to be encouraged. When Luther and Melancton gave over
their former corrupt Doctrines, and superstitious Practices, the Papists
condemned them for Turn-coats, and Apostate persons; when yet this change was
necessary. So that, as they say in Philosophy, there is alteratio corruptiva
and perfectiva; a destructive change, and a perfective change: thus it is also
in Divinity, and the Latter is absolutely commanded by God, when Errors or
Profaneness have, like a gangrene, spread over the whole Church: but of that
in its time. We are now speaking of that sinful change whereby people
accommodate themselves to the times they live in, and therefore judge of truth,
judge of the holy things of God, as Jeroboam did, with subordination to
State-Interests. This is the great carnal Policy that the Wisemen of the world
admire; as if the true Doctrines of Christ were not always the same: as if a
thing might be the worship of God one time, and Idolatry at another: as if the
same thing might be the Doctrine of Christ at one time, and Heresy at another:
as if that of Cusanus were true, though otherwise not a very bad man, That the
Scripture is to be understood according to the present state and Affairs of the
Church; and therefore, says he, We are not to wonder, if at one time some
Customs and Usages be exacted in a Church, which, at another time are to be
decryed and refused. But certainly the Scripture is a Rule of Faith and Manners
in all Ages, in all Changes and Revolutions. Though Kingdoms and States may
alter, yet the Scriptures are the same still, and what was once the Doctrine,
Worship, and Order of Christ, is still the same.

Lastly, That all Particulars may be comprehended in one, To live according 5.
Selfpleasing.
to the Principles of the Flesh, is To set up our selves as the Alpha and
Omega; to enjoy our selves, and to use all things, yea God himself, in
subordination thereunto. Thus this love of a man's self, even to the hatred of
God, is that which makes us put on multiform shapes; it is that which makes
us bend and bow, and comply in all things. For, if we did love the Honor and
glory of God, more than our own selves, as we ought to do, then we should not
attend to self-advantages, but Gods glory and honor: So that we may say, This
Self-love is the Beelzebub sin; it is like Pharaohs lean Kine, that devoureth
all it meets with. Why does a man pursue this thing one time, and then oppose
it again? Why does he build, and then destroy it again? It is only for Self. No
wonder then, if our Savior laying down a fundamental Qualification in his
Disciples, requires, that a man should deny himself, Mat. 16. 24. and truly,
he that cannot deny himself, he will certainly deny God, and Christ; he will
deny the true Faith of Christ, when he is plunged into extreme temptations.
Self-denial then is that which will make a man deservedly be called homo
quadratus, better than he in Aristotle; for he is settled upon such a sure and
immovable Rock, that he will abide the same under all storms and tempests.

In the next place we are to show, What are those Principles and rules of grace
we ought to walk by, opposite to those of the flesh, that some may always be
steadfast, and immovable in the work of the Lord.

But for the present, we may by Use of Instruction be informed what to exspect
from any carnal man; he will never be faithful to God, and man, he will change
and alter according to earthly respects: and therefore every such man is a
liar, both toward God, and man. Constantine did once, by way of stratagem,
make as if he were turned Arrian, and published, That all who would not
Arrianize should lose their Preferment, and be deprived of his favor. Hereupon
their were very many began to change their Religion, many did deny the Deity of
Christ. But when he had discovered them enough, then those few who would not
deny the truth, and embrace Arrianism, though it was to their great loss, he
embraced and encouraged; and, as for the other Apostates he threw them off,
saying, That they, who were not faithful to God, would never be so to him.
Now, from all natural men, who walk by no Scripture-Principles, but the lusts
of their own hearts; you cannot exspect any better: they never followed Christ,
but for the loaves, and therefore, when they fail, they will also withdraw.
These are like the Mill, that goes no longer than the waters drive it. No
wonder then, if godly wen find them to love to day, and to hate to morrow; for
they do thus even to God himself. Take heed then of purposing the things of thy
soul after the flesh; for then all those present affections will presently dye,
and wither within thee. Thou will not long hold in the same mind, but we shall
quickly see it changed, and thee falling off. Therefore, as David prayed, when
he saw the people offer willingly, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. O Lord God keep this for
ever in the hearts of thy people. So we may pray for thee, when at any times
manifesting some desires, some affections, to what is good, O Lord keep this
for ever in their hearts.

SERMON. CXIII.
Of Principles in general, and a godly man's in particular.

2 COR. 1. 17. Or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the
flesh?
HItherto we have been discovering what principles of flesh there are, which
natural men do walk by, whereby they are made so mutable and inconstant. We are
now to show the godly man's principles, who purposes things according to the
Spirit, and thereby he is always the same, because God and the Scripture is
always the same; yea hereby as Nazianzen says, it may be said of him as of
God (though with infinite disproportion) I am God, and change not: So the godly
man having the Image of God stamped upon him, he is godly, and he changes not.
But before we come to specify the principles of the godly who purpose after
the Spirit, let us take notice of something in the general, relating both to
the spiritual and carnal man: As

First, Herein are men differenced from bruit beasts, that they are carried
forth to Of Principles. 1 Herein men differ from bruit beasts, because they act
from inward principles, beasts by instinct.
operations by some principles within them, where as the bruits are acted by a
natural instinct. The Schoolmen make a Question, Whether the bruit beasts do
work for some end, or no? And they conclude negatively, because they have no
reason or understanding; yet by God, the first cause, they are acted to an end,
which they do not understand: according to that Rule, Opera naturae, sunt opera
intelligentiae. But now man he being a rational creature, as he has some end
to which he refers all his actions; so he has several principles guiding of
him to that end. These principles are like the wings to the Bird, the oars to
the ship; legs to a man to bring him to his end. So that principles having such
powerful influence into what a man does; it behooves a man above all to look
to them, to have sanctified and spiritual principles, to consult, choose, and
act by.

Secondly, These principles whereby all men do walk, are either speculative,
or 2. Principles are either speculative or practical.
practical, such as regard truth, to be embraced, or good to be practiced.
Indeed there are in all men some general and common principles; but of those we
speak not. There are superadded to these, acquired principles, or infused; and
these are more proxim and particular than the former. It is a general remote
principle, That good is to be embraced, evil to be avoided. But (alas) come to
the practical improvement of this, and then you would think the clean contrary
were true, that evil only was to be loved, and good to be eschewed; and the
reason is, because the corrupt heart of man acquireth practical sinful
principles 3. All the principles of natural men are sinful and carnal.
to walk by. So that until God infuse heavenly principles, he does no more
incline to, and delight in good, than swine can in pleasant flowers.

Thirdly, Such is the universal corruption of man by nature, till regenerated,
that all the principles he walks by are sinful, carnal, and earthly. And
therefore Paul alleges out of the Psalms, Romans 3. That there is none
understands, none seeks after God, there is none that does good, no not
one. And is it any wonder? For can men of corrupt principles do holy actions?
Every man is as his principles are; they make him a good tree, or a bad tree.
As a man is affected, so he judges, so he loves, so he hates, so he lives
and works in all things. Hence with the Schoolmen, we have often this
assertion, That what principles are to conclusions, the same is the end in
things to be done. And therefore as from false principles a man can never
gather true conclusions; so neither from a corrupt end is a man ever able to
perform a good action. They have also another Ru^e, That what the form is in
natural things giving being unto them, the same is the end in moral things, and
that humane actions are specified from the end. They are gold or dross, as the
end intended is; all which show the necessity of a man's attending to his
principles; what they are that move him and carry his soul out to work. For it
is not so much a man's actions and ways, as his principles therein that do
denominate him; and seeing they are either the Spirit or the flesh; every one
either walks in the flesh or the Spirit; let a man faithfully search into his
own bosom, and observe what has the predominant efficacy; what he may call
his principles he purposes, and lives by: and the rather, because

In the fourth place, These principles, though efficacious, yet are manytimes
latent 3. Principles are often hidden
and hidden. It is a Rule, Principia sunt maxima virtute, minima quantitate.
Therefore being thus secret and inward, it is not easily found out, what
principles we walk by. Do those that walk after the flesh, know they do so? Do
they believe so? Do they complain of such a rotten and sandy foundation? No
they rather applaud themselves: even the most carnal men that are, do judge
their principles good and right; they have a good heart, and good ends. No
doubt when Paul persecuted the Church, opposed so zealously the way of Christ,
though in all this he was acted by fleshly principles, yet he thought them
Religion and service of God. It is therefore our duty to examine, and search
into every corner of our hearts, to find out the bottom of thy soul. For thou
art never able to judge of thy condition, whether good or evil, till thy
principles are made manifest in thee. How often may thou flatter thy self,
as doing things for God and his glory, when it is thy own corrupt self, thy own
glory, thy own advantage?

Fifthly, These principles of the flesh, are not only in our external dealings
5. There are principles of flesh even in our holy duties.
with men, or in gross bodily sins, but in religious duties, and our sacred
performances. Oh consider this diligently! A man may pray after the flesh, hear
after the flesh, preach after the flesh, and that is, when a fleshly motive
puts us upon spiritual duties. The Pharisees when they prayed, they did walk
according to the flesh; and those who adored Angels, and introduced voluntary
worship, these had a fleshly mind, Col. 2. 18. Men are in the flesh, and walk
in the flesh, not only in respect of gross sins, and bodily iniquities, but
even when in spiritual duties they are led by sinful motives. Thus Jehu, when
he purposed the destruction of Ahab, and his family, the overthrow of Baal and
his worship, he did all this after the flesh. When Judas resolved to follow
Christ, to be his Disciple; all this was a resolving according to the flesh.
Now this we should hear with trembling, and an holy fear; my religion may be
flesh, my holy duties flesh, my profession of godliness, nothing but flesh.
For though the duties themselves are good, and commanded by God, yet the
principles from which they flow, may be the flesh in thee. Do not take
therefore all holy performances to come from a principle of sanctification in
thee. Did hypocrites and temporary believers diligently consider this, it would
be a special means to prevent their final destruction.

Lastly, The principles of the carnal, and the spiritual are directly contrary
to one another, even as light and darkness; and therefore one can never agree
6. The principles of the carnal, and of the spiritual are contrary.
with the other. Prove. 29. 27. An unjust man is an abomination to the just; and
he that is upright in his way, is an abomination to the wicked. Every godly man
cannot but abominate the way of the wicked; and then the wicked abominateth the
way of the godly, so that there can never be any agreement. Now both strive for
their principles, dispute for their principles. The godly man urges his, and
would bring men off to them. The wicked man is as resolute for his principles,
and is active to have them take place. And from hence is that enmity between
the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent. Now it is a godly man's duty
to keep close to his principles, not for a moment to depart from them; This is
to betray God and his conscience. But the wicked man he is bound to leave his,
to come out of them with all haste, for they will be his damnation at last.

In the next place, let us consider, What are the principles of a godly man, by
Of the principles of a godly man.
which he thinks, purposes and lives. So that if at any time he deviateth
from this, his heart is smitten, his soul melts, saying, This is not
according to my principles, I have not thought, said, or done like my self.

Now there are two general principles of a godly man, whereby he is kept There
are two general principles. 1. There is a principle of knowledge, viz. the holy
Scriptures.
from purposing or living according to the flesh. The one I may call Principium
cognoscendi: The other Principium essendi, or rather efficiendi.

For the first, which is the principle of knowledge, by which we are to
regulate our selves in faith and manners, that is the holy Scriptures, which
are a perfect, sufficient and adequate Rule to live by, how contemptuously
soever the Papists on the one hand, and Enthusiasts on the other, do speak of
it. We see the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. directing Timothy, though so
eminent in the Church of God to the Scriptures, not to the immediate
inspirations, but unto them which he had known from his youth, giving admirable
commendations of them from the efficient cause, they were by the inspiration of
God, who would not regard what God himself says? That will prove true, and
every thing contrary to it a lie: and then the adjunct property, holy; they are
holy Scriptures; By these alone thou will be enabled to have an holy nature,
and to live an holy life. As those that keep in Apothecaries shops, smell of
the ointment: thus those who exercise themselves in the holy Scriptures, they
become holy, they are conformed thereunto. Such a man is like a tree by the
waterside, bringing forth his fruit in due season. Again, they are commended
from their end, which is to make us wise to salvation. This is the desirable
and ultimate end of all men to be saved. But we are ignorant of the way, how to
attain it; we mistake the paths that lead thereunto; and therefore the
Scripture only gives us wisdom herein. Furthermore, they are commended from a
fourfold effect, For Doctrine, correction, reproof and instruction in
righteousness, with the consequent thereof, That the man of God (even Timothy,
and such who are in holy Offices of the Church) may be thoroughly furnished for
every good work. By this we see, what is the Rule a godly man walks by, it is
the Scriptures; he believes according to them, he worshippeth according to
them, he lives according to them. Oh the holiness and admirable loveliness
that is in his life, who thus walks according to Scripture! Oh remember that
you have no other Rule to walk by in reference to heavenly things! Thy Religion
must be a Scripture-religion, thy faith a Scripture-faith, thy repentance a
Scripture-repentance, thy godliness a Scripture-godlinesse; else at the day of
judgment, thou will have that sentence upon thee, which was an handwriting in
the wall against that great King, Thou art numbered and weighed in the balance,
and art found too light and wanting. But oh the horrible neglect herein! who
mattereth what the Scripture says? Who orders his life according to that
Canon? What art thou a drunkard by Scripture, a swearer by Scripture? Know
assuredly, that he which learneth not holiness from the Scripture, shall never
find comfort from the Scripture; that has precepts as well as promises; and
without obedience to one, we cannot reap any comfort from the other.

Secondly, The other principle of a godly man's, but efficiently, is the Spirit
2. The principle of his acting, viz. the Spirit of God.
of God enlightening and sanctifying by the Scripture. The Word is the Rule, the
Spirit of God is the efficient cause; The Scripture is like Christ's garment,
the Spirit is the virtue and power of God communicated to the soul thereby.
Hence are those descriptions of a godly man, that he is in the Spirit, that he
lives in the Spirit, walks in the Spirit, is led by the Spirit; which must
not be wrested to any immediate Revelations, and Enthusiastical motions, and
thereby opposed to the Word, but the Word is subordinate to the Spirit. This is
the pool, wherein the Spirit of God descends and vouchsafes healing to the
soul therewith. Now Chrysostom makes this a great part of Paul's meaning, he
did not purpose according to the flesh; that is, he could not dispose of
himself, and his journeyes to come and go whither he desired, because he was
wholly at the command of the Spirit, to be directed thereby. For we read, when
Paul had a mind to preach the Gospel in some places, he was hindered by the
Spirit, and so could not go; but those directions of the Spirit and
Revelations, were extraordinary, and for that present age of the Church, and
are not now to be expected: The Spirit does now enlighten, sanctify, direct
and guide us by Scripture-rules. And hereupon it is, that the godly are said to
be led by the Spirit, and to walk by the Spirit; and this should provoke the
godly to all holiness. Oh is pride from the Spirit of God? Is worldliness, is
envy, is passion from the Spirit of God? Remember always from what Spirit it
is, that thou do things. The Apostles thought it a good zeal, when they
would have fire from Heaven to come and destroy the Samaritans, Luke 9. 55. but
Christ rebuked them, saying, Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of. Take
heed then thy own Spirit, or a deluding spirit be not the principle that moves
thee instead of Gods good Spirit. Thus you see the two general Rules, that we
should order our lives by; the Word and the Spirit: whatsoever is not according
to these is not suitable to Christianity.

Besides these general principles, we may instance in some particulars, that a
Particular principles. 1. Always to keep a good conscience toward God and man.
godly man does walk by, and against which he dare not sin. As

1. To keep a good conscience toward God and man. Paul professed he exercised
himself herein (Act. 24. 16.) toward God, therefore he takes heed of any
thing that may make his heart smite him; he had rather have his peace of
conscience than all the advantages in the world. Hence in all things his
Question is, Will not this trouble my conscience? Will not this disturb the
peace of my conscience? This is a blessed principle he keeps close unto. And
then again, in respect of man, he keeps an inoffensive conscience, he lies
not, he defraudeth not, he injureth not, he looks to righteousness as well as
Religion; his principle is to be holy toward God, and just toward man; and in
following this principle, he abounds with joy in his heart, he lives
cheerfully and fruitfully, and withal does awe the hearts of the most
desperate enemies to the ways of God.

2. Another principle is, To make sure of his ultimate end for which God made
2. To make sure of his ultimate end, and the necessary means to it.
him, and the necessary means conducing thereunto. His end is glory and
salvation hereafter. The necessary means thereunto is grace and godliness here,
while we are in this world; so that while other men walk according to their
several principles, some will be rich, some will have their honors, others
their profits; his principle is to be godly here, and saved hereafter. Hence he
gives all diligence to these two things. So that if you ask him, Why are you
sollicitous? Why are you so careful? Why so often in praying, so often in
hearing? It is (he says) to obtain grace here and glory hereafter. This I must
have, I dare not live and die without it: for want of this principle, men have
such sluggish and dull affections to heavenly things.

A third principle is, To live and walk with daily expectations of death, and
the day 3. Daily to expect death and judgment.
of judgment, as if he heard always that voice sounding in his ears, Arise,
and come to judgment. He desires to have such thoughts of sin, as a man
dying, as a man arraigned at Gods tribunal would then have. Death is certain,
nothing can exempt him from it; and therefore he desires to die daily, to be
preparing for these great changes. In morte sola non est fortassis, as Austin
observed, In all things in the world there is a fortasse, a may be. Thou may
be a rich, thou may be a great man, but we cannot say, It may be thou may
die, it may be the time will come, when thou shall fall into the grave. No this
is without all doubt: hence the godly man's principle is so to live, that death
and the day of judgment may be no new thing, or terrible dreadful thing to
him.

A fourth principle is, To judge sin the only, or the greatest evil, and
godliness 4. To judge sin the greatest evil, and godliness the greatest good.
the greatest good. If this were a principle in men's hearts to live by, what
reformed persons should we see every where? This principle in thy heart would
be like fire there; if sin be thought worse than any evil, then poverty,
shame, misery, yea and hell it self, better be any thing than a sinner. How
could thou give thy self up a servant thereunto? Though it were a pleasing
sin, a profitable sin, yet because it is a damning sin, thou would
run from it, thou would say, Oh this sin, though I love it, though I am
used to it, yet it can never be good for me, it will be the poison of my soul!
And then on the other side, a godly man's principle is, That godliness is more
worth than all the great and glorious things of the world. His soul longs for
it more than silver and gold; he thinks every rich man, every great man, a
miserable man, if he be not godly. As Rachel cried, Give me children, else I
die; so give me godliness, Lord, else I am damned. As Abraham did not so much
rejoice in his wealth and outward mercies, because he was still childlesse; so
says this man, It is not earthly comforts Lord, but grace that refreshes my
heart, let me be poor, contemned, rather than not godly.

Use of Exhortation, To examine what are the principles you walk by. There are
but these two, and they are contrary one to the other, the principle of the
flesh, and the principle of the Spirit; and such as your principles are, such
are ye. If thy principle be to be godly, to live by the Word, to save thy soul,
then thou art daily in these things: thy heart is there, thy life is there. But
if it be flesh that rules in thee, then this makes thee like a worm and a
moal always in the earth. You cannot repent, you cannot believe, you cannot be
saved, while these principles abide in you; for they make you prejudiced
against godliness, they make you neglect repentance. Oh but when thou shall
lie howling and roaring in hell, how will thou curse and bewail such
principles? These have damned me, these have brought me to this place of
torment, I would not entertain other principles.

SERMON. CXIV.
Of the kinds and sinfulness of Lying.

2 COR. 1. 17. That with me there should be yea, yea, and nay, nay?
IN these words is the sin specified, that would flow from those two evil
causes named before, viz. Inconstancy, and corrupt principles. They that are
led aside by these, must needs be liars, and perfidious persons, frothy and
vain, to whom no credit is to be given. The Apostle therefore does here remove
the sin of lying, or saying one thing, and doing another thing; for such an
unfaithful, false man, can never be serviceable unto God: by that uneven
carriage of his, he makes himself incapable of bringing glory to God, and of
edifying others.

Concerning the Greek expression, and the interpretation of it, there is great
diversity amongst the learned: That which troubles most, is the gemination of
those particulars, yea, yea, nay, nay. For we read it as a command and a duty,
Matthew. 5. 37. James 5. 12. That our communication ought to be yea, yea, nay,
nay; whereas the Apostle does here speak of it as a sin. Some therefore do
think that the gemination of the particle crept into the Text by the error of
the Scribes, who finding it used in other places, thought it should be here
also; and they are the rather induced to this, because in the verse following,
the Apostle does not use the gemination, only affirming, Yea and nay. Others
they think that the Greek particle (...), which is a note of negation, should
be supplied, making it to run negatively, as if with me were not yea, yea,
and nay, nay.

But there is no necessity of running unto these harsh remedies, for we may
keep the gemination of the particles well enough, as intending thereby a
vehement affirmation, and a vehement negation. For so the Hebrews use to affirm
vehemently, by doubling the word; And our Savior often uses Amen, Amen; which
custom also Heinsius says is among the profane Greek Authors. And thus the
sense will be very coherent, I do not inconstantly and carnally purpose
things; as if I should with great vehemence affirm one thing at one time, and
then with as great a vehemence deny it again at another time. But then we must
acknowledge, that this differs from those places abovementioned, Matthew. 5.
and James 5. for there the latter Yea, and latter Nay, is the predicate in the
Preposition; here it is the subject, and Nay, nay the predicate. In those
places also there is a respect had to our speech, as opposite unto oaths; but
here is denoted only truth and constancy in our affirmations. Chrysostom does
not read the words interrogatively, and thereupon has a peculiar
interpretation, implying the clean contrary to what we have said: For he makes
the meaning to be, as if Paul did deny he was constant, or ought to be
unchangeable; he was not to have Yea, yea, nay, nay, but to be yea and nay, as
occasion served, because he was not at his own disposing, to go whither he
would, but was wholly guided by the Spirit of God; and therefore when he
attempted to preach in some places, the Spirit of God suffered him not. So that
with this Author, Paul's intention should be to remove from himself such a
constancy, as if he were to dispose of himself, and to hold to his own
resolutions, whereas he was wholly to follow the guide and motions of Gods
Spirit. But this seems not so proper. The Apostle rather defends himself
against the charge of lying and unfaithful dealing; he was not Yea and nay.
Hence some make the Latin word Naucus, that signifies a vain, empty, trifling
fellow, to come from the Greek words (...), but of this more in the following
verse. Seeing then that Paul does in this expression free himself from the
crime of lying, and saying one thing, but doing the contrary, We may observe,

That lying, or contrariety between our words and words, or words and Lying is
not consistent with godliness
actions, are not beseeming a Christian, neither are they consistent with
godliness.

A godly man can be no more godly and a liar, than godly and a drunkard, than
godly and a profane person. This sin the Apostle makes as a stream to flow
from those two poisoned fountains of levity of mind, and a corrupt carnal
heart. Now how inconsistent this is with the new man, and the work of grace,
you have heard from Colos. 3. 9, Lie not one to another, seeing you have put
off the old man with his deeds. To be yea and nay, is to be a liar; and
sometimes, as the Apostle supposes here, we may be very vehement and earnest
in our yea's and nayes, and then we are bold vehement liars. I shall not
enlarge my self concerning the whole Theological matter, that may be delivered
about a lie, but speak so much as will be for our practical improvement of this
truth. And

First, We are to take notice of this, That there may be a lie materialiter and
formaliter. That is a material lie, when we speak that which is 1. There is a
material and a formal lie.
untruth; but yet we think it to be a truth, or else we would not speak it.
But then that is formally a lie, when we affirm that to be true, which we know
to be false; and this is directly and properly a lie. Some say, the former is
Mendacium dicere; the other is Mentiri. Now this latter way of speaking
untruths, is that which properly is called a lie; and men do then formally lie,
when they speak that which their consciences do tell them to be false; yet in
some cases, when we speak those things that are untrue, though we think them
to be so, we are not presently excused from sin. For in many things, it
behooves us to have knowledge, and a right information, before we speak about
them. Hence the false Prophets are often called liars, who it may be thought
they spoke what was true, being delivered up by the just judgment of God to
believe a lie: and therefore we must take heed of rashness and suddenness in
our words, that we may always speak that which is consonant to the truth, both
materially as well as formally.

Secondly, We may distinguish of lies, as they do of oaths, There are
Assertory 2. There are assertory and promissory lies.
lies, whereby we affirm things to be so and so; There are also Promissory
lies, whereby we do promise to do such and such things, but afterward break
these engagements. And the Apostles speech may relate to both these kinds of
lies, and both these are sins against the second Table; either when we
affirm any thing falsely, or perfidiously break our promises. For seeing words
are instituted to signify our sense and mind to others, if we abuse them to
other ends, we do hereby destroy the end of speech, and so as much as lies in
us overthrow all humane commerce and society. But in a Promissory lie, there is
a further aggravation of the sin, because hereby the rules of justice are
broken; for by promise another man comes to have a right to the thing
promised. The Corinthians in this Text, had a right to Paul's presence, when he
had promised them. Now where grace is in a man, that does so sanctify him,
that he takes heed of every way of lying, whether in words or promises. It is
true, Aristotle speaks of this verity as a moral virtue: And there are some,
who have (as it were) a natural justice, their words are as good as oaths,
their promises are as good as bonds and bills. Some Heathens have been famous
for such a truth in their conversation; but yet godliness makes a man keep
from lying and falsehood upon other grounds, then such natural just men; which
is good to be observed. because many are so apt to build the comfort of their
souls upon it. For

1. Such natural true men, they are so only from the Principles of a natural
conscience, not from the principles of sanctification within them. If you ask
them, Why they do it, or observe the ground, you shall see it is only because
the light of Nature instructs them herein. And although this be commendable,
yet it is not enough to make it godliness in them; for what is done in a godly
manner, arises from a principle of godliness, which is the new nature within
a man. So that it is one thing to abhor lying from a mere natural conscience;
and another thing to do so from a supernatural light within them.

2. You may observe a difference in the motive, The godly man dares not lie,
because God forbids, because it is a sin that he abominateth; whereas the
natural true man, never minds the Scripture; it is not from the word of God
that he does it, but because it is a laudable thing amongst men. They will
greatly praise such a man, that is so constant; It Is the glory of men they look
at, not the command of God.

3. That such men are true and just, but not from a godly principle, is plain,
Because they do not receive all other holy duties. The same God that has
commanded thee not to lie, not to deal falsely, has also commanded thee not to
be drunk; he has commanded thee to sanctify the Sabbath, to keep up
Family Duties, to love those that are godly, and to delight in such: whereas
many times none are more bitter enemies to the power of godliness, and the
beauties of holiness, then such natural, just and true men. Oh therefore that
such would not stay in that! Thou do well that thy words are sure, that thy
speeches and actions are just; but do not stay here, do not think thou have
enough for Heaven. For though you do all these, yet if you delight not in
godliness, if you love not those that are holy men, if you cannot abide this
strictness and preciseness in religious duties, know that thou art but half a
Christian yet, there are duties of the first Table, as well as the second, and
how greatly may thou charge thy soul with such sins, did thou not put thy
trust and hope in thy true and just dealings.

Thirdly, Divines do usually speak of a threefold kind of lying, There is a
pernicious lie, a sporting lie, and an officious lie. 3. There is a pernicious,
sporting and officious lie.


1. A pernicious lie is, when we speak that which is false to the hurt and
damage of another.

2. A sporting lie is, when we do in merriment affirm things that are false,
only to please and delight.

3. An officious lie, or mendacium misericors, as some call it, a merciful
lie, is when we tell a lie, but it is for the good of another, to save him out
of danger or death: such was Rahab's lie, and the lie of the Midwives. For
though God rewarded them for the maine, yet it does not follow he allowed their
lie, but pardoned it. It is disputed by some, Whether this be a sin, or no?
And Luther is so far from making it a sin, that he speaks of it as a duty
(in Genes.) And Musculus also allows of it. Yea (Comment. in Johan. cap. 8.)
he has this strange division, Mendaciorum quaedam fuit licita and bona,
quaedam excusabilia, quaedam levia, quaedam vitiosa, quaedam diabolica. But
certainly, though sporting and officious lies, are not so great sins as
pernicious, yet they are all intrinsecally evil, and so cannot be made good for
any advantage of the world. To lie that thou may deliver a man from death,
is not lawful, because of the Apostles Rule, We must not do evil, that good
may come thereof, Romans 3. 8. Even as adultery and fornication may not be
committed under any pretense whatsoever, no not by a woman, to save the life of
her husband; of which case some speak of: So it is also with a lie, being a
sin intrinsecally, and of its own nature, and therefore can never be made
good. Hence it is, that it is forbidden without any limitation to this lie,
rather than another, Levit. 19. 11. even as stealing and dealing falsely are.
Therefore Cassianus is of opinion, That it is lawful to use a lie, as we do
Hellebore, to depell some grievous danger, and that the Patriarchs for this
end, did sometimes use lies, is wholly to be exploded. Plato was first the
author of this opinion, That Magistrates might use, Mendacio, ut medicamento,
from whom Origin and his followers were infected in this point. But as we
heard, every lie, is of its own nature a sin, because as the Schoolmen say,
It Is Actus cadens supra indebitam materiam. For words are naturally the sign
of our meaning, and to use them otherwise is unnatural. And this should make us
be the more wary in our ordinary sporting discourses. For how few do attend to
this sinfulness of the tongue herein. But if of every idle word, a man shall
give an account, then much more of every lying word, though it may seem no such
great matter to us. It is certain, the Martyrs thought no such lies lawful,
no though thereby they might have escaped cruel torments. Yea, they are blotted
with ignominy in Antiquity, who either by favor or money would accept of a
Certificate or Testimonial, that they had sacrificed at the Altar, when indeed
they had not, and thereby preserving themselves. But what gain is this to save
a temporal life, and loose a spiritual life?

Fourthly, Whereas sins according to Divines are distributed into sins 4.
Lying is a sin of the tongue.
of the heart, of the tongue, and of the hand; Cordis, oris and operis, Lying
is a sin of the tongue. So that as by the tongue we come to know the disease
sometimes of the body that is within; so by the tongue we may discern a
sinful, wicked heart. A lying tongue does argue a deceitful heart. So that as
the pureness and foulness in the fountain does quickly empty it self into the
streams: Thus as the heart is either holily or sinfully affected, so it
emptieth it self into the tongue and hands.

Hence in the fifth place, All those who would abstain from the way of lying,
must study the spiritual government of the tongue. Nature indeed 5. They that
would not lie must study the government of the tongue.
has enclosed it with lips and teeth; but Grace must have a more powerful and
predominant curb over it. The Apostle James does notably speak of the
sinfulness of the tongue, James 3. 6. calling the tongue, though a little
member, yet a world of iniquity, an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.
Certainly, the Apostles zeal discovered in that Chapter against a sinful
tongue, should make us with much diligence watch against it, especially in that
it is so unru y, that no man can tame it. Now among many sinful evils of the
tongue, this of lying and falsehood is not the least. So that he who has an
holy, meek, just and faithful tongue, is called by the Apostle a perfect man,
verse. 2. not but that he has still much imperfection in him; only we are so
apt to sin by that, to offend by that. What is in the heart, is so quickly in
that, that the Christian has arrived at a great proficiency in godliness, who
has this power over his tongue, Hence David, as sensible of this work above
his own strength, makes his earnest address in prayer unto God, Psalm. 141. 3.
Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. Grace must
be the spiritual porter to watch the mouth, else such sins will come out
thereat, that will both greatly offend God and man.

Hence in the sixth place, That this government of the tongue against lying or
any other sin may be attained unto; it is necessary, He that would govern his
tongue, must first cleanse his heart.


1. To cleanse the heart, that is the original and source of all evil; and
therefore it is in vain to heal the outward, unless the inwards also be first
purged. Therefore David in the forementioned prayer, adds another Petition
to the former, Psalm. 141. 4. Incline not my heart to any evil thing. Therefore
when Solomon had first given that counsel, Chap. 4. 23. To keep the heart with
all diligence, then he speaks of the duties about the eyes, hands and feet.
No man can in an holy manner keep his tongue from lying, cursing and swearing,
with other sins thereof, unless he first endeavor that the inward frame of
the heart be made pure and holy. The old man must be put off, and the new man
put on, as the Apostle speaks, and then we lay aside the way of lying.

In the next place, Let us consider, what are the causes of lying, of yea, and
nay. I do not mean the general ones, for the Text names them to The causes of
lies.
be inconstancy and a corrupt heart, but the particular ones. And

1. Some have a strong inclination and peculiar propensity to it; they love 1.
Natural inclination.
and delight in telling of lies. Yea this lying disposition is noted to be the
property of some Countries; as the Poet said of the Cretians, They were always
liars, Titus 1. 12. which witness the Apostle says, is true. And no wonder at
this, for the same Apostle makes it the quality of every man by nature, and
that wherein he does oppose God, whose Attribute is truth, God is true, and
every man a liar, Romans 3. 4. Seeing then the nature of man is thus prone to it;
and some have a more peculiar inclination to it; no wonder if lies as well as
oaths do make a Land mourn. Do we not see it in children, how they are more
forward to lie than to speak? They come both together, only lying seems more
natural.

A second cause of lying, is want of dependence upon God, as if he would not
fulfill his promises without our lies, and unlawful means that we 2. Want of
dependence upon God.
use. In this Rebecca failed, Genes. 27. 6, 7. though she knew of Gods promise
to Jacob, yet because Isaac's affections were set upon Esau the elder brother,
she saw no visible way how the promise should be accomplished, therefore she
used lying and dissimulation; but though she got the blessing for her son,
yet many sad afflictions did befall both her and Jacob thereby.

3. Another cause is, The captivity and bondage that we are in by nature to 3.
Our captivity to Satan.
Satan; for he being (...) liar from the beginning, we imitate him, and follow
our father in this particular. This our Savior tells the Jews, John 8. 44.
Ye are of your father the Devil; when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his
own, for he is a liar, and the father of it. Mark that the father of it,
implying that by the Devil we are solicited, and tempted to lies: and if there
were no other consideration but this, it were enough to make us with David,
Psalm. 119. 163. To abhor the way of lying, because it comes from the Devil,
we thereby demonstrate the Devil to be working in us, to move our tongues. And
truly the name of a lie is a very reproachful thing: How hardly can men endure
the name of it, who yet are constant in the practice of it? So that the
reproach, especially the cause from whence it comes, may persuade us to leave
it off, which is hell it self, we shall then quickly hear every man speaking
truth with his neighbor.

4. An inordinate desire of profit and gain, does many times put men upon 4.
Covetousnes
lying. They will commend and praise that, which in their conscience they know
to be bad, and all to get a little profit. Thus Ananias and Saphira they lied
to Paul, and all to reserve a little profit to themselves.

Lastly, A sinful and immoderate fear, that many times provokes to lying. 5.
Fear.
It was thus with Abraham and Isaac about their wives, they lied to save
themselves out of dangers. And although David did abhor the way of lying, yet
we see him in several exigencies degenerate from his principles. It is true, in
case of a man's life, to choose rather to die, than to tell a lie, must needs be
an argument of heroical grace in a man: but we see in Peter, how difficult it
is to abstain from lies, when thereby we can preserve our selves out of danger.
So that if at any time we find the godly overtaken with this sin, we must not
from thence conclude the lawfulness of it, but rather bewail our pronenesse
thereunto. For if those that are godly in an eminent manner are thus apt to
fall, what shall the little Trees do, when the Cedars are so weak?

Use of Exhortation, To take heed of this sin in a special manner, as being
so reproachful to a man, much more a Christian, so opposite to the Attribute
of God, whose faithfulness and truth is so often celebrated, that it is
impossible for him to lie: Yea it comes so immediately from the Devil, that
there ought to be no communion with him in this thing. Never call any lie
profitable, for it will not prove so at last: What if by it thou escape danger
here, and be cast into Hell hereafter? What if thou gain the world here, and
lose thy soul hereafter? Will not this be a dreadful and dismal lie to thee?
Remember that place, Prove. 12. 19. The lying tongue is but for a moment. Hence
Prove. 13. 5. A righteous man hates lying. For that lying tongue is but for a
moment, hereafter it will scorch in hell, it will burn in those eternal flames.

SERMON. CXV.
GOD is True.

2 COR. 1. 18. But, as God is true, our word toward was not yea and nay.
IN this Verse the Apostle gives a reason why he did not use Lightness, or
purpose things according to the flesh, viz. Because the word he preached was
not so much his word, as that which came from God, the Supreme truth: and
therefore as no Falsehood could fall on God, so neither upon his Word that
flows from him. Some indeed understand the Word Paul here speaks of, of his
Promise to come to them; as if he did thus solemny affirm, That he was not
unfaithful in his Promise. But the ensuing words do evidently declare, That he
means his Preaching: that his Doctrine was not mutable and changeable; For
the malevolent Adversaries that he had to do with, they took occasion from the
altering of his purposes, or at least deferring of his Promise in that
Particular, about coming to them, to charge his whole Doctrine with the same
levity and inconstancy; to bring all he Preached into Question, because of
that. Whereupon the Apostle being far more solicitous, for his Doctrine, and
his Office, then his own credit, or glory, does especially fortify that, and
confirm the Truth of that: so that, by this we see the nature of evil men;
Whatsoever failings or weaknesses may be in a Minister, they presently charge
his doctrine with it, and blame his Ministry; whereas Gods truth is truth, and
thou art to receive it, though the Minister may be false, and unworthy: but of
this wore in its time.

The Apostles Argument in this Text, to confirm the truth of the Doctrine he
preached, is from the truth of God, the measure and Rule of all truth: if his
word be a lie, then God must be said to lie, which is heinous blasphemy to
speak but God is true. This Expression is taken by some to be only Enunciative,
and Affirmative, barely asserting the truth of God; as if the meaning were, God
is true, from whom we have received our commission to preach the Gospel, and
therefore that also must be true. Others, (and they speak more probably) take
it to be an oath, that the Apostle does here use a sacred oath, for the
confirming of what he says; and so it is the same with the Hebrews form of an
oath, The Lord lives: and Heinsius makes those expressions, (...), 1 Timothy 1.
15. 1 Timothy 4. 9. to be equivalent to this. We take it there to be an oath, but
because we have Paul using an oath again at the 23d Verse, I shall wave that
respect at this time, and consider it only enunciatively, attending to that
Attribute and Property which this oath is built upon, and that is Gods truth,
God is true.

From whence Observe.

That God is true. God is true.


God has many glorious Attributes: There is his Omniscience, his God is true
Omnipotency, his Justice, and his Mercy: and there is also his property of
Truth, which is of great use and Influence in our comeforts and Duties. This
truth of God is often celebrated in the Scripture: Yea, he is not only said to
be true, but truth itself, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. he is so essentially, truth it self,
that the Word says, It is impossible for him to lie, Heb. 6. 18. For, he being
truth in the abstract, no falsehood or lie is compatible with him. Abstractives
admit of no mixture, though Concretives may: Light in it self, or whiteness in
it self admits not of any darkness: but as it is in subjects, so it does.
Now God, as he is said to be Light, and that there is no darkness in him at
all, 1 John 1. 5. So God is truth, and in him there is no falsehood at all. But
let us discover this Doctrine in particulars. And

First, There is a twofold Truth. A Metaphysical Truth, and a Moral, or 1.
There is a Metaphysical and a moral Truth.
Ethicall truth. A Metaphysical truth is the truth of Being, and Entity; and
thus the Scripture does often celebrate the truth of God, making him only to be
the Jehovah: He is the (...), the Am that I am. For if that rule be true, Ens
and verum convertuntur, then, where is the chiefest and Infinite Entity? there
is also the Supreamest Verity. This true being of God is often opposed unto
Idols, and the Heathens Gods, which have no true being at all. And that God is
true in this sense is the very fundamental Article of all Religion, Heb. 11. 6.
He that comes to God, must believe that he is. This truth of Gods being is
often to be remembered against that Atheism which does reign in most men's
hearts. How could they live in such excess of riot, did they believe there was
a God? But secondly, there is a moral or Ethical Truth, and that is Twofold,
either Verity or Veracity. Verity, is when we speak, or barely affirm that
which is true. Veracity, is in our Promises, when we faithfully perform them:
Now this Twofold truth is eminently in God: There is the truth of his
assertion, and that is revealed in his Word, which is also called truth: So
that, whatsoever is affirmed there, can no more deceive us than God himself.
And then there is the truth of his Promises, and the Truth of his Threatenings:
the truth also of Prophesies, and Predictions, in all which God will be found
true. When every man is a Liar, God is true then in what he says, in what is
foretold, in what he promises, and in what he threateneth. Never let the
profane and secure sinner flatter himself, hoping it will prove otherwise than
the Word speaks. There is no threatening of God will prove a lie.

2. There Is a Division of truth; into truth increated, and created. Increated
2. There is an increated, and created truth.
truth is God himself; and he is called truth, because Gods understanding is
the measure and rule of all other Truths. Nothing in the world is true, but as
it is consonant to his knowledge. It is otherwise with us: Our understanding is
not the measure of the truth of things, but there truth is the measure and rule
of our understandings: then is our knowledge true, when it is conformable to the
thing it self; but then is the thing true, when it is conformeable to the
knowledge of God. So that, herein is the Infiniteness and excellency of Truth,
as it is in God manifested, above that which is in man: So that, man may well,
respectively to God, be called a liar, There is no truth in him. Now, because
truth, as it is in God, is invisible, and the same with his Essence, and we are
never able to cown to know Truth but by God: Hence we have the Scriptures given
to the Church, as the rule of truth. All truth is from God, whether it be
natural or supernatural. When any of the Heathens have found out Truth, it was
from God, even as all fashood is from the Devil: so that, when the Godly do
lie, it is from the Devils temptation, the Father of lies. Thus when wicked and
ungodly men have uttered truth, it has been of God. Now because Supernatural
truth could not be discerned but by Divine Revelation, and pacefaction. Hence
it pleased God to make known in his Word, What is that truth which will lead us
to Salvation: So that, seeing we are not able to behold truth, as it is in God,
we must look upon it as it is in his Word; for God is the hidden Truth, as it
were; the Word is the revealed truth: Therefore whatsoever is Scripture, we may
conclude of it as sure and firm Truth, coming from the supreme truth. If then,
ye ask, as Pilate did another way, What is truth? I answer thee, The Scripture
is truth. No men are true, any further than guided by Scripture, and led by the
Spirit of God accordingly. Oh that therefore you did more aw your hearts with
the truth of Gods Word! If that say, sin will be bitter in the latter end,
though it may bring profit and pleasure for a while, believe it against all the
wicked men in the world, and say, I do more believe this Text, this Place of
Scripture, than all which the wickedness of men may oppose against it.

3. In that God is true, Herein he differs from man; and is thereby opposite
3. In that God is true, he differs from men and devils
to the Prince of darkness. He differs from man: Therefore it is said, Numb.
23. 19. God is not as man, that he should lie or Repent. To trust in man, is to
lean upon reads. Yea, hence it is, that because God only is Truth, no pastors
or Officers in the Church are to be believed any further than they bring the
Word of God: It was Christ alone, God and man, that could say, I am truth.
Neither Austin, nor Luther, nor Calvin can say, I am truth: Not that therefore
the Ministers of God are therefore to be laid aside, because they are not
infallible: For God has commanded us to hear them, and to submit to them; only
we are not ultimately to depend on them. The Church is called the Pillar of
truth, because she does declare and hold out the Truth, but, she is not the
Author of it. We are then to conclude of all men, that of themselves they have
no Truth, they need the Spirit of God to guide them therein: And then hereby is
an Opposition in God to the Devil: As God is true, so the Devil is the Father
of Lies, John 8. 44. when he speaks of his own, he speaks a lie. Now then
consider, how inexcusable every wicked man will be. For; on the one side,
Christ, who is Truth it self, he speaks to the sinner, to repent, to reform,
promising Everlasting Happiness to him: Christ says, Thy sins have no
pleasure, no profit in them; thou will find them prove a lie to thee. On the
other side: The Devil he tempts thee, contrary to Christ, he tells thee sin
is sweet, it is good and profitable to sin, he bids thee follow the lusts of
thy soul, thou shall not be damned for all that: and now thou believe this
Devil, this Father of lies, rather than Christ. Oh how unsufferable is this?
how great is the Patience of God toward thee? What hearken to the Devil,
before God? But even thus Eve did at first; she believed the Serpent more than
God, and thereby brought ruin upon her self, and Posterity. Oh that we could
convince you enough herein, that you may see, with what madness and folly your
sins carry you away, while you listen to the Father of Lies, who is the
Adversary of your souls, rather than Christ; who mourns over you, saying, Oh
that such a sinner did know the things that makes for his peace!

4. From this truth of God, Hence it is, that we are so much commanded in 4.
It Is because of Gods truth that we are commanded to believe, and trust in him,
Scripture to believe on him, to trust in him, and to depend upon him: which
indeed is a quiet and blessed life. For what is that makes thy heart like a
Sea? What is it that causes one. wave to rise up after another in thy soul? Is
it not because thou do not depend upon this truth of God? Were thy soul more
assured here in, the frame of thy spirit would be more joyful. Two Temptations
amongst others there are, wherein the soul cries out, as in a Whales belly,
not knowing what to do^ whereas the confidence of Gods truth would presently
satisfy the soul. The first is, In matters to be believed about the Doctrine
that is delivered there: For, because that is wholly supernatural above our
humane reason, though not contrary to it; hence it is, that we have many
fluctuations of spirit, and our understandings are with difficulty captivated
unto the Word of God. Though these temptations about the Truths of Christian
Religion are not incident to all the Godly; and it is a special mercy to be
preserved from them, yet upon some they have come like a violent storm, and
therefore there is no way to stand disputing, and arguing, but to say, God is
true, the Word is true, I believe, when I cannot dispute, as one Martyr said.
But then a Second temptation, which is like a continual thorn in the sides of
the Godly, is their Diffidence and distrust about the Promises of God. They do
not live and walk, as if they were true: So that never did any Heretic more
subtly cavil against the Doctrine of the Scripture, than they do argue
against the Promises of the Scripture, Whether they be such as belong to the
Church, or to themselves; To the Church, when they read the Scriptures, they
find such glorious and excellent Promises; that they exspect she should
always have Halcyon days, that her enemies should always be vanquished: but
alas, they find experimentally the contrary: They cannot see, how Gods Words,
and his Works, how his Promises and Providence do concur together: But the
reason of this is from themselves. They do not take a right way to understand
the truth of God in this particular, for these three Causes, which commonly
make the sense to err about the Object (although, to speak properly, the sense
does not err, but the judgment of a man, discerning according to sense; for
sense would be more properly said to err, if under such impediments it did not
represent as it does.)

First, One impediment in the sense, is the two long distance of the Object
from the eye: (to instance in this senfe,) As we judge the Sun less than the
earth, because of the vaste distance from us, so that, till a man take
Astronomical Instruments, and correct Sense by Art, he misjudgeth about the
Suns magnitude: thus is it here, When we go to judge of Gods Promises to us, or
his Church, we find not the truth of them, because the ways of God are too
remote from us, his thoughts exceed ours, as much as the Heavens do the earth.
Therefore we must necessarily err, till we go to the Scripture; that is, as it
were, the Artificial Instrumennt, whereby we are able to behold that truth in
Gods proceedings, which otherwise we could not.

A Second Impediment is, the medium indispositum, when the means of seeing is
Indisposed; as when we look upon a stick in the waters, or the Sun through a
dark cloud. Thus, many times, when we judge of Gods proceedings according to his
Promises, we look through False mediums, we think according to the Principles
that men would do in the world, as Luther said, We would think that God should
destroy Pope and Turk immediately: but all this is because we look through an
indisposed glass in this particular.

Lastly, The eye cannot judge right of its Object, when the visive faculty is
disturbed, when that is infested with any evil humors. Thus the spiritual eyes
even of a Godly man are in some measure vitiated, and therefore are not able to
behold that glory of God in carrying on the Affairs of his Church, and by those
very ways which we would think tend to the destruction of the things promised,
by them he does fulfill them; for the ways of the Lord are wonderful to us,
in making good his Promises, and commonly they are fulfilled by those means
which seem contrary to them; even as he cured the blind man, by mingling
spittle with clay, which he laid upon his eyes. And thus the Godly soul may
find, how God is true in spiritual Promises to his soul; for he obtains
comfort through desertions; the way to Heaven he finds through Hell: yea, in
sanctifying Grace, he comes to higher Degrees in Grace, even by his Failings.
So true is that of Suarez, Aliquando substractio gratiae est ad finem gratiae.
The end of Grace is accomplished by the gradual substraction and suspension of
Grace for a time. But I must not enlarge herein.

Lastly, This truth of God is the foundation of all Religion and Godliness.
For, if there were no truth in the Scriptures, which are Gods truth, if 5. The
truth of God is the Foundation of all Religion and godliness.
there were no truth in the Promises or Threatenings, into what a Chaos and
Confusion of wickedness would all men fall? There would be no difference
between Hell and this World: So that Gods Truth is a Foundation of all Piety in
these three ways;

First, The truth of God in his Doctrine delivered to the Church, is the
foundation, yea, the Essence and soul of his Church. In this it does differ
from Jews, Turks, and Pagans; yea, from all Heretical Societies, That she has
the truth of God, and others not: So that, as the soul^ keeps the body from
rottenness, and Putrefaction. Thus also the truth of God keeps the Church
from being only a Carkase, or to have the Name and Title of a Church, without
the thing it self.

Secondly, The truth of God in his Promises is the great supporter of the hopes
of all the Godly. By them alone they are enabled to walk with Peter upon the
water, and sink not, because they believe Gods Promises to be true; they do
therefore renounce all unlawful Pleasures and Profits; they will not leave the
fatness and sweetness of them to go to those briars.

Thirdly, The truth of God in his threatenings; That is like a fiery sword, to
keep them from all evil: They know those threatenings are true, and that the
World and the Devil prove liars to all those that serve them; therefore they
awe their hearts with a continual fear of them. And certainly, if every wicked
man would remember this, That Gods threatenings are true, they will be made
good; no wisdom, no greatness, no power can resist him. For, how can the
stubble withstand the consuming fire? this would make them utterly forsake
their sins. But whether thou will believe or no, Gods Curses will fall upon
thee. For there is this difference between the Promises and Threatenings; The
Promises (many of them) are not made good unto them, unless thou do believe;
believe, and thy sins are forgiven thee, but the threatenings will be made
good to thee, a profane sinner, whether thou will or not. Gods Word will have
its effect, though thou do desire it might be false.

SERMON. CXVI.
The personal failings of Ministers are often cast upon the Ministry it self.

2 COR. 1. 18. But, as God is true, our word toward you was not yea and nay.
THe next particular considerable is the occasion of that Transition, which the
Apostle makes from the word of his Promise in particular, to come to them, and
the word of his Preaching in the general. The occasion is from that evil, and
malevolent Disposition which was in his Adversaries, who from any, either real,
or but supposed Imperfections in other things, would presently burden his
Ministry with it, and thereby, as much as in them lies, make Paul wholly
useless in the Church of God. Now, because this is the continual stratagem,
which the Devil uses to make the best Ministry ineffectual, and because it is
the constant inclination of wicked men to do so, therefore I shall pursue this
Observation.

That there is a propensity in wicked and evil minded men, to cast all the
Wicked men usually cast the Imperfections of the Minister upon the Ministry.
imperfections of the Ministers of the Gospel upon their Ministry and Doctrine.

To bring the Truths they Preach either into doubt or disesteem, because of
some failings, yea, though they be not real, but supposed in their own
Imaginations. Thus the Adversaries of Paul, they did captiously lay hold upon
his Promise, and failing as they think in that, thereby they would render all
his Doctrine and Ministry odious, that thereby their falsehoods and corruptions
may have the greater success. Thus the wickedness of ungodly men does
constantly bend to this, that they may be hardened in their hearts against the
Word Preached; that they may fortify themselves with some damnable Principles
of others, that so the message of the Lord may be rejected.

Now to illustrate this, consider these particulars;

First, That when a Minister either preaches false Doctrine, or lives
scandalously, or is lazy, and negligent in his place, then it is lawful for 1.
A people may have an holy Zeal. againg a loose scandalous Minister.
a people to have an holy and wise zeal against such persons, that they may be
quickened up to their duties. Neither is this to be an enemy to the Office of
the Ministry, or to endeavor the public Dishonor of it, but rather to
advance the honor of it, who by Heretical Superstitions, or scandalous manners
is made contemptible to the people for Doctrine. If that which men preach, be
errors, or falsehoods be the Imaginations of their own hearts, as the false
Prophets did lies in the Old Testament, and, as many are said to do in the New;
from such we are commanded to turn away; with such we are not so much as to
learn any familiar commerce, no not so much as to bid them, God speed. The
Champions of Rome, they condemn the Protestants, for their Schism and Faction
they made against the Officers of their Church; but they proved that they were
Apostatical, not Apostolical; that they were wolves, not shepherds: yet, at the
same time, they affirmed diligently, the Ministry of Christ, according to his
Institution, against any fanatical Spirits that did run into that extreme: So,
if a Minister live a wicked, and a scandalous life, though we are not to reject
the sound Doctrine, because of his life, yet that ought to be a great grief and
trouble to us. We are not to approve of a wicked life for the Ministers sake,
nor to make good Sermons cover the multitude of many sins: Nay, the more
excellent his doctrine is, and the more raised his parts are, the more is his
life, if wicked, to be abominated. It is true, people are very injudicious
herein, and are very prone to condemn the Office, because of a wicked life; but
that is not to be done, we are to hear them, as our Savior said of some
Pharisaical Doctors, but not to do as they do, Mat. 23. 3. all that the Scribes
and Pharisees bad them do, sitting in Moses his chair; that is, while preaching
consonantly to Moses his Doctrine, and not adding their superstitious leaven,
they were bidden to observe, but then they are forbidden to follow their
example; They must not do as they do. So that what Truths such Preach out of
Gods Word, we are to awe our hearts with them, and to receive them as good
truths; but yet, if their lives be contrary to Gods Word, they must not approve
of them, or imitate them. Lastly, If they be negligent and lazy, which is an
intolerable sin in a Minister, whose Names and Titles the Scripture gives him,
denotes Labor, Pains, and Solicitude, This also may be justly complained of,
and yet not in that to be thought to strike at the Office of the Ministry. Now,
there are two Extremes in this way: Some corrupt and scandalous Ministers
would make the world believe, when judged or censured, for their crimes, that
it is because of their Office, not their unworthiness; that it is not their
personal sin, but Ministerial employment that is aimed at. And again, there are
others, that though they pretend the sins and vices of Ministers, yet indeed
are glad of any such offenses, do rejoice, when they fall out, and make
occasion thereby as much as lies in them, to overthrow the Ministry it self:
But, both these delude their own souls; for God will own his instituted
Office, as being a Plant of his own planting; and therefore, the Adversaries to
it may think as well to pluck the Sun out of the Heavens, as those Offices
Christ has set in his Church: And on the other side, unfaithful and ungodly
Ministers are to know Gods anger is more against them, than other wicked men,
and the very station they had in the Church, will tend to their greater
aggravation, So that, we may distinguish between setting our selves zealously
against the corruptions of unjustifiable Ministers, and against the Office it
self.

In the next place, Secondly, Many ways are a people prone to take offense, 2.
A people are often prone to take offense at the Ministers when yet it is their sin.
at the Ministry of a man, when yet it is their sin. They that do wickedly take
an offense at a Ministry faithfully discharged; they procure inevitable ruin
to their own souls. These endeavor to put out the Light of the Sun, that so
they may with the more boldness commit their sins in the dark. There is a
twofold Scandal, or Offense, (as Divines usually note.) The one is, Scandalum
datum, when any shall give a just occasion to any, to stumble at the Truths of
God, and to depart from the way of Christ: Not, that ever any can have a just
occasion indeed. For, suppose, all the Ministers of Christ, yea, and all the
people that profess Christ, should so live and walk, that Christianity would be
made loathsome in the world, yet a man ought not to be offended hereat, so as
to depart from Christ: for he is to believe the Word more than the lives or
Examples of men; only I call that a just occasion, which is apparently so;
when some do carry themselves in such an ungodly manner, that the weakness of
some cannot but be offended at their proceedings; so that, they like Ministry
and Godliness, the worse, for their sakes. Now, though this be the sin and
weakness of any to do so, yet, because they administered an active occasion
thereunto, a woe is pronounced in an heavy manner to such Persons, Luke 17. 1.
The Scripture makes it a terrible thing, either for Ministers or people, so to
live and walk, as, that thereby the ways of God, and Godliness may be evil
spoken of. But then, their is a scandalum acceptum, which is called Scandalum
Pharisaeorum; and that, when men through their own ignorance, peevishness, or
wickedness, do take any offense, and cry out of Religion, because of such and
such things, which they do not rightly understand: And this was the case of our
Saviors Preaching, and his acceptance in the world; insomuch, that he says,
Mat. 11. 6, Blessed is he that shall not be offended at me. Why, was there any
thing in Christ's Doctrine or Life, that might rationally offend any? No, but
the Pharisees, and others, being Superstitious and proud, seeing also his
outward contemptibleness, took great offense; and thereupon they condemned
Christ by the Law, which God made against Blasphemy: They condemned Christ, by
that very Law, which was in force against Blasphemers, thinking him guilty of
it, because he said, He was the Son of God, John 19. 7. Now, the many ways
that may be taken sinfully, to set against the Ministry, and to lay all the
Burden upon that, are,

First, when we, out of a cavilling and quarrelling temper, dislike that, which
1. When they dislike that, which may be of great use.
if well understood, would be of great use to us; So that, many times, when the
whole fault lies upon our dullness, our mistakes, our Ignorance, and weakness,
we are ready to charge it upon the Ministry. Thus we have heretofore instanced
in John 6. 60, 61. concerning those Disciples, who murmured at Christ's
Expressions; and were so offended, that they departed wholly from him: So that,
he who would not go off from the Ministry, is to avoid a quarrelsome, cavilling
disposition; which some are very prone unto; but, it is a very great Judgment
to be left to such a temper; For herein they do every day more and more
obstruct their own Conversion, and prepare themselves to be combustible matter
in Hell. Indeed, a modest, and humble enquiry into the Truths preached, as the
Bereans did, about Paul's Preaching, is allowed and commendable; but, a froward,
cavilling Disposition indisposeth to find out the Truth, and is like some
fretting humor in the eye, which hinders the sight.

2. We then do sinfully oppose the Ministry, when we strive and contend with
them, 2. When they are offended at his reproveing sin.
because of their zealous and faithful reproving and withstanding the course
of sin.

Because a Minister would bring thee to the sight of thy sins, to a deep and
serious Humiliation, because of them, because he would recover thee out of
those damnable ways thou live in: Hence it is, that thou cryest down the
Ministry, and their Labors: This is the true ground of most men's calumny, and
malice; because the word Preached is a convincing Word, a reproveing Word, a
discovering Word, of that evil and wrethchedness, which is in thy heart: Hence
it is, that thy soul cannot endure the messengers thereof; This is not merely
to be wicked, but Diabolicaly wicked. And yet, if many Despisers of the
Ministry were asked, What is it that moves them to such despite against the
Officers of Christ, They would, but for shame, speak that which lies in the
bottom of their heart, viz. That the Ministry discovers unto them all the
evil they have done; That is, speaks only evil and Damnation to them, and
therefore they cannot abide it; but, woe be to that man who striveth with a
Minister, doing his duty. That, because he tells thee the truth, he deals
faithfully with thy soul; therefore thou do become an enemy to him. Consider
that place, Hos. 4. 4. Let no man reprove another, for this people are as they
that strive with the Priest. The meaning is, It is to no purpose, to reprove
the wicked men of Israel any more: it is to no purpose to bring them balm, or
spiritual Medicines, for they are an incurable people, Why, how does this
appear? In that, they strive with the Priest. They will not et him do his duty.
If he reprove them for sin, if he set against their iniquities, they rise up as
proudly against him, as the Sodomites did against Lot, their Preacher of
righteousness. By this you see, its a property of a desperate and incurable
people when they strive with their Church Officers, in doing of their Duty.
Indeed, if Ministers should pervert the Ordinances of God, endeavor to bring
in Heresies, Supers^ition, and Profaneness, to exalt the Kingdom of darkness,
then they are in all lawful and wise ways to strive with them, even as
Children may, in some cases reprove their Parents, who are desperately set to
damn their souls, provided they show that Reverence and Humility that they
ought to do. This Text of the Prophet is made use of by the Papists, who charge
our Reformers, that they did strive with the Pope, and their Bishops, refusing
submission to them. For their Canonists have a saying, That, if the Pope should
draw thousands of souls to Hell, none might say unto him, why do thou so?
But this place will not be a Sanctuary to them; for if we take the ordinary
exposition, and common one, which I have given (there being another by-Learned
man, who makes directly against them) it speaks of such a people, who, do
sinfully strive with the Messengers of God, because they reprove sin, and
zealously do their Duty. This is the highest Degree of sinful Opposition that
can be, no contesting with the Ministry is so heinous, as when it comes upon
this account. These are like frenetique men, who fight with their Physician. In
other diseases commonly men send for physicians, they desire their help; but
the mad man, he will ne re send for any, and if any be brought to him he rages
at them. Thus does such wicked men, and so are like a ground Historians speak
of, that is dryer by the rain that falls upon it, and the more drought, the
more moisture.

3. Then we sinfully reflect upon the Ministry, when the vices of the persons,
we 3. When they cast the saults of the persons upon their Office and Doctrine.
cast upon their office and Doctrine. This was that which made Paul so di
ligent and zealous in this Text; had it been his own glory and name, he would
more patiently have born it. But when they come hereby to disparage his
Doctrines, to call that in question, then he could no longer bare it. Take heed
then of this disposition, upon any evils, or faillings in them, presently to
fall upon the Calling, immediately to dislike the Doctrine they preach. For,
though it ought not to be so, yet we are naturally ready ex personis probare
fidem, not ex fide Personas, We are ready to like and approve of Faith, as we
approve of men's persons, and therefore, if any failing or weakness be seen in
them, we presently charge their Doctrine with it. What should a man have
refused all that Peter said, thinking, it is no matter what he Preaches,
because, in his fear and temptation he denied Christ? What, shall a man exclaim
at Paul, and say, we know not how to believe, what he Preaches? For, he was
once as hot and zealous for the contrary way. Oh, take heed of such ungodly
Judgment. The Truth is Christ's Truth; the Gospel is the Gospel of God, however
men may fail.

4. This is still the more abominable, when men take false rumors and slanders
4. When they refuse the Ministry upon false Rumors and Surmises.
up, or go upon their own surmises, and conjectures, and thereby refuse the
Ministry: for this was Paul's case. He had just grounds, as is in time to be
showed, why he did not come to them, as he promised. It was to spare them, as
he says, v. 23. So that, if there were any fault, they were the cause of it,
yet, how readily do they make an occasion, to bring Paul's Doctine out of
credit, and nothing is more ordinary than this, for men to feign Reasons, and
pretend many absurd Arguments to vilify the work of the Ministry, which yet is
appointed by God, for the good of their souls. If you ask, What are the
Reasons, why men are so apt (...) upon the Doctrine preached? They are such as
these,

First, Wicked men being under the power of the Devil, they are acted by him,
and his works they do. Now, his greatest work is to destroy that, which if
suffered, would destroy him, and his Kingdom. The end of the Ministry we may
read in Paul's Commission, Act. 26. 18. which is, To open men's eyes, to turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. It is no
wonder, if the Devil in all ages tempt men to this sin, rather than others.
For, hereby his Kingdom will be lift up: so that, as the Physicians were never
quiet till they had deprived Sampson of that which was his strength, so neither
is the Devil and his Instruments ever at rest, till they have removed that
strength Christ has appointed for the destroying of the works of the Devil.

2. Men are carried out against the Doctrine and Office, for any real or
supposed failings, because it is that which does most grieve and trouble them.
It is the Word of God that is a terror to them, that will not let them sin
securely; theresore they have no care to take, but, as much as lies in them,
to make it no word, to make it nothing but the humors of men. For all the
while they believe this is the Doctrine of God, this will reprove me, this will
damn me, they dare not, they cannot rise up against God; but to delude their
souls, therefore they run to lies, and sinful refuges, whereby they would
undervalue this Word, and make it nothing but the Opinions of men.

3. They fall foul upon the Doctrine presently, because herein they think they
do the greater despite to the faithful Ministers of God. Herein they think the
more to afflict them; they know, that no glory, honor, or profit does so much
prevail with him, as the honor of his Office, and the truth of his Doctrine:
and theresore, that they might show their mischief, and malice the more, they
would him in that which is dearest.

4. They condemn the Doctrine from personal failings, because, herein they
think to justify themselves the more. That there is no such reason why it
should be powerful to reform, or convert them, seeing it does not so to the
Minister himself: They think, they have a good plea for their unprofitableness,
and unfruitfulness. If he be a Physician, say they, Why does he not heal
himself? if he can save others, why does he not save himself? as they derided
Christ.

Use of Exhortation, To observe, and take notice of this subtilty of Satan, and
the naughtiness of thy own heart, in this particular. Are not all his workings
to prejudice thee against the faithful Pastor of thy soul? Does not every tale
or story; does not every slanderous and lying report, presently take off thy
Faith, and reverence to the word that is preached? Oh remember, that it is Gods
word, it is Gods truth, whatsoever our failings may be; its Gods treasure,
though it be in an earthen vessel. It will be no excuse for thee, at the day of
judgment, to say, Lord, I regarded not the word, I mattered not Sermons, I
attended not to what they Preached, because I thought the Messengers thereof
were proud, and covetous. Will not God arraign thee? saying, It was my Word
howsoever, It was my Doctrine: my word was not proud, or Doctrine Covetous; if
not for their sakes, yet you should have received it for my sake: It was not
the Ministers Doctrine, the Ministers Sacrament, but mine, The Devil is very
busy to destroy thee by this temptation; but watch and pray against them.

SERMON. CXVII.
Of Changing in Matters of Religion.

2 COR. 1. 18. Our word toward you, was not yea, and nay.
WE are now arrived at the last particular considerable in this Text, and that
is the firmness and constancy of the Doctrine that Paul preached to the
Corinthians. You heard that malevolent adversaries from a supposed levity in
Paul, otherwise did presently argue to an inconstancy in his Doctrine. And
although this was but once, they could not charge such an appearing levity upon
Paul often. It was but at one time, yet how ready were they to take an
advantage hereby against Gods truth. It is true, the verity and firmness of
Gods truths does not depend upon the esteem of Ministers, his word is sure,
though men be vain and inconstant; yet by this instance we see, how much it
concerns the Ministers of the Gospel to abound in gravity, sincerity and
constancy; especially so to deport themselves, that the Doctrine they preach
may not be suspected of changeableness, as if they would preach that for Gods
truth one time, which afterward they would preach to be the Devils lie. This
is that which Paul does here renounce, Our word toward you (says he) was not
yea and nay, that is, it was not light, mutable, it was not white and black,
hot and cold, but it was always the same constant abiding truth. From whence
observe,

That for a Minister to be mutable and contradictory in his Doctrine, is very
reproachful to him, and makes his Ministry wholly useless It Is a great
reproach for a Minister to be mutable and contradictory in his doctrine


Sometimes to preach one way, as the way of God; one opinion as the certain
truth of God, and then afterward to preach up the clean contrary, this
debaseth the person, and the office of a man, it makes all his Ministry to be
despised: They conclude either that such a man thinks there is no Religion at
all, or at least, that he is either Atheistical, believing none, or else very
ignorant, or carnal, and self-seeking; that with Demetrius the Priest of
Diana's Temple, does judge that only Religion, which is profitable, and
therefore measure the truths of Doctrines by their interest and carnal
emoluments. In the Old Testament we read of many such lying Prophets, who did
not prophecy according to the visions of the Lord, but from the imagination of
their own hearts, preached to Kings and people such pleasing things as they
desired. This has done a world of hurt in the Church of God, when the officers
therein have not regarded, whether the things they preach were Gods truths, but
whether pleasing to men, or no. This was to make the Sun to follow the Dial,
and the truth of God shall no longer be truth, but while it pleases man. Now
such men, that are thus mutable, must needs be accounted transgressors by all.
For so says the Apostle, If I build the things again, I once destroyed, I
make my self a transgressour, Galat. 2. 18. This Doctrine deserves serious
examination, because as there is much truth in it, and thereby much good may be
done: So occasionally through mistake, men may be prejudiced to their own hurt.
For did not the Papists brand the Reformers at first with inconstancy and
perfidiousnesse, that they were nothing but Yea and Nay? For formerly they came
to the Mass, they worshipped Images, they acknowledged the Pope as well as
they: But then of a sudden they were all changed, then the Pope was Antichrist,
then the Mass was blasphemous Idolatry, then they puiled down their Altars and
Images. Thus say the Papists, they were yea and nay. And in our age, Are there
not many offended, because the Ministers of the Gospel do not keep up the same
Church-administrations, as they once did, that they do not pray, baptize,
administer the Lords Supper, in the same way as once they did? If it was no
sin then, why is it now? Thus they think there is much inconstancy and levity
in Ministers, because they see such changes and alterations in their public
administrations.

Let us therefore abide the longer upon this truth, seeing the Text does give
such seasonable advantages thereunto. And

First, You must know, That all yea and nay is not bad. There may be a 1. All
changes are not bad.
time, when he that has been for a Yea a long time in Religion, must if ever
he will be saved, come to a Nay. There is sometimes a necessity of changing,
and that is, when people and Ministers have been carried away with errors and
false ways. Though such things may plead antiquity, though you may urge
prescription for many hundred years, yet upon conviction and illumination, we
are to change from yea, we are to bewail such errors as we once lived in. Was
it not thus with Paul? Though Paul was not now Yea and Nay, since he was an
Apostle, yet he was once so; neither was that to his dispraise, but his honor
in the Church of God. Did not Paul once violently persecute that way, which
afterward he preached for? Those traditions and pharisaical superstitions
which once he maintained, even to the killing of all the opposers thereof; Does
not he in time, with as much zeal renounce them, as ever once he did plead for
them? This change of Paul was so wonderful that Act. 9. 21. Many who heard him
preach Christ, were amazed, saying, Is not this he, that destroyed them, who
called on this Name in Jerusalem? You see then that there may be a just
occasion to change our opinions, our practices in Religion. There is a just
occasion for a Jew, a Turk, to leave his Religion, and become a Christian.
There is a just occasion for Papists and Heretics to forsake that way of
worship, they have followed with so much zeal and devotion. Neither may they
fear the shame and reproach of being accounted weather-cocks and turn-coats;
but rather they have cause to bless God, who has opened their eyes, and not
suffered them to perish in the Egypt and Sodom they were in. It is true
naturally, it is accounted an heinous sin to change that Religion which a man
is born and bred up in. Therefore we have an History of our King John, (Fuller.
Histor. of the Church) who being in great Stateextremities, sent to the King of
the Moors for aid and assistance, promising him his Kingdom if he would, and
that the Nation should receive the Turkish Religion. But the Morocco King
refused the offer, saying, That he had lately read Paul' s Epistles, and did
like the matter well, so that he found no fault with Paul, but because he
changed the Religion he was born in. I bring this instance to show, what a
great influence that Religion has, let it be false or true, upon a man, in
which he has been educated. Yet there is a necessity, if men will be saved,
sometimes of forsaking that Religion our Fathers and Ancestors have lived in.
For seeing that is directly against Scripture, that any man in any Religion may
be saved: and also that seeing there are so many contrary Religions in the
world, it follows inevitably, that there are some in such damnable ways, and
that of Religion, that without repentance, and coming out of those former
impieties, they shall never escape the eternal flames of hell; and such a
change is not matter of reproach, but it is the wonderful conversion of Gods
grace upon our hearts. Hence the Apostle does so often admire the riches of
Gods grace to those Heathens, who were delivered out of that ignorance and
darkness, with the abominable impieties they once lived in. As it is in
Philosophy, they distinguish of alteration or change, it is either destructiva
or perfectiva. Thus when a man of a fool is made wise, of a vicious person,
virtuous, here is a perfective alteration: so it is also in the matters of
Religion, we may change the best error for truth, darkness for light. It is
not then enough to say, Thou will not change thy principles, thy way of
Religion, thou have been born in them, and thy Ancestors have lived in the
same way; for this every Jew, every Turk may plead as well as thou. The
Heathens pleaded this against the Christian Religion, Sequendi sunt patres qui
foeliciter sunt suos sequuti, contumeliosa est emendatio senectutis. If this be
true, why art thou not a Papist still? Why do thou not call for the Mass
and Church-duties to be done in Latin? For this was the way thy Ancestors
were brought up in.

Hence in the second place, It is not simply the Yea and Nay that is to be 2.
But it is a sin and reproach to change from the truth
blamed, but when it is in the truth, when we ought to be constant and
immovable therein. As every party does brand another with Heretic,
Schismatic, Apostate, so also with inconstancy; but it is not the mere names,
but the reality that makes such persons. If then a man holds Gods truth, he is
no Heretic, though the whole world should condemn him. He that has a
Scripture-ground to depart from the Idolatries of the Church, is no
Schismatic, though others charge him with it, for Causa non separatio facit
Schismaticum. Thus if a man forsake his former errors, his former
superstitions; if he leave his corrupt Doctrines, this man's change is a duty,
he is not to be blamed for it; but if a man leave the truth, if he forsake the
way of God, then his Yea and Nay is to be reproved. If then you see a man,
leaving one opinion after another, one practice after another, so that all this
while it is a progress in the truths of Christ, this man is the more to be
encouraged. For such is the pertinacy of man, and love to his own credit and
glory, that it must be some great cause, which shall make him retract and
recant that which he did once zealously profess; so that it is in Doctrinals,
as in morals; if you see a man that has for many years wallowed in his lusts,
that has been glewed to them, so that he appeared, Non tam peccator, quam
ipsum peccatum; if this man through the grace of God be converted do contrary
to all that once he did, shall this man be derided, because he will not be the
same profane person, that once he has been? No, God rather is to be
glorified; who made the prodigal that was lost to be found, that was dead to
live again?

Thirdly, Although thus to increase in knowledge and light, whereby we leave
off doing the things we once did, be thus a duty, yet even such a change 3.
Even such a change supposes imperfection.
supposes an imperfection in a man. For were our understandings fully
illuminated, we should be able to see the truths of God, at the very first;
light would not come in successively upon us, and by degrees dispelling
darkness, as we see the Sun does in the morning, but it would be in its
vertical point immediately. Even as Photius reports out of an Historian
Agatharcides, that there are a people to whom the Sun does not appear by
degrees, as to us, but it comes suddenly and perfectly upon them, out of the
depth of darkness. It is true therefore our weakness and imperfection, not
that we come to know things better than we did, or that we are changed, but
because we needed such an alteration: We know but in part, says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians. 13. putting himself into the number. Hence it is that in Heaven, when
our understandings shall be fully perfected, then we shall not grow in
knowledge, we shall not embrace errors, and upon further illumination leave
them. So that whenever God shall make such a change upon us, that we are not
to believe, as we have done, worship as we have done, lived as we have done: As
we are to be thankful unto God, so we are to be humble in our selves, because
that ever any darkness did take hold of us. The Thomists among the Schoolmen,
give this for a reason, why the good Angels proved constantly good, and the
evil Angels unchangeably evil: Because (say they) Such is the perfection of the
Angelical Nature, that what it wills, it wills immoveably, it cannot alter
again, and therefore an evil Angel cannot repent. I shall not justify this
reason; but certainly we see it a glorious perfection in God, that his
understanding is infinite, his will immutable; so that he cannot know any new
thing, or will any new thing, which he did not from eternity: Yea the estate of
the glorified Saints in Heaven, is admirable in this particular, that they are
so confirmed by grace, they are so perfectly enlightened and sanctified, that
they receive all truth at first, and can never come to know more or better,
then they did at first admission into that glorious place.

Fourthly, There is no man living, though never so learned and so knowing, 4.
No man but may know more than he does.
but may still understand more. In him there may be, there will be Yeas and
Nayes: He will have cause to confess he was in this error once, he
misunderstood such and such Texts of Scripture formerly. Does not experience
confirm this? Hence are their retractations, their recognitions and reviews of
their works, which they have put out with much judgment and deliberation. So
that we are not to wonder, if the most excellent and learned men do sometimes
say, This I thought once, and this was my judgment once, but now I am better
informed. It is true, the case of the Apostles, and such as were divinely
inspired of old, is different from the most eminent, holy and learned men that
are in the Church; for though after their first call by Christ, they did retain
some ignorance upon them, yea did err in some doctrinal points of great
consequence, yet after they received the holy Ghost, in a full confirmation of
them in their Office, then they were made infallible; so that in their
preaching and writing they could not err: And therefore if there had been any
Yea and Nay, any contrariety in their Doctrine. If any of them should have
said, Thus I thought once, but it was my error, I am now of another mind, this
would have made us questioned their immediate call from God; but all Pastors
and Teachers that are to guide the Church, they are not to expect such
infallibility, neither should people look for such assistance upon us; but we
are limited to the Scripture, as the Rule by which all spirits are to be
tried. If therefore any eminent Officer of the Church do build hay and stubble
upon the foundation of precious stone and pearl, wonder not at it: Or if you
see such afterward more enlightened, and to bewail the hay and stubble they
have built. Let not this make you stagger; so as to think with your selves,
what can we believe? For they may err in one thing as well as another; and as
they confess they have taught false in one particular, so it may be in all the
rest, and therefore we are not bound to believe them at 5. We must distinguish
betwixt what is, and what is not fundamental.
all. For

In the fifth place, You must distinguish between that which is fundamental in
a word, and that which is circa, or supra fundamental. The word of God
contains in it all things that are necessary to salvation, but withal it
has many excellent conclusions that are deduceable from them. It has not
only the foundation stones, but an excellent and glorious superstructure: It
has not only milk for the babe, but strong meat for the adult person. And
although there be no truth revealed in the Scripture, which when sufficiently
proposed to us, we ought to despise, it being the truth of the holy Ghost: and
wilfully to oppose any known truth of Gods word, though it be far from the
fundamentals, is a very damnable sin, and rebellion against the Spirit of
God; yet for all that, we must always distinguish between the fundamentals and
principles of Religion (such as are named, Heb. 6.) and the conclusions, by
many mediums deduced from them; between the seed and the crop; between the
essentials and the accessories. For there is no godly man, much less no godly
Officer, that is so far left by God, as to err in fundamentals of salvation,
at least perpetually; and therefore they have no Yea, and Nay in them. For they
have the promise of God, which is, That the Spirit shall lead them into all
truth, John 16. 13. And they have also the anointing, which will teach them all
things, 1 John 2. 27. where by all things, is not meant, Omne scibile, Every
thing that may be known; for then they should know all the arts, and all the
tongues, every one would be wiser than Solomon. No nor all things in Religion,
not all things in faith and manners, for that would contradict other places,
which say, We know but in part, 1 Cor. 3. and also, That we are to grow in
knowledge, 2 Pet. 3. 18. but all things necessary to salvation. They shall not
want the knowledge of that thing, the absence whereof will damn them. It may be
for a season, they may be involved in some fundamental error, even as they may
in regard of their lives fall into some grossimpieties, that do for the present
take away the present claim that they have to the Kingdom of Heaven; but at
last they shall be delivered, because it is not possible the elect should be
deceived, viz. totally and finally, by the most deceiveable ways of falsehood
that are, Matthew. 24. 24. Now the knowledge of this is necessary to obviate that
Objection, which you heard mentioned. If the Ministers of the Gospel may be Yea
and Nay in some things, why not in all things? If they err in one thing, why
not in every thing? This is not to be yielded unto. For they cannot err in
necessaries, though they may in accessories; They cannot lay any other
foundation than what is laid, yet they may build hay and stubble. Therefore
it is senseless and irrational to argue from any error or mistake the Ministers
may have in some points of Religion, that are problematical, to those that are
essential. For in these later we are sure, we are never deceived, we may with
Paul confidently say, If an Angel from Heaven preach contrary to that Doctrine,
let him be accursed.

SERMON. CXVIII.
A further Discovery of the sinfulness and reproach of Inconstancy, especially
in a Minister.

2 COR. 1. 18. Our word toward you, was not yea and nay.
WE are pursuing this truth, That inconstancy and contrariety in the Doctrine
of Ministers, is a very great reproach to them. For the discovering whereof we
have brought in some particulars, and proceed upon the same account. As

First, We must always distinguish between constancy and pertinacy; for these
1. We must distinguish betwixt constancy and pertinancy.
differ as much as light and darkness, though one may seem very like the
other. Insomuch that the rash, wilful pertinacy of some men in their ways and
opinions, though never so false, is gloried in by them, as true constancy.
Never is sin more ready to deceive us, then when it comes in truths mantle,
when the Devil appears like Samuel. For then this luster and glistering does
deceive us, taking vice for virtue, that we cannot be brought into any way of
amendment. But this we must resolve upon, That constancy and pertinacy, they
differ as much as evil and good. To be a constant man is a duty; to be a
pertinacious man is a sin. If you see a Papist, or an Heretic, that will
endure the greatest torment, ere he will be Yea and Nay, as often it falls
out: This man is not to be commended for constancy, but condemned for his
wilfulness and pertinacy. So that among many other differences constancy and
pertinacy are discriminated in their object; for constancy has always that
which is good and true for its object, as the Apostle says, It is good to be
zealously affected in a good thing, Gal. 4. 18. so it is good to be constant,
and persevering in that which is a duty. But then pertinacy is always in that
which is false and evil; and therefore is commonly made to be a necessary
concomitant of an heretical person. Though he hold a grievous error, yet if he
does it not with pertinacy after frequent admonitions and convictions, he is
not judged an Heretic; according to that known saying of Austins, Errare
possum, Haereticus esse nolo. The Apostle also supposes wilfulness and
refractorinesse in Tit. 3. 10. when he bids us, Reject an heretic after the
first and second admonition, implying that thereby he has fully discovered his
pertinacy, and so his incorrigibility. If then in a sacred Oath, wherein we
solemnly call upon God as a witness, when it is about a sinful and ungodly
thing, it is our duty to break it. It was Herod's sin, that he would fulfill
his oath; then how much more, if thou art in an erroneous, or in a sinful and
ungodly way to go on wilfully, and wilt not change thy mind whatsoever comes
of it? This pertinacy is also seen in wicked men, who will not be reformed;
though the Ministry be never so potent and effectual; though light penetrate
never so secretly into their breasts, yet like Balaam they go on desperately
against the Angel of God, with a sword in his hand, and glory that they are no
changelings; whereas, is to be of another mind, were always sin, their
repentance would be a vice, and not a virtue. For what is that, but to be of
another mind, to change our minds? whether it be in doctrinal errors, or
practical impieties, there must be a repentance, a changing of our minds, else
we shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Remember then this
difference, be a constant man, not a pertinacious, self-willed man. The
former's Yea, yea; and Nay, nay, in a good sense; the later in a bad sense.
Solomon says, Bray a fool in a mortar, yet his foolishness will not depart
from him, Prove. 27. 22. What is he therefore to be commended, because he will
not be changed? Yea, this change from all evil of mind, or life, is so
necessary, that God has appointed his Ministry for this end. For this end he
afflicts and chastises, that we should be men of other minds, of other
persuasions than we have been. Arrianus's Epictetus has a Chapter (Lib. 2.
cap. 15.) against such who will contumaciously persist in what they have
decreed; and instanceth in a friend, who had decreed to famish and starve
himself, and was hardly persuaded to the contrary, merely because he would be
as good as his purpose: whereas, first, we are to consider, whether the thing
decreed be good and right or no. Mad men have strength, but they put it out in
a furious way; so erroneous and wicked men, they will be the same, they will
not alter or change; but this is in a sinful and damnable way. Oh that we
could see many putting a Nay upon their former Yea! To cry as he did, Ego non
sum ego: for unless such do become changed, they are sure to perish.

Secondly, Then therefore is yea and nay so reproachful, when they are mutable
2. Then is it a reproach to change, when we change from truth.
from truth as well as error, as also from corrupt and light motives. Some
have an inconstancy and levity of mind, they do not adhere long to any one
thing. These want solidity and weight, and therefore are like feathers and
straws that are blown up and down with every wind of Doctrine. These are
children wanting sound judgment, and so are easily deluded. Hence the Apostle
exhorts, Ephesians. 4. 14. That we be not as children tossed up and down with
every wind of Doctrine. How many are there that do not adhere to the truths of
God upon constant divine motives, but light and corrupt, whereby it comes to
pass, that they have Annuam and menstruam fidem; They have a daily, monthly
and yearly faith; and we may truly say of them, what Maldonate by scorn,
deriding the division of faith, given by Protestants, Illis enim tot sunt
fides, quot sunt in lyra. It is this unsetledness and inconstancy, that makes
the Protestant Religion so reproached by Papists; herein they boast; by this
they insinuate, that you Protestants go from Religion to Religion, from opinion
to opinion, and have no huc usque, but change their persuasions, as often as
their fashions. Now it must be granted, that such giddiness and inconstancy,
does not consist with a sound faith and judgment. Men may be very learned men,
and yet very unsettled in their judgment. Who will not acknowledge that Grotius
was to be honored for his learning? But his inconstancy was the dead fly in
his box of ointment. Hence Rivet relates of him, That when he was in prison,
some interceded with Prince Maurice for his liberty; but the Prince denied, and
pointing to the weathercock upon his house, said, En caput Grotii. On the
other side, it was the commendation of John Baptist, that he was not as a reed
shaken with every wind. When we have once tried all things, and found out the
truth, then we are to hold it fast; we are not to be always enquiring and
seeking; this is perpetually to err in the wilderness, and never come into
Canaan. Pray therefore to God against inconstancy and unsetlednesse in mind in
matters of Religion, such a temptation has fallen so foully upon some, that it
has even brought a distraction upon them. It is a mercy to be settled upon the
Rock, to be rounded upon the truth, and then to be immovable; whereas the
doubting and divided mind, is never satisfied, and flies from one thing to
another, never having any rest. If then thy says be true, believe as thou have
done; if thy worship of God be according to his will, continue to do as thou
have done; and so if thy life be according to Gods command, never change it,
thou can not do better; only be sure thy foundation be truly laid, and then
abhor all temptations and opinions that would bring thee to doubting; for
here will be no end, thou will be in daily restless thoughts of soul. Hence
the Apostle James says, A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways, Jam.
1. 6, 7. He is like a wave tossed up and down in the Sea. Oh how unfit and
unable are such to confess the truth before a crooked generation, to give
witness to it by the loss of the dearest comforts they do enjoy, when they
do not know whether it be Gods truth, or man's error that they plead for?

Now you may ask, What are the causes procreant of such lightness and The
causes of inconstancy. 1. Ignorance.
inconstancy?

The first is Ignorance, when we are not able of our selves to judge what is
the truth of God, but receive it wholly from trust by tradition. This
traditional Religion, receiving things merely from men, and because of their
authority, must needs make men change, as that changes. Solomon has a full
expression to this, The fool believes every word, but the prudent man looks
well to his going, Prove. 14. 15. The more ignorant then a Ministry is, the more
credulous it is; and so is like the materia prima, ready to receive different
forms and shapes; when a man's faith is wholly borrowed, and he lives by
another man's faith, not his own; when he shuts his own eyes, and will only
see by another man's, then he must call black, white; and white, black, as often
as those will have him do so, upon whom he does depend. If then it be a shame
for a private Christian not to live by his own faith, and to resolve all into
an implicit belief of others; Is it not much more an heinous sin in
Ministers, who are to be guides, and to lead others?

Secondly, An affectation of singularity and vainglory in a Minister, may 2.
Affectation of singularity and vainglory
make him to be Yea and Nay. He sees that by holding and preaching the old
known way, he shall not be much admired; and therefore as people run in
multitudes to new sights, so they do to such who bring unheard of opinions.
This has been one of the chiefest causes of all the heresies and errors that
ever have been in the Church; they have been weary of the accustomed Manna;
they have like the Athenians been always enquiring into what new thing is
brought forth. And hereupon, as pride in apparel does always bring forth new
fashions; so pride in Religion, new opinions. And hence it is, that men affect
new words, new phrases, new expressions, yea and new Doctrines; all which
causes a mutability and change. Now surely, if a man ever did find the lively
power of the truths of God, he once professed, upon his own heart; when he
should at any time be invited to taste of new wine, he would say, the old is
better. When Peter knew, that with Christ alone was eternal life, then he
says, Whither shall we go? John 6. 68. Or to whom shall we go? We cannot be
better than we are. Now the other Disciples had not fully tasted of the good
Word of God; they depart from Christ, and never follow him more. We may say
then to all those unstable souls, who wander from one opinion to another, and
so from truth to falsehoods many time; Why do ye leave the Fountain to go to
the Cisterns? Why do ye leave the fatness of the Olive, and the sweetness of
the Vine, to go to the Briar?

Thirdly, Another cause of changeableness, is, Love to profit, to earthly
greatness, and worldly advantages. There is none addicted to this, but he must
be Yea and Nay, often and often again. Must not the shadow alter often,
sometimes longer, sometimes shorter, sometimes straight, and sometimes bowed
down, because it wholly follows the body, and has its dependence thereon? So
it is here, when men regard Religion only for politic and self-seeking ends,
then they must be hot and cold, they must be bitter and sweet, as their
interest requires. This has always made Ecebolius's in the Church; only it
were well, if at last they would bewail this carnality, this inconstancy; as
Ecebolius did, throwing himself down before the Church gathered together,
crying out, Calcate me insipidum salem. This made one Bishop be surnamed
Euripus, for his frequent compliances and accommodations of himself, that
thereby he might be advanced.

Lastly, Another cause, though external, is, The example of others. 4. Examples.
When an whole Church, or an whole Nation, becomes Yea and Nay, then it is
very difficult to be immovable. To be only Athanasius, when the whole world
is Arrian, that is difficult. We are apt to think that multitude is patronage
enough for any inconstancy. Though we judge the usages in Religion
superstitious, yet we are ready to say, as he did, Eamus ad communem errorem.
Hence it is that we read some Nations have received the Popish Religion, and
then after that Protestantisme, and so change them mutually again. Now unless
a man be bottomed upon divine Motives, he cannot be Lot in a Sodom; he cannot
be like that River that emptieth it self into the brackish Sea, and yet keeps
its own sweetness. Not to turn when all turn, argues there must be some
strong principle within, some life within, else the dead fish would be carried
away with the stream.

The conclusive particular to clear this whole Discourse, and which will
antidote against the Objection at first mentioned, is this; We must distinguish
We must distinguish betwixt essentials and circumstantials in Religion.
between the Essentials of Religion, and External forms thereof, which are
mutable and changeable. It may be the same Essential Religion sull, though the
form of administrations may alter; even as it is the same man still, though he
wear change of garments. This is on purpose mentioned to discover the ignorance
of those, who charge levity and inconstancy upon the Ministers of the Gospel,
because they use not the same public Liturgyl, nor administer Sacraments in
the same order and form, as was formerly. Yea some are so far scandalized,
as to think this is the removing of the Protestant Religion; but all this is
built upon a false foundation, as if Protestant Religion were built upon
Church-formes of administration. For if that were so, then there would be many
Protestant Religions, because several Protestant Churches have always had
several forms of administration; some more pure than other, though all
retaining the essentials of Religion. Religion then is the same still, and the
Ministers of the Gospel are the same still; we have also the same way still to
Heaven, and the same Christ our Mediator, though the form of
Church-administrations be altered; we have public prayer still, and the same
Scripture-matter that is to be put in prayer, only the form is altered; and so
about the Sacraments only the order may be altered. If therefore this offend
thee, and cause thee to think that Ministers are light and inconstant, it is
thy own ignorance; as if wine were altered, because emptied into diverse cups.
Yea it cannot appear out of good antiquity for many years, that ever the
primitive Christians meeting together in a Church Way, for the solemn
administration of Christ's Ordinances, ever had any public Liturgy, or set
form. For as for those Liturgies that are fastened upon some of the Apostles,
they are justly censured as supposititious. Let this then stop the mouth of
such cavillers, as ask, Why is not the Cross and other Ceremonies still used?
Why not the same form of Prayer? For hereby the true Religion is not altered at
all. Now the reason why such inconstancy must needs be a reproach to Ministers,
is because hereby it is plainly discovered, that they are not guided by the
Spirit of God after his Word; for the Word is the same, and the Spirit of God
is always like it self. When therefore men preach contrary Doctrines, we may
certainly conclude, these are not in both guided by the Spirit of God, but that
they are carried away according to the imaginations of their own heart. When
therefore men do not appear as coming from God, nor as having Commission from
him, all that they say is easily rejected: They see no more than of a mutable
changeable man in them. Paul does so often commend his Office with this
character, that it is of God, and not of man; whereas if thy administration be
of man, and not of God, it will not bring honor or majesty with it.

Secondly, It is not only thus a reproach, but also it rendereth a man
useless, it hinders that other good and truth, which may be in him. Some
report of Luther, that he was convinced about his error of Consubstantiation,
but yet thought it not wisdom to publish his recantation, lest all his other
Doctrine should be likewise called into question. Certainly that was more
carnal policy, than Scripture-wisdome, if it be a true report. However there is
thus much truth may be deduced from it, That inconstancy in some truths, though
of never so small concernment, is enough to bring all under examination. Yet
the people of God they are always to remember this Caution, that they labor
for the full assurance of Gods truth so upon their own hearts, that though they
see many Ministers alter and change, that they may remain immovable. It has
been a saying, Optima fides laicorum. And we read of a Martyr, though a woman,
who being converted from Popery by a Minister, but revolting and denying the
truth afterward; when this example was brought to her, to make her change
also, she replied; no, for now she believed the truth, not because that
Minister said it, but because Gods Word did confirm it.

SERMON. CXIX.
Christ the Alpha and Omega of all Preaching.

2 COR. 1. 19. For the Son of God Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by
us, even by me, and Sylvanus, and Timotheus, was not Yea, and Nay, but in him
was Yea.
THis verse contains a new Argument for the constancy and immutability of
Paul's Doctrine, and it is from the object matter of his preaching. If Christ
be always the same Christ; if there be no new Christ, then his preaching must
always be the same, because he preached nothing but Christ.

So that in the words we have,

1. The Object matter of Paul's preaching, what were the contents of his
Sermon, not his own imaginations, not the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies, but
Christ: and he is described,

1. From his two Natures, his Divine, The Son of God; His humane Jesus, which
name was given him by the Angel. 2. From his Office, Christ. The two Natures
are united, but distinguished; there is aliud and aliud; there is not a
confusion of them. Again, they are united into one person, so that there is not
alius and alius.
In the next place you have,

1. The Instruments that do thus preach Christ, whereof Paul is set down as the
principal, by me. 2. His associates and fellow laborers, Sylvanus and
Timotheus.
Lastly, Here is the Predicate, or Property affirmed of this object matter thus
preached, was not Yea and Nay, but in him was yea.

In all these parts we may find excellent substantial matter; but I shall be
the briefer in some of the Doctrines, because I have handled them upon other
occasions.

Let us begin with the Object Matter, the Son of God Jesus Christ, was
preached. By Christ, some here understand the Doctrine of Christ, and give a
Canon or Rule for interpreting Paul, that sometimes by Christ we must
understand his Doctrine: so Ephesians. 4. But ye have not so learned Christ. In
like manner some expound that place, Hebr. 13. 8. which is parallel to the
Text, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, that is, the
Doctrine of Christ. We may understand both, Christ and the Doctrine of Christ:
the one is preached, ut quod; the other, ut quo (as they say.) Indeed some
Expositors do not make this an Argument from the Object Matter, but a pari, or
majori; if Christ Jesus was not unfaithful, was not uncertain and inconstant;
but whatsoever he promised, he made good; then neither are we his Ministers,
who are deputed to this Office by him. But I rather go the former way proposed,
and then the first Doctrine is,

That Christ only is to be the subject of all our preaching. Christ only is to
be the subject of our preaching.


The Apostle argues his Doctrine was always the same, and uniforme; because
Christ is so, he never altered and changed, now he preached only Christ. As
therefore the subject of the whole Scripture is Christ: The whole Word of God
tends to the exalting of Christ: So it ought to be with us the Ministers of the
Word. As Christ is in himself the Alpha and Omega; so he should be in our whole
Ministry: him whom God intended to exalt, we should also magnify. And to let
you know, that you do not understand any thing rightly, till it bring you to
Christ, there is no truth, that you are simply to stay in; but you are to
follow this stream, till it empty it self into the Ocean, which is Christ.
When we preach of Faith, of Repentance, of a godly life, these are but the
ladders (as it were) to tread upon, that you may lay hold on Christ.

To enlarge this truth, we must take notice how, or when Christ is preached.
When is Christ preached.
And

First, When we declare that Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified at Jerusalem
1. When he is declared to be the Messiah.
is the promised Messiah, that he is the Person, in whom all those glorious
Prophecies that are mentioned in the Prophets, are exactly fullfilled. This is
indeed the Fundamental Article, upon which all the other Doctrines about Christ
do depend. For if that individual person be not the Messiah, then do we in
vain preach him to be the Mediator, and the Savior. Now this preaching of
Christ is the more necessary, because of the Jews, that are desperate enemies
to our Christianity, expecting another Messiah, judging our Christ to be an
Impostor, and that he deservedly died, upon the Law made against false Prophets
and blasphemers. So that this was a great part of Paul's preaching, to prove,
that Jesus was the Christ promised for the Jews, being pre-possessed with
false principles about a Messiah, expecting he should come like a temporal
Prince, to work external deliverance for them, the more difficult was it to
persuade them of this truth. And for this ground it is, that we have the
Scripture attributing so much to the believing of this truth, He that believes
Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, 1 John 5. 1. and 4. 15. Whosoever
confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, dwells in him, and he in God.
Hence also it is, that our Savior enquired about this faith so much, when any
came to him, If they did believe he was the Son of God; If they did believe
he was able to do what they desired. The Papists indeed would from hence
infer, That there is no such thing required in Scripture, as by a special
Faith to appropriate Christ to our selves, to be mine and thy Savior; because
this general faith will suffice (say they) and Christ required no more than to
acknowledge he was the Savior sent of God into the world to heal sinners; but
this does not exclude justifying, special faith. Only the great reason, why
they were required to make a confession of that dogmatical truth, viz. that he
was the Messiah, was, because that was the thing so greatly controverted at
that time; if that were believed, all the rest would be quickly assented unto.
So that this is the introductory work, with this we are to begin, That the
Jesus crucified at Jerusalem is the Messiah promised; and that it is in vain to
look for any other, seeing that all the characters of a Messiah, given by the
Prophets, do so exactly andually meet in him. And as for that great Objection,
that the Jews have, The temporal glorious things attributed to the Messiah,
were not accomplished in Christ. The weight of which seems so heavy, that
some expect a second coming of Christ, when he will personally reign in a
glorious manner upon the earth, and then those promises will be fulfilled. But
the most proper and solid Answer is, That as the Old Testament does describe
Gospel Worship under the Names and Titles of the Levitical service; so it does
also declare spiritual and Gospel-priviledges, under the names of earthly
greatness. Neither is this any wonder, seeing even the New Testament
describes the joy and glory of Heaven, by that which is glorious and pleasing
to our senses.

Secondly, Christ is to be preached as God and man, for so both his Natures 2.
When preached as God-man.
are here mentioned. Wonderful has been the violence of the Devil, in raising
up cursed Heretics, who have with all their might endeavored to dis-robe him
of either of his Natures. Some, and they quickly filled the whole world, denied
the Divine Nature of Christ; others, though not so numerous, they denied his
Humane Nature. Which opinions, though so abominable, and very destructive of
the Fundamentals, yet found many gates and doors set open for their
entertainment. But if he be not preached as God-man, as Emanuel, as the Word
made flesh, then also our faith and consolation is wholly destroyed. In the
union of these two Natures is founded that aptness and fitness which is in
him to be our Mediator: No mere creature could be a Mediator, no not the
highest and sublimest Angel. He must be man, because man had sinned, because
the curse of death must be removed by death. And he must be God also, else he
could not satisfy Justice, nor remove the curse of the Law. It is true, God
and man united together in one Person, is a wonder of wonders, there is not the
like, nor an example thereof in all the world. Divines do bring many instances
to illustrate it, but none are perfect: And indeed if there were the like, then
it would not be singular. Now though Christ be thus often preached amongst us,
How great is the ignorance of many people in this particular? Ask them, What
was Christ? They will say, a Savior, or some such thing; but to give any
understanding account about his Godhead and Manhood, therein they fail
exceedingly. How can thou be saved that know not what Christ was? Though
it has been a thousand times preached in thy ears, That Christ is God from
all eternity, and that in time he became man, to die for our sins, yet thou
remainest as ignorant, as if thou had lived amongst Pagans, where the Name of
Christ is not heard. But let the true believer be daily exercising himself upon
this mystery of Godliness, which the Apostle in a most compendious manner does
describe, 1 Timothy 3. 16. God was manifest in the flesh, etc. Neither is this
speculatively to be believed, but it is to advance godliness; and therefore
called the mystery of godliness. For what holiness, what love, what
thankfulness, what reformation should this make, in that God is made man? Cur
Deus fit homo, si non corrigitur home?
Therefore the Socinian, that denies the Godhead of Christ, takes away that
great incentive to godliness, which the Scripture urges from Gods
manifestation in the flesh.

Thirdly, Christ is to be preached in his Person and Offices, as well as his 3.
When preached in his person and his offices.
Nature. That he is one Person, not two Persons, though he has two Natures:
And herein also faith does transcend reason; here is a particular above the
reach of the most intellectual capacity: How there can be an individual, humane
Nature, and yet not have a personal subsistency complete of it self, which yet
it has not in Christ; for then Christ would be two Persons, one as God, and
another as man, which is absurd to think. It is well called Christian Faith,
because in this the understanding of a man must only acquiesce upon the
testimony of the Scripture. Therefore when the Scripture says, Christ was made
like us in all things, sin only excepted; we may also add the manner of his
humane subsistency, which is not as in other men: but his Office that is to be
celebrated with great joy. How were the Angels affected with this, though they
did not immediately reap the benefit by his death? Now this Office of Christ
is made by Divines threefold, a Priest, a Prophet, and a King; the sum of it
consists in being a Savior and a Redeemer from all our sins, both in respect
of the guilt of them, as also the power of them. It is woe with the Church,
when Christ is not thus preached the alone Savior, the alone Mediator. Now
how abominably derogatory the Popish preaching in many ages has been to Christ
herein, the world knows: Insomuch that St Francis, or St Dominick, or the
Virgin Mary, or some other Saint, these were preached more than Christ.
Insomuch that we may say, Till God raised up our Reformers, there was no
preaching of Christ: Images, Saints, Pilgrimages, and works of
Supererogations, these were made the whole of Christianity. It is true, they
would sometimes mention Christ, but then they make him but a semi-Saviour; they
make others to join in this work. And although they run to many plausible
distinctions; yea would persuade us, that they more honor Christ, then we do;
yet all the water of their Tyber, cannot cleanse them herein. It was then
blessed mercy, when the Sunshine of the Gospel began to arise; so that
Christ was exalted in his Glory and his Offices; that now there was no more
robbery, making others equal to him. Yea the bold blaspheming picture, was not
ashamed of this Inscription, That the way to Heaven by St Francis, was easier
than by Christ. The Papists then do not preach Christ. And as for the Socinian,
he surpasses the Papist, and deferveth not to be reckoned amongst Christians.
For although they hold him to be a constituted God; and some of them say, That
religious adoration is due to him: yet they say, This is merely from Gods
appointment. Hence as they dis-robe him of his Deity, so they deny him to be a
Savior and Redeemer, by way of satisfaction and atonement to the justice of
God, and therefore make him but as an eminent Prophet and Martyr, but having no
essential Godhead, nor procuring by his death any atonement for our sins to
the vindicative justice of God. What cause then have we to rejoice under the
full and exact preaching of Christ, where Christ in his Natures, in his Offices
is so magnified, that he alone is to be our Mediator? In his obedience alone,
in his death alone we put all our confidence. For if Christ be not known as the
way, truth and life: If the Natures and Offices of Christ be not understood,
all the way of consolation, of justification, of remission of sin, is wholly
mistaken. Because Christ is not known in his Mediatory Office, therefore men
either run into despair and tormenting fears on one side, or else into
instituted ways of superstition and supererrogation; to the works of the Law;
and to merits, which has been the poisonous Doctrine in Gods Church for many
years together, this was the wormwood that was in all their water. The Popish
Casuists did give consciences troubled for sin, nothing but gall to drink;
and in stead of healing did provoke and irritate the wound far more. 5. When
he is set up as the head of his Church.


Fifthly, Christ is preached, when he is set up as the King and Lord of his
Church, to whose Laws and commands we are wholly to submit, else we shall
hereafter find him to be the great Judge of the world, who will judge it in
righteousness. People are deceived, when they think Christ must be preached
only as a mere absolute Savior, that though they live in profaneness and
dissoluteness, yet they are to trust in him as a Savior. Whosoever preaches
Christ thus, he preaches another Christ than what is revealed in the Word.
Therefore the Doctrines of Antinomians and Libertines, who turn the grace of
God into wantonness, are to be abhorred with all abomination; though there may
be a sinful setting up of righteousness, and our good works against Christ
and his grace; so there may be also a licentious conjoyning Christ and
wickedness. We must therefore distinguish of what persons we have to do with.
For, as Luther observed well to this effect, (Comment. in Gen.) The
Antinomians, who cry down holiness and mortification, they maintain themselves
by my words and doctrine which I have preached; but they must remember, that
when we came out of Popery, we found the whole world in pharisaical admiration
of superstitious works, as if by them they should be justified and saved,
which made us so advance Christ. But under this pretense to cry down the
preaching of the Law, to give way to all licentiousness; as if a Publican
living in his sins might be saved by Christ, though not a Pharisee: This is
to separate one Scripture from another.

But you will say, If we are only to preach Christ, then we must not preach
the Law, we must not preach about regeneration, and the differencing characters
between a temporary believer, and a true one: we must not then preach
repentance, holy duties, nor the day of Judgment.

To this it is answered, That the right preaching of all these, is to preach
Christ. Therefore the Law is preached, hell and damnation are preached, that so
Christ may be the more welcome, that so the grace of the Gospel may be the more
conspicuous. Even as it is with the Physician, it is health that he aims at,
even while he makes sick, while he puts to pain, and seems to take the
ready way to destroy and kill. The Husbandman, while he ploweth and harroweth
the ground, it is the crop he looks at in all this: So it is with the
Ministers of God, while they convince, threaten, terrify; while they inform,
direct; all is to bring you nearer to Christ; These are the Ladders to stand
upon, while Christ is built in you.

SERMON. CXX.
Our Lord Christ is the Son of GOD.

2 COR. 1. 19. For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, etc.
WE heard what was the Subject matter of Paul's Preaching, even the Lord
Christ, who is described from his Natures, and Office.

The first is, His Divine Nature, in the former words, The Son of God. What is
necessary for the Explication of this, shall be brought in the Amplification of
the Doctrine; which is,

That The Lord Christ is the Son of God.

This is the greatest and most glorious Attribute that can be given to him. It
The Lord Christ is the son of God.
is for this that all adoration and divine worship is due to him. It is for
this that we are commanded to put our trust and confidence in him. Had he not
been truly God, he could not have been our Mediator, nor purchased our
Salvation for us. No mere, pure creature, Man or Angel, could accomplish this
work, but he that is our Savior must be Immanuel, God with us. I shall not
enlarge my self, concerning the dignity of this Subject, but briefly dispatch
all I shall say at this time. And,

First, When we say, He is the Son of God; the meaning is, so that he is truly
and properly of the same Nature with God. It is not to be understood
diminitively, 1. He is truly God.
as if he were not the most High God, and Jehovah; but distinctively, in
respect of the Father, he is the Son of the Father; so that, he has the true
nature with God, though not the same personal propriety with the Father. As
then he is called the Son of man, because he has the same nature of a man, so
also the Son of God, because he has the true nature of God; and therefore,
Romans 9. called God, blessed for evermore. And indeed, he that has the Titles
of Jehovah, the Properties of Jevovah, that does those works only which Jehovah
can do, he must needs be so the Son of God; that also he is God himself. And
had not Christ been truly God, it be hoved him to have denied it, when it was
attributed to him. But, Phil. 2. He thought it no robbery to be equal with God.
Such was Christ's Humility, such was his love to his Fathers glory; such was his
care to instruct his Disciples in that which was necessary to Salvation, that
above all things he would have forewarned them, not to have taken him for the
true High God, if he had not been so. How solicitous was John Baptist, that he
might not be thought the Christ? How passionately affected were Paul and
Barnabas, when the Heathens called them Gods, and would have attributed divine
worship to him? Would not Christ have much more disclaimed these things, had it
not been his due belonging to him? That he should be acknowledged the true God,
equal with the Father. For, though indeed, at sometimes he says, The Father is
greater than I, and he makes himself as sent from God, to do his will; yet,
then he speaks that in respect of his Office, as Mediator; and so he is the
Servant of God, appointed to do his will, in reference to the Salvation of
Mankind.

2. Hence, he is not the son of God in those Respects, which others are called
so 2. He is not the son of God as others are called his sons: as 1. By
Creation. 2. By Regeneration. 3. Because of their dignity.
in the Scripture: as First, Some are called The sons of God in respect of
creation: because they had their being immediately from God. Thus Adam is
called the Son of God. 2. Some are called the sons of God, because of
Regeneration, and Adoption, as all the godly are: neither is thus Christ called
the son of God. Lastly, some are called the sons of God, because of their
excellent Dignity and Privilege; in which sense the Angels are called the sons
of God. But Christ is called in such a sense the Son of God, that it cannot be
attributed to any but him; and therefore, sometimes is called the Only son of
God; some imes the Only begotten son of God. And therefore none else may be
called the Son of God in that respect he is.

3. He is therefore called the son of God, because begotten from Eternity of
the 3. He is therefore called the Son of God, because begotten from eternity of
the Father.
Father. He is not called a Son in a metaphorical, but proper sense, and that
by Generation; Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Psalm. 27. which,
though applied in the New Testament, Act. 13. 33. to Christ's Resurrection, when
God raised him from the Grave, yet that is to be understood in respect of
Manifestation and Declaration only: then he was powerfully manifested to be
indeed the only begotten Son of God. That this begetting of him was from
Eternity appears, Mich. 5. 2. Whose goings forth have been from of old, from
everlasting. He is not then called the Son of God in the several senses the
Socinians Assign; as, because inaugrated to be a Prophet of his Church, nor
because of that miraculous Conception and Nativity: nor, because, upon his
Resurrection he was invested with Lordly Dignity and Dominion, but because he
was from all Eternity begotten of the Father. As for that Passage in Luke 1. 3.
where the Angel speaking of the overshadowing by the Holy Ghost, adds,
Therefore also, that holy thing, which shall be born of thee, shall be called
the Son of God: which has prevailed with some, though Orthodox, so far, as to
make that miraculous birth a ground of his Sonship to God. The best answer is,
That it is an Argument from the sign, not from the cause; because he had such
a miraculous conception, this did declare, that he was the Son of God. This
must needs be so, because he was called the Son of Man from that birth: now he
could not be called the son of man, and the Son of God, from the same
fundamental respect. It is necessary then to inform your selves in this
fundamental Article, that Christ is the Son of God; and in what sense he is so.
For the Socinians acknowledge him a God, but an appointed one; a made and
constituted one. Therefore Smal^ius the Socinian inscribeth his Book, de
Divinitate Jesu Christi, not Deitate; he confesses the Divinity of Christ, but
not the Deity. Now they were called Divi amongst the Heathens, who were made
Gods after their death.

4. When he is called the Son of God, and that properly, this does necessarily
4. He was begotten of the Father.
imply, that he was begotten of the Father. And in this Consideration the
humane thoughts of men would be much scandalized, if they did not submit to
Scripture. How many Heretics blasphemously have derided at this, because we
say, God had a Son, and that he is begotten of the Father? But we must know,
there is a threefold Generation. First, Physical, of man begetting a man, and
this is accomplished with manifold Imperfections. 2. Metaphorical, in which
sense Philosophers do often speak of the Conceptus mentis, that the mind does
degignere verbum; which instance some learned Divines delight to use in the
Illustration of this Mysterious point. 3. There is an hyperphysical or
supernatural Generation, above the way and course of nature; and in this sense
the father is said to beget the son: so that, we are to remove all those
Imperfections, which adhere to humane Generation, especially that of Separation
and Multiplication. For amongst men, when the Father begets the Son, there is a
multiplication of a new Essence; and then a Division or Separation of the Sons
Essence from the Father; so that, although the Son has the same specifical
Essence with the Father, yet not the same numerical Essence: whereas in this
supernatural Mystery, there is no division, or distinction of the Essence, but
of the Person.

5. Because these Mysteries seem very difficult to flesh and blood, therefore
under 5. In these Mysteries we must adhere wholly to the testimony of the word.
all temptations we must adhere immoveably to the Word of God, believing the
testimony thereof, and not attend to what humane Arguments suggest. Thou must
no more regard the Socinian Cavils, than Hezekiah was to do the railing
Language of Rabshaketh; and we are the more solemnly engaged hereunto, by our
Baptism; for that is a Dedication of us to the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. Though there is a Distinction in Order; first the Father, then the
Son; yet none in Dignity, and therefore, its the name, not the names. That
place also of John, howsoever Socinians would wrest it, stands like Mount Zion,
yea firmer than that, 1 John 5. 7. There are three that bear record in heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. When a man
takes off his heart from the Scripture, and begins to think, How can the
Infinite Majesty of God have a Son, how can he have the same Essence, and yet
be a distinct Person, whether did he beget this Son naturally or freely,
whether from Eternity or in time; and if he might beget one Son, why not more?
while (I say) thy Imperfect low Soul is arguing after this matter, fly from
these temptations of Reason, as Joseph from his Mistress; captivate thy
understanding to Scripture-testimony, hide thy head in this cloud, as it were,
and put off thy discussion of it, till thou come to that perfect Academy in
heaven, where we shall no longer know in part, but completely and perfectly.
Hence those Heretics, who deny Christ's his Godhead, that they may the more
securely indulge themelves in these Blasphemous Doctrines, make Reason the Judge
of all Controversies in Faith, The Scripture must be submitted to reason, not
Reason to Scripture. This Reason is made the standard to weigh all things by.
But Bernard said well, quid tum contra rationem, etc. What is so much against
Reason, as to think to comprehend by reason the things above reason? Such
Pigmeis cannot measure the Pyramides. Yet this is not spoken as if that it were
against true and solid Reason, that the Infinite God should have a Son: it is
one thing, to be above Reason, another thing to be contrary to it. Now the
cause of all that unhappy miscarriage in this matter is, because we are apt to
judge of God, according to our thoughts of a man. When we hear of the Father,
and his only begotten Son, we are apt to think it must be so in the Divine
nature, as it is with the humane: we apprehend all alike. But thou must know,
as the nature of God is incomprehensible, so is this begetting of his Son. Thou
that art not able to comprehend the nature of God, how can thou reach to the
manner of the Begetting of his Son? Let us therefore satisfy our souls with
the belief that it is so, not daring curiously to search into the manner how,
lest like moaths flying about this light, we be at last consumed by it.

6. That we may the more firmly believe this truth of Christ's being the Son of
6. He is Antichrist that denies the Son to be God.
God, we are to remember, that the Scripture makes this Antichristianism; So
that, he is an Antichrist, that denies the Son to be God, 1 John 2. 22, 23. He
is Antichrist that shall deny the father, and the son. Whosoever denies the
Son, the same has not the father. Here we see, that these are inseparable, the
Son and the Father; he that denies the one, must necessarily deny the other;
for they are essential Relatives, depending upon one another. The Jews, the
Turks, they hold one God; but because they deny Christ to be the Son of God,
they deny the Father. It is not enough to acknowledge one true God, but we must
also acknowledge him to be the Father of Christ, and Christ to be his Son:
without this there is no Eternal life to be had, as 1 John 5. 20. We are in him
that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ; This is the true God, this is
Eternallife. The Socinians also differ but gradually in their impiety from the
Turks, and therefore, no wonder if some of them have fallen into Mahumetisme;
for they make Christ to be a mere man, though a constituted Lord and God; and
therefore they deny the Father and the Son: and although they pretend it is
their conscience, that out of reverence and regard to the honor of God the
Father, they dare not affirm the Son to be equal God with him, yet it is plain,
that there is no jealousy between Father and Son in point of honor; but the
Father commands us to honor the Son, and the Son also to honor the Father.
For, how clear is that? John 5. 23. That all men should honor the Son, even as
they honor the Father. He that honors not the Son, honors not the
Father. And therefore all those Blasphemous Doctrines, which tend to the
Dishonor of Christ, as the Son of God, do also tend to the dishonor of God
the Father. So that, it is no wonder if he be made an Antichrist, that does so.
For their is a political Antichrist, who opposes Christ in his Offices, and
while pretending to Christ, does oppose Christ: such is the Pope of Rome: and a
Doctrinal Antichrist: and they are those who deny Christ, either to be God or
man. When therefore you hear how much this pestilential Doctrine of Socinianism
prevails, that men dare boldly plead against the Godhead of Christ, tremble
at it, humble thy self under the want of love to the truths of God; take heed
of pride, self-conceit, contempt of the faithful Guides God has set over
thee; for those sins do hurry men headlong into everlasting Perdition: those
spiritual Judgments of God upon men's parts, and intellectual abilities are the
most dreadful of all.

7. The spirit of giddiness and contradiction is justly fallen upon those, who
have 7. The spirit of giddiness has justly fallen upon these that deny Christ
to be God.
denied this essential Deity of Christ; insomuch that one party will not
acknowledge the other Christian. For some of them hold, that because Christ is
not truly God, therefore he is not to be praid unto; neither does Religious
Adoration belong to him. The other, they affirm, because he is an appointed
Lord over the whole world; and so, though not a God by nature, yet by Office:
and seeing that the Father has given him the Dominion of the world; therefore
Prayer, and all Divine Worship is to be attributed unto him. Volkelius the
Socinian handling this Question, de ver a Relig. lib. 4. c. 11. Whether it be
lawful to pray to Christ, declares his mind, in two Assertions. 1. That we
may lawfully pray unto Christ always. And 2. That we are not always bound to
it: yet adds, that we might deservedly be thought not worthy of the Christian
Name, if we should refuse to call upon him. But all this is mere impiety; for
it is impossible to call upon God the Father, and not also to call upon Christ:
and when one Person is prayed unto, the other is not neglected, but included.
And therefore, how those Socinians by their Principles can maintain the
Religious Adoration of Christ, against Franciscus David, let them look to it.

Let us proceed to make Use of this. Is Christ the Son of God? Then with the
Scripture let us admire that Love and condescension of the Father, who sent his
only Son to become a most ignominious and accursed man for our sakes. The
Mystery of the Doctrine, and the Mystery of his love are both incomprehensible:
the one is above our understanding, the other above our affections. What may
not God exspect from us, who has done so much to us? God made man, God made
weak, miserable, and crucified man, to redeem us from our sins. What strong
Obligations does this lay upon us, to make us for ever to abhor all sin? All
the Arguments of moral Philosophers against sin, are but like a wooden dagger
to this Goliahs Sword. Here is fire enough to melt the toughest iron. Was God
made man to remove sin, and shall thou yield thy self up to it? What remedy
will prevail if this do not?

SERMON. CXXI.
Christ is Jesus, a Savior to his people.

2 COR. 1. 19. For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, etc.
WE have in a brief manner declared the former description of Christ, in
respect of his divine nature, The Son of God; whose Deity, so much oppugned by
blasphemous Heretics, is yet the Foundation of our Christianity. Therefore,
those Socinians, who would reckon the manner how he is God, among the
Accessories, and not Fundamentals in Religion, are justly to be exploded. If we
believe he is God (say they) it is enough to salvation: but, whether he be an
essential God, or made and constituted one, that is not necessary. Even as
(they instance profanely concerning Alexander) to some he was accounted a God,
to others a man: but because both these, though different in their Opinions,
did reverence and obey him, as a King, that was enough. But, oh profane mouth!
The Lord rebuke such spirits, and let not the Godly so much as bid God speed,
or receive into their houses such as bring this blasphemous Doctrine. But let
us proceed to the other descriptions of Christ, which are partly in respect of
his Humane Nature, Jesus; and partly, in respect of his Office, Christ. We have
already said enough from the first Verse, to clear the Grammatical
Interpretation of these words; as also, what the judgments of Learned men are
about those two Names: So that I may not actum agere, I shall insist upon New
matter, not then delivered, and first we Observe.

That the Lord Christ is a Jesus, and a Savior to his people. Christ is a
Savior to his people.


This Name contains the glad Tidings of the Gospel. If so be the news of a
Physician, that can cure all Diseases be so welcome to diseased Persons: if the
year of Jubilee was so acceptable to all those whose Lands were morgaged
amongst the Jews, and they perplexed in extreme Debts: how precious and dear
should the name of a Savior be to poor undone sinners, who while they look
upon themselves only, and their own power, see no way to escape Eternal wrath?
Did the Angels so much rejoice, when this Jesus came into the World, who were
not concerned so much in his Redemption? and shall distressed and sinful man
not have his heart leap within him, for joy hereat? That we may be affected
What is employed in Christ's being a Savior. 1. That all mankind was lost.
herein, let us consider, what is employed in this Title, He is a Savior. 2. Of
whom he is a Savior.

First, In that Christ is thus called a Savior, their is necessarily employed,
that all mankind are lost, that we are all in an undone and hopeless
condition. Thus our Savior, Mat, 18. 11. For the son of man is come to save
that which is lost. What blessed words of comfort are here! He is come to save;
it is of his own accord, of his own good will he comes; there is no necessity,
he might have chosen whether he would or no; but, of his own mere will, he is
come: and then he is come to save: that implies, this is the work, he had no
other thing to do: if man had not been lost, he had not come into the world. If
then it be Christ's proper work and Office to save, shall we think, he will be
frustrated therein? and then it is to save, in that it comprehended all things.
He came to convert, to sanctify, to justify, to glorify; for Salvation
includes all these. Hence the Scripture speaks of the Godly, as saved
already, though but in the way, 2 Timothy 1. 9. who has saved us, and called us.

Lastly, He came to save that, which was lost, actually lost, not in danger to
be lost, not in probability to be lost; but lost; and then lost; that does
imply our hopeless estate. Its grace must find us out, its Christ that must
seek us out; as the good Shepherd did his wandering sheep. So that we see in
what condition every man is, though never so great, wise, and learned, till he
has an Interest in Christ; though a Great man, a lost man; though a Rich man,
yet a lost man, and that to all Eternity, for ever lost, till this Savior does
recover. What then have thou to do, but to sit down, and bewail thy loss? to
aggravate thy loss? Oh wretched and undone man, I have lost God, I have lost
his image, I have lost Eternal glory. Is it not a reproach to thee, to see how
thy heart can mourn, and mert, for outward losses? I have lost my dear
Relations, I have lost all I am worth; and to have it like a stone and a rock,
in this particular? It is one thing to be lost, and another thing to be
sensible of this. All men by nature are lost, though they do not feel it,
though they rejoice, and are carnally jolly: but then, some few only, whose
hearts God does soften by his Grace, they feel, and groan under this lost
estate.

2. We are to consider, what kind of Savior he his, and what kind of
Salvation 2. What kind of Savior is Christ? Even a spiritual one.
it is: And now that is plain, he is not a temporal Savior, but a spiritual
one. so the Angel interprets it, for he shall save his people from their
sins, Mat. 17. 21. In the Old Testament we read, that God did raise up his
people many temporal Saviors. Thus Moses was a Savior, Joshua, who has the
same name with Jesus, he was a Savior: and the Apostle to the Hebrews makes
Joshua the son of Nun, delivering the Israelites from their dangers and
enemies, so that at last, he brings them into the Land of Rest; to be a Type
of Christ, our spiritual Savior, who delivers us from all our spiritual
enemies, sin, and Satan, not leaving us, till he has made us sit on Thrones of
Glory. Now this carnal Opinion, that Christ would come as a temporal Savior,
did almost infect the whole Nation of the Jews; yea the Disciples were leavened
with this sower leaven. And because some places of Scripture did plainly speak
of the lowliness and afflictions of the Messiah, and other of his glory and
greatness, therefore some Jews fancyed two Messiahs, one humble, lowly, and
poor, the other magnificent and glorious. And certainly, if Christ had come as
a temporal Messiah, to vindicate his people from all external bondage, and to
bestow on them outward pomp, and greatness, this world would have suited with
flesh and blood; but it is a spiritual Salvation he brings; and though
natural men do not think so, yet this is the greatest Salvation, this alone
deserves to be called Salvation: To be saved from thy sins, to be saved from
hell, to be saved from damnation. This is that which alone makes happy. The
Romans they sacrificed to Jupiter, as their Savior, and that was only for
temporal Deliverances. But with what praise and joy are we to acknowledge Christ
our Savior, who does thus vanquish our most potent and spiritual enemies? But
no hearer can relish this truth, unless he be spiritual; he must be like the
man of Jericho, wounded not in body, but in soul, crying out, I am not a dead
man, but a damned man, that desires this oil to be poured into his wounds.

3. As it is a spiritual Salvation, so it is an efficacious, full salvation.
Hence 3. He is an effectual Savior.
he is called (...) and (...), in the abstract Salvation it self: and we have
an excellent Expression, He is able to save those to the uttermost, that come
unto him, Heb. 7. 25. He is not an half savior, he does not save in part. It
is true, this salvation is not in one instant perfected, it is done by degrees;
the Lord does not perfectly save us from the spot and blemish of our sins.
There is the guilt of sin, the power of sin, the filth of sin. Now, even in
this life, Christ does save us perfectly from the guilt of sin; so that, Romans
8. 1. There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus: as also from
the power of sin he delivers us so, that Sin shall not have dominion over us,
because we are under grace: only for the presence of sin, and the lusts
thereof, exciting and tempting; these are left as the Jebusites in the land.
Christ could perfect his Salvation in one instant, but for wise ends, he does
it by degrees. With him it is easy to save, there is no difficulty in it.
Indeed this salvation is purchased upon hard terms; he was willing to be in
those Agonies, and conflicts, he was willing to die that ignominous death, that
we might be saved, so that, he himself seemed to be lost a while, that he might
save us; otherwise, by his death he has obtained a plentiful Salvation. There
are no sins too many, or too great, from which he cannot save. It is true, we
meet with an expression, 1 Pet. 4. 18. That the righteous are scarcely saved;
which some indeed apply to a temporal deliverance, that they do hardly escape
outward afflictions; for the Apostle had formerly spoken that Judgment must
begin at the house of God. But if we apply it to the spiritual Salvation of a
godly man, then it is true, even a godly man is scarcely saved. Not, that there
is want, or any defect in Christ; not that his blood can difficulty do it, but,
because the way to Salvation is so straight a way, so contrary to flesh and
blood, and the Oppositions are so many, to retard, and divert, that therefore
he is hardly saved. Were it not for the preserving Grace of God keeping of us,
when we do not keep our selves, it is impossible, that the most holy man should
be saved. Yet, if we consider Christ himself, the Savior, the godly soul may
take so much encouragement from his Fullness; and see more in him to save, then
can be with his sins, (yea, if all the sins of the world were likewise upon
his score,) to condemn and destroy him.

In the next place, let us consider, Who they are, to whom he is a savior.
For, Who is Christ a Savior to?
though he be a savior, yet it is not of all men; the greater part, not only
of mankind in the general, but of such as are within the Church, will be
damned. Therefore the Apostle distinguishes mankind into two sorts of
persons, 2 Cor. 3. 15. the (...), and the (...): such as are to be saved, and
such as are to perish. not that this does redound to the blame of any Decrees
of God, about the salvation of some men only, or to the particularity of
Christ's death; as if some had a desire, and would have been saved, but Christ
would not save them; but because, in the men to perish, their own sins do
indispose them for salvation, and they do wilfully and obstinately thrust it
away far from them. And then the (...), they are such, who by the mere grace of
God are saved from Hell, that would have been damned as well as others; only
the Grace of God did from the first to the last preserve them for this
Blessedness. In this sense it is, Act. 2. 47. The Lord added to the Church such
as should be saved. Not that this word denotes a present Disposition, where by
a man does escape the sins of the world, (though all that are saved shall do
that,) but the merciful Grace of God pulling them out, as he did Lot from
Sodom; (for there its said) When he lingered, the Lord being merciful to him.
So it is here, we are unwilling to come out of this Sodom, unwilling to be
delivered from our lusts; and so are unwilling to be saved. But God being
merciful to us, by his omnipotent power he changes our hearts, and makes us,
of refractory and unwilling, ready and obedient. Well then, who are these saved
ones? A great Question, and necessary. For would it not be more than all the
world, to find thy self one in the number of these saved ones, when thousands,
and thousands shall perish in everlasting flames.

I shall not enlarge in this, but give some brief Descriptions of them.

First, It Is some of mankind that he comes to save: not any of the Apostate
1. Some of mankind.
Angels; which does infinitely commend the love of this Savior to lost man.
The Apostle takes notice of this aggravation, Heb. 2. 16. For verily he took
not upon him the nature of Angels. Who would not have thought, Christ would
come rather to save lost Angels, than lost men? Angels are of more noble and
excellent natures than men. Angels, if saved, would have done God more service,
and brought him more glory than men. We see, if a learned, if a great man in
place and power, be converted, how much he may do for God beyond an inferior
man: and then, much more would a saved Angel have done, than the most able men.
Yet such was the love of God, that his only Son must come from his bosom, to
save lost man.

But Secondly, It is not all lost men that he comes to save, but the humbled
sinner; the repenting and believing sinner. He must be a sinner, for if he were
not 2. The repenting, believing sinner.
so, he needed not a Savior; hence he says, Matthew. 9. 13. He came not to call
the righteous, but sinners to Repentance: that is, either such as thought
themselves righteous, that were presumptuously confident thereof; or else, (as
others) those that are indeed righteous, if any such could be, Christ came not
to them. Hence this consideration of being a sinner is not to discourage thee
is not to keep thee off from a savior; for if thou were not a sinner thou
did not need a Savior: Who should come to a savior but a sinner? to the
Physician but the sick? Hence Paul comforted himself under this, when he had
been such a Persecutor, and Blasphemer, that Christ came to save sinners,
whereof he was chief, 1 Timothy 1. 15. But I add, it must be the humbled sinner,
the wounded sinner, that feels himself perishing; as the Disciples in the
waters, feeling themselves ready to sink, cried out, Master, save us, we
perish, Matthew. 8. 25. So it must be such a brokenhearted sinner, that feels
himself dropping into Hell, falling into those eternal flames, and therefore
cries out, O Lord Christ save me, else I perish. We may read, Mat. 11. 28. who
they are that have the Scepter of Grace held out toward them, and are invited
to come into his presence, even such as labor, and are heavy laden, that have
no rest in their souls as yet, because of sin; neither their bids, nor their
houses, neither their gardens, nor their wealth can give them any rest.

Hence, in the third place, They are such as are saved already from the evil 3.
They are saved from (...), and the world.
and wicked ways of the world. There is a twofold salvation; the one, from
Hell and damnation: and many look only upon this as salvation. But then, there
is a salvation from the evil customs, and wicked ways of the world: and he
that has not this salvation will never have the latter. Therefore Act. 2. 37.
when Peter's hearers were pricked in their heart, (that is a preparatory way to
conversion) they asked, Men and brethren what shall we do? They would gladly be
saved from the guilt of these sins. Then observe, what counsel the Apostle
gives, yea, he did it with much exhorting and testifying, v. 40. save your
selves, or be ye saved from this untoward generation: that is, Be not in the
number of those that do resist Christ; that will not believe his Doctrine, and
miracles, but escape from them: they are in a dangerous estate. Therefore if
thou would be saved hereafter, see, Art thou saved already? art thou
delivered from the number of those wicked and ungodly men who will not obey
Christ? How greatly would a man roaring in Hell be affected with such mercy, as
to be delivered from those torments? But, it is no less to be saved from those
ungodly ways, thou did once live in: to be saved from the wicked companions,
and the inticements of lusts, that once thou wast entangled in.

Fourthly, They who are to be saved are Christ's people and none else. Such as
take him for a Lord, as well as a savior. Every wicked wretch loves to hear,
that 4. Christ's people.
Christ is a savior: but then, if thou inquire to whom, this will mar all
thy hopes; He will save his people from their sins, Mat. 1. 21. his people,
that is, such as do accept of him, and receive him, as their Lord and Master;
who do cordially submit to his Laws, and Ordinances. So that, these two words,
Christ's people do shut out a very great part of of the world from this
Salvation; they have neither part or lot herein. Is the praphane man one of
Christ's people? no, he is one of his enemies, one of his adversaries; he says,
We will not have Christ reign over us.

Fifthly, They that are saved are very few, comparatively, to those that are 5.
The saved are but few in comparison of the damned.
damned. Christ, though he be a sufficient savior, to save the whole world,
yet he is an actual efficacious savior but to few only: therefore, they are
called a little flock. Hence when one put that Question to our Savior, Whether
there would but few be saved, Luke 13. 23. Though our Savior did not directly
answer him, as proceeding from curiosity, yet he did implicitly resolve it,
when he bid that man strive to enter in at the straight gate, for many will
seek to enter in, and shall not be able. There will be a time, when a savior
will be in request, though for the present we seek after other saviors. But
alas, Will thy riches save thee? will thy wealth save thee at that day? If
Christ then be a Savior, and salvation is the great end of thy soul, to
prepare for that ought to be thy greatest care and delight. Better never have
been born, then not to be saved hereafter. Oh remember, now is the acceptable
time of thy salvation, now Christ proffereth to be a Savior. In his first
coming his profession is, that he came not to judge, but to save the world, John
12. 47. But at his last coming, he will then appear, not to save, but to juge
the world. Oh then that men should be so besotted, and bewitched, as to neglect
this salvation offered! Oh what terror will it be, to hear millions of persons
adjudged for their sins to eternal destruction! then in horror to cry out, Oh
Christ save us, Lord save us, but it will be too late.

The Second Doctrine I shall but only name; which is,

That the Lord Jesus is Christ; that is, the Messiah, the anointed one, he is
Jesus is the Christ, the anointed of God.
a Christ, that he may be a Jesus.

Now Christ is no more then Anointed: and because in the Old Testament Kings,
and Priests, and sometimes Prophets were anointed to that Office, and thereby
were made sacred, and inviolable; Touch not my anointed, and do my Prophets no
harm: hence in allusion Christ is said to be anointed, not indeed with material
oil, but with the holy Ghost; which is called the oil of gladness, Psalm. 45. 7.
And from hence we have our names, Christians, as much as anointed ones; A
glorions title implying our participation of Gods Spirit, and his Graces. Hence
the Apostle 1 John 2. 20. But ye have an unction from the Holy One. and at the
21th verse in this Chapter, God is said, to have anointed us. I shall therefore
put off this excellent point of our anointing by Christ, till we arrive at that
Text.

SERMON. CXXII.
Of Assistants required in the Ministry: false Charges laid against it; and the
happy Agreement of it.

2 COR. 1. 19. Who was preached among you by us, even by me, and Sylvanus, and
Timotheus.
THe next Particular considerable is, The Ministerial and instrumental Cause of
the preaching of Christ: and there we have three named. The First and
principal is, Paul himself. The other two Colleagues and Associates are,
Sylvanus, and Timotheus. Calvin propounds the Question, Why Apollo was not
named as well as these? and he gives this Answer, That probably these only
were charged with the same Calumnies that Paul was, because they were his
Attendants, and Companions in his spiritual peregrinations: and therefore he
would defend their names as well as his own. Concerning Timotheus, which is
Timothy, we have spoken already from the first verse. Only concerning this
Sylvanus, there is some doubt; but the most learned do make him to be the same
with Sylas, mentioned often in the Acts of the Apostles, as a companion of
Paul: hence some would expound that Periphrastical expression, 2 Cor. 8. 18.
The brother whose praise is in the Gospel of Sylas, as not being applicable to
Luke. Sylas and Sylvanus are generally thought to be the same name, though some
would make them two names of one person: yea, some would make them two distinct
persons, which has no probability. The word comes from an Hebrew root, which
is to send, and so is the same with Apostolus, an Apostle, one that is sent. We
may read often of this man, as being eminent in the Gospel Ministry. Paul
inscribeth both his Epistles to the Thessalonians, with his name, as well as
his own, putting it also before Timotheus. He with Barsabas were chosen by the
Synodat Jerusalem, to distribute the Apostolical letters, having this
character, They were chief among the brethren; they were in great eminency and
esteem. We read also, when there was that (...), a sharp contention between
Barnabas and Paul, (we see the frailties of the best in this; for I cannot
approve of those that take the word in a good sense, because it is so used Heb.
10. 24.) that Paul chose Sylas to be his companion (and no wonder he names him
here) in this text; for he was a special coadjutor to Paul in the planting of
the Gospel at Corinth; for you may read, Act. 18. 5. how that, when Sylas and
Timotheus were come to him thither, being before sent for by him, it is said,
Paul was pressed in spirit, and testified unto the Jews, that Jesus was Christ.
Paul then took more courage, having these Companions, and was the more animated
to discharge his office: so that, it was not for modesty, as Chrysostom
hinteth, that Paul does assume him to this Colleagueship, but also, because
there was need of his help: the harvest being great at Corinth, there needed
many laborers: and withal he conjoyneth these himself, to show the harmony
and consent that was between him and the other Ministers in preaching of
Christ. So that from the conjoyning of these with Paul, there are three
Observations deduceable, which shall be briefly dispatched at this time. The
first is,

That whereas the Ministerial labor and work is great, there needs the more
assistance, and help from others.

Paul himself alone is not able to do all the work that this Church of Corinth
Where Ministerial labors are great, there needs the more help from others.
does require, and therefore he calls in other Laborers to assist him
therein. Hence our Savior directs us to pray unto God, that where there is
work for a Ministry, suitable Ministers may be sent thither, Matthew. 9. 37, 38.
The harvest truly is plenteous, and the laborers are few. He compares a
people prepared by grace for the Ministry, to the harvest: now, as it is a high
degree of laziness to be idle in harvest; thus it would be inexcusable in the
Ministers of God, if they should be loitering and sluggish, when the souls of
people are ready to receivd the good message of the Lord. Two things the
Scripture takes notice of in harvest; the joy of harvest, and the labor in
harvest; and both these are to be seen in a people fitted for Ministerial work,
for Instruction, for Reformation. There is infinite matter of joy to the
people, and to the Minister: whereas, to meet with a people that are like a
field of briars and thorns, as Ezekiel did, this is wholly discouraging. The
people may rejoice, because God gave them such a willing mind. How many
Congregations are there, that cannot be called an harvest-field, but a
wilderness, an heath, a dunghill? Now, it is the mere goodness of God, that
makes such a difference between Congregations: some are a stiff-necked,
obdurate, and profane people: others, a willing, attentive, and a ready
people. But God makes Congregations as well as persons, to differ one from
another. Then there is joy to a Minister; it is comfortable to be plowing and
sowing upon fruitful ground. What joy is there to plow and sow upon a rock?
The same it is to preach to a senseless and stupid people. As there is joy, so
there is labor; none must be a sluggard at that time: and truly the people
must labor, and the Minister must labor; and so both join together, for the
bringing of men to Heaven. Now, because it is such pity to see a field of corn
perish, because there cannot any workmen be had, to cut it down; how much more
is it to have a people damned for want of a faithful and diligent Minister?
Therefore says our Savior, Pray the Lord of the harvest that he would send
laborers into his harvest. It Is Gods harvest; it is his corn, and therefore we
may the more effectually prevail with him in prayer, for this matter. And you
see here what the title of the Ministers is, they are Laborers, and laborers
in harvest, which is the sorest. He says, The laborers are few: there were
many Priests and Scribes, but few Laborers. Hence, though the people lived
under their Ministry, who read and expounded the Law every day, yet, because it
was done so corruptly, our Savior had compassion on them, as sheep without a
shepherd. So that such as enter upon this work, must not dream of ease and
idleness. All the Names the Scripture gives them, denote hard work and
labor. It is matter of solicitude and care, more than honor and dignity. And
truly, What Minister is there, who reading the labors, zeal and diligence of
Paul in his Ministry, may not cry out, Oh me adwarf to such a Giant! If no
Minister should be saved, unless he be a Paul, what would become of most of
us? Again, they are called Laborers; therefore this confuteth the fancies of
common people, that think the Ministers does not labor at all, that he has
his Maintenance for his ease and idleness. As if there were no labor, but
what is bodily: the labor of the mind, of the heart is greater than that. The
Labor of a godly Magistrate, and of a godly Minister, is transcendent to all
other Labors. Indeed, Who is sufficient for these things? says Paul, 2 Cor.
2. 16. Men are sufficient for earthly employments: we cannot say, Who is able
to be a Tradesman, to be an Husbandman: but we must, Who is able to be a
Minister? So that is a monstrous inconsiderateness, though coming from pride
and covetousness, that the Pope would have all the Churches in the world to be
his charge, and Bishops but his Curates; yea some, Bishops, Metropolitans and
Diocesans, they plead to have all the Diocesses to be their charge, only not
assuming other Pastors, in partem sollicitudinis, as Cyprian did. Even as
Ignatius also in his Epistle ad Trallianos, calls Presbyters (...) to the
Bishops. But alas! if a man be not able to be a Pastor to one Congregation, how
can he be to many? If Paul would have Sylvanus and Timotheus to help in this
Church of Corinth, how much more does the Pope and such Metropolitans need
assistance? As for their distinction of inspection per se, vel per alium, that
will not be made good by the Scripture; which commands Pastors to have a
personal residency, and government over their own flock. Hence God has
appointed several Officers in the Church, and given various gifts, that all may
be employed for the good of the Church: whereas, though Paul was supposed only
faulty about his breach of promise, yet they charge Sylvanus and Timotheus with
the same inconstancy, thinking all were alike. In the second place we observe,

That where there is any one real or supposed fault in one Minister, people are
apt Where there is any fault in one Minister the people are apt to charge it
upon all.
to charge it upon all other Ministers, as if they were all alike.

It was for this that Paul does not only apologize for himself, but his
Associates also. But how unreasonable is this, grant that some were truly
blameworthy, must all be so? If in the Old Testament there were many false
prophets, that daubed with untempered mortar, that cried peace, peace to
sinners, when destruction was at hand; shall we therefore condemn the good
Prophets, who reproved even the greatest and most mighty for their sins?
Because Judas was a thief, and for filthy lucre sake betrayed Christ, shall we
condemn all the Apostles, making them to be no better? Must Sylvanus and
Timotheus be accused, Because they thought Paul was inconstant and light? yet
thus it falls out continually, and that from these Grounds,

First, The policy and enmity of false teachers, who like Haman think it a
small matter to destroy one Mordecai, unless they root out the whole race of
the Jews. The grounds of it. 1. The policy and enmity of false Teachers.
Thus the false Apostles concluded; Though Paul was disgraced and vilified, yet
if Sylvanus and Timotheus be in esteem and authority, our Kingdom will fall to
the ground. It is therefore the adversaries design to cast dung in the faces of
all the faithful Ministers of Christ, that so there might not one be left,
that should be useful in their place.

A second Ground is, From the injudiciousnesse and indiscretion of people; who
are credulous, and apt to believe all rumors and reports. How could it be,
that 2. The indiscretion of the people.
the Pharisees by their calumniating Christ as an Impostor, and a Blasphemer,
should prevail with the greater part of the people to be on their side? because
they were blind, and led by the blind, they would not make use of their own
judgment; they would not examine, and try, whether things were so, or no.

And then the third Ground is, From the natural enmity that is in all wicked
men to the Office of the Ministry, when faithfully discharged. That is a 3. The
natural enmity in man against the Ministry.
burden to them; they must needs say with Ahab to such faithful Michaiahs, We
hate him, because he always prophesies evil. Alas! godly Ministers cannot
give any comfort, cannot promise peace to such ungodly persons, therefore they
have hatred against them, and are glad to receive any false report concerning
them. Ministers are compared to Light, and to salt; now the Light must needs be
offensive to distempered eyes, and Salt to soars. Thus if the Ministry be
powerful to enlighten, to convince, to reprove, no ungodly man can endure
this. Therefore it is, that the office of the Ministry, when faithfully
managed, is so great a trouble to wicked men. They are thievs, therefore cannot
endure this light: they cry out with Ahab, have thou found me, O my enemy?
Every Sermon that is powerful is as bitter as gall and wormwood to them; and
therefore there being such an enmity and ill will against them, it is no
wonder, if they be quickly prejudiced, and will not believe there is a godly or
faithful Minister in the whole Church of God. But I hasten to the Last
Observation; and that is,

It is a most blessed and happy thing, when all the Ministers of God agree It Is
an happy thing when all the Ministers of God agree to advance Christ.
with one consent to advance Christ.

As Luke calls it, chap. 1. The mouth of all the holy Prophets which have
been since the beginning of the world. It was but one mouth as it were. They
all agreed in the same Doctrine, Paul and Sylvanus and Timotheus; they all
preach the same Christ; they were not yea, or nay. This accord and agreement
among the Ministers of the Gospel is of so great concernment, that our Savior
in his valedictory prayer, does with much efficacy and vigor press this
Petition, That his Disciples may be one, and one in the most near manner
imaginable, even as the father and son are one. I shall not enlarge on this,
because heretofore much spoken off: only I shall instance in some useful
Effects and consequences of this happy Agreement. Only before I do that, we
have cause to take notice of the goodness of God, and that (...), manifold
wisdom of God, whereby he has provided many Offices, many Officers for his
Church, and those variously gifted; and all for the spiritual benefit of our
souls: some are Barnabasses, some are Boanergeses. Thus as the Kings Daughter
is said to be clothed with needle work of diverse colors; so has God richly
adorned his Church with variety of abilities, that if men be not converted, the
greater will be their condemnation. For whereas Auditors are of diverse
appetites, some are for doctrinal Preaching, some for affectionate; some are
for legal terrible Sermons, others for sweet Evangelical discourses: if Christ
send Ambassadors thus qualified every way, what can they look for, who are not
by these several baits allured and taken? For this cause we have Christ himself
upbraiding the Jews, that no kind of heavenly way would please, no kind of
dressing the Word of life was acceptable to their palates, Matthew. 11. 18. John
came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, he has a devil. The son of man
came eating and drinking; and they say. Behold a friend of publicans and
sinners. Hereupon he compares them to children playing in the markets; saying,
we have piped to you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye
have not lamented. Thus nothing would do any good to them. Admire then Gods
goodness, that has thus abundantly provided for thee. Do not simply and
enviously compare one Ministers gifts above another, but adore the mercy of
God, that uses all the different abilities of men for the Churches good. This
premised, we may from the harmony and Agreement of Ministers, in advancing
Christ's The effects of this Agreement. 1. The greater confirmation of the truth.
Kingdom see

First, The greater Confirmation of the truth. If out of the mouth of two or
three witnesses, then how much more out of the mouth of many thousand witnesses
is every truth abundantly confirmed. How can thou give way to any atheistical
thoughts? whether there be a God, or a day of Judgment, or an heaven, or an
hell; when thou shall hear so many thousands of Gods servants in all ages
witness to this thing. All the Prophets and Apostles, men renouned for
holiness, for miracles, they all preached the same Doctrines that we do to you.
And therefore consider with thy self what a cloud of witnesses thou gainsayest
by thy unbelief.

2. The greater consent and harmony, the greater defense there is for the
truth. 2. The greater defense of the truth.
The old rule is, vis unita fortior. Our Savior confirms it, when he says,
A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. What advantages do the enemies
of Gods Church make by the Divisions, and different Judgments of men, in the
Reformed Church? The Papist does confidently conclude, that all will turn to
them at last; for, say they, you have so many Sects amongst you, and one says
he has the spirit of God; and another he has; but all contrary to one
another. Now although it were easy to recriminate, yet this difference and
division is greatly to be lamented. A late Papist says, (Ford against Tailor)
That seeing Protestants write against Protestants, and fight against
Protestants; and that for the Protestant Religion: he hops, that at last all
will see cause to turn to the Catholic Religion. But, not to tell them of
their Divisions, though our differences are a great stumbling block, yet to any
settled judicious Christian they should not prove so; for the Scripture does so
evidently foretell, that there must be heresies: and that false Prophets will
arise, that shall come in such deceivable ways, that they would deceive the
very Elect, if possible: and also, that God does for wise ends suffer all such
rents to be, that none should stagger thereat, yea the approved will be made
more manifest: and this file will get off the rust from the iron: this
winnowing will drive the chaff from the wheat.

Lastly, This harmony will be for the greater conviction of every one that 3.
The greater conviction of the impenitent and unbelieving.
shall abide in his unbelief and impiety. For what a stock or stone art thou,
if so many droppings will not at last enter into thee? Go from one Minister to
another, do thou not hear every one cry down profaneness, encourage to
godliness? If you hear hundreds of faithful Ministers, what is the work of
all, but to subdue sin, to dispossess Satan, to bring men into obedience unto
Christ: Do we not all come with the same Embassage? Entreating of you to be
reconciled to God; and to agree with this adversary while you are in the way.
What can more convince, yea confound than this? It was this which brought utter
destruction upon Jerusalem: there was then no more remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16.
It was not one or two, but many Messengers he sent; and yet all these were
refused, with the same disobedient heart. All the Prophets and faithful
Pastors that have ever been in several ages will rise up against thee for thy
condemnation in that day, directly, or indirectly, one way or other they will
witness against thee.

SERMON. CXXIII.
The truths of Christ and the Ministers of it are always the same.

2 COR. 1. 19. Was not Yea and Nay, but in him was Yea.
WE are now arrived at the last Particular to be considered in this Verse;
which is, The Predicate affirmed of the Doctrine preached by Paul and his
Associates: and that is, It Is not Yea, and Nay, but Yea. The expression has
been explained already. The sense is, That the Doctrine of Christ is certain,
constant, and immutable. As also, that such only are to be accounted of, as
true Doctors, who do adhere to the same truth. For Calvin says gravely upon
the Text, That this taxes all versatil and Proteus-like men, who can transform
themselves into any shape; preach one time one Doctrine, for their advantage;
and then again change, and preach the contrary: or else, for sinful fear, do
at one time assert such Doctrines, as true, and afterward retract and recant
them again: whereas the truth of Christ is like Christ himself, The same
yesterday, today, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. and like God himself, who changes
not: yea, in whom is no shadow of change. So that from the words we may observe,

That it is a proper note of Gods truth, and true preachers thereof, that they
Gods truth, and so the true Preachers of it are always the same.
are always the same.

There is no change, no contrariety in their Doctrines. As the Apostle (you
heard) expressed it, If I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my
self a transgressor, Gal. 2. 18. It is in an heinous manner to transgress, when
a Minister is thus contradictory. This Doctrine is the more to be observed,
because Stapleton in his Antidotes upon this Text makes a long harangue, to
demonstrate, that Luther, Melanchthon, Zwinglius, Calvin, all the eminent
Reformers, cannot be the true Apostles of Christ; because in their writings
there was yea and nay; one while they preached such and such things; at another
time the clean contrary. Hence he brings a passage out of Zwinglius confessing
that he did tempori, not rei scribere, he did write to serve the time, not the
matter: that he could not deliver pearl, because for the present auditors like
swine would trample it under their feet, and rend him also; especially
Melanchthon is instanced in, as a very inconstant man, in whose judgment they
could put no confidence. Hence he alleges a Synod of the Flaccians, who were
rigid Lutherans, that call his Common-places, Jocos communes, and not Locos
communes; and much more to this purpose. We find him triumphing in the
incertainty of the Protestants Doctrine; so that although we know what they
hold this year, we cannot tell what they will the next, and in the constancy of
their Popish Religion, which they have adhered unto for many years. To all this
we will readily grant, that the truths of Christ are always the same; there
cannot be any more new truths, than a new Christ, than a new Bible; and
therefore we will grant the Thesis, but deny the Hypothesis, or application of
it to Protestants; that wheresoever there is yea and nay, there cannot be the
truths of Christ. But that we may thoroughly understand this point, let us
consider these particulars,

First, That we must distinguish between the external administrations, and 1.
We must distinguish between the external forms of Gods worship and doctrinals.
forms of Gods worship, and the doctrinalls; between the Diducticalls and the
Rituals. For the former, though appointed by God himself, yet we plainly see a
great a teration therein. What a vast difference is there between the service
and Sacraments of God, in the old, and in the new Testament? There was
Circumcision, and the Paschal Lamb; we have Baptism, and the Lords Supper:
there were Sacrifices, and many external Rites, and Ceremonies, which when
Christ the substance came, they presently vanished, as the blossom falls
when the bud comes. This great change, with some other Arguments, made the
Marcionites of old conclude, that it was not the same God of the Old, and New
Testament, but different; but that is absurd. The Church administrations,
though by Gods command, are now altered; so that it would be a heinous thing to
circumcise children, to offer Sacrifices to God; though once it was the peoples
duty. Here you see then, there is a lawful yea and nay; a time when we might
circumcise, and a time when we must not circumcise. And if you say, Does not
this argue inconstancy in God? does not this contradict that glorious Attribute
of his immutability? I answer, No; for God does here as the Physician with a
diseased person, that sometimes administreth one kind of Physic, and
sometimes another; according as the nature of the disease requires: or, as the
husbandman sows his ground, sometimes with one seed, and sometimes with
another. God then was pleased to appoint such a temporary worship, and
afterward to appoint another, which was more suitable to the Church, being now
no longer an infant, as the Apostle insinuates, Gal. 3. 1. As therefore the
mother orders her child otherwise, while a child, than when an adult
person; so did God with his Church. But then, if we come to the Doctrinals, we
shall find, that the same truths necessary to salvation were in the Old
Testament, as the New; Abraham, David, and all the Godly were justified by
faith in Christ, as well as the Believers in the Gospel. This indeed is that
which the Socinians pertinaciously deny: they think that the Godly in the Old
Testament did not believe in Christ; that this is a peculiar new duty required
under the Gospel, and never before, viz. to believe in Christ. But the Apostle
in his Epistle to the Hebrews does admirably open the mysterious signification
of those Jewish ceremonies and sacrifices, showing that Christ was represented
therein, and that it was not the blood of Rams and goats, but of Christ, that
did take away sin. Hence Abraham is said to see Christ's day, and rejoice. 1
Cor. 10. they are said to drink of the spiritual rock, which was Christ: and
Act. 15. 10, 11. Peter and the Council speaking of the yoke laid upon our
fathers, adds, But we believe, that through the grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ, we shall be saved, even as they. The Doctrine then of Jesus Christ, of
the Trinity, of eternal Life were in the old Testament as well as the New; only
more implicitly and obscurely; the Old Testament being the New hidden and
covered; the New being the Old revealed and explained: so that, the Old and New
Testament do not contain old and new Doctrine essentially, but gradually; as we
say, the old and new moon, not meaning two moons, but distinct discoveries 2.
Between the growth and the change of truth.
of light therein.

2. We are to distinguish between progress and growth in the same truth, and
the alteration or change of truth into error. And truly this is of great
consideration; for this very particular will obviate all the calumnies of the
Papist. Let it be granted, that the first Reformers did not did not at first
view, see all the truths of the Christian Religion, but that by degrees they
had scales fall off from their eyes, and some things that at first they thought
true, or tolerable, afterward they rejected, as false and abominable. And thus
Calvin (de scandalis) answers the Papists, who calumniate us, saying, If you
had the spirit of God, why did ye not see all truth presently? Why was it that
some things did appear false to you afterward, which did not so at first?
This, says he, is to envy us proficiency in the truth; and to expect, that the
Sun in the morning should shine as gloriously as at noon day. So that it is one
thing addere aedificium fundamento, as Austin calls it, and another thing to
make a new Foundation; Thus Lyrinensis, when he made this Objection, To what
use are Doctors and Officers of the Church, if so be they must only receive the
Doctrine delivered, and not excogitate new by their own wit? He answers,
There is profectus, but not permutatio allowed, a growth, but not a change. The
work of the Ministers of the Gospel is not to find out new, real, fundamental
truths, no more than a new Christ, or a new Bible. he that cannot see by one
Sun, would not by twenty; and he that will not be convinced by one Bible, would
not, if there were more. Yet they are not useless, for these Fundamentals they
are daily to confirm, to explain, to polish, and affectionately to improve for
Sanctification more and more: so that, as he says* they must not deliver nova,
yet they may nova: not new things, but in a new manner. When a child grows
up into a man, he still retains his humane nature, though there be an
increase in his stature; but if this child should grow into a horse, or a
bear, then this would be a change of his species, and his na^u^e: Thus the
Church and her Officers they are to grow in more light, in more knowledge, in
more faith; but still in the same truth: whereas, if they degenerate into
Errors and false Doctrines, then the species is altered: now it is not honey but
gall, it is not gold but dross, not meat but poison: So that if we see eminent
men growing out of those errors, and those Superstitions they were once
entangled in, you must not call this yea and nay, but a laudable duty: for we
see the spirit of God communicating it self by degrees: Even as the Sun does
not presently arise to its vertical point: so neither does the spirit of God
reveal all things at once: It comes in by degrees, he could perfect our
understandings even in this life, as much as they shall be in heaven, so that,
we shall no longer know in part: but he is pleased to work gradually, even as
he did make the world, not in an instant, but successively. Thus we see he did
to the very Apostles, they were under his Instruction and Government a good
while, and yet were ignorant in many particulars, till at last he confirmed
them from his spirit from above. The Protestants then are not guilty of yea and
nay, though they did not at first discover all the abominations of Popery.
Neither may we charge any particular Minister for yea and nay, if out of error
he proceed to truth, if from darkness he attaineth to more light: For, although
many Heretical persons may shroud themselves under the serious name of new
light, yet it is plain; that both Pastors and people are to grow in new light
gradually, though not specifically. Thus the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 19.
commends the believers, for attending unto the word of God, as unto a light
that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in
their hearts: not as if ever they could come to light enough, that they need
not to attend to Scripture any further, that they may throw away the Bible as
useless, having light enough within them. No, but that donec, that until, is
continual and always, as sometimes it is used.

3. We are to distinguish between Yea and Nay indeed, and a seeming yea and
nay: between (...) constant new Doctrines indeed, and those that are 3. Between
a seeming and a real yea and nay.
apparently so. We grant, that such corruptions, such darkness may cover the
face of the Church, that the true Doctrines of Christ may seem new, and be
condemned for novelllsm; and the Doctor who preached them, be thought to come
with his yea and nay. And thus again Luther and Melancthon with many others are
condemned for their inconstancy. They were once ours, say the Papists, they did
once believe as we believed, worship as we worshipped; but now they are a nay
to their yea. This calumny will easily vanish, if you distinguish between new
things indeed, and new things appearingly so. The Protestant Doctrine was not
new indeed, if you look to the Scripture and Christ, it is old as they are; but
then we grant, that if we consider the Chaos, the Church was in at that time,
what superstitious abominations did then prevail; we grant, what the Reformers
did, all was new, their service new, their Doctrine new; but the iniquity and
the corruption of the times made it appear to be so. And indeed Popery is
properly the great Novellisme: for the Popish Doctrines, the Popish Worship
began to creep in, when the Churches of Christ began to degenerate from their
Primitive Institution. The change then that is many times in the face of
Religion, which does so offend many, is not indeed so, but in appearance. Those
truths of God were formerly professed in the Church; only an Eclipse did arise,
which obscured the light of the Sun. As then the Sun is not changed after an
Eclipse, we do not see a new Sun: thus it is also with the truths of Christ;
the Reformers do not bring new truths, only the darkness is dispelled, and we
see them which were long before. It is with us, as with men, whose heads are
distempered; we think, such and such things run round, whereas indeed it is a
distemper upon us, and it is a sign that we have been corrupted, when old
truths seem new to us.

4. We may therefore truly conclude, that antiquity and consent are inseparable
properties of a true Church. That Church which retains Doctrines of the 4.
Antiquity and consent are properties of a true Church.
greatest Antiquity, and which does agree with the Primitive Apostolical
Churches, that must needs be a true Church, for truth is always alike. That
cannot be true Doctrine in one age which is not in another: though men are apt
to be changed by the times they live in, yet Gods truth cannot be. When
therefore the Papists bring antiquity, and consent as notes of a true Church,
we deny they can, or are to be called notes, because it is not Antiquity
barely, but antiqvity in the true Doctrine: nor Consent merely so, but consent
with the Primitive Churches Doctrine. So that True Doctrine is properly the
note of the Church; only we add, that Antiquity and Consent with the Primitive
times do inseparably follow the true Doctrine. Now the ground of this certainty
and equality of the truths of Christ is, because they are Gods truths, Christ's
truths: if they were the truths of men's making, then they might alter and
change as they please, then it might be formed, reformed, and transformed into
all the shapes that men's Interests could put them upon; then truth might alter
according to the climates, customs, and advantages of men; then truth might be
one thing at Rome, and another thing at Constantinople: then we might say, such
things were truth in one age, and ye the contrary truth in another. Popery was
truth in Queen Mary's days, and Protestantisme in Queen Elizabeth's. And truly
some men are so Atheistical, or self-seeking, that they account truth, as the
Apostle said, some did godliness, even outward gain; and therefore, when such
an opinion is gainful, then it is truth, but when not so, then it is Heresy.

Use of Instruction. How odious Instability and Inconstancy is in matter of
Religion, whether it be in private Christians, or public Officers? It plainly
discovers, that not the truth of Christ, but some other uncertain motive
prevails with thee; either thy profit, or thy applause, or the times, or
customs, or the Laws of the Land, or some other mutable respect does work
upon thee: and if so, then thou can not but be a reed shaken with every wind
of Doctrine. Thou art then but as an Instrument of music, making no other
sound, nor no longer then thou art breathed into. Profit will make thee a
Papist, profit will make thee a protestant, profit will make thee an Heretic.
How contrary is such a fickle temper to the nature of Faith? which is the
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen.

Use 2d of Instruction. How false that position is of some Papists, That the
Church may make Articles of Faith; and that the Authority of the Church makes
the Authority of the Scripture, at least toward us? So that the Scriptures
would have no more authority then Titus Livius, or Aesops fables, in respect of
our duty to believe, were it not for the Churches Authority. No less
blasphemous is that other comparison of another Papist, resembling the
Scripture to a nose of wax? If so, then no wonder, if they make what truths,
and what religions they please; then we may call it, the Popes truth, the
Churches truth, and not the truth of God. It is a ridiculous passage of a
Papist (Ford against Tailor) saying, that it is probable, the Church will make
that Opinion about the immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary to be an
Article of Faith. As if the Church could make that necessary to be believed, if
we would be saved, that was not always so. Why may she not as well make a new
Bible, set up a new Christ, as they establish a new Article of Faith?

SERMON. CXXIV.
Of Gods Promises to man.

2 COR. 1. 20. For all the Promises of God in him are yea, and in him amen,
unto the glory of God by us.
THis Verse is a further confirmation of the constancy and immutability of the
Lord Christ, and so by consequence of Paul's doctrine. For that Christ is
unchangeable, he proves, in that all the promises which God has made, they
receive their fulness and complement in him, and so are therefore true,
because fullfilled both in him and by him. This is the Apostles sense in this
assertion, which Calvin does well call, memorabilis sententia, etc. a memorable
sentence, and one of the chiefest Articles of our Religion; for herein is all
our faith and confidence seated, that in Christ God makes his gracious
promises to us, by whose efficacy and impetration they be accomplished; so that
a promise is fullfilled, not because of any worth or dignity in us, but because
of of the fullness and worth that is in Christ.

1. The words may be taken as an entire Proposition; wherein we have the
subject and predicate, with the amplification of it from the final cause.

The subject is described from the nature of it, (...) promises.

2. From the universality and extent, (...) all promises, as many as are made.

3. From the efficient cause, the promises of God.

4. The predicate, are yea, and are amen in him: Of which in their order.

Let us begin with the Subject, (...) the promises, many times in the plural
number, at other times in the singular; for indeed the covenant of grace is but
one large promise, or an ocean emptying it self into many streams; yet
sometimes called promises, because of the many things both spiritual and
temporal that are particularly promised by God, the sum whereof is contained
in that great promise, or Magna Charta of the Church, I will be their God, and
they shall be my people: or else it may be promises in the plural number,
because of the frequent repetition and reiteration of the grand promise of
Christ to the Church. Now the word promise is sometimes used for the things
promised; as when any are said to inherit the promise, Heb. 6. 12. and
sometimes for the promise it self. The Greek word, (...) is used often in the
New Testament, whereas the Ancients did use the word (...) more frequently for
a promise: though the Apostle Peter uses that also twice, 2 Pet. 1. 4. 2 Pet.
3. 13. The theme of it is (...), which comes of (...), say some; and for
better pronunciation, (...). But Eustathius makes it to come of (...). From
this root we have the word (...) in the singular number, and (...) applied to
the Gospel; Whereas among humane Authors the word is for the most part in the
plural number, signifying both glad tidings, and also the reward given to
those that brought them; but the Gospel does only deserve this name of glad
tidings, and therefore the word is now appropriated unto that, though sometimes
it signifies, besides the good thing preached, the very preaching it self, as
1 Cor. 4. 15. and therefore when the Apostle speaks of one whose praise is in
the Gospel, 2 Cor. 8. 18. the meaning is, one whose praise was in preaching the
Gospel, and laboring therein; not of the Gospel written by Evangelists: for
Evangelium and Evangelist, in that sense, as it signifies the Gospel written,
or a writer of the Gospel, is not used in the Scripture, but came in afterward
by Ecclesiastical use. The Greek word (...) signifies in the general to
declare, to denounce, sometimes to accuse; hence is that phrase (...) spoken of
by Budeus; but in Scripture use it is often taken more particularly for to
promise: Hence Hesychius, and out of him Varinus renders (...) and (...); but
this is enough for the word: the thing itself has much comfort and treasure in
it, and so observe,

That God has made promises to his people, all the promises of God in Christ
God has made many promises in Christ to us.
are Amen.

This doctrine deserves to be opened theologically, as being the foundation of
all our hope; for on Gods promise only we can plead, as we see the godly often
in their prayers urging that; Not any thing of ours, O Lord, but merely thy
promise we do plead before thee.

And 1. take notice, That God might only have dealt with man by his absolute 1.
God might have dealt with man by absolute sovereignty.
Sovereignty and dominion; imposing only upon him commands to do his duty,
without adjoining any promise of a reward, especially such a reward as eternal
happiness, and truly this makes much as for our comfort, so also for our
humiliation under all the holy works we do. For it is of Gods mere goodness,
that he has promised glory to thy repentance, to thy obedience; after thou
have done all, God might have annihilated thee; neither would he have done thee
any wrong, if he did not put a crown of glory upon thee, after thy holy life;
so that its gods great condescension to deal by way of promise with us, and not
by way of dominion and command alone; as he might do, he being our Creator and
we his creatures.

Secondly, The promises that God makes to us are truly and properly promises;
2. The promises of God are properly promises.
They are more then simple and bare assertions of what good he will do to us.
We know amongst men, there is a great difference between a bare affirmation
what he will do, and a promise; for that adds a new bond and obligation to a
man, for fullfilling his word. Now some have thought, that those passages which
we call promises are not so properly and truly promises, as mere insinuations
and significations of Gods will and purpose what he will do. Thus Durand
expresses himself, lib. 2. did. 27. quest. 2. because happily it may be
thought that we attribute imperfection to God, when we say, that he promises
properly; for then thereby would accrue justice on man's part, and a right or
claim in him to the things promised, hereby also the liberty of God would seem
to be infringed, as if he could not bestow his gifts any other way then he
promised, but these are no cogent reasons. And seeing the Scripture does so
often call them promises, and does so constantly say, God does promise; there
is no reason why we should go from the proper signification of the word to an
improper, especially there being no imperfection in the act of promising. For
merely as so, that denotes a dominion and power in him that promises: and
certainly if the actual giving and collation of any good thing, does not
declare any imperfection in God, why should the promising of it do? For when
God has bestowed any thing upon us, that is not so alienated, as it were, but
that still it is his, and at his disposing, to continue or takeaway, as he
pleases: we therefore conclude, that God does truly and properly, not in a
metaphorical sense make promises to his people. Yet

In the third place, the reason of Gods promising, is not as if that were to
add 3. Gods promises do not add to his simple affirmation, but only are to
confirm our faith.
more confirmation to his simple affirmation, but for condescension to confirm
us against our unbeleef and diffidence. Hence there is a vast difference
between man's promise and Gods promise. For the promise of a man does add a new
tie and obligation to his word, and so his word is made surer in it self, as
well as to those whom he promises; but when God does barely declare his will
to do such good things for a believer, this has truth enough, yea, so much
that nothing can be added to make it truer; only because we are apt to conceive
of God, after the manner of men, it does greatly conduce to strengthen our
faith, as well as his affirming word; yea, sometimes to his promise, God is
also pleased to add his oath; all which is not in respect of himself, as if
his word could be made truer, but only to antidote the more strongly against
that diffidence and distrust which is apt to rise up in our hearts. This the
Apostle notably considers, Heb. 6. 7. when he says, That God to declare the
immutability of his counsel, confirmed the promise by an oath, so that by two
immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a
strong consolation. It is not for his own sake that he promises, yea, that he
swears, but for our sakes, that we might have not only consolation but strong
consolation. O beatos nos, etc. cried Tertullian, Oh happy us, for whose sakes
God does thus swear; but oh us wretched and miserable, if we do not believe him
thus confirming his promise: so that the right understanding of Gods promise
will make us see, that it is not for his own sake, but our sakes, that he
deals in a promise-way with us.

Hence in the 4th place, The mere original and rise of Gods promising any 4.
The rise of all Gods promises is his free mercy.
good to us, is the bounty, liberality, and free mercy of God. The Apostate
Angels have not the least promise of any good to them, so that being without a
promise, they are in that respect altogether miserable; but the Lord having a
love to mankind, did freely and graciously make his promise of Christ, and in
him all blessedness to those that are his; Insomuch that the spring of all our
happiness is Gods promise. We cannot plead any worthiness, only thy promises
(Lord) that we put thee in mind of, which is like the rainbow, when God
beholds, that he will not drown the world more; and when God remembers his
covenant, then he works all good for his people. Thus when God would delay
his help no longer, but deliver his people groaning under their oppressions; It
is said, God remembered his Covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Exodus 2. 24.
there was no natural necessity, nor no moral necessity that could induce God
to make these promises to us. No natural necessity, for God is a free agent,
and so does not as the Be, that necessarily makes his honey, God does not
necessarily communicate his goodness to us: As God is a free agent, so he is
alsufficient; he is perfect and blessed in himself, he needs not man, he
wants not his service; and therefore he did not upon this account make any
promise, but it was his mere voluntary goodness. Again, there was no moral
necessity, that is, there was no supposed worth or dignity in us, for which it
behoved God to make such promises; He found nothing in us but matter of his
displeasure and wrath: to us all the threatenings in the Law did belong, and not
one promise, Insomuch as the damned in hell have not any promise made to them;
they have not the least ground for any hope, no not for a drop of water to
releeve them in those scorching flames, so it might be with every man if Gods
grace did not interpose; not any promise might have been made for thee, to have
the least dependence upon. Thus you see Gods mercy alone to be the 5. Therefore
the fullfilling of his promises is only of grace.
ground of all promises.

Fifthly, Because God does this out of his mere bounty, make a promise of good
things to us, the fullfilling of them is not of debt to us, but from his grace
and verity. And thus it differs from the promises between man and man, that
are made in contracts, or otherwise; there a promise is made, but upon some
consideration or work done, which is equivalent to the thing promised: but it
is otherwise with God, he promises out of grace, and fullfilleth it likewise
out of grace. Thus when God has promised pardon to the humbled sinner, and
believing not only the promise, but the actual pardoning is of grace; neither
is God by his promise become a debtor to us, as if God would be unjust, if he
did not bestow such a privilege upon us; but because, as the Scripture says,
he cannot lie, or he cannot deny himself. So that the reason why he makes good
his promises, is not because we have any condignity in our selves to claim
those things, but because he is immutable and unchangeable: so that upon this
account he makes good his promises, even because he is God, and cannot lie, or
change his mind. Therefore Divines speak well of a twofold debitum about Gods
promises, debitum fidelitatis, and debitum justitiae; a debt of fidelity, and a
debt of justice. When God makes a promise of eternal life to a godly man, he
may urge God with his promise; and there is a debt of fidelity, whereby God
has engaged himself to do this; but we cannot say, God is a debtor to man
hereby; no, he is a debtor, as it were, to himself, he cannot go against his
own word, his truth will not suffer him to change; but in no respect must we
say he is a debtor to man, reddis debita nulli debens, it was said of old. This
is necessarily to be understood, that so under all the promises of God made to
us, we may not look upon our selves, but Gods promise only. But then there is a
debt of justice and righteousness, and herein many Papists are proud and
arrogant; for they distinguish of Gods promises, those that are for the first
grace, and those that are for the second and after grace. They grant the
promise of the first grace to be only from a debt of fidelity, but then for the
second grace, they maintain a debt of justice. Hence it is that they conclude,
that heaven and salvation, though we have it by the promise of God, yet it is
by debt of justice, and not mere grace. Hence we read of a dying Monk, who
blasphemously uttered these words, Read mihi, Domine, vitam aeternam, quam
debes, sive velis, sive nolis; but a gracious heart cannot but tremble at such
arrogancies. It is true, Paul calls God a righteous Judge, who will give him
a crown of glory: and he tells the Hebrews, that God is not unrighteous to
forget their labor of love, Heb. 6. 10. but righteousness is not here taken
strictly for proper justice, but for fidelity and faithfulness. If God should
not give heaven to his people, who endure persecution for his Name sake, he
would go against his own nature, he would deny his truth, and so even cease to
be God; not that he would be unjust properly to man, as if man by doing or
suffering any thing for his sake, did that which was equivalent to eternal
glory. We see the Apostle defying this, 2 Cor. 4. 17. calling it, but a light
affliction, and for a moment, in respect of that eternal weight of glory. And
Aristotle observed, that there cannot be justice, or righteousness between us
and the gods, and our Parents; for their is no equality, and we owe all to
them. And as Durand well argues, it is so far from justice or righteousness
that we may claim glory, that the more grace God has given us to prepare
thereunto, the more we are beholding to him, and can the less plead for our
selves, by how much the more we receive of his grace; so that the more gracious
acts we do, we are so far from meriting, that we are the more obliged to God.
Yet

Sixthly, Lest because all the promises of God are said to be fullfilled of his
6. The promises of God are absolute or conditional.
grace only, and because all works of ours are rejected as causall and
meritorious, we should fall into Antinomianisin, and fancy to our selves such
absolute and irrespective promises, that though abiding and wallowing in our
sins, yet we might think it lawful to run to them as to a city of refuge, and
there to be delivered from the guilt of our sins: we must know that the
promises of God are of two sorts, absolute and conditional; Absolute, and such
are the promises of God, for the working of our first grace in us of
conversion, and taking away the heart of stone from us, of which promise the
Prophets Jeremiah and Ezechiet speak; Though some will not allow those to be
promises, but predictions, yet the very tenor of them does evidence it. Now
these do not suppose, but work all conditions and qualifications in us for
other mercies, for it would be absurd to say, God promises to give us faith if
we do believe, or to renew and change our wills if we will: These absolute
promises then are the executions of his decrees of grace and salvation upon the
Elect. But then there are conditional promises, and such are the promises of
pardon to the believer, of eternal glory to him that is godly; only you must
know, that they are conditions only in a large sense; they are more properly
called qualifications and determinations of those who are thus to be justified
and saved: faith indeed in our justification has a peculiar notion of being an
instrument or supernatural means to lay hold on Christ, and is not to be
called a condition, when we speak exactly: You see then that there is no ground
for licentiousness and dissoluteness, to venture all upon the gracious
promises of God, for they are determined and specified by such qualifications,
who shall have either pardon here, or salvation hereafter: Only you must know,
that when we call them conditional promises, the meaning is not as if we had
power of our own to fulfill these conditions, and so the promises remain
suspense till we perform them; no, these conditions we are enabled to
accomplish by the grace of God, they are his gifts as well as our duties; so
that there are no conditions required of us, which also we are not enabled unto
by the grace of God; that all may glory in Gods grace, and not in themselves,
and therefore God has appointed an order between his gracious gifts; this
god^nesse is for happiness, holiness is for glory, faith is for
justification, and if we speak exactly, we cannot so well say, Gods promises
are conditional, as the things promised may be conditions to one another by
Gods appointment.

Lastly, There may be good reasons assigned why God is pleased thus to promise;
7. There may be reasons given why God made such promises. As 1. To exercise our
faith.
he might have given and never have made any promise at all; but before he is
pleased to bestow the actual benefits, he is pleased to give us many sure and
gracious promises, that he will do such things for us in time: The reasons may
be

First, Because hereby God would exercise our faith, and teach us to live upon
him only; for when we cannot see any possibility in second causes, when they
with Sarah have a dead womb, yet because of Gods promise we shall keep up our
hearts, as Abraham did: Why is it then that the promises of God are in no more
esteem and request with us? were it not for them, how many times might thy
heart break. Yea, to put our faith to greater experiment, hence it is, that
though he has promised such things, yet his providence seem to cross all,
and after Gods promise, as it was in the Israelites deliverance, all things
seem to be more unlikely than before.

A second Reason (for I shall instance in no more) may be to teach us humility
2. To teach us humility.
and thankfulness, acknowledging Gods promise alone to be the fountain of all
the good we enjoy; by the promise we are regenerated, by the promise we are
justified, by the promise we are glorified; we are what we are only by the
promise: hence all the godly are said with Isaac to be the children of the
promise, Gal. 4. 28. by the promise we had our spiritual being, and by the
promise we are Preserved in it; but this deserves more improvement.

SERMON. CXXV.
A further Discovery of the Nature and Sorts of Gods Promises.

2 COR. 1. 20. For all the promises of God, are in Christ, Yea and Amen, etc.
OUr work is to enlarge more upon this useful and necessary subject, viz. 1.
Of the several sorts of promises. 1. The promises of God are either Legal or
Evang elical
The promises of God. And

In the first place, we may give in divisions of the Promises, or the
distribution of them, as there are Legal Promises and Evangelical Promises; the
ignorant confusion whereof has caused much mischief in the Church of God. The
Legal Promise is nothing but the Covenant of works, contained in that
expression, Do this and live. For as they are cursed, who continue not in all
things that the Law requires: So again, they are blessed, and eternal life is
promised to all such, who perfectly obey the Law of God. By this promise God
dealt with Adam. And although God never transacted with man, when fallen, by
this way of promise; yet he was pleased to have the Doctrine of the Law in its
full perfection manifested to the people of Israel; but in an Evangelical
intention, that so the Israelites being humbled under their utter impotency and
inability ever to perform it, might make their earnest applications unto
Christ for help and succor. For what was impossible by the Law, through our
weakness, Christ made possible through his obedience. Now this Legal Promise
the Jews generally attended unto, neglecting the Evangelical consideration of
promises in Christ. The promises to works made unto Adam are not intended in
this Text: they were not Yea and Amen, seeing there was no need of a Mediator,
if Adam had not fallen; only now all the promises of grace become firm and
sure in him. But naturally we regard the Legal promise more than Evangelical.
What labor did the Apostle show to bring the Jews off from the Covenant of
works? And whence is that Pharisaical and Popish principle of
self-righteousnesse; but because we trust in our works, and not in the promise?
So that it is an excellent proficiency in Christianity, when persons are taken
off from being Legal, to be Evangelical; when they do not slavishly rely upon
their works done, but filially depend upon the promise. The Apostle does
excellently, and at large declare the difference between these two, Galat. 3.
and 4. Chapters. It is strange that any should desire to be under the Law,
rather than the promise; yet all Pharisaical Justiciaries are propense that
way. What is this but to desire to be under a curse, and perpetual malediction?
Whereas the Evangelical promise is like the City of refuge to the pursued
malefactor. It is better than Jonah's gourd against the scorching heat of Gods
wrath, because of sin; for no worm can arise and consume this. So that the
Evangelical promise being wholly of free grace, God thereby pardoning us
freely, sanctifying us freely, justifying us freely, is like the Land of
promise flowing with milk and honey. It Is to (...) is promise, that every
humbled sinner must look, as the Israelites stung did upon the brazen srepent.
Let therefore the people of God look more to the promise without them: They
poreupon their own hearts; they perplex themselves with many doubts and fears;
but if thou did consider what an Evangelical Promise means, this would be
like oil poured into thy wounds, when temptations aggravated by Satan, have
left thee not so much half dead, as half damned.

In the next place, Promises are divided in respect of their object matter into
2. Promises are either spiritual or temporal.
spiritual and temporal. Spiritual are such as concern the welfare of the soul:
Temporal are such as relate to the body and the outward man; for there is no
external mercy, but God has promised it to the godly. Therefore godliness is
said to have the promise of this life, and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
In deed in the Old Testament temporal promises were more frequent, and
spiritual more rare; and many times shadowed out by the temporal ones. In the
New Testament, spiritual promises are far more frequent, and temporal ones
more rare; yet the New Testament does abundantly testify this, That all things
are the godly man's, whether life or death, 1 Cor. 3. 23. and that only they
have the promise of this life, as well as that which is to come. And certainly,
If God has given us Christ, as the Apostle argues, Romans 18. how shall he not
with him give us all things else? So that we see the treasure of a Christian,
it lies in Gods promises, both for this life, and the life to come. So that as
it falls out sometimes, a man may have little money for his present use, and
yet be very rich in bonds and bills. Thus it is sometimes with a godly man,
though he has a promise of all things, yet for the present he may want all
things. As Abraham had a promise for the possession of the Land of Canaan; and
yet for the present had not where to set his foot, as upon his own ground.
Only we must distinguish between the spiritual and temporal promises, these
later are not absolutely promised, but with the exception of the Cross, and
with this limitation, when they are good for us. For seeing these earthly
mercies are not ablutely and as indipensably necessary, as Christand grace are,
so therefore no wonder if they be not absolutely promised. If a godly man could
not be saved, unless he had riches and wealth, unless he had health and
strength, then he was as sure to have them, as he has Christ; but that not
being so, therefore it is that they have Christ, and yet many times want other
things. They have the Ocean, when they cannot have a drop. Again, Temporal good
things are not absolutely good, but conditionally, and upon supposition; though
they may be good in themselves, yet not to thee. As wine may be in it self
comforting, but not unto a man in a fever: Thus it may be, if thou should
have riches, they would do thee hurt; if thou should have health and
strength, thy corruptions also would be the stronger. Those things are not
called good, because they make us good; no, we may make them good or evil. But
now Christ is such an infinite good, that thy having of him can never be
hurtful to thee:? Yea, when he finds thee evil, he can make thee good. It is
good to inform our selves thus about the nature of temporal promises; for we
are ready to murmr and repine, when we find not these promises made good to
us; whereas we should rather be thankful and rejoice, in that God will not
give us that which would do us so much hurt. And certainly, if thou were
spiritual, as thou should be, this would be enough to thee, that spiritual
things are absolutely promised, that thou art sure to have Christ, to have
Heaven, how sad and afflicted soever thy portion may be in this world. Does it
not argue thy heart to be too carnal, when thou mournest for want of outward
mercies, and yet Christ is thine, God has sanctified thee, God has converted
thee. Alas has not God in this done more for thee, than the greatest Emperors
in the world, that have not godliness? What if thou have not riches, the
greatness others have? It may be they have not the Christ, the grace that God
has bestowed on thee. Only when we say spiritual things are absolutely
promised, you must distinguish of spiritual things: some are essential and
necessarily conjoined with eternal glory; so that if he have them not, he
cannot be saved; such is Regeneration and Justification. Again, others do
much conduce to our eternal happiness, but are not inseparably joined with it;
such are the degrees of grace, spiritual consolation and joy, as also the
assurance of Gods favor. These are precions-advantages; more to be desired
than the gold of Ophir, but they are not absolutely promised to every godly man.

In the second general place, We are to know, that the promises of God, 2. Gods
promises are the executions of his Decrees.
they are the executions in time of what he had decreed to do from all
eternity. Insomuch that from Gods promise, we may argue to his predestination;
when God promises Justification, and pardon of sin to thee, it is because he
has purposed this according to the counsel of his own will. So when he
promises to give grace to thee, and the increase thereof, it is because he
has in mercy ordained thee for this. If you ask then, why is it, such and such
promises are fullfilled? You must not have recourse to man's free will, or any
works that he does, but to the will of God and his gracious counsel. Hence
some expound that place, (Titus 1. 2. where it is said; That God who cannot
lie, had promised eternal life before the world began;) of his decree to
promise: for it is not proper to say, God promised before the world was. Seeing
then there was no men to whom the promise could be made; therefore (say they)
the meaning is, He decreed to promise. But there is another interpretation more
probable, which is to render the Greek words, (...), before the ancient ages,
alluding to the first promise that God made to Adam upon his fall concerning
the woman's seed, which was Christ. For till that promise was manifested, there
was no difference in respect of hope and comfort between lost mankind, and the
Apostate Angels. The promises then of God are but Gods predestination put into
execution.

Hence in the third place, No wicked men have any promises of God belong to
them. Therefore the state of the Heathens, Ephesians. 2. is said to be 3. No wicked
men have any promises belong to them.
without Christ, and without the promises; which argues as desperate a
condition, as when those of the old world, were without the Ark, there was a
necessity of perishing. It is true, all wicked men, who live within the Church,
they cannot in that sense be said to be without the promises, as Heathens are;
for they are under the offer of promises, they are under the external
dispensation of them; and because they manifest an outward acceptance of Gods
offer with the conditions tendered, therefore we may call them the children of
the promise in an external sense. In which sense, Romans 9. 4. the Apostle
speaking of the Israelites in the general, says, Of whom is the service of God
and the promises. In this sense many were the seed of Abraham, not only after
the flesh, but of the promise also; else circumcision, the seal of the promise
had not been applied to them: yet they were not the seed of the promise, in the
sense the Apostle intends, as Isaac was; that is, so as to have the true and
real benefits of the promise; and in this respect we say, no ungodly man has
any promise of any privilege made to him, abiding in that condition. No
promise of pardon, no promise of Gods favor, no promise of any earthly
comfort, not a morsel of bread, or drop of drink; he cannot plead any
promise in his prayers. And therefore when we may enjoy many outward mercies,
these come not by virtue of a promise to him, but only through the providence
of God, God out of a general love does bestow such comforts upon him, it is not
from any promise made to him. And indeed seeing the Text says, The promises of
God are confirmed in Christ; unless a man be in Christ, there is no promise
can be effectual to him. Oh the sad condition of all ungodly men! For if thou
have no promise, what hope can thou have? Are not the Devils therefore
eternally wretched, because they have no promise? Hope in this is compared to
an Anchor, Heb. 6. 19. Now what shipwreck must that ship needs endure, which
under waves and tempests has no Anchor for a defense?

Fourthly, Gods promise for the accomplishing of it, does suppose faith on 4.
Gods promises to us suppose faith in us.
our part; for the promise on Gods part, and faith on our part, are correlates.
We cannot put forth faith for any mercy, where we have not Gods promise;
neither is Gods promise accomplished to any but the believer. Thus the Apostle,
Romans 4. 16. says, The promise is of faith, that it might be not only by grace,
but also made sure to such who do believe. So that it is with a godly man
according to his faith. Christ says to thee, Be thou justified according to
thy faith; receive pardon and comfort according to thy faith. If thou
complainest God has made great and precious promises, but I cannot taste of
this honey, I perish notwithstanding this fulness: Then remember it is not,
because there is not enough in the promise, but thy faith is weak, thy vessel
is narrow to receive: As if the woman should have refused to borrow vessels,
when the Prophet multiplied her oil. For the oil did not cease, till her
vessels ceased: So neither will Gods promise cease working, till thy faith
cease to operate. Indeed in Gods comminations and threatenings they are
fulfilled, whether man will or no: Let him believe, or not believe, God will
throw the ungodly into Hell; but in the promises it is otherwise; then they do
good to us, when by faith we embrace them. So that by this we see how dangerous
and noxious it is, not to put forth faith; it both dishonours God, and
depriveth us of all good: it dishonours God, as if he were not true, as if it
were not impossible for him to lie, as if he were no more than a man. Therefore
Abraham is said, To give glory unto God by believing, Romans 4. 20. because he
did not regard the dead womb, or the improbability in second causes, but rested
upon the promise alone. If it be so heinous a matter to accuse man of a lie,
who yet is by nature a liar, as the Scripture pronounces of him, how
unsufferable is it to attribute it unto God. And then it is a very destructive
sin; for it evacuateth all promises as to us; it makes thy condition as
hopeless, as if never any promises had been made: This is to cut the
Conduit-pipes of all comfort and consolation. This is with the Philistims, as
it were to throw earth into all the Wells of water. Therefore above all things
look to thy faith, for it makes God no God, Christ no Christ, promises no
promises, as to thee.

Fifthly, That our faith may be the more confirmed, he is not only pleased 5.
God has sealed his promises to us.
to make promises to his people, but also to give signs for the confirmation
thereof. Therefore Sacraments are confirming signs of Gods promise, they are
visible promises: so that our unbelief will still be the greater sin; if
neither the promises nor the seals visibly annexed thereunto, shall not
establish us against all doubting and uncertainty. It is true, the Sacraments
cannot make Gods word surer in it self, but they do in respect of us, God
graciously condescending to our humane weakness: By which merciful provision
of God, that his people might live a life of faith in his promise', we may
gather as the necessity of faith, so also the great pronenesse that is in us to
unbelief, that we rather live by sense, than by says. Hence it is that when
we have outward supports and comforts, our hearts are kept up; but when all
these leave us, are taken away, then like Peter upon the water, we are afraid,
and should even sink, did not the Lord support us.

Sixthly, It is therefore a very great skill to make use of the promises of 6.
It Is great skill to make use of promises
God by faith. It is the Gospel-wisdome, a mystery it is, that even the
Disciples of Christ are a long while ere they can learn it. For though God
does promise to do such and such wonderful things, yet he suffers so many
cross providence to fall out, that we would think God had wholly forgot his
promise. Hence the Church complains; Does his promises fail for ever? Yea the
Apostle Peter does speak of some profane scoffers, that asked, Where was the
promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3. 4. because they saw all things continue as
they did, therefore they thought Gods promise was in vain. It behooves the
people of God therefore to acquaint themselves with Gods Riddles, to plough
with the Scriptures Heifer: for their unskilfullnesse herein, is that which
makes them so full of dejections, which does so often perplex them, not
knowing what to think or say: yea they are apt to question the truth and
righteousness of God: but take heed of this, it is a very great sin, when
God gives thee a sufficient testimony of his grace and favor to thee, by his
promises and seals thereof, still to question and doubt, whether God will do
it or no. This is grievously to tempt God, as the people of Israel did, Exodus
17. 7. who though they had so many miraculous discoveries of Gods presence with
them, yet still they ask, Is the Lord amongst us, or not? Oh take heed of
saying, Is the Lord mine? Will he do good to me? When he has given proof
enough, both by his promises, and seals, of his favor. Oh satisfy thy soul
with this! Lord, I have thy promise, before thou promisedst, thou wast free
whether thou would do it or no; but since thy mouth has promised it, how can
thy hand but fulfill it? Let thy temptations, thy straits be never so great,
yet know the promise of God cannot be straightened. Though thy friends die, though
thy goods are lost, yet Gods promise cannot die, neither can that perish. And
if thou say. Oh but I am unworthy, I am a poor wretch! What then? Say, Lord
though I am noworthy to be helped, yet thy promise is worthy to be made good! O
Lord, though I have sinned, yet thy promise has not sinned! But more of this
in the next particular, which is the Predicate in the Proposition.

SERMON. CXXVI.
How all the Promises are confirmed in Christ.

2 COR. 1. 20. For all the promises of God, in him are Yea, and in him Amen,
unto the glory of God by us.
HAving dispatched the Subject in this Proposition, we proceed to the
Predicate, that which is affirmed of the promises of God; and that is their
stability and immutability; they are Yea and Amen: with the meritorious or
fundamental cause, [In him] that is, Christ. Some indeed take the latter
clause, viz. in him they are Amen, with relation to the final cause, and so
explain it of our duty, that we are to set our Amen to the truth of Gods
promises.

In the former expression is denoted the certainty and firmness of the
promises, when they are said to be Yea.

In the latter our duty, and what obligation lies upon us in reference to
them, viz. that we should set to our seal of Amen, giving our assent of
confirmation; and this will greatly redound to Gods glory. Calvin goes in this
latter explication, as being most congruous and adapted to the Apostles
meaning: Though he confesses he will not be contentious, if the common path be
trodden in. I shall therefore follow our Translators, which seem to go the
genuine way. It is affirmed of Gods promises, that they are Yea; by that you
heard the Apostle means a constant affirmation, and verity. Has God promised
any good thing to an humbled soul? This will always be Yea; God will always
grant it, he will say Yea, yea. How comfortable would this meditation be to a
gracious heart? How often does thy trembling, desponding soul go into his
presence, fearing that God will give a Nay to thee? Because thou art apt to
change, and to be mutable, therefore thou fear God will be so also.

Now the Apostle for the greater certainty sake, does double his expression to
the same sense, [In him they are Amen, In him they are Yea,] In him they are
Amen.] The one is a Greek word, the other Hebrew: and it is to show, that both
to Jew and Greek the promises are confirmed in Christ. For whereas the Jews
persuasion was, That the Messiah should come only to their Nation; therefore
the Apostles dared not to preach Christ to the Gentiles, till Peter was
confirmed by a vision from above. By Christ, this partition wall is broken
down: so that the promises of grace are made to the believing Gentile, as well
as the believing Jew. To the Gentile the promises are Yea: to the Jews they
are Amen. To this purpose the Apostle also, Galat. 4. 6. speaking of the Spirit
of Adoption, which is sent into the hearts of believers, adds, That thereby
we are enabled to call him Abba, Father. Father for the Gentile, Abba for the
Jew. So that whereas the believing Gentile might have doubted, whether he being
as a dog, the childrens bread should belong to him: Hereby is certified, that
Christ is a Christ to them, the promises are promises to them as well as to the
Jews. The word Amen is used sometimes nominally. Thus Christ is called the
Amen, Revel. 3. 14. These things says the Amen; well then may the promises be
Amen in Christ, seeing Christ is the Amen. Sometimes it is used adverbially,
and so is to be understood by way of desire and wish, Let it be so; or by way
of attestation and confirmation, It is so. Hence translated by the Interpreters
of the Old Testament, sometimes (...), and sometimes (...). When it begins a
speech, it is a note of affirmation, as often our Savior, Amen, Amen, I say
unto you, etc. When it concludes, then it is a note of confirmation; and in
this sense Calvin and others take it, as our duty by way of consent,
confirming: the promise, as you heard. The Rabbines speak of a twofold Amen, a
perfect Amen, and an imperfect. The imperfect Amen, they make threefold, Amen
Pupillum, when one says Amen to the prayer he does not understand. Amen
subreptitium, when a man says it before the end of a prayer. Amen sectile,
when a man says Amen, but distracted and divided in his thoughts, so that he
does not attend to what he says Amen. And certainly this latter Amen, most are
guilty of that use to say it. The words being thus explained, the Observation
is,

That in Christ alone all the promises of God are confirmed, and made In Christ
alone are all the promises of God confirmed and made good.
good.

Thus you have also at another time asserted by the Apostle, Romans 15. 8. I say
that Jesus Christ was a Minister of circumcision for the truth of God, to
confirm the promises made unto the fathers, and that the Gentiles might
glorify God for his mercy. This is a notable place, which the Apostle
affirms with much vehemence. This I say (and the matter is this) that by
Christ all promises both to Jews and Gentiles are confirmed. The Jews they
were apt to think, that by their own works the promises were confirmed. Yea,
how secretly does this Pharisaical sin lodge in our breasts, as if the
promises were performed not for Christ's sake, but our own sake? This is that
Ivy-sinne, which adhering so close to our natures, does secretly consume and
devour all. Insomuch that we may say, the whole Gospel consists in this
truth, and that the whole treasure of Christian consolation is bound up in this.

And therefore that we may both understand, and be affected with it, consider
these things:

First, By the promises of God we mean the promises of grace only. There 1. By
the promises of God here are meant only it is promises of grace.
is no grace to a sinner, but through Christ; and hereby we exclude the
promises by works, or the Covenant of works, of which we spoke the last day.
Although the Law does continue still in its force to us Christians; as it is a
Rule to order our conversation by, yet as it is a Covenant, so it is abolished:
No man being able to plead eternal life, by a Do this but by believing; and
therefore the Law as a Covenant, is so far from, being established or made
good by Christ, that it is directly opposite to him. So that the Law and the
promise are made by the Apostle two contra-distinct ways of justification: He
that seeks to be justified by the Law, falls off from Christ, and makes
him to be of none effect. Thus the promise by works is contrary to the promise
of grace through Christ; yet there have been some always in the Church, who
have endeavored to join those things which God has put so far asunder, and
that is the Law and the Gospel, the promise of works, and the promise of grace;
by which confusion they have made void the grace of God. For if Gods promise be
not solely of the grace of God, and every way of grace, then it is not at all
of grace, If of works, then not of grace. It is the Apostles infallible
argument, Romans 11. 6. It cannot be of grace and works also. Luther (Comment.
in Genes.) makes this properly Simony, when we would have Heaven for the
works we do; and thereupon says, Omnis homo naturaliter est Simoniacus. Now
how necessary is this truth to be known by every humbled and afflicted sinner?
How difficultly is he brought to the promise of grace, as if it were the
forbidden fruit, that he might not taste of it? This was the precious gold that
the first Reformers with much labor dug out of the mines of the Scripture:
it was the oil they poured into wounded hearts. In what a wilderness does the
child of God wander, till he has this pillar of fire to guide him? Peace and
joy cannot be obtained, till he come to this promise of grace in Christ. How
slavish, how servile is he; till he know that this only is the way of
justification, this only is the way of pardon and acceptance with God? And
Gods children, especially while in the pangs of conversion, or at any time
under deserlions and black fears about their estate, are to fly unto this, as
a City of Refuge. Many an heavy temptation, many an heartbreaking doubt would
be overcome, were thou once persuaded, that in the matter of justification,
thou must know nothing, live upon nothing, but the gracious promise of God in
Christ.

Secondly, We are to distinguish of promises: they are either fulfilled in 2.
Promises are fulfilled either in Christ or by him.
him, or fullfilled by him. For according to this division, so some do
differently understand the Text. For there are Interpreters that make this the
meaning, All the promises, viz. which have of old been foretold by the
Prophets, they were all Yea and Amen in him, that is, They were all fullfilled
in him; and in this sense all the promises are true, in him, ut subjecto. But
then others, they say, not only the promises of the Old Testament, but of the
New also, they are sure in him, because through his worth and dignity they are
accomplished; and thus the promises of God are Yea in him, ut fundamento, and
causa meritoria. But we are not to oppose these interpretations. For if we take
the promises of both kinds, they may well be applied to the Text: Yea the
latter do necessarily suppose the former: The former is to support our
assenting faith; the other, our siducial faith. For the first, we read of many
promises in the Old Testament, concerning a Messiah to come: and these were all
accomplished in that person, Jesus of Nazareth. The first promise that was made
concerning him, is Genes. 3. 15. where he is promised, As the seed of the woman
that should destroy the seed of the Serpent. Afterward he is more particularly
promised, As the seed of Abraham in whom all Nations should be blessed; which
the Apostle does industriously apply to Christ, and to Christ only, Galat. 3.
16. So that we may say, the promise made to Adam, the promise made to Abraham,
are fullfilled in Christ, they are Yea and Amen in him. Thus also the promise
of a Shiloh, the promise of a great Prophet whom God would raise up, the
promise of a King, who should sit upon David's threne, and of his Kingdom there
should be no end. The promise of a Messiah by the Prophet Daniel, were all yea
in Christ. When he came into the world, we might truly say, Behold the seed of
the woman, behold Abraham's seed, behold David's King, Jacobs Shiloh, Daniels
Messiah. Yea the Prophet Isaiah, who is justly called the fifth Evangelist,
because he does as plainly and clearly speak of Christ, as the Evangelists do,
All his promises concerning him, especially in Chap. 9. 6. To us a Child is
borne, to us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his shoulder.
As also Chap. 7. 14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and
shall call his Name Immanuel. But chiefly Chap. 53. where at large his
sufferings are foretold for our sins, That he was wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, and that by his stripes we are
healed. All these are made evidently Yea and Amen in him. And not only the
promises, but all the Levitical administrations, the Sacrifices, the
Scapegoat, the whole burnt Offering, the Paschal Lamb, these were types of
Christ, and were Yea in him; which made John the Baptist say, Behold the Lamb
of God that takes away the sins of the world, John 1. 29. Now the
consideration of this serves greatly to confirm our faith against Jews, who
blaspheme the Lord Christ, cavilling that those promises could not be applied
to him, and therefore they do expect another Messiah. Neither does the
usefullnesse of this truth stay there, but when it has persuaded us of the
true dogmatical faith, then it further inclines us to a fiducial recumbency
and reposing of our souls upon him, as our Prophet, and King, as our Christ,
who is to bring us into reconciliation with God. And this sense of the Text we
are to acknowledge; but then the other, which flows from this, is, That in
Christ all the promises of God to his Church are confirmed, they have their
virtue and efficacy from him. Without Christ there could not have been such
promises made, neither without him could they have been accomplished, as may
appear in the third particular; which is,

That the promises being the signs of Gods grace and favor, there could 3.
There could have been no promises without Christ.
neither have been the existency of promises, or the fullfilling of them
without Christ. And the reason is, because of that infinite holiness which is
in God, whereby he cannot but loath sinners, and his glorious Attribute of
Justice, whereby he is carried out to punish every such offender. This Justice
of God causes such a great gulf between us and God, that neither a gracious
promise can come to us, or we to it, till by the blood of Christ, this justice
be atoned, and a sufficient expiation made by his blood. No wonder then if all
Gospel-promises are said to be made in him, because the least good thing
promised could never be vouchsafed to us without Christ's mediation: There could
not be remission of sin, there could not be accepting of our persons, there
could not be the least drop of any blessing communicated to us, had not Christ
as our Surety interposed. Therefore it is not the promise, but Christ in the
promise, that the soul is by faith to receive. The Ens incomplexum, not
Complexum, is Objectum fidei, says the learned. The promise or proposition is
only Objectum quo; Christ, or the matter promised, is the Objectum quod. In
all promises then we are still to have our eye upon Christ, as without whom
they could not have any efficacy at all. So that as it is with the creatures,
they all subsist by his power, In him we live, and move, and have our being:
And if God should withdraw his arm, they would all fall into nothing. Thus it
is with the promises recorded in the Scripture, they all move and act (as it
were) in him; They all live, and work in him; were it nor for his merit, and
his Spirit, they would be but as empty words, or as a tinkling cymball.
Therefore

In the fourth place, The Covenant of Grace, which is virtually all the 4. And
therefore is the covenant of grace called a testament.
promises of God, it is not only called a Covenant, and a Promise, but a
Testament likewise. And that for this end, because it does necessarily relate
to the death of the Testatour: So that Gods promise is not to be conceived, as
when one man makes a promise to another absolutely, and without any thing
intervening. For here we have God indeed promising from his mere absolute
goodness and mercy: but then the execution of this cannot be without the blood
of Christ: so that all the force of the promise arises from the death of
Christ. The Apostle therefore argues the validity of this Covenant from that,
which is amongst men, Galat. 3. 15. A man's testament when it is confirmed,
cannot be disanulled or added unto; how much rather then must the testament of
Christ be confirmed for ever? The Apostle does excellently consider this, Heb.
9. 15. For this cause Christ is a Mediator of the New Testament, that by
means of death, -- they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. For where a testament is, there also must of necessity be the
death of the testatour. By which it appears, that the promises of God are
established upon a sure and unchangeable foundation, even the blood of Christ:
and therefore as sure as Christ died, so sure will those promises of God be
made effectual to thee. Indeed if Gods promises were Yea and Amen, according to
thy works, to thy worth and dignity, woe would be unto thee. Yea, though God
does require faith and repentance, yet the promises are not settled upon these,
as a foundation, but on Christ; and therefore it is, that our hopes, our
comforts can never be shaken. The promises then of God have two Pillars to bear
them up, though one be enough: The first is, The immutability and verity of
Gods Nature; he cannot change, he cannot lie. The other is, From the Merit and
Efficacy of Christ's death, whereby the things promised are deserved, and that
at a dear rate, even Christ's blood. Now then can any godly soul, give way to
unbelief, to sinful dejections, seeing that God cannot lie, and the blood of
Christ cannot but obtain, God cannot deny himself, neither can he deny his
only Son? Therefore let the godly soul remember this, Gods promise is not
only a bare promise, but Christ's Testament also: Insomuch that all spiritual
benefits are the fruit of his death; and shall we think that blood will be
shed in vain? Shall we give no more to Christ's Testament, then we will to a
man's? But this Doctrine deserves further enlarging.

SERMON. CXXVII.
Of the usefulness and unchangeablenesse of the Promises of God.

2 COR. 1. 20. For all the Promises of God, in him are yea, and in him amen,
ALl the promises of grace, you have heard, are established upon two immovable
pillars, Gods unchangablenesse, and the blood of Christ. To proceed from this,
follows First, That Deus absolutus, as Luther was wont to say, or Deus in
praedicamento substantiae, is a consuming fire, and we are nothing but stubble
before him: it must be God as in praedicamento relationis, as he is a God
promising mercy unto us in Christ; that is the ground of all our commerce and
fellowship with him. We are not to appear before God in confidence of our
obedience to his commands, but by faith in his promises: insomuch that the only
foundation we have to build upon in all our approaches unto him, is Gods
promise alone in Christ. The godly soul is to look with as much or more
cheerfulness on that, than Rahab could do on the scarlet thread held out, as a
commemorative sign to preserve her life: were it not for this promise in
Christ, who could, who might, who dare draw nigh to God the Father? So that it
is through Christ that the way is opened for us to come unto God. We may see
this notably prefigured, as it were in Gods dispensation with the people of
Israel, Exo. 33. 2, 3. for when they had by their sins greatly provoked God,
the Lord denied his presence to go along with them: I will not go up with thee,
lest I consume thee in the way: this shows, that such was Gods anger against
their iniquity that he could not bear it; It Is a speech taken from the humor
of men, otherwise the anger of the Lord is subject to his own power, only this
is spoken to show what distastefull objects they were to him; But though his
anger be thus against them, yet see what he promises, ver. 2. I will send my
Angel before thee: Here God would not go, but his Angel, now this Angel is
Christ, as appears Exodus 22. 20, 21, 22. where he is described as one, in
whose power it is to pardon iniquities, with this addition, for my Name is in
him. Observe then here a sweet Economy or dispensation of Gods dealing with
the people of Israel, as a President to inform us about all mankind; God would
not look upon mankind, neither would he behold, as it were, if he did, he
should immediately destroy them all; but he sends an Angel, he sends Christ
into the world, and so in and through him he becomes propitious to us: Now how
little is this understood by Christians, who do go to the promises upon their
own obedience? they think they believe, they repent, and in the mean while
Christ is not all in all, as if in our graces, in our performances: The
promises of God were yea and Amen, and not in God himself: It is a long while
ere the ministry of the Law has any efficacy upon men's hearts, ere they are
sensible of the weight and the heaviness of sin, ere they go bowed down
because of this burden; and when that has broken them, it is many times longer
ere they are directed to an Evangelicall life, ere they can tell how to make
use of the proper remedy, which is the promise of God in Christ; for all their
disputes and doubts arise from this, as if the fullfilling of the promises were
established upon themselves, and not upon Christ's blood. Truly if the humbled
sinner were well instructed in this principle, it would be like the rising of
the Sun, to dispell all darkness, for either the promises are made good
because of thy faith, and of thy repentance, or because of Christ's blood and
atonement through that; if because of the former, then no wonder thou art no
more quieted in thy mind, no wonder thy heart is so full of fears: for how
weak is thy faith? how strong and heavy is thy heart? if thou must be justified
by their worth, thou art undone. But then if Christ be the surety, if he has
undertaken for thee, and performed for thee what was required by the Law, then
thou may plead, though not for my sake, yet for Christ's sake let thy promise
be made good to me.

But the troubled soul will object very plausibly against this, Though Gods
promises are made good in Christ, yet there is the duty of faith and repentance
required of me, so that if I do not believe, if I do not repent, there is no
promise through Christ's blood established, that will do me any good: what? is
it your meaning, that though I am a sinner, and while I abide in my sins, I
should plead the promise of God in Christ? Is not this to dash my soul at the
Antinomian rock? This deserves a full answer.

And first, It must be acknowledged, that in this point it is hard to sail
between Ans. 1. It is hard to sail between the Arminian and Antinomian rock.
the Scylla and Charybdis of the Arminian error on one hand, and Antinomian on
the other side. For the Arminians they indeed make Christ to be the atonement
for our sins, but so that we must believe and repent, all which is true. But
then if it be asked, how come we to believe, and to repent? here they fly, in
part at least; to our own free will, for they deny that faith is purchased by
Christ's death; so that by their doctrine the whole fruit of Christ's death
stands suspense and indeterminate, till it be determined by our faith.
Christ's death is made effectual to us by our believing; and this believing is
not wrought in us by Christ's Spirit, nor is it bestowed on us as the fruit of
his death, but only we joining with the grace of God do make the redimibility
which was before faith, by faith to be actual redemption. And the Papist he
erreth more grossly herein, for he adds further, that our faith and
repentance, yea, all holy works are causal conditions, such as are meritorious,
and have an inward condignity and proportion to the reward. Thus generally the
Papists, though some of them deny this merit and causality; But the Antinomian
falls into another extremity, for he does so offer Christ and his promises to
a man, as if nothing at all were required on man's part, and therefore tells a
sinner that it is his duty while a sinner, and abiding in that state, to
receive the promise; yea, one goes so far Saltmarsh.
as to say, that Christ did believe for us, Christ did repent for us, and
therefore that we are not bound to believe or repent, but only to rest on
Christ that he has done these things for us. Thus you see, here are two
extreme opinions, and it is very hard for the soul in its first troubles and
pangs to be guided out of this wilderness: how many have been seduced by
Antinomian errors, under the specious pretense of free grace? and how many
again have fallen into Armintan and Popish principles, thinking that way to
assuage their bleeding hearts? but the Scripture truth does lie between these
two; for Christ, and so the promises, are not applicable to sinners as sinners,
whether they believe or not believe, whether they repent or not repent, but do
require indispensably of all grown persons faith and repentance; but yet on the
other side, this faith and repentance of ours, have no merit or dignity in
them, nor are they the effect and fruit of our own will and power, but are the
gifts of Gods grace, and the consequent of Christ's death, so that Christ did
not only die for our sins, he did not only dye to confirm the promises to us,
but he died also to give us faith and repentance, that by them we might be
qualified subjects for such glorious mercies. Hence the Scripture makes faith
and repentance to be the gifts of Gods grace, as well as remission and pardon
of sin. These duties then are necessarily required of us, that the promises
may be made good to us, against the Antinomians; yet these duties are Gods
gift, and the work of his spirit, not the issues of our free will; against the
Arminians.

Therefore in the second place, when a Christian comes to make use of a
promise, 2. A Christian in making use of a promise must not oppose it to
Christ, nor Christ to it.
he must not oppose Christ and his duties, but compose them together: he must
subordinate his duties to Christ. We complain that the Popish doctrines oppose
Christ and duties, even as the Apostle argues against the Galathians, who by
works of the Law made Christ of none effect: and we cannot deny but the heart
of man is so prone to put confidence in what we do, and although we disclaim
the merit of works, yet to have a secret rest of the soul upon them, that it is
very difficult to keep within our bounds, but yet we are also to know that
every thing in Christianity is very hard to flesh and blood. Any thing
graciously done, is exact, and accurately commensurated to the rule of God:
whereas such is the instability and unrulinesse of man naturally, that he is
apt to run from one extreme to another, and while he seeks to avoid one, to
fall into another: our duty therefore is, to rest upon Christ alone in the
promises, as the meritorious and fundamental cause, yet diligently to pursue
after holiness, as that which qualifieth the subject for the glorious things
promised: God has required these duties of thee, therefore be thou as faithful
and diligent in the performance of them, as if there were no Christ, no
Mediator: And again, be thou as wholly recumbent on Christ, as if thou had
no faith, no repentance at all; distinguish between the necessary presence of
them, and the causality of them. Thus it ought to be the wisdom and skill of
Ministers so to preach and exalt Christ, as thereby no duties are to be omitted
or neglected: And again so powerfully and exactly to press duties, that Christ
be not in the least manner disrobed of his glory; for although Christ
interposeth between the Fathers wrath and us, yet you must not so understand
it, as if by our sins we could not provoke Christ; as if through our unbeleef
and impenitency, we might not cause him of a lamb to be like a roaring lion: We
must not apprehend Christ to have only mercy in him, and all wrath to be in God
the Father only: for observe that counsel given to the people of Israel
concerning this Angel, who was to guide them, which is Christ, Exodus 23. 21.
Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not, for my Name is in him.
Though then the promises are established upon Christ, yet take heed of
provoking him by impenitency, for even Christ will be a judge against thee
because of thy disobedience: Well, let all this be granted, yet still the
tender and broken heart will object: I dare not lay hold on the promises, they
do not belong to me; I find so much unworthiness, so much dullness and
stupidity, that though others What a Christian ought to do in his doubtings of
his interest in the promises. 1. He is not to ascend into the high points of
predestination and universal redemption.
may plead the promise, yet my heart is so full of fears and confusion, that I
dare not do it. What therefore should a Christian, doubting whether the
promises do belong to him, do in that darkness and perplexity which is upon
him?

And first, we grant, That a Christian so exercised, is not to ascend up to
those high points of predestination, or the universal redemption by Christ's
death. We do not require of thee to ascend up into heaven, as it were, to
search into the Book of life, whether thy Name be written there, and then to
say, the promise belongs to thee. This absurd and preposterous course some
would fasten upon those, who hold the doctrine of Gods absolute election; as if
from that it did necessarily follow, that no Christian humbled for sin might
apply the promises, till they first know whether they be elected or no. And
again, those that plead for Universal redemption by Christ, they think, that
unless that be received, we cannot rationally persuade any humbled sinner to
apply a particular promise to himself, that Christ loved him, and gave himself
for him; but no afflicted sinner is to run to any of these doctrines, but is
out of the sense of his unworthiness, to go as boldly to Christ in the
promise, as if none of those doctrines had ever been disputed by learned men.

For in the second place, We are to make Gods commands and invitations the 2.
He should make Gods command and invitation his ground of drawing nigh to a
promise.
ground of our drawing nigh to the promise. If then the Scripture be full of
such gracious invitations to all that are hungry and thirsty, to all that are
humbled and debased under their unworthiness, to come and find rest for their
souls; yea, if the Scripture commands such as are poor in spirit, with all holy
boldness to draw nigh to the throne of grace, then here is their warrant, from
this, they are to encourage themselves; so that the truly humbled sinner is
only to hearken what the word of God commands. Art thou one who find thy
self undone? Do thou f^el thy self to be a lost man? then know it is Gods
will and command to come unto him for pardon: Thou art bound in conscience, if
thou will not dishonor God, nor damn thy own soul, to eat of this tree of
life. Never then perplex thy self about these thoughts, whether the promises of
God belong to thee or no; for it is plain, They belong to such who are sick
under the sense of sin, who are burdened under the weight of it; and if the
promises belong not to such as thou art, they belong to none in the world: and
withal set this home upon thy soul, that the longer thou keep off from the
promise, the worse it is with thee; the work of faith will be the more
difficult; the longer thou suffer this wound to fester, the more difficultly
will it be cured: The longer thou wandrest in this wilderness, the more hard
it will be at last to enter into Canaan: the longer the water is muddied, the
harder will it be to see the face. For when all is done, and thou have disputed
thy self out of breath, thou must come to this at last, even to lay hold upon
the promise by particular application, Shall Esther resolve to go into the
Kings presence, though no Scepter of Invitation were held out, saying, If I
perish, I perish? how inexcusable then will thou be if thou drawest back, when
the Scepter is held out? No wonder if Adam did run from God, endeavoring to
hide himself from his presence upon his transgression; for as yet he had
received no promise from God. But how will thou plead for thy self, when the
promise is indefinitely propounded to every one that finds the need thereof?
This is certain, it is inevitable ruin to run from the promise; where will thou help thy self, if thou flyest from it? There is no other way, but this Ark
to escape drowning: Therefore remember, it is not disputing, but resting of thy
soul on Christ, that will at last quiet thy spirit.

In the next place, in that all the promises of God are thus Amen in Christ; it
The promises being ^ounded upon will never be altered or changed.
follows, That they will never be altered and changed; that they are more
immovable than the Laws of Medes and Persians: so that although David and
others of Gods Children, have sometimes sadly complained, Has the Lord forgot
for ever? yet this was from their imbecility, attending more to the dead womb
of second causes than to Gods truth. For God can no more break his promise,
than he can ceafe to be God; and truly herein the heart of a godly man should
greatly rejoice. The promises depend not upon thy strength, upon thy
perseverance, upon thy good use of the opportunities enjoyed by thee, but upon
Christ alone. How often have thou, as much as lies in thee, made the promises
of none effect to thee? but the promises keep thee, and not thou the promises,
God cannot break his promise. Oh pray to God for an heart that is yea and Amen,
as well as the promises: say, O Lord, I would gladly have faith as firm as the
promises; I desire my soul may be Yea and Amen as well as they are. Oh how full
is the Scripture of sweet and comfortable promises? But we are dejected and
desolate, not at all attending to them; so that it is with us, as Pythagoras
fancied about the heavens, viz. that they made most admirable music in their
motion, but our ears through continual use are stupefied, and hear them not.
To be sure, the Scripture vouchsafes excellent music and ravishing joy to a
gracious heart, but that many times attends not to it. But you may say, If
this be so, that God breaks not his promise, how shall we understand that
place, Number. 14. 34? where God threatening the people of Israel for their
murmuring against them, and that their carcases should fall in the wilderness;
then says God, ye shall know my breach of promise, or as in the margin, my
altering of my purpose. Here it should seem God may break his promise: to this
it may be answered, if we follow this Translation, that God speaks of that
particular promise about their entering into the land of Canaan, which was
conditional, if they did not rebel against him; and so they not fullfilling
the condition, God is there said to break his promise. But others render the
Hebrew word otherwise, as some translate it, ultionem meam, my revenge: The
Hebrew word Tenuathi, comes of Noah to break; and as it is applied to words
and promises, so also to other things; and therefore the most genuine
translation is abruptionem meam, you shall know my breaking, that is as some,
that disobedience whereby you have broken your selves from me; or else, which
is most probable, that breaking which I have made upon you, because of your
sins; you shall know I have divided my self from you for your iniquites; and
this I conceive most genuine.

The Use is of Instruction: would we ever have the promises of God fullfilled
to us, then the way is to get an interest in Christ; the promises are
fullfilled in him, and therefore without Christ, without the promises. He is
the heir, and therefore contrary to those in the Parable; Let us not kill him,
but obey him, and receive him for our Lord, and then the inheritance will be
ours. Can thou upon good grounds say, Christ is mine? then thou may also
say, all the promises are mine: but know Christ cannot be thine upon any other
terms than by forsaking all thy sins, though never so pleasant and profitable:
Christ cannot be thine, unless you leave every thing else for him. This is the
pearl that we must sell all to make ours; and truly no tongue is able to
express, or heart to conceive the desperate condition of those, to whom no
promise of grace does belong: they are herein like the damned in hell. It is
true, in your extremities, in your terrors, you will call for mercy, cry out
for pardon; but where is the Christ, in whose name this is to be obtained?
Certainly if Christ be yours, the spirit of Christ also, subduing your lusts
and sins for you.

SERMON. CXXVIII.
The Promises give glory to God both as they are made by him, and believed by
us.

2 COR. 1. 20. And in him amen, unto the glory of God by us.
WE are now arrived at the final cause or end of Gods promises, and their
confirmation in Christ, which is said to be Gods glory, and that by us. The
Ministers of the Gospel are the instruments who do offer these promises, and so
God is glorified by their ministerial labors. Some copies indeed read our
glory (...) for (...), expounding it in this sense, that it is the glory of the
Ministers of the Gospel to proclaim the year of Jubilee, the acceptable time of
Gods promises; but that is not so probable. Some also, as we have formerly
hinted, read it thus; and therefore in him is Amen, to the glory of God. Thus
the Vulgar Latin, and one Manuscript Greek copy, which Calvin does commend,
calling that connection we have, frigida, a frigid and cold one; whereas this
does notably discover the duty of all believers, that they are to set to their
Amen as a Seal to Gods Promises: and certainly it is a blessed thing for the
people of God to be nourished up in the Evangelicall Amen. We do with more ease
use the word Amen optatively, Let it be so, then confirmatively, So it is. For
if we did give our Amen in this latter sense to the promises, our hearts would
have full quietness and serenity after our prayers: when we had cast our
burden upon the Lord, then we should no more disquiet our selves with doubting
thoughts, whether the Lord will fulfill his promises or no. So that this Amen
would exclude all ergo's, all arguings and doubtful disputations we are apt to
molest our selves with. Now although we shall not follow those copies that
read it so, yet that sense must necessarily be included; for then are promises
to Gods glory, when they are believed and received by us. Let us then seriously
consider the end of Gods promises; why has he taken such a full and sure way
for believers? The Text tells us, it is for the glory of God; we would think
the promises had this rather for their end, to bring salvation to us; and so
indeed that is a subordinate end, but the Apostle he instanceth in the
principal and chiefest end of all, which is Gods glory. And therefore
Chrysostom does well observe upon this Text, that this is a sure argument to
prevail with God in our Petitions, for the accomplishment of Gods promises; for
though he might neglect our salvation, yet he will not his own glory, says he:
though thy happiness be no argument, yet his own honor will be a motive to
prevail: so that the words then afford this Observation.

That the promises of God are made on his part, and are to be believed on our
part The promises of God are made and are to be believed to his glory.
to the glory of God.

When we believe Promises, we do not only advantage our selves, but we also
glorify God: This is not sufficiently thought of, for we are apt to look upon
faith in a Promise as that which is for our comfort, our profit only, and do
not attend that. hereby also we do exceedingly glorify God. Hence Abraham is
said, Romans 4. 20. to be strong in faith, giving glory unto God: That the
usefulness of this doctrine may appear, we will consider the Promises, first
on Gods part who promises them, and show how this makes to the great glory of
God, and then on the believers part, while he gives his Amen to them.

And for the first, Gods glory is exceedingly manifested in promises, by these
Wherein the glory of God is manifested in his promises. 1. Hereby his goodness
is known.
particularly.

First, Hereby his bounty and goodness is made known. The Lord, as you heard;
formerly, was infinitely sufficient in his own self: Nothing can add to the
blessedness of God, no more than a feather can to the weight of a mountain.
Had God created no world, or creatures therein, he had been altogether happy in
himself when he made the creatures: It was not for that end that Eve was to
Adam, to be a meet help to him; No, it was his plentiful goodness, for bonum
quo melius, eo magis diffusivum. God is said indeed to make all things for
himself, he is the end of all: but as Lessius the Jesuit expresses it, he is
not finis indigentiae, but assimilationis; not an end of indigency; as if he
wanted any thing by us, but an end of assimilation and perfection, whereby he
would reduce the rational creatures to his own likeness: we may then with
enlarged hearts admire the goodness of God in all his promises: Has the Lord
promised to be gracious, to pardon sin, to sanctify and subdue corruptions,
give glory to God in all these things: Be like a David, a sweet singer of the
praises of God, thou may read in every promise the glorious attribute of
Gods goodness and bounty.

Secondly, As we may see the glory of his goodness in promises, so also the
glory 2. His love.
of his love: We may there read how great his affections are to us, he lays
aside as it were his absolute Majesty, his terrible greatness, and
condescendeth to deal with us in a way of promise; he gives us leave by this
to have confident and familiar converse with him: so that as it was the
unspeakable love of God to become man for our sakes; thus also it is to become
in promise to us: so that whereas the Majesty of God might affright us, his
commands and threatenings might amaze us. Now his promises they give us
encouragement, and we are with Moses admitted as it were to speak to God face
to face, as one familiar friend to another; he gives us the key when he makes
a promise, to come into his chamber of presence when we will, or to go in his
wine-cellar for all spiritual refreshments: when you come with a promise, you
have a mandamus as it were for every door to open to you, and to receive you
in: These promises of God, like Peter's Angel, does break up all the strong bars
of any prison we are in; any difficulty we are afflicted with: As Dalilah
gathered Sampson loved her, when he would manifest where his strength was, so
may we assure our selves of Gods love to us, by revealing his promises; oh if
you bring the promises, you bind the hands as it were of the Almighty, he can
do nothing against his promises: when therefore any thoughts of Gods Majesty,
of Gods purity and holiness, may affright thee, run to his promise; and as the
people of Israel when amazed, under the terrible lightnings and thundrings at
Gods presence, in giving the Law cried out, Let not God speak any more to us
but Moses: so do thou: let not thy Majesty speak, thy Justice speak, thy
Holiness speak, but thy Promise, let that speak, and we will hear.

Lastly, The freeness of Gods grace is made very glorious and resplendent in
3. The freeness of his grace.
the promises of grace: Free Grace is more than love or goodness and bounty.
for Adam while in the state of integrity had those, but free grace is only
where a miserable and hopeless sinner is: Now to such an one belong only
curses and threatenings: when therefore in stead of a threatening like a roaring
lion to devour thee, thou meetest with a gracious promise to embrace thee, this
must needs rejoice thy heart: Go to the spring head of every promise, and thou will find it to be alone free grace. The Scripture uses these Arguments as
equivalent, to have a thing by grace, to have it by a promise, and to have it
by faith, for grace is the original and fountain: Promises are on Gods part
the active and communicative means, faith on our part is the receptive and
applicative; so that when we enjoy any mercy by Gods promise, thereby is
excluded all works and all boasting, and thus God is altogether exalted and man
debased.

Again, if we come to the second particular, there we shall see how that our
Amen, subscribed to the promises, or our firm believing in them, does give
glory to God: and this is the more to be pressed, because we are apt to have
low thoughts of faith; as we see in Popery, where Charity is far preferred
before it, and withal, to believe is accounted an easy thing: Thus also the
Papists charge us, as if we made the way to heaven a broad way, because we say,
they must believe, that is the soul and life of all. And further, it is good to
press this, because the people of God look upon faith (as was hinted before)
only as their ease, not as bringing any glory to God: Hence, though they never
doubt whether they should repent of sin, or love God, yet they do very much
doubt about their duty of believing. Now all this preposterousnesse arises
from the want of consideration in this particular, that Faith gives glory to
God as well as procures mercies to our selves, yea, to believe in the promise
is the great and signal eminent way of giving glory to God. How faith in Gods
promises gives glory to him? 1. Hereby we acknowledge our dependence upon him.


First, because by believing in Gods promises, we thereby proclaim our
dependence upon him in all things, that we live both spiritually and corporally
upon him only; so that faith in this consideration is the great duty of the
first commandment, That requires us we should have no other Gods besides him:
Thus faith does, it takes off from all supports of sense of second causes, of
all humane advancements, and setleth us upon the promise of God alone: Now must
not this needs give glory to God, when God alone is set up, no creature, no
other help is looked upon; This is that which makes faith in the promises so
difficult, because it is so hard to be weaned from the breasts of the creature:
we know not how to swim without these bladders; Though we have ten thousand
promises to support us, yet one cross providence does more to unsettle us,
then all these promises to confirm and quiet us; Some have observed, that all
the letters in the Name Jehovah, are literae quiefcentes, teaching us thereby
to rest our souls alone upon him, it may be that is too curious, howsoever
faith may be called the acquiescent or quietative grace; therefore to believe
in the promises is to give glory to God,

Secondly, By believing in the promises we glorify God, because hereby we 2
Hereby we manifest him to be the truth it self.
manifest him to be truth it self, the supreme and infallible truth, Therefore
the Scripture makes the contrary to this a very heinous sin, highly
dishonouring God, as when it is said, John 3. 33. He that receives the
testimony of Christ (which is by faith) has set to his seal, that God is true:
Then on the contrary, he that does not receive it, he sets to his seal, that
God is a liar: Oh execrable blasphemy, so much unbeleef is so much giving the
lie to God; and if this be so heinous a sin, then believing does God as much
honor. And truly it must be unpardonable, if we who do upon a man's promise
rest our selves contented, and never doubt of the performance; especially when
a just and honest man; that we should not much rather rely upon God, of whom
the Scripture says, It is impossible he should lie.

Thirdly, Herein does believing in Gods promise so exceedingly glorify 3.
Hereby we exalt Gods way of justification.
God, because it exalts that Evangelicall way of our justification and
salvation, which God above all things purposed for his own glory. The works of
Creation are for the demonstration of Gods glory: Whether we eat or drink, we
are to do all for the glory of God. But the way of man's salvation is in a more
signal and eminent manner ordered for Gods glory. This is the mystery that
has astonished all the world; This is that glorious truth which the Angels
desire to search into more and more; Now by faith this glory of God is
published and acknowledged. Take the despairing sinner, look upon the damned in
hell, do they give God the glory of his grace, and of his wisdom and mercy? Do
they with cordial ravishments speak of the unsearchable riches of Gods grace
in Christ? No, they cannot do it; therefore the Believer only is he who gives
God the glory due to him for all Gospel-wayes, and all Evangelicall
Privileges. Therefore has God exalted Faith above all its fellow-graces,
because that above all graces does give God the glory due to him. Indeed in the
state of Integrity, their love of God had the pre-eminence, as it shall also
have in Heaven; but in the state of grace, there Faith has the Excellency: God
has taken off the royal Crown from that Vasthi, and put it upon this Esther,
this despicable grace, as it were, and which has no Pomp at all in it; Only as
it is said of Christ, who being poor made many rich; So this poor grace does
not only enrich us, but every way advances the Glory of God; Insomuch that
from the unbeleever God has no more glory than if he had never sent his Son
into the world; No more glory than if there were no promise, no grace, no mercy
and pardon: Let not then the People of God have low thoughts of Faith: No, thou
do more in believing, and b^ingest more glory to God thereby, than thou
could do by all thy other obedience. Should thou mortify sin to thy
desire? Should thou dye a Martyr for the Cause of God? thou would not so
glorify God as thou do by believing. I know this seems very Paradoxall to
the humbled sinner: I know he is difficultly persuaded, that by trusting in
God, he does thus glorify God; but if thou understandest the Scripture-way,
then thou will quickly see, as to believe is the most difficult duty, so it is
the most consequentiall for Gods glory: And indeed what have other Duties
admirable in them, that Faith it self in the Promise has not? in believing the
understanding is mortified, in believing the will is crucified, in believing
the Heart and Affections are martyred: So that faith makes a man to be offered
up as an whole burnt-offering unto God.

Use of Instruction, That the only way to make a man live a joyful life in
himself, and a glorifying life of God, is by faith in the Promises. This is
that Faith by which a just man is said to live; so that thy doubts, thy fears,
thy unbeleeving thoughts, these bring a dishonor to God, these reproach the
Gospel-way: these obscure the honor of Christ. Let then the godly soul take
heed how it gives way unto such temptations; if your own consolation, if the
glory of God be dear unto you, then bolt out unbeleef. No wonder if the devil
that is so great an enemy to the glory of God, does assault your souls most in
this; if he have broken down this part of the wall, what legions of other
sins may not he bring with them. For this reason many Divines say, Sola
infidelit as damnat, which is not to be understood as if other sins were not
meritorious of damnation, yea, and did actually damn; only that opposes the
Physician, that would heal us, that refuses the atonement that is made for us.

Secondly, As the Promises are thus to be improved for Gods glory by believing,
so also attend to another effect, which the Scripture does infer from them,
and that is to cleanse our selves, to be every day perfecting holiness. For so
the Apostle notably exhorts us, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having these Promises, let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit: Promises are no
ways incentives to sin, or encouragements to evil works: No, but a strong
antidote against them. Neither is faith in them a light superficial assent,
swimming upon the heart as a fowl in the water, said Luther: but as water
calefied does no more manifest its own coldness, but the heat of the water, so
does faith fermentate and leaven the whole soul of a man, that humane things do
not so much appear as divine things in him: As the Apostle expresses the
energy of it, when he said, I no longer live, but Christ in me; and that life
is by faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. Thou then that say, all thy trust
is in the Promises, thou hopest in them for mercy and pardon: Are they
cleansing Promises, purifying Promises? Do they perfect holiness every day in
thee through the fear of God?

SERMON. CXXIX.
Our Settlement and establishment in the faith of the Promises is the gracious
work of God alone.

2 COR. 1. 21. Now he which establishes us with you in Christ, and has
anointed us, is God.
THe Apostle having formerly spoken of his constancy and unchangeableness in
the preaching of the Gospel, lest this should be attributed to his own power,
he informs them, who is the fountain of this strength, even God himself: For
the Apostle does upon all occasions delight to exalt grace, having
experimentally found the mighty work of it upon his own soul. Or we may make
the coherence this, The Apostle in the verse preceding spoke of the certainty
of Gods Promises in themselves; they were in themselves Yea and Amen; which is
called, certitudo objecti, though some learned men think, that it is not a
proper expression. Now in this Verse he comes to the certitudo subjecti, or to
show whence it is that the children of God have this assured persuasion in
their own hearts, that they are true and constant; whence it is that we are
able to give our Amen, as a note of confirmation to them, and therefore in the
words we may take notice of

The blessed and happy Effect it self, and that is 1. Confirmation, he which
stablisheth.

2. The Subject of this, us with you.

3. The Object in whom, in Christ.

4. The efficient Cause of this, is God.

5. The Illustration of this Establishment, by a threefold Similitude, of
anointing, sealing, and giving the earnest.

6. By whom God does this, and that is, by his Spirit, as it follows in the
next verse.

So that in these two Verses is the proper seat of that excellent and precious
Doctrine, Which is, The assuring and sealing of the Spirit of God that is given
unto Believers. But I begin with the First.

It is God that establishes us, (...), though we render it now, yet some make
it causal, for he that stablisheth us, etc. and that seems more probable. The
Greek word is (...), or (...), which Varinus makes the same with (...) and
(...), as if the Adjective (...) used by the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 10. is made the
same by Hesychius, with (...), that which cannot be shaken, or altered; this
word is sometimes used of the Doctrine of Christ, when that was confirmed, and
made sure by miracles, or otherwise, Mark. 16. 20. Thus an oath is said to be
the confirmation of the end of a strife, Heb. 6. 16. or else of persons, as
here in the Text, and Col. 2. 7. stablished in the Faith. which being used
passively, denotes that this strength and power we have, comes from God only.
That we of our selves are like reeds shaken with every wind. It is the grace
of God that makes us pillars in his Church. So that, from the Text we may
observe,

That our establishing and confirming in the faith of the promises is alone the
Our establishing in the faith of the promise is the gracious work of God alone.
gracious work of God.

Though the Promises be never so lovely and precious, though never so
profitable and necessary for us, yet we are not able to rest our selves upon
them, but by the power of God strengthening us. Our hearts do so quake and
tremble with the consideration of our own sins, and unworthiness, that unless
the Lord make it steadfast and immovable, we are tossed up and down like the
leaves of a tree. That it is God alone who does thus preserve and confirm us is
plain, by that notable place, 1 Pet. 5. 10. where the Apostle prays, that God
who had called them would make them perfect, stablish, strengthen, and settle
them. The Apostle having before spoken of resisting the Devil, and of
exspecting afflictions, because flesh and blood would soon sinck under these
burdens, he directs his prayer unto God for them, as knowing, if they had no
better preservers than themselves, they were utterly undone. Now, although by
that multiplication of words, the Apostle might seem to mean the same thing,
yet every word has its peculiar emphasis: for the word (...), that is used of
nets, when they are to be mended, as Mark 1. 19. and thereby is employed, That
the work of Grace, which we are as it were weaving every day, would quickly be
all broken, did not the Grace of God constantly restore it. It is also used of
members and parts of the body, when broken and set fast again by the skill of
the Surgeon; and thus it supposes how apt every believer is of himself to
break all his grace into pieces, did not the power of God daily preserve him.
It shows hereby, that there is no such thing as perfection in this life. The
other word is (...), which sigrifieth firmly to stablish a thing, for it is
more then (...), of which it is derived, so that it implies, God does as it
were bear us up by his hand, and support us, that we fall not under those
temptations we meet with. This denotes the firmness of their condition; for
although Moses hands did wax weary, yet Gods will not. The next word is (...),
and that properly signifies to confirm inwardly, by taking away all that
sinful weakness, that is apt to arise in us. The ^a^ is, (...), which
signifies, so to settle as to lay a foundation, thus Heb. 1. 10. it is used of
Gods laying the foundation of the earth at the beginning; denoting that the
people of God in the work of Grace have as sure and immovable a foundation
laid, as the very heavens and earth have. For this confirmation does much
relate to our perseverance, that we shall never fall off from that state of
savor we are in, but that God who has begun will also finish. Hence some
contend that these words are to be read in the future tense, God will
establish, and not by way of prayer. To amplify this Doctrine, many things are
to be taken notice, of, as

First, God may be said to establish us two ways, either in the thing it 1.
God may be said to establish us either in the grace it self, or in our
apprehension of it.
self, or else in our knowledge and apprehension. These may be separated from
each other; God does and will establish his people, to their lives end, and
till they come to the end of their race; the greatest temptations and
afflictions shall not break their interest in the favor of God: but then they
may not have certain knowledge, they may be tossed up and down with diverse
fears, that they are but hypocrites, that they shall never persevere, that they
shall not be able to hold out to the end. Therefore the people of God are to
pray for and expect this twofold establishing at Gods hand; both that God would
preserve the work of grace in their hearts, as also assure them hereof, and
confirm them in a powerful persuasion of it; that is, it is in it self sure,
so it may be to them, to which purpose that command is, make your calling and
election sure; 2 Pet. 1. 10. (...), that is not in it self, but to their own
sense and apprehension, and it is of this latter establishing the Text
principally speaks, though it necessarily presupposes the other.

2. This effect which God is said to work, implies what miserable, weak, and
2. We are not able of our selves to do any thing toward the work of grace
impotent creatures we are, as to the work of grace, or any assurance by it.
That as the world cannot enlighten it self, if God withdraw the Sun, it is
wholly in darkness: Thus is it with every man, though made godly. All this
spiritual building would fall to the ground again; of spiritual thou would
become carnal, did not God uphold thee: and then if thou had obtained any
assurance about thy condition, fears and doubts would presently fill thy heart,
if God does not shine into thy soul. Thus as the earth without the Heavens
would be as it was at first, a confused Chaos, so is the heart of man without
the daily Influence of Gods grace upon it. But this will come in more
pertinently upon the next particular, in the Division of this Text.

3. We are therefore to consider wherein lies this establishing work of Gods
3. Wherein lies the establishing work of Gods grace. 1. In preparing the
understanding to it.
grace: and that does consist in some things antecedently, and something
formally, by way of intrinsecal constitution. For the First.

Confirmation being properly upon the will, and the affections. Before this can
be done, It is necessary that the understanding of a man, which is a guide to
all the other powers of the soul, that it be prepared and formed by God there
unto. The work of God therefore is, to illuminate and inlighten the mind, that
so thereby the heart of a man may be more settled upon the Promises. And for
How God prepares the understanding. 1. By discovering our own infirmity.
Illumination that does manifest it self in these Particulars;

1. God does discover unto us our own infirmity and impotency; that we are not
able in the least measure to confirm our selves. We experimentally find, how
often purposes and resolutions were upon us to those things that were good, how
often like Sampson we did suffer our selves to be bound by many obligations,
and decrees of spirit, but (alas) upon every emergent temptation we did
immediately break all again. That which Austin did so bitterly complain of in
himself, viz. the uncertainty and inconstancy of his desires. The same may
every one find, while left to his own strength. It is therefore a special
preparatory work of God, for our settlement, to make us see our own
self-emptiness. When Peter had confidence of his own spiritual ability, in what
a sad revolt did it end? he that had more than ordinary confidence, fell into
more than ordinary fear. So that, it is a great work of God, when he fully
informs us, that we are nothing, and can do nothing. Though we have ten
thousand Promises set before our eyes, yet we are not able to reach forth the
hand, to lay hold upon any of them.

2. Another Object about which we are enlightened preparatorily to our 2. The
acceptablenesse of the work of says.
settlement, is the acceptableness of the work of Faith: That it is his will we
should depend wholly upon him; that whatsoever burden we feel upon us by our
sins, yet it is the way he takes delight in, that we should wait on him,
trust in him, roll our staggering souls as it were upon him: and this is no
mean work of God, thus to inform and direct a man. For what is it that makes
the afflicted sinner for his sins be tossed up and down with such fears and
doubts? is it not because he seeeth nor that it is his duty to cast himself
into the arms of Christ: he does not consider how severely it is commanded,
insomuch that that very sin of not believing, of not resting our souls upon
the Lord Christ would damn us, if there were nothing else. How happy then is
it! and in what good forwardness are they for establishment, who begin thus to
be enlightened? who are thus persuaded? Though I cannot believe, yet it is my
duty to believe. Its not Gods will that I should excruciate my self with these
tormenting doubts. I am sure to be damned if I go not to Christ the Savior, if
I take not this way, there is no way for me to take; and thus we have got
advantage, when we are come thus far. And that this may be done, all those
Texts which do either command faith, or commend faith, are very often in his
mind.

3. The mind of a man is antecedently wrought upon for establishment by
illumination, concerning the Evangelical way of grace wherein God does
vouchsafe 3. The evangelicall way of Gods vouchsafing mercy to the soul.
all spiritual mercies to the broken in heart. For the spirit of God does not
enable us to cry Abba Father, till our understandings are opened to know that
glorious Gospel-way Christ has taken for to save the humbled sinners; the sum
whereof is this, That it is in believing, not in working, Romans 4. the Apostle
argues against all conceits of Justification by the works we do; yea, that
Abraham himself, though so eminent in holiness, did not obtain remission of
sins hereby, and in other places the righteousness of faith, and the
righteousness of works are made immediately opposite to one another. It is then
a special mercy of God to have the judgment of a man satisfied in this truth,
although the poor humbled sinner cannot yet repose himself in the bosom of a
Promise, though he does nothing but stagger and reel up and down by fears and
temptations; yet this is no small proficiency to arrive at the certain
persuasion of this Doctrine. For we see in the Apostles days that this very
Doctrine was called into question, and is it not still by Papists and others
arraigned, as teaching men Presumption and Security? and truly, as the head of
a man may invent many plausible Arguments against the truth of it; so the heart
of a man is naturally proud, and self-righteous, and therefore is hardly
brought off from works to faith; for faith seems not to have that activity
for justification as love and other graces have, though indeed that be the life
and soul of all, the primum vivens, and ultimum moriens. As it is with the
roots of trees, they have no sweetness nor comeliness in them, when the fruit
thereof has: Thus when good works are glorious and precious, faith from whence
they have their life and being seems contemptible. But this order the spirit
of God takes, before it is a sealing and a witnessing spirit unto us. It is
also an enligtening and teaching spirit, and that especially in this grand
truth, which is the sum of the Gospel, viz. that by faith, and not by works, we
become justified before God: and where his Gospel Light has not taken place in
any afflicted conscience for sin, Oh the unspeakable temptations, oh the woeful
days and nights that they meet with. When the spirit of God has thus
antecedently wrought upon the judgment, then in the next place comes this
chief and special work of establishing and settling the heart. And as it is in
planting of a tree, first the briars and thorns which cumbred the ground
before, must be removed, and then the tree is planted. Thus also it is with
God, while settling the heart of a man upon the Promises; he does first remove
that which is prohibent, and hindering of this confirmation, and positively
inables it to rest upon Christ; even as the sun does first dispel the darkness,
and then introduce the light.

The two Impediments to our establishment on the Promises alone are 2. In
settling the and removing the impediments.
Presumption on the one hand, and Despair on the other; for those are the two
Generals as it were, under which all the other sins opposite to this way, are
comprehended;

The first is Presumption, and that is the damnable estate of most men, they 1.
Presumption.
are secure in their own condition, they rest contented in their own
righteousness and goodness. Now these indeed are settled but upon a rotten
foundation, these have no changes, no inconstancies of spirit arising from the
fear that is in them, but are therefore the more dangerous. Such as these are
the most untractable and unteachable, both about the promises of God, and their
dependence on them; you can no more remove them out of their Presumption than
mountains out of their places, the saddest subject in the world to preach upon,
or to preach unto; for they have door upon door, and bolt upon bolt, that must
be opened, ere you can make any way for Christ or the Promises in their souls.
All the weapons taken out of Gods word are peesently dulled, when they fall
upon them, like a bullet in a pack of wool. When we come to such upon their
sick beds, we know not how to begin with them, what to say to them; for
whatsoever is said, they are confident it is in them; and all this while its
nothing but Presumption, and spiritual security of soul.

The other is Despair, with all diffidence and distrustful fears that incline
2. Despair.
thereunto. This (I confess) is not so common as the other. We have very few
that cry out of their sins, fearing they are greater then can be forgiven.
But some there are that are ready to be swallowed up in this whirlpool. When
therefore God does confirm the heart of man in the Promises, both these sins
are removed, he is no longer a self-righteous man, a self-full man, he looks
upon himself as wicked, and destitute of all, and yet on the other side does
not despair in God, though he does in himfelf; though he has nothing of his
own to stand upon, yet Christ is his rock on whom he is settled. Thus God
keeps his people from being Cains, and Judasses on one side, and proud,
self-righteous Pharisees on the other side.

SERMON. CXXX.
Of Gods confirmation of us upon his Promises, by his own grace.

2 COR. 1. 21. Now he which establishes you with us in Christ, and has
anointed us, is God.
THe establishment of a Christian upon the Promises of God is only the work of
God. Man cannot settle himself, no more than he can make himself. Wherein Gods
confirmation of us upon the promises consists. 1. In working principles of
grace.
There remains for the explication of this truth, to declare, wherein
positively this confirmation by God does consist, and

First, Hereby God does strengthen the heart in reference to the Promises, by
working in us habits of grace, and some permanent constant Principles, whereby
we are carried out easily and delightsomly unto them. The heart of man being
originally and habitually corrupt, is contrary both to the commands of God, and
the Promises of God, which is greatly to be observed; for the enmity indeed of
our hearts against those holy duties which the Law commands is often treated
on, that is constantly preached upon; but the sinful enmity that is in our
hearts naturally to close with the Promises of God, that is seldom thought
upon. It is therefore very necessary to know the backwardness and frowardness
of the heart, to embrace Promises, as well as to obey commands: For, whence is
it that the heart is humbled for sin? whence is it sensible of the guilt and
burden thereof, that it flies from the Promise? whence is it that the Gospel
of Grace, and Justification of a sinner is such a Mystery to it? Whence is it
that experience in a godly man teaches him that Faith in the Promises of all
works is the most difficult? Is not all this from the contrariety of the heart,
though humbled, to Gods way of Promises? This being then laid for a foundation,
when God does sanctify a man, he does not only put these Principles into him,
whereby he is enabled to obey the commands of God, but also whereby he is
strengthened to receive the Promises of God. And therefore as we have the
Spirit of Sanctification, whereby we are fitted for Holiness, so we need the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we are prepared for the Promises of God. Now if you
ask what are those habitual Principles wrought in us by God, whereby we
entertain the Promises, and apply them to our own selves? I answer, They are
these,

The First, which does immediately and formally work the soul thereunto is 1.
Faith.
Faith. Faith and the Promises are mutually related one to another, They are
like the stomach and meat, hence Gal. 3. 22. it is said, That the Promise by
faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. And Ver. 14. the
Gentiles are said to receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. By which
it does appear that the Promise without faith does us no more good than meat
without eating: Therefore to believe is John 6. to eat the flesh of Christ, and
drink his blood. This Faith therefore in the Scripture is commended above all
other Graces, both in respect of its working, ad intra, and ad extra: ad intra,
for by it Christ dwells in our hearts, by it we receive the Promises, by it
we are justified, by it the heart is purified: and then ad extra, by faith we
are quickened up to all those holy duties which are required of us. It is faith
which works by love, Gal. 5. 6. and so by patience, by zeal, by repentance.
If then thou would have thy soul fixed upon the Promises, pray above all
things for this grace of faith. Faith dispelleth fears, doubtings, and all
temptations of Satan: therefore we are said to be kept by the power of God, but
through faith to salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. we are left, as in a safe garrison, so
the word signifies, as some observe. Know then, that if thy faith could
always be kept lively, and vigorous in thee, there is nothing could divide
between thee and the promise; but as the child in the womb is nourished by
the navel of the mother, so is thy heart by Faith in the Promises. Hence it is
observed, that of the same root in the Hebrew, whence the word Faith comes,
there arises also the word signifying a nurse, (...) Numb. 11. 12. as a
nursing father bears the sucking child: as if faith did make a man
continually suck at the Promises, as a child does at the nurses breasts. This
then is the most eminent and principal grace, establishing the heart: As on the
contrary, unbelief is that which does unsettle and distract the heart.

A Second habitual grace and principle inclining the heart to the Promises, is
2. Love.
Love: not that we are justified by love, or that love is a receptive grace,
applying the Promises; but only it does sweeten the heart in reference to God.
It puts us upon good thoughts to God, we look not upon him as a severe judge,
taking all opportunities to damn us, but as a gracious and loving father,
reconciled to us through the blood of Christ. Therefore not only faith, but
love likewise does expel tormenting fears, and doubts. Thus the Apostle
notably 1 John 4, 18. There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out
fear, because fear has torment. He that fears viz. in this slavish manner is
not made perfect in love. We see in this Text what the nature of slavish fear
is, and what is the proper effect of a filial love of God. Slavish fear is
tormenting: does not every soul exercised therewith, subscribe thereunto? are
not servile fears almost like the torments of Hell it self? How intolerable is
it to fear God as Cain did, as Judas did, with dreadful apprehensions of Gods
wrath against them? Thus fear produces spiritual hornets as it were in the
soul to sting it day and night; but love, the more that is perfected, it
casts out them. How blessed a thing then is it to have the heart filled with
the love of God? For as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13. Love suffers long, and
is kind, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil. Thus does our love affect us
toward God: though he exercises and chastizeth us, yet we suffer long, and
bear it patiently; neither do we entertain hard thoughts of God, as if he were
too severe, as if he did punish us more than our sins deserve: it removes
these suspicious thoughts which guilt is apt to raise up in us, as if God were
become our enemy, and interpreting every thing in the worst sense; yea this
love seeks not her own, but so that God is honored, that his great name is
magnified and glorified, he mattereth not his own consent and ease. Therefore
though God leave him long in desertions, though he be under manifold
temptations, yet he says, God is good, and he loves God, even when God
seems not to love him; so we may truly say with Solomon, Cant. 8. 6. Love is
as strong as death, the coals thereof are as coals of fire. Many waters
cannot quench love, many floods cannot drown it. Certainly if this be true of
humane love, how much more of divine love? If therefore thou would have thy
heart settled upon the promises, preserve this love like the fire upon the altar
of thy heart daily.

Thirdly, Another habitual principle to confirm the heart upon the promises, 3.
Heavenly courage and spiritual fortitude.
is, Spiritual fortitude and heavenly courage. Aristotle makes fortitude a
moral virtue, when a man either does or suffers great things for virtues
sake; but Christian fortitude is of a more sublime nature: neither do we speak
of it, as enduring great things from man, but from God. For we may see David
many times ready to sink under the heavy temptations, he was conflicting with;
but then see how his holy generosity recovereth it self, Psalm. 42. 9, 11. I
will say unto God my rock, why have thou forgotten me? etc. And why art thou
cast down, O my soul! Why art thou disquieted? hope in God. Hence David
exhorts all that hope in God, Psalm. 31. 24. To be of good courage, and God
shall strengthen their hearts. Of all temptations none are so grievous to be
born, as those which arise from Gods withdrawing of himself, and hiding of his
face from us; then we apprehend no promises do belong unto us; then we question
very principles, and so are like a ship tossed in the Sea, without Pilot or
Anchor. Therefore spiritual fortitude to withstand these strong assaults, is
above all required. How many have sunk irrecoverably into this pit of
destruction? So that unless Gods power settle us, unless that compose our
hearts, we can as well remove mountains, as this sad and sainting spirit of
ours. Lay then fast hold on Christ, thou can not sink in these waters, if his
arm does uphold thee. Thus Timothy is exhorted, To be strong in the grace that
is in Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 1. there is his duty to be strong, but how must
he come to have this strength, It is by Jesus Christ; you would think the
exhortation were superfluous: for why must I be strong, if it be the grace of
Christ that must enable me? But the exhortation is useful howsoever; for
hereby we are taught our duty, as also to go out of our selves, renouncing our
own strength, and laying the faster hold upon Christ himself. To this purpose
we have the like exhortation, Ephesians. 6. 10. Finally my brethren be strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might: when he had before laid down several
precepts, then knowing how impotent and unable we are, he says, Be strong in
the Lord. Here you see what we are commanded, but it is the power of his might,
that is, his mighty power, that must confirm us; and where this is present,
then we wonder how we are carried through such temptations, led through such
wildernesses as we have been; we stand and admire to see what red Seas we have
gone through, and how the waters have yielded unto us. Thus Paul, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13.

Fourthly, Divine hope does exceedingly conduce to stablish the soul upon the
promises, 4. Divine ^op^
as you heard, from those admonitions of David to his soul, Hope thou still in
God. Faith is carried out to the truth of God, and hope to the mercy and power
of God; and therefore he that hops in God, is got into the Ark, while others
float in the waters, Heb. 6. 19. it is compared to the Anchor of the soul, both
sure and steadfast, and which enters within the vail. By this we see, that
hope does notably settle the soul. Faith indeed and hope are two sisters and
twins, and look so like one another, that we can hardly make the difference;
yet faith establishes the soul upon the promises, by apprehending them as
present; so that the soul is in as holy a manner secure, as if it were already
in Heaven. But hope does settle the soul on Gods promises, as the things
promised are future and to come. For seeing between Gods promises, and the
accomplishment of them, there happen so many cross providence in appearance;
yea so many difficulties and seeming impossibilities are in the way, we need
some divine grace to overcome all these, and that is hope, compared excellently
to an Anchor; for as that does fasten the ship, which otherwise would be tossed
up and down, and in danger of splitting upon every Rock; so the soul of the
most godly man is tossed up and down with such sad temptations, that did not
this hope bear up the heart, all would fail within us. But this spiritual
anchor exceeds all material ones; for this is sure and steadfast. Sure, so
that no outward violence of storms can break it: and steadfast, in respect from
within there is nothing without or within that can disanu^l this. But then
whereas other anchors are fastened into the earth, this is in Heaven, in God,
and invisible things. A godly man's hope cannot be seen by the bodily eye. Take
heed then of weakening this grace of hope, it is an excellent corroborater of the
soul, staying it up with that glory, which will be revealed hereafter.

Lastly, Another habitual principle, whereby God does exceedingly establish the
heart on the promises, is Spiritual joy and heavenly consolations. This is 5.
Spiritual joy
one great reason, say Divines, why Angels and Saints in Heaven are so
confirmed in that estate, that nothing can tempt them off from God, they never
will be weary of the presence of God; even because they are filled with so much
infinite delight and joy, that they cannot desire any better thing than God.
Now the godly they have the beginnings of these consolations here upon earth;
for by the spirit of adoption, they are so filled with joy and delight, that
all the world is no more than an husk unto them; they look upon the world as a
wilderness, and Heaven as the Canaan. So that spiritual consolations, when
wrought in the soul, are like a mighty pillar to bear up the heart. Hence the
Apostle prays, 2 These. 2. 17. That God would comfort their hearts, and
stablish them. First, Comfort, and then establish. How hardly is the heart
dejected, and full of despondent thoughts established? But comfort and joy is
oil to the wheels. Thus Nehemiah spoke, Neh. 8. 10. Be not ye sorry, for the
joy of the Lord is your strength. So much sinful grief as thou let in, it
is like the letting in of waters at some leak in the ship, it may sink the ship
at last. Bless God therefore for any gladness of heart, for any consolations
of soul through the Spirit of God; these support the soul, these make it
rejoice in the midst of all afflictions. It is true, sometimes the people of
God, for wise and holy ends are deprived of them; but when they are vouchsafed,
they come like pleasant gales of wind to carry the ship to its Haven.

In the next place, As God does positively establish by these habitual
principles; 2. By actual motions of his Spirit upon us
so also by the actual motions of his Spirit upon us. There is not only
habitual grace, but efficacious grace, whereby the Lord works in us both to
will and to do. How many times do the principles of grace, like Christ in the
ship, lie asleep in us, insomuch that till they be awakened, we are in danger
of shipwreck? Therefore when the Apostle exhorts us, To work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 13. he gives a wonderful reason;
for it is God that works in you to will and to do, and that of his good
pleasure. So that the confirming power of God lies chiefly in this, in
actuating those habitual principles within us, whereby we depend upon God
continually, as the beams of the Sun do upon the Sun. This Doctrine Pelagians
and Papists cannot relish: but certainly if God come not with efficacious
actual help, as well as habitual; the instances of the falls of Gods people in
all ages, will palpably declare they are undone of themselves.

Having thus illustrated the Doctrine, let us touch some arguments a
posteriori; Arguments that all our establishment is from God. It appears, 1.
From that unevenness that is in the godly themselves.
whereby it is plain, That all our establishment is from God. And

1. It is plain, In that a godly man finds such an inequality in the temper
of his soul. Sometimes he is able to withstand strong gusts of temptations; and
at another time, he is so weak, that every blow will beat him down. David
discovers these hills and valleys in his soul in many Psalms. Now if it were a
man's own strength, then he would be more constant and uniform. Only by these
ebbings and flowings we are taught, that God does alone support us; if he
withdraw his hand, then are we troubled.

2. It is plain, Because sometimes weak Christians have gone through great
temptations, 2. In that weak Christians have gone through great temptations,
when strong ones have failed.
when strong ones have exceedingly failed. Did not Peter an eminent Apostle of
Christ fall very dangerously? And yet how many weak women have been enabled to
become Martyrs for Christ? Did not Abraham called the father of the faithful,
show much sinful fear when he was in Abimelechs country? Alas, if Samsons hair
be cut, he is no stronger than other men. Oh the wise dispensation of God!
Sometimes the strong Christian stumbleth and falls, when the weak stands.
And why is all this? but as the Apostle teaches us, to show, That the root
bears us, and not we the root, Romans 11. 18. Christ keeps us to him, we do
not keep Christ to our selves.

Lastly, That it is God alone who establishes, as appears, By the prayers of
3. It appears from the prayers of Gods people.
Gods people. And it is a Rule of Austins of old against the Pelagians, It is an
absurd thing to pray unto God for that which is in our own power. If we can
establish our selves, why do we pray, that God would not lead us into
temptation? Do we not therein proclaim, that our own power, our own strength
cannot preserve us in any temptation? Thus David prays, Uphold me according
to thy Word, Psa. 119. 116. and Psalm. 51. 12. Uphold me with thy free spirit.
The guilt upon his soul, for those gross sins would have swept him away like a
flood, had not God mercifully upheld him: and as the godly have declared this
by prayer, so also by their praises and thanksgiving, acknowledging that they
could never have gone through such exercises, conflicted with such temptations,
had not the Lord supported them. They wonder to see how their hearts were kept
up under such dejections. Thus David, Psalm. 63. 8. My soul follows hard after
thee, thy right hand upholdeth me. And Psalm. 145. 14. The Lord upholdeth those
that fall; though they fall, yet he does not quite take off his hand from them,
but raises them up again. Thus you see how true the Text is, That it is God
who establishes us.

SERMON. CXXXI.
The most eminent for Godliness need to be established by God as well as the
meanest, which Establishment is in Christ Jesus.

2 COR. 1. 21. Now he which establishes us together with you in Christ, etc.
THe next thing considerable is the Subject of this Establishment, with the
Object wherein. The Subject is, Us with you. In this does appear the Apostles
modesty and humility; Though he had such a plerophory, and did exceed many
others, as much as the Cypress does the shrubs, yet he attributes it not to
his own strength, or power, but to the grace of God: If God leave him, then
this Samson is no more than other men. And when he says, With you] this is to
be understood indefinitely, not universally. For who can think, that every
Corinthian was thus established, anointed and sealed? But it is ordinary with
the Apostle, when writing to Churches, to speak of them as those that are truly
godly, either because many were so, or else because in charity, it was meet for
him to think so. Or lastly, because according to their outward calling and
profession they declared themselves obliged and bound thereunto. Thus writing
to the Church of the Ephesians, he speaks generally, Grieve not the Spirit of
God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30.

In the next place, you have the Object, and that is, in Christ, (...), in
Christum. Some render it, as being more emphatical. The sense is, that we are
incorporated (as it were) into Christ, and thereby established, for out of
Christ, we are as reeds shaken with every wind. From these two particulars, we
may observe two Doctrines to be briefly dispatched at this time. The first is,

That even the most eminent in godliness do need Gods power to stablish them,
The strongest Christians need Gods establishing grace as well as the weakest.
as the weakest and most infirm.

Even the Paul's that are like giants, when others are but as dwarfs, are not
preserved by their own power. It Is Gods right hand that upholdeth them, and if
that be removed, they are no more than other men. This is a very necessary
truth to be improved for the comfort of those that are weak in their own sense
and feeling. Whatsoever encouragements you declare to them, they are ready to
put off all with this; It is true, such as Paul, such as Abraham and David,
that were stars of the first magnitude, these could do so; God was in a
special manner present with them. But we must not argue from these Cedars to
such Briars as we are; whereas this Text shows, that all are alike as to this
dependence alone upon God, Us with you, says the Apostle; and therefore we
have him, Romans 8. and in other places putting himself in the number of other
Christians, and a guing for their justification, perseverance and eternal
glory, by such arguments as are common to all believers, not from any thing
peculiar and extraordinary in himself. So that all believers have the same God,
the same Christ to rest their souls upon, though they differ much in their
inherent graces. Thus we may see David a president herein, Psalm. 32. 6. when he
had declared Gods great goodness to him, upon his purpose to confess his sins,
I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin: that is spoken by way of aggravation; whatsoever was
guilty and damnable in it, though never in so heinous a manner, thou did
pardon it; then mark the inference, For this shall every one that is godly,
pray unto thee for this, because God did so with David: whereas it might be
objected, Though God did so with David. yet will he with such an unworthy
wretch as I am? But David answers you, For this every godly man shall be
encouraged to pray.

To demonstrate the Doctrine, viz. That the strongest Christians are alone
stablished by the power of God, consider these particulars:

First, The examples of the falls of the most godly men that are recorded in 1.
It appears from the falls the strongest have had.
Scripture. By which it is plain, that not they themselves, but the power of
God did preserve them, and when that had forsaken them, being left to
themselves, they fall into the mire. Thus David and Peter are sad instances:
what weakness is upon the best, if the Lord forsake them but for a while?
Peter was so confident of his immoyeablenesse, that he thought, though all
others should deny Christ, yet he would stand it out; but how sadly did he fall
to the great bit ernesse of his soul? Thus the godly appear sometimes like
Trees in the winter, which though having some life in the root, yet outwardly
have no apparent difference from those that are stark dead; and all is, because
they have not that establishing grace they use to have. Let not then the strong
man in grace, glory in his strength, nor the swift man in the ways of Heaven,
glory in his swiftness and fervency, for he is alone supported by the power of
God. Yea, which is the more observable, you may see them falling and staggering
in those particular graces, wherein they seem to be most corroborated. Abraham
is the Father of the faithful, and yet he discovered much carnal fear in
Abimelech's country. Moses was the meekest man upon the earth, yet in what a
froward passion, when he struck the Rock? which so provoked God, that thereby
he had only a sight of Canaan, and was not permitted to enter thereinto. Peter
is noted to have the greatest fervency and zeal of all the Apostles, and yet
how surprised with cowardice and sinful fear? In these graces of all other,
you would not have thought they should stumble and and fall: But behold how it
is the arm of the Lord that does bear us up.

Secondly, This truth is demonstrated from those wonderful dispensations 2
From Gods dispensations toward them
toward his best servants. Many are the temptations that they are assaulted
with; and all this is, to show their impotency to them, to discover their
infirmities to them, that so they may be humble always in their own eyes. Thus
Abraham and Jacob, they were in constant exercises; no sooner were they
delivered from the Lion, but a Bear met them; one wave followed another. And
what was the end of all this, but to keep them in continual dependence and
waiting upon God? David also was constantly in a wilderness, where no water
was; and Gods end herein was to make him see his salvation was in God alone.
Yea Paul himself, though by the grace of God he was so preserved, that after
his conversion we read of no other extraordinary fall he had, yet lest hereby,
as also from many other glorious privileges he enjoyed, he should be puffed up
above measure, 2 Cor. 12. he had the buffetings of Satan, and a thorn in the
flesh, to make him go out of himself, and to rest on Christ only. So that Gods
end in putting them upon these trials, is to instruct them wherein, or in whom
their strength does consist.

Thirdly, That it is God alone who does stablish the most holy, will appear, 3.
From the Devils malice against them more than others.
If you consider how great the power, subtilty and malice of the Devil is, who
is set against them more than any others. As Christ told his Apostles, Satan
had a desire to sift them as wheat, Luke 22. 31. Thus the Devil does with the
greatest violence oppose those, that are more esteemed for gifts and graces
than others. These like Uriah stand in the forefront of the battle; for if
they ^al^, if they become a stumbling block; and a reproach, God is more
dishonored, wicked men are more hardened, then if many weak Christians should
fall: and therefore those that are remarkably godly, they are to be so far
from high-mindednesse and self-confidence, that indeed they are to be in the
greatest fear and watchfulness; for it is such as thou art, the Devil aims
at. The trees full of fruit have the greatest violence made upon their boughs.
Now alas, what is a godly man's strength to the Devils violent assaults and
subtle insinuations, if God did not strengthen him. What defense has a sheep
against a roaring Lion? Observe that reason expressed, 1 John 4. 4. You have
overcome Antichrist, says that Apostle; but why? Because greater is he that is
in you, then he that is in the world. In you] that is emphatical: It Is Christ
dwelling in us, that keeps off Satan's victorious power, and all his
instruments. Thus also 1 John 5. 5. It is faith that overcomes the world,
which always relieth on a power without us; for faith as it is a grace, does
not; but as it receives strength from Christ: As the Vine and Ivy are not
supported of themselves, but by those trees they lean unto.

Fourthly, It is plain, that God alone does establish the most able believers
from 4. From Gods leaving them often to themselves, that they may see their
strength to be only in him.
that providence of God, whereby he many times leaves such to themselves, that
in their own experience and acknowledgement of others they may see all help is
from God alone. This truth the godly are not always so practically convinced
of, as they should be. Hence they are apt to be puffed up sometimes with secret
delight and complacency in themselves, for which God does leave them to
themselves, that they thereby falling, may know what they are of themselves,
and what they are by the grace of God. Thus it is noted of Hezekiah, a man full
of integrity in Gods ways, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. God left him to try him, that he
might know all that was in his heart. Even this good man did not know how base,
false and deceitful his heart was, and therefore God left him: and we see the
blessed effect of this merciful desertion, verse. 26. Hezekiah humbled himself
for the pride of his heart. Is not here then a plain instance, that God many
times in much mercy leaves the godly to themselves, that so they may have full
sentiments of this truth upon their hearts? This also was the case of Peter,
who did not answer his name of a Rock in this case; and had the Church been
built on him, as the Papists boast, it had fallen all into pieces; for it was
Christ's looking upon him that recovered him, not any strength of his own. But
how comes Peter thus to stumble and fall? It was because of his
self-confidence and presumption in his own power; yea some have said that
Christ left him merely to himself, not for any preceding sin in Peter, but
only by way of mere dispensation, that hereby an example of humility and holy
fear might be left upon record to all ages. But that Peter's sin of gross
confidence did deserve this graduall dereliction, is more than probable: only
we grant that as God does sometimes tempt, so also forsake sometimes for sins
antecedent, sometimes from his mere sovereignty and holy wisdom, thereby to
teach man, that which otherwise would not be acknowledged. It is indeed a Rule,
that Deus neminem descrit, nisi prius deseratur: God forsakes none, that does
not forsake him; which may be granted as true, if we speak of a desertion by
way of anger and punishment; but of a desertion by way of mercy and trial, or
thereby to make way for greater dispensations of his glory, so it is not
always true; God may forsake gradually, that thereby he may not forsake
totally and finally. Such desertions that are for a season are sometimes
mercies and very useful, being a substraction of grace, in order to fill us
with more grace: And the end of such providential administrations is to
convince us fully of this truth, that we do not settle our selves, but it is
God that does it for us.

Lastly, This truth may be demonstrated from the nature of that grace which is
5. From the nature of the grace within us.
habitual and permanent in us. For though that there be in us as a principle
qualifying of us to work holy things with delight, joy and content, yet it
cannot put us upon working without a further actual efficacious work of grace
upon our souls; which you heard the Apostle calls, Working in us both to will
and to do, Phil. 2. 13. So that although there be never so much grace planted
in us, yet that lies asleep (as it were) and works not, till this
efficacious grace actuate it, and put it into motion; neither ought this to be
any wonder to us. For we see in natural causes, it is not enough to have a
principle of life, unless God also enable us to move; For in him we live, and
move, and have our being; much more then must this be in supernatural things,
where the Actus primus and secundus is of God. Not but that in the progress of
grace we act and move, but Acti agimus, moti movemus. It is the grace of God
that does efficaciously incline the sanctified will to spiritual operation;
then the North Wind, and the South, do (as it were) blow upon the spiccs, that
they may send forth their fragrant smell. It is true, at the first work of
grace, there we are merely passive, but God does not then force our will, he
only changes it; as water which naturally descends, when made air does
naturally ascend upwards. Thus the will of a man which was depressed to earthly
things by sin, when sanctified and made heavenly ascends up toward God and
heavenly objects. By these discoveries it is manifest, that the best Saint in
this world is settled by the grace of God alone. Those corruptions within him
are treacherous, and would betray him into the hands of Satan, did not Christ
corroborate him. And is this any wonder of man fallen, seeing Adam fell for
want of this confirming grace, and the elect Angels do therefore not leave
their habitation, as the Apostate have, because the grace of God does confirm
them? So that the good use we are to make of this Doctrine, is to be exceeding
watchful and tender about all sin, lest thereby we provoke God to leave us.
How terrible do such desertions many times prove? To whom are woes, to whom are
wounds and gripes of conscience, but many times to those, who being left of
God, have thereby engaged in sinful ways, and so having lost an holy frame of
heart, have thereby deprived themselves likewise of an Evangelical, comfortable
one? Take heed through thy laziness, negligence, pride, or some other sin,
God forsake thee, and thou become worse than Nebuchadnezzar, of a godly man,
made like a beast. This will be bitterness in the latter end.

As for the second Doctrine, I shall not say much to that, because it has been
in part already spoken unto; it is

That in Christ alone we are established. In Christ alone we are established.


That as in the building, other stones are strengthened, because of the corner
stone, or the foundation stone; or as the branch in the Vine does therefore
live and flourish, because in the Vine: so it is with us, because in Christ we
are settled with Christ; in Christ we are confirmed with Christ, which made
Austin say, In Christo sumtis Christus, extra Christum, nihil. In Christ we are
even like Christ, out of Christ we are nothing at all. To consider this, we are
to know,

First, That all the godly through the efficacy of Gods Spirit are united to
Christ, and so become his mystical and spiritual body. By reason of this it is,
that Christ 1. By grace are Christians united to Christ.
dwells in them, and they in Christ; Christ actively communicating of his
goodness and virtue to them, and they passively receiving influences of grace
from his fullness. This union is represented in Scripture by many similitudes,
of a building, of a vine and branches, of an husband and wife; but none so
expressly, as that in the Sacrament of bread and wine, denoting us those
elements are naturally turned into our nourishment, and made one with us: so we
are in a spiritual and mystical manner made one with Christ. This being laid as
a foundation, then

Secondly, From this our establishment and settlement follows, whereby we are
sure to persevere, and nothing shall be able to dissolve this union; whence
once 2. From this union follows our establishment.
made a true member of Christ, there cannot be any separation made, so as ever
such a person should at last be damned in hell; for that would redound to the
highest dishonor of Christ the Head, as could be imagined. The reason why Adam
fell, though without any inherent corruption in him, was partly because he was
not united to Christ in that manner, as the weakest believer is now under the
Covenant of Grace. And although these things are derided by the Arminian, yet
this Doctrine of spiritual union with Christ, may compel every one to believe
the truth thereof: so that if we now fall, Christ must fall with us; we are not
to be considered as single persons, standing upon our own bottom, but as
united to Christ. Therefore

Thirdly, Being thus in Christ, our stablishment arises two ways from Christ.
3 Our establishment comes from Christ 1. By meritorious impetration.


1. By meritorious impetration, Christ as our Mediator has deserved this
through his propitiatory death, that we should always be kept his; and
therefore when we have a thousand times over deserved, that God should leave
us, yet because Christ has deserved that God should always love us, therefore
it is that we stand faster than Mount Zion, which yet is said, not to be moved.

The second way is by efficient application; for he does communicate of his 2.
By effectual application.
power and strength to us, whereby when we are ready of our selves to fall, yet
he does prevent it. So that our being in Christ is the foundation of all
strength, and all comfort, and therefore this discovers the wretched estate
of such who can claim no interest in Christ; these are tossed up and down from
one lust to another; they roll from one iniquity to another; the Devil does
what he pleases with them, he throws them sometimes in the fire, and
sometimes in the water, and all this is because not in Christ. If at any time
through the common graces of Gods Spirit, they are got up to the pinnacle of the
Temple, they are eminent for gifts and place in the Church of God, all the
godly have admired them for a while; yet at last you find them blasted and
cursed in this way; you find them like swine wallowing in the mire, that were
judged to be the sheep of Christ. Wonder not, but say, they wanted the root,
which is Jesus Christ.

SERMON. CXXXII.
Of the spiritual anointing which Believers receive from God.

2 COR. 1. 21. And has anointed us, etc.
THat which the Apostle called Confirmation and Establishment, the great and
precious work of God upon the hearts of his people, is metaphorically declared
under three similitudes. The first is anointing, (...), because the Priests in
the Old Testament used by anointing to be inaugurated into their Office, and
sometimes the Prophets also; as we read of Elisha, 1 King. 19. 16. Hence Beza
does interpret this place, of the Ministers of the Gospel, as if by us, were
meant us Ministers. For (says he) he is asserting the dignity and excellency
of the Ministry, in opposition to those calumnies that were cast upon Paul, and
his Colleagues. This interpretation of Beza's, Stapleton does greedily catch
at, and makes use thereof to oppose Calvin, who does understand it of
believers in the general. But first Beza, though he thinks the Apostles
meaning is principally of Church Officers, yet he does not gainsay, if any
shall understand it of believers, comparing that place of Peter with this,
where Christians are said to be a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Neither do I
meet with any Popish Commentator, but Stapleton, that do expoundit of
Ministers only. From this word (...), to prove the Oil or Chrisme that is used
in Popery, when they baptize children, is ridiculous; but we may speak more to
that in the next verse, where sealing is spoken of.

The Text of it self is plain; whereas in the Old Testament Kings and Priests
were set apart for their Office, by an external anointing, which did externally
represent some inward power and virtue of God poured out upon them: In the New
Testament, this is applied to the efficacy of Gods Spirit, that is upon
believers; they have all, though not a material one, yet an invisible and
spiritual anointing, which is the grace of Gods Spirit in the soul: for they
are to the soul, what oil was to the body in the several effects thereof. So
that we observe,

All true believers have a spiritual anointing from God. All true believers
have a spiritual anointing from God.


They are Gods anointed ones. Thus Psalm. 105. 15. Touch not mine anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm. Yea (Habak. 3. 13.) all the people of God are called
his anointed, which caused Grotius, though very absurdly to understand the
(...), spoken of Hebr. 11. 26. where Moses is said, To esteem the reproaches
of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; Not of Christ, but the
people of Israel; as if they were the Christ, or anointed one in that Text:
This will much gratify the Socinian. In the New Testament we have a notable
place to confirm this Doctrine, 1 John 2. 20. But ye have an unction from the
holy one, and ye know all things. And verse. 27. The anointing which you have
received of him, abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you. Here
is the anointing or ointment, as some understand, because anointing (say they)
is a transient action, and so passes away; whereas the Apostle speaks of
something permanent in us, we may comprehend both. Now it is good to mark the
opposition; for the Apostle having before spoken of the Antichristian party,
how that deluded many by specious pretenses, he comes with an adversative, But
ye have the unction; by that you are enabled to discern between falsehood and
truth: Yea so far it works in you, that ye need not any man should teach
you; that is (say some) not exclusively, but comparatively; for so a negative
expression is sometimes used: If there be not this unction from God, all humane
teaching is in vain. So that as Calvin, and others well observe, he does not
speak here against the use of the Ministry, as Illuminatists, and others
pretend. For then why should the Apostle teach them in this Epistle, while he
says, They need no man to teach them? Again, the Apostle speaks of the
fundamentals and essentials of Religion; as if he had said, You are not so rude
and ignorant, as to be taught the principles; for so all Christians grown up,
should not need a Ministry for plantation, and a foundation, but edification
and further instruction. Therefore because the Hebrews were negligent herein,
how severely does the Apostle reprove them, Hebr. 5. and Chap. 6? Further, the
meaning may be, Ye need not any other man, that is of the heretical way, should
teach you, you have received the truth of God from us, you need not go to them
to be instructed. Thus the Orthodox may say, We have informed you in the sound
knowledge of God, you need not to go to Papists, to Socinians for more light
and truth.

By this Text we see, that though anointing does chiefly refer to the work
of grace, yet it also comprehends knowledge; for Oil was used to keep up the
light of their lamps; and therefore Priests and Prophets were anointed. So
that this very expression is very noble and magnificent, You are the anointed
ones of God: if you do truly believe, you have an unction from the holy one.
Now how will this title be applied to ignorant and profane persons? Have they
this choice anointing? May you not call a dunghill sweet ointment as well?

But to enlarge this excellent point, we must

First, Know, Who is the fountain of this spiritual ointment; and the Text
says, It is God. John says, The holy one, that is, the Lord Christ, who 1.
Who is the fountain of this ointment, even God and Christ.
therefore has his name Messiah and Christ, because he is anointed as the
Head, and then (as from Aaron's head) it runs down to his members; he is
the anointed Head, and we the anointed Members. Whether this anointing of
Christ refers to his Divine Nature, or Humane, needs not to be disputed;
for it is certain it belongs to him as God-man. Hence Isaiah 61. 1. Christ
says, The Lord has anointed me to preach the Gospel. Acts 10. 38. God is
there said, To anoint Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with power. So
that this anointing of Christ was in him, as in us, the cause of all that power
and virtue we do partake of. Therefore when it is said (Psalm. 45. verse. 7.)
of Christ, Thou love righteousness, and hate iniquity; therefore God has
anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy fellows. That is not an
argument a priori; as if therefore Christ were anointed, because he loved
righteousness, but a^posteriori by way of sign and manifestation; hereby it
was made known, that he was the anointed of God. Thus the spiritual anointing
of Gods people is the cause of all that fragrancy and sweet smell that is in
their lives.

Secondly, Let us compare the properties of material oil with this spiritual
2. The comparison betwixt material, and this spiritual oil. They are like, 1.
As oil was used in the consecration of things to God.
anointing. And

First, It was used (as you heard) in setting apart of Kings and Priests for
their Office; yea most things in the Temple were consecrated by the anointing
of them. So that they were not afterward to be converted to any common use;
neither might any take of the ointment that the Priest was anointed with, and
apply it to other matters. Now this denotes both the Dignity and Duty of all
true believers. The Dignity, they are Gods anointed ones, therefore touch them
not, for God will avenge their quarrel; by this we are both Kings and Priests;
Kings spiritually conquering the world, as also our own lusts and sins.
Shall thou who art a King over thy passions be a slave to them? And then we are
also Priests, because we are to offer up soul and body, as a Sacrifice unto
God: we are not to live to our selves, but to him. Again, here is our Duty,
for we being thus Gods anointed ones, his consecrated ones, we must not apply
our selves to lusts and sins, or defile our selves with the pitch that is in
the world. Shall a man with this spiritual anointing roll himself in the mire
and vomit of sin? What pride and curiosity has been used about ointments for
smell and beauty? Insomuch that the very Poet could say, Male olet, qui been
olet. May not this shame every godly Christian, to think how much vain and
proud persons do regard such precious ointments, that are for the body only,
above what thou do for soul-ointment, and the spiritual excellency thereof?

Secondly, Oil was used to comfort the heart of a man, and beautify 2. As it
comforts the heart and beautifies the countenance.
the countenance. Therefore (Psalm. 45.) it is called, The oil of gladness.
Hence it was that in their Feasts and Nuptial banquets, they anointed
themselves. The oil of gladness is opposed to mourning; and in this sense the
Spirit of God may well be compared to oil; for he is the Comforter as well as
the Sanctifier. And this is part of the meaning in the Text, at least by way of
consequent. For where the Spirit of God does witness and seal to the true
believer, that is many times accompanied with great joy and consolation.
Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, (says Solomon, Prove. 27. 9.) How much
more will those inward and effectual operations of Gods Spirit? It is true, joy
and real godliness are many times separated from one another. The chariots of
a godly soul, many times go heavily for want of this oil in the wheels.
Only we are to know, that there is an aptitude and fitness in the connection
between grace and consolation, godliness and delight. Pray therefore for this
anointing of Gods Spirit, even to fill thy heart with joy unspeakable. For this
will make thee like Elijah, go to Heaven in a fiery Chariot. Thy duties, thy
performances, these will have more vigor and activity in them.

Thirdly, Oil was used to refresh those that were weary. The Jews did use it
to those who travailed, by way of restoration (as it were) to 3. As it
refreshed the weary.
them. Thus (Luke 7. 46.) that woman anointed Christ's feet with ointment. This
was done for refocillation after lassitude. And thus also the Spirit of God,
with his gracious effects, does wonderfully exhilarate and cheer the heart
after many wearisome labors and temptations. The body is not so much subject
to weariness and restlesnesse, as the soul is. The way to Heaven is a
straight and narrow way. Hence the Spirit of God is like ointment to refresh us
in these laborious exercises: arguments taken from the nature of the Gospel,
from the excellency and usefulness of Gods promises; these do administer much
spiritual ease and content to the soul.

Fourthly, Oil was used to those who were wounded, as being of special
operation to heal their wounds. Therefore Luke 10. 34. the good Samaritane 4.
As it heals wounds.
took oil and poured it into the wounds of that man of Jericho. And now that
man was but once wounded, whereas the godly man receives many wounds several
ways; sometimes through his own carelessness, and negligence, he wounds his
own heart sadly; sometimes God for special ends seems to wound him with the
wounds of an angry one. Oh then how blessed is it to have oil poured into
these bleeding wounds! Yet of such suppling and mollifying efficacy is the
Spirit of God to afflicted consciences for sin. And if you ask, What is this
oil that is to be poured into such wounds? I answer, It is the balm of
Gilead, the oil of the Gospel, the precious promises that are in Christ. The
Spirit of God does anoint the soul with this oil, and thereby the heart
recovereth of those sad and deadly wounds which the Law, and the guilt of sin
had made upon it.

Fifthly, Ointment has its peculiar smell and fragrancy, it recreateth the
nostrils of others. Not only they that have the ointment, but others 5. In
that it is delightsom to the nostrils.
that are in company partake of the smell thereof. Therefore we read of the
Church, (Cantic. 1. 3. Chap. 4. 10.) so greatly affected with the smell of
Christ's ointments. What is that, but only the loveliness and excellency in
the Lord Christ, which a gracious soul is so deeply affected with? For this it
is, that the Virgins are said to love him. By Virgins are meant sincere and
upright persons, these follow Christ because of the savor of his ointments. It
is not any carnal advantage, or worldly respect, but the mere preciousnesse
that is in him, as a Mediator, and as the husband of the soul, that makes
the godly thus press after him. Now as it is thus with Christ, so it ought to
be with Christians. As a man cannot hide the smell of his ointments, but others
will be refreshed with it; so it ought to be with a Christian; all his whole
life should be a sweet savor, and a precious odor; there should be that in
his conversation, which should make every one that beholds him to be in love
with him: They should love to be in his company, in his presence. As they say
of the Dove, when it has any precious ointment poured on it, it makes all the
rest flock after it. Especially this should make all the godly take heed of
those things that will make Religion to stink, or their persons to be vile and
abominable before others. Solomon says, A dead fly falling into a box of
ointment, will make it to stink, Eccles. 10. 1. If a dead fly, what then will
a dead toad, or a piece of a dead dog? Such carrion must needs make a man to
be abhorred. The very consideration that thou art anointed, ought to work upon
thee so far, as to do nothing that may make thee to be abhorred.

Sixthly, Oil was used to mollify and soften things that were harsh 6. As it
mollifies.
and stiff. So (Isaiah 10. 27.) the yoke is said to be destroyed, because of
the anointing. Thus the graces of Gods Spirit are to the soul, they soften and
mollify the hardness of thy heart. How often does it melt thy stubborn
soul, and make thee kindly relent under all that subbornnesse and disobedience
which thou have showed to God?

Seventhly, Oil was used to comfort and strengthen men in their limbs. And 7.
As it strengthens and comforts the limbs.
therefore those who were accustomed to bodily exercises, did make much use of
it. It was necessary to combat and conflict with enemies. Thus also it is
here; all Christians are called to a spiritual wartare, and that with
principalities and powers in high places, as well as with flesh and blood. They
are continually to put on their armor against all the assaults of the Devil.
Now this could not be done, unless we had this oil, this anointing from the
Spirit of God. In the Spirit of God, we are to go out against all the assaults
and temptations of Satan. In the name of Christ, we are to set upon these
Goliahs. How many have been overcome in this battle, even of Gods own people?
because they had not this establishing grace ready at hand. Do not think to
get into Heaven without a sore conflict with Anakims in the way. There must be
a wilderness and a red Sea to pass through, before thou can enter into
Canaan. And therefore for this end, have we this anointing, whereby we may be
the more confirmed; and having done all things, to stand, as it is Ephesians. 6.
13. What more is to be said to this point, will come in upon the other
metaphorical terms.

Therefore let us improve this. And

First, We see what a glorious and excellent title the name of a Christian is,
for that signifies as much as one anointed. If thou art a Christian in deed,
as well as in name, thou have this anointing and unction that is here spoken
of. How far then are all profane and wretched sinners from the reality of
this name? What have they to do with the name, who are so contrary to the
thing it self? Art thou anointed, that smellest of the very flames of hell? Thy
tongue, thy actions do all discover it. There are no sons of Boanerges that
can thunder terribly enough against such reproaches and dishonours, yea
blasphemies to the holy name and profession of Christianity.

Use 2. Of Instruction. What is a special preservative against all heresies and
damnable opinions? even this spiritual unction. For that does not only
illuminate the mind, but sanctify the heart also. And if a man have never so
much knowledge by education, and other means, if he has not also this
spiritual teaching, he is a ready prey for the Devil. Only you must know, that
this unction is not speedily, and in an instant accomplished in the people of
God, it is successively, and by degrees. Even as it was with the Lord Christ,
though he was anointed to be the Lord of his people, and he had the right to
this even from his Incarnation, yet the actual exercise, and manifestation of
this was not completed, till his Ascension into his glory. Thus the spiritual
unction of Gods people will not be fully finished, till they are made perfect
in Heaven. And therefore for the present, both their knowledge, and their
graces are but in part; which consideration should keep us from being
scandalized; if we see that even those believers, who yet have all received
this unction from God, if in things not fundamental they differ from one
another.

Use 3. Of Exhortation, To wicked men, to take heed how they persecute, or
oppose these anointed ones; how contemptible and vile they may be in thy eyes,
it is no matter; you see how the Lord has dignified them, he has set his mark
upon them: what you do against them, he takes as done against himself; they
are as the apple of his eye. David when but cutting off a piece of Readiness
garment, was smitten in his heart, because he was the Lords anointed; yet that
was only an external unction, Saul had not the spiritual anointing. Do thou
therefore take heed of reproaching, deriding and persecuting such as God has
anointed with the graces of his Spirit.

Use 4. Of Admonition to all the Godly, that they should do nothing unsuitably
to this anointing. Heresies and impieties do not agree with this excellent
composition. Thy spiritual ointment is to discover it self in all companies,
in all temptations, in all exercises. The more, precious ointment is stirred,
the sweeter it smells: So the more God afflicts thee, chastizeth thee, the
more he does pound thee (as it were) in the mortar, the more does thy
preciousnesse manifest thy self. We read, (Matthew 26. 7, 13.) that when a
woman poured an Alabaster box of precious ointment upon Christ's head, that
Christ did so far encourage her, that he said, Wheresoever the Gospel should
be preached, there also should this, that the woman had done, for a memorial of
her. And yet when thou confessest Christ in the midst of a wicked generation,
when thou art ready to part with all for Christ, when he requires it, thou
do more for Christ, than this woman did. Look then to thy self, that all
thoughts, all words and actions favor of this ointment; whatsoever is of sin
and lust within thee, think that is of the dunghill, that is of vomit and
filthy mire.

SERMON. CXXXIII.
Gods People are his sealed ones.

2 COR. 1. 22. Who has also sealed us,
WE come to the second noble Privilege which the Apostle attributes to the
Corinthians, for although we told you the same benefit is represented under
three metaphorical similitudes, yet every one of them has a distinct notion,
as this of sealing has from that of anointing, though both intend the
confirmation and establishment mentioned in the former verse: Some Popish
Writers would from hence prove their spurious non-instituted Sacraments, as by
anointing they would have their oylin baptism; as also in their extreme unction
established; and by sealing their Sacrament of Confirmation, wherein likewise
they use their chrisme and oil, blasphemously calling it oleum salutis, the oil
of salvation. Hence they tell us confirmation is usually called in antiquity
signaculum, and the obsignation of the holy Ghost, bringing this Text for the
proof thereof, as Vicecomes a great Popish Ritualist, lib. 1. and 2. de
confirmatione, would make us believe: but first this Interpretation confuteth
that of Stapleton, who limits the interpretation to Ministers only; whereas
Baptism, Confirmation, and extreme Unction were applied to private Christians:
and secondly, they are never yet able to prove any such Sacrament, of
confirmation, as they speak of: Indeed in Antiquity there was Confirmation used
in the Church of God; When persons baptized in their infancy were afterward by
Church Officers called to account about their knowledge and Christian life;
wherein if approved, they were commended by prayer to God for their
establishment in the Christian faith against all persecutions and oppositions:
The use whereof Calvin wishes were brought again into the Church of God; as
being advantageous to prevent heresies, as also to reprove the carelessness and
negligence of parents about the education of their children; but as for that
abominable abuse of this afterward in Popery, making a Sacrament thereof,
adding thereunto many Popish and ridiculous ceremonies; This is a noisome weed,
not any plant of Gods planting: We are therefore to enquire what is the Sealing
that here believers are said to have from God, and that will appear to be a
metaphor taken from men, who for several ends make use of seals, and so
accordingly it is to be applied to that work of Gods spirit, which is in the
hearts of believers: All which will better appear in the opening of the
doctrine, which is,

That the people of God are his sealed ones. The people of God are his sealed
ones. 1. There is an active and a passive sealing.


To improve which truth, Consider,

First, That we read of an active sealing and a passive sealing: An active
sealing is, when we by profession or otherwise do give our Testimony to the
Truths of God, for when a man receives the Word of God as his Truth, and does
accordingly manifest this in his life; herein he does seal to God: So the
Evangelist John, chap 3. 33. He that has received his Testimony, has set to
his seal that God is true. By which expression, you see of what necessity faith
in the Word of God is, with the profession thereof in our lives: It is a
sealing that God is true: insomuch that he who believes not, as much as in him
lies, makes God a liar. Oh consider this, thou who art tempted to unbeleef,
to distrust, not to rest upon the Promises of God. What an heinous sin is this,
not to give testimony to Gods Truth? but this we are not to speak of: Therefore
there is a passive sealing, which we read applied to Christ, and to all
believers: To Christ, thus Joh. 6, 27. For him has God the Father sealed: How
was that? when by the wonderful miracles that were wrought, he was confirmed
to be the Messiah. And then for believers they are said to be sealed not only
in this place, but Ephesians. 1. 13. and Ephesians. 4. 30. Thus you see the people of God
have a sealing.

But in the next place, Gods sealing of his people is twofold, either visible
or invisible, external or internal; Gods visible sealing was again twofold,
extraordinary 2. Gods sealing of his people is either vifible or invifible.
or ordinary; extraordinary were the miracles and wonderful signs, which many
believers did in the first plantation of the Gospel: Thus Paul calls miracles
the signs of his Apostleship, 2 Cor. 12. 12. and they are said to be a sign to
those that believe not, 1 Cor. 14. 22. Now some would have this sealing, which
believers are said to receive, meant of these extraordinary miracles, which
were visible to the world; but that cannot be, partly because all true
believers in those days had them not, and some who were not true believers did
partake of them; and partly because that was but for a season, while the Gospel
was first preached: whereas the Scripture speaks of such a sealing, as the
godly may have in all ages, even till their redemption.

In the next place there are visible ordinary seals, such are the two
Sacraments of baptism and the Lords Supper; for as circumcision is called Romans
4. 11. the seal of the righteousneste of faith, so that is to be applied to
every other Sacrament being of the genericall nature thereof: It is true, the
Apostle in this Text and other places, may happily allude to this Sealing in
the Sacrament, which is visible and external; but because the outward
application of these is to the unregenerate and hypocrite, as well as the truly
godly: therefore the Apostle means a further thing, even some proper
privilege that is peculiar to the godly only, and that invisibly or
spiritually in our hearts, as the next words show, the earnest of the spirit in
our hearts; So that as the anointing is a spiritual invisible thing, thus also
must the sealing be: Therefore before we come to declare the nature and use of
this obsignation: Let us consider what is implied in the metaphor of sealing,
for thereby we shall in part be brought to understand the admirable nature
thereof.

And first, Sealing of the godly, does imply the precious and excellent esteem
What the sealing of tee godly implys. 1. The great esteem with God.
they have with God; for so amongst men, those things are sealed up by us, as
we account precious: None use to seal up dung and pibbles in a bag. Thus Hag.
2. 23. God promises Zerubbabel, he will make him as a signet, because he had
chosen him, that is, he should be very precious and dear to him as the diamond
in a ring. Therefore we have that expression, Jer. 22. 22. Though Coniah were
the signet of my right hand (says God) yet I would pluck him from thence, that
is, though never so dear to him; We have also the Church praying, Can. 8. 6.
Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thy arm: As these who dearly
love any were wont to have their image engraven upon the rings they did wear on
heir hands, to have them continually in remembrance. Thus the Church prays
that she may be put as a seal even upon the heart of Christ: so that by this
expression is meant the preciousnesse, the high esteem God has of them; they
are his Jewels, they are his peculiar treasure; and therefore it is that he
does thus seal them.

2. Sealing is for the safety and preservation of any ohing, that we would not
2. Their safety
have lost. Thus Dan. 6. 17. when Daniel was cast into prison, there was a
stone laid upon the mouth of the den, and the King sealed it with his own
signet, that so there might be no hope of having Daniel released; and thus God
seals his people by special grace preserving them, that they shall never
totally and finally be lost, though Satan be never so watchful to destroy them:
They are sealed, and therefore they shall certainly persevere; but because this
will come more fully in the next particular, I pass it over.

3. Sealing does not only imply safety, but security also against such danger
3. Security.
that is imminent upon us: God seals his people, that the destruction which
is consuming of others may pass them by. Thus we read in Ezechiel, cap. 9. 4.
when the Angel was to destroy the inhabitants of Jerusalem, yet there was a
command given to set a mark upon the foreheads of such as did sigh and cry for
the abominations thereof: When the Egyptians likewise were to be destroyed,
they passed by every house that had blood sprinkled upon the posts thereof.
Rahabs red thread was like a seal to preserve her from destruction, and her
family; hence Rev. 7, 4. we read of many thousands of Gods servants sealed in
the foreheads; and they were therefore sealed, that they might be preserved
from desolation: This sealing was not any external mark, no more than the mark
of the beast was, but that real profession of Christ which they put forth in
the midst of all dangers, not defiling themselves with the impurities of
others. And thus God does still seal his people, that Satan though he desire to
winnow and sift them, yet is not able to devour them as his prey. Oh what
unspeakable mercy is this, when the justice of God goes with a drawn sword to
throw such and such into hell, he passes by thee because thou art one of Gods
sealed people.

Fourthly, Sealing is for the differencing and discriminating of persons; Thus
4. Their difference from others.
the Shepherd sets a proper mark to know his own sheep by: The Soldier he
has his proper badge and colors to discern what General he belongs unto:
And in this sense, though not principally, the Sacraments are seals; hereby we
are acknowledged to be the Lords people, and so differenced from all that are
enemies and strangers to him, but this is more remarkably seen in this
spiritual sealing, for thereby we are not only distinguished from the
heathenish world, but from every hypocrite in the Church of God: Though many
may go sar in profession, in parts, in gifts, so as to be admirable in the
eyesof others, yet none have this sealing but the truly godly man. Every gifted
man is not this sealed believer; None has this but the true child of God: The
spirit of God does not seal, but where it has sanctified; Therefore

Fifthly, This sealing does suppose the work of grace truly wrought in a man,
Sealing does not make him godly properly, but supposes him so: Thus Ephesians. 1.
13. after ye believed ye were sealed: there was first the work of
sanctification, and then of obsignation. It is true Zanchy upon that place
makes sealing to be the impression of grace upon the heart, even as in sealing
the print of the seal is stamped upon the wax; and so far we may yield that
the increase of grace and confirmation therein is a sealing of the spirit; but
yet to speak exactly this sealing is after the work of grace in the soul: Even
as it is in the Sacraments: The external sign or seal does not make the
promise, but supposes it, so in this inward sealing, grace is not thereby
wrought in us, unless it be in the further degrees thereof, but does confirm
that which is in us: and thus seals are to confirm contracts, not make them as
is to be showed; yet though it be not the divine impression of grace, yet this
seal is always supposed; God does not set to his seal to a blank, and hereby
this sealing is distinguished from all carnal presumption, and the delusions of
Satan, for the devil has as it were his sealing, he confirms and
establishes men in heretical doctrines, and they are ready to take this for
the obsignation of Gods own spirit; when heretics give their bodies to be
burnt, professing they have much peace and joy of conscience; Here the Kings
Seal is conterfeited, as it were; They make a diabolical delusion, to be the
holy sealing of Gods Spirit. Thus as in sanctification, there is the true work
of Gods grace, and a counterfeit, that which does resemble and is like it; so
in the witnessing and sealing of Gods Spirit, there also may be a resemblance
of it, which yet is not that glorious privilege indeed: only as a man that is
awake does certainly know he is so, and not in a dream, though men in a dream
imagine themselves to be awake, when they are deceived. Thus where the sealing
of Gods Spirit is, there the authority and light of it does powerfully discover
it self to be of God: even as the Sun by its own light does discover it self to
be the Sun; though they that think they have it may be deceived, yet those that
have it are sure they do enjoy it. Hence

Sixthly, This sealing does imply secrecy and privacy; That which is closely 6.
Secrecy and privacy.
reserved, as Deuteronomy. 32. 34. Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up
among my treasures? says God. Thus also Job says, cap. 14. 17. his
transgression was sealed up in a bag; God did take special notice of it in
time to punish it; Now in this sense also we may apply this sealing of Gods
Spirit: It is very secret, hidden and unknown, and that in a twofold respect.

1. The nature of it is a mystery, and hardly unfolded; Insomuch that as the
lamb in the Revelation was found only worthy to open the seals. Thus only men
enlightened by the Spirit of God, and experimentally taught of him, can
savourily explain this. Come to the Learned and most eminent men devoid of
spiritual discerning, and whose senses are not exercised evangelically, who
have not the Spirit of Adoption effectually working in them, and they can no
more speak with understanding to this point, then Nicodemus did to the doctrine
of regeneration. He will say with those in the Prophet Isay, cap. 29. 11. I
cannnot read this book, for it is sealed. But then

2. The secrecy of it is discovered, because none know what it is, but he that
has it. As none knows what Parents affections are but parents; none knows
what love is, but he that loves: So none know what this sealing of Gods Spirit
is, but he that does partake of it: Therefore this sealing is compared to other
things, Rev. 2. 17. to the hidden manna: There was the manna that did fall from
heaven, of which all did eat promiscuously; and then there was the manna hidden
in the ark. The godly man is said to eat of this: It is likewise called the
white stone, which is a note of absolution, and justification when accused, and
that with a new name upon it, which none knows, save he that receives it. By
this expression it is clear, that the nature and efficacy of of this Sealing is
understood only by those who enjoy it; and therefore no unregenerate man is
able to conceive rightly about it, no more than a blind man can about the
Sun: yea, the godly man himself, though he feel it, yet he cannot express it
to another: Even as we cannot express the life we live unto another; we feel
it, but cannot describe it.

Lastly, Which is the chiefest of all, and most principally intended in this
expression, Sealing was to confirm and secure all contracts and bargains made
amongst 7. Confirmation.
men. Thus Jeremiah cap. 32. 10. when he purchased some land, he had the
evidence sealed: In which respect some understand that place, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The
foundation of the Lord stands sure having this seal: by (...) they understand
not the foundation of an house, because that does not use to be sealed, but a
contract or bargain; to which a seal is annexed, but that is not so probable;
only in the general, seals are chiefly to secure and confirm: and for this end
it is, that we have the Spirit of God sealing; for the sense of our
unworthiness and guilt does make us very propense to diffidence, to distrust,
to continual fears about Gods love to us: and therefore as we need the Spirit
of God to sanctify us, so also to witness and seal unto us, which is more
largely to be treated of.

SERMON. CXXXIV.
Of Gods Spirit Sealing his People.

2 COR. 1. 22. Who has also sealed us.
WHat is comprehended in the expression of sealing has been already declared:
I shall therefore in the next place consider of, and compare some equivalent
Texts of Scripture with this, and then from those conjoined we may be able to
find out the nature of this obsignation; for although our principal endeavor
is to be made partaker of it, yet it is very necessary in its kind to know
what it is: Though it cannot be denied but many of Gods people may have it, and
yet not give the definition of it; Even as they may believe and be regenerated,
and not happily be able to give an exact description of these things. As many a
man has health, may sleep well, and Scriptures equivalent to the text. Romans 8.
18.
yet is not able to tell you, what health or sleep is.

The first Text, which will afford much light to this we are upon, is that
famous place set like a beacon upon the mount, and much agitated between
Papists and Protestants in the doctrine of assurance, Romans 8. 18. where the
spirit it self is said to bear witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God. I shall not insist upon the controversies on this place,
either grammatical or real, but take the positive truth plainly delivered:
Here the godly, who all have the spirit of God, first sanctifying and leading
them on in all their ways, whereby they are said to be spiritually minded, are
in the next place declared to have the spirit of God in another manner working
upon them, and that is to witness with our spirit. So that the spirits
Testimony is not single and immediate, as when there was a voice heard, saying,
This is my beloved Son. No such Enthusiastical impressions and impulses are
to be dreamed of, but mediately and conjunctly with our spirits; By it our
consciences are so enlightened that we are thereby enabled to be persuaded, that
we are the Children of God; for that you see is the object of the Testimony,
that is the matter witnessed, that we are the children of God. You see then,
here is no encouragement for the Popish doctrine of doubting; nay, when they go
the highest, allowing a moral certitude, such which excludes all fear to the
contrary, yet it does not rise up high enough to this glorious privilege
spoken of. For as with the spirit in Sanctification of us, moral virtues came
far short of the graces and fruit of the spirit; So does an humane persuasion
from the sincerity of our conscience within us, of this witnessing and sealing
of Gods Spirit.

A second Text reducible to this, is Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are sons, God has
sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. This
Gal. 4. 6.
is nothing but the sealing in my Text, only the words are (...) of divine
worth; Because ye are sins; Therefore none but the Sons of God have this
privilege: Children of the devil cannot pretend to this. Thou who art not born
of God stand aloo^ off, this does not belong to thee: As thou know not what
it means, yea, with Esau, for thy mo^sels, do profanely despise this
privilege; so neither does God give such childrens bread to dogs, or Pearls to
swine. Again, God has sent the spirit of his Son, you see our Sonship is
built upon Christ's Sonship; our Sonship of Adoption is established upon that
Sonship which is by nature in him. He does not speak here of that eternal
mission of the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, but a
temporal one bestowed on believers; and he says, the spirit of his Son,
because by Christ's death this spirit in its peculiar operation, is as it were
purchased for the godly: For had not Christ made an atonement, the Spirit of
God could not have been given us, either for sanctification or consolation.
Further, This is sent into our hearts, not into our memories or minds only;
for the temporary believer has some superficial and vanishing persuasion of
Gods favor toward him; but it is sent into our hearts, implying the full,
deep, and through possession that it has of the godly. Lastly, Here is the
notable and glorious effect, it makes us to cry, that is, fervently,
confidently, and boldly; God, Father; Abba, Father. Some read it indicatively
in this sense, God is my Father; Some by way of wish and prayer; it comes all
to one. These are two words signifying the same thing, teaching us; that both
Jew and Gentile is indulged this privilege, or else it is germinated for
assurance sake: Oh then how unquiet and restless should the people of God be,
till they find this work of the spirit of Adoption upon them? Thou daily
inquire after the spirit in its sanctification of thee, how it makes thee
more heavenly, how it mortifieth thy lusts; and do mourn because thou do
not partake of it in a greater measure. Why does not thy soul also long after
the fruit of this spirit of Adoption in thee? Do thou observe how it subdueth
thy slavish fears? how it inclines thee to a filial and Evangelicall
affection toward God as a Father? I tell thee, thy life is never a Gospel-life
till this be obtained. As therefore these blind men cried, Jesus have mercy on
us, though the Disciples reproved them, and bid them hold their peace; so also
let it be with thee: whatsoever temptations, guilt and fears, thy heart
suggesteth to the contrary, do thou notwithstanding boldly cry, God my Father.

The third Text to illustrate this, 1 Cor. 2, 12. Now we have received, not 1
Cor. 2. 12.
the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know
the things that are freely given us of God. Here we see two principles opposed
as contrary to one another, the spirit of the world, and the spirit of God; and
he who has the spirit of God, has it for this end partly, that he might know
the things which God has freely given him; implying, that without this spirit
we could not discern of these things: Even as if a man had not a rational soul
bestowed upon him, he could not discern the things of reason, but would be as a
beast. So did not God bestow his spirit upon us, we were no ways able to
discern of those Gospel-mercies which are bestowed upon us. He says, which are
freely given us, us in particular, that we might not think he speaks of the
privileges of the Gospel in the general, remission of sins, and
sanctification in the general, but as applied to this and that subject: So
that if a man have no more than the spirit of the world, if he have not as yet
this spirit of God, dwelling in him, he is not a fit auditor for this truth. If
Aristotle thought not young persons fit auditors for his moral Philosophy, how
much more are we to judge every man, though of never such abilities and parts,
yet if destitute of the spirit of God, altogether incapable of this truth?
Therefore the spiritual hearers are only such who can give their testimony to
these things. There must be a spiritual life, a spiritual foundation, before
there can be this spiritual superstruction.

A fourth Text is, 1 John 3. 24. and indeed that Apostle does often speak to 1 John 3. 24.
this sealing of Gods Spirit upon the hearts of believers, though in other
terms. This I have mentioned is pregnant; for having said, that he who keeps
Gods Commandments, dwells in him, and he in him. Whereas it might be said,
how shall we know that he dwells in us? May we not be deluded and deceived?
No (says he) hereby we know that he abides in us by the spirit which he has
given us: and lest any man, though living loosely and carnally, should pretend
to this spirit, he says, They that have it keep his Commandments. Thus
doubtings and sinful diffidence is excluded on one hand, and all carnal
presumption on the other hand.

The last Text to bring in assistance to this truth, shall be, 1 John 5. 8, 1
Ioh. 5. 8, 9, 10.
9, 10. where the Apostle speaks of three Witnesses on earth, as he had
before in heaven, viz. water, and the blood, and the spirit. Now although there
be many perplexed controversies about this passage, yet I shall pitch upon that
which is most probable, without further disquieting of you. It seems to be
without doubt that the Apostle alludeth to the legal administrations, wherein
there was blood for expiation, and water for cleansing: by which is represented
justification and sanctification; and these being wrought in us, do evidently
witness, that Jesus is the Christ, and Son of God. We finding these glorious
effects upon our souls, cannot but acknowledge that Doctrine; but because these
are not enough of themselves, seeing that sanctified and justified persons may
be under great discouragements, therefore he adds the Spirit also. It is
true, the same spirit is said to be a witness in heaven, but that was because
of the extraordinary and visible Testimony that it gave to Christ; but here it
speaks of the witness it gives on earth; and that must be the sealing
spoken off in other places; for he says, verse 6. It is the spirit that
bears witness, because the spirit is truth, having there also mentioned
water and blood: Verse 10. he seith, He that believes on the Son of God,
has the witness in himself. Thus you see that as God has abundantly provided
for the holiness of his people by his spirit, to quicken them up therein; so
also for the assurance and consolation of his children, to establish them
therein. Oh how greatly are we indebted unto the Lord Jesus Christ, who gives
us his Spirit not only to lead us into the truth, and mortify the deeds of
the flesh, but also to fill us with comfort, and to assure us that we are the
children of God: So that it is the duty of the Ministers of the Gospel, not
only to improve the former truth, but this also; and to press you upon the
sealing work of Gods Spirit, as well as the sanctifying: Has not the Spirit of
God this Name given it, to be called the Comforter, John 14. and shall we
divide the operations of Gods Spirit, minding him as he is an holy spirit, but
not a comforting Spirit?

Having thus informed you what the Scripture declares in this matter; I The
description of the sealing of Gods spirit.
shall give you a large and popular description of the nature of this sealing,
and the opening of the several parts touched therein, will much conduce to the
knowledge thereof.

The sealing of Gods Spirit may be described after this manner: It is a The
description of the sealing of Gods spirit.
supernatural and gracious work of Gods Spirit upon the hearts of sanctified
persons, in a secret and unspeakable manner; whereby they are confirmed and
established in the Covenant of grace, as belonging to them in particular; by
such means which God has appointed thereunto, that through the sense thereof
they may daily walk more and more boldly, joyfully, and thankefully,
notwithstanding all discouragements to the contrary, till they be made
completely happy in heaven.

I have made this description the larger, because I would take in every
particular considerable about it, as much as may be.

And First, I give two Qualifications or Adjuncts to this work of Gods 1. It is
a supernatural and gracious work
Spirit: It is supernatural and gracious. Supernatural; and that if we respect
either rectified nature or corrupted nature: Rectified nature, for Adam in the
state of integrity, though he was made perfectly holy, yet he had not this
Gospel-sealing; no more then he was in Christ, as a Mediator: for had he been
thus sealed, he would certainly have persevered; and although Adam was partaker
of the holy Ghost, yet it was as he is the third person, not as the spirit of
Christ, viz. purchased by his death for those that are his, so that in this
respect we may say, this sealing is a privilege above the nature of Adam,
while considered before his apostasy: but then I call it supernatural, chiefly
in respect of corrupted nature; for as man naturally of himself has no power
to that which is gracious, so neither to that which is comfortable and joyful.
All the world, all Ministers and Angels, cannot power one drop of this assurance
and joy into thy soul, unless the Spirit of God enable thee thereunto. As it
is supernatural, so it is gracious; for this flows from the former: There is
nothing in thee to deserve this establishing; as Gods grace sanctifying found
thee dead in thy sins, so his sealing and comforting finds thee in a guilty
despairing way: and therefore as God might leave every profane man to wallow
in his lusts, and so let him perish; thus also might he forsake every guilty
conscience under the burden of thy sins, and suffer thee to be a Cain, to be
a Judas, even to fall from an hell here into an hell hereafter: So that not
only by grace we are sanctified, but by grace we are healed. Bless God for any
establishment of soul against fears and doubts, as well as for victory against
any lusts: It is merely of Free Grace that we are thus sealed.

In the next place, Secondly, we have the general nature of it, with the 2. Of
Gods spirit.
efficient cause, The work of Gods Spirit: It is true, in the Text it is said,
That God does seal us; and so whatsoever works there are, ad extra, from God to
the creature, they are all common to the three Persons: yet there is a peculiar
order and appropriation which the Scripture takes notice of; So that it is
made the work of the Father to send his Son into the world: It is made the
work of the Son, to offer up himself a Sacrifice for our sins; And it is
made the proper work of Gods Spirit, to apply the benefits of Christ's death to
our souls; therefore sanctification is attributed to the Spirit, so also
consolation and sealing thereunto. Thus the Texts we mentioned formerly give
all this work to the Spirit of God, as in an appropriated manner, doing this
for us: It is not then of our selves, or of our own power; that we can obtain
this privilege, but it is wrought alone by Gods Spirit: As we have no
free will to the grace of God, so neither to the comforts. God as he is called
a God of all grace, so a God of all consolation: and Gal. 5. Joy is the fruit
of Gods Spirit, as well as Faith, Love, and Repentance are in other places
attributed to God. But you will say, It may easily be granted, that a man being
dead in sin, he needs the mighty work of Gods Spirit to raise him up, and
to give spiritual life; but does it follow, that he needs the same spirit to
establish and assure him of Gods love? Yes, no doubt but that the same Spirit
of God, which brings thee out of the gulf of thy lusts, must also out of the
gulf of thy doubts and fears. It Is as impossible for thee to have comfort of
thy self, as grace of thy self; And therefore you see the Scripture speaking of
this twofold operation of Gods Spirit, as being necessary to antidote against
our twofold corruption: and the grounds of this necessity of Gods Spirit are
these.

First, The heart of a man is naturally opposite to any thing that is
spiritual: Reasons why it is the spirit alone that thus seals (...)
Whatsoever is of God, though never so desirable in it self, yet meeting with
our corrupt natures, it finds opposition; therefore we cannot of our selves
any more receive the promises, though infinitely needing of them, then we can
obey the commands: We cannot endure honey any more then gall; The way of
Gospel-joy is contrary to a troubled heart, as well as Gospel-obedience to a
secure carnal heart.

Secondly, We need the Spirit of God to this sealing, because that which does
oppose this, is indeed nothing but the fruit of sin running down another
channel: He that once lived in diverse pleasures, did continually grieve the
holy Spirit of God; Let this man find the guilt of sin; Let the Law wound
and sting him, then he grieveth the comforting spirit of God by fears and
doubts: No wonder then, if it must be Gods Spirit only that seals, because
that alone can remove the guilt within thee, that only can take off these
objections, these discouragements that are upon the soul: As God raised an
East-winde that suddenly delivered Pharaoh from those Locusts that molested
him: (this was miraculous, none could do it but God) so it is the Spirit of God
that alone can take off the heavy burden of sin upon thee: It is Gods Spirit
alone that can overrule thy conscience, that can pacify it, that can comfort
it: It is the Spirit of Adoption that makes us cry, Abba, Father; but more of
this may come in afterward.

SERMON. CXXXV.
A further Discovery of the Spirits sealing the People of God.

2 COR. 1. 22. Who has also sealed us.
THe third particular in the Description of the Spirits sealing, comes to This
sealing of Gods spirit is in the hearts of the sanctified.
be considered, and that is the subject thereof, which is twofold,

1. Of Inhesion. And 2. Of Predication.
First, Of Inhesion; so it is said to be the work of Gods Spirit upon the
hearts of the godly. For after this manner the Scripture speaks, He has sent
his Spirit into our hearts, Gal. 4. 6. And in this Text, He has given the
earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. By this expression is denoted that deep,
radicated and full possession, which the Spirit of God has upon the hearts of
true believers. So that hereby is excluded that vanishing and superficial
persuasion, which may be in a temporary believer, of his interest in Christ. As
a temporary believer has something like true faith, like true joy, and like
true grace upon the soul: so he has also something like this sealing, and like
this assured persuasion upon his heart. Therefore as the former is much
disputed, and it does greatly exercise tender hearts, viz. How they may know
when they are carried on in the work of sanctification, beyond those inchoate
and imperfect workings, which an hypocrite may have: So this latter also does
cause great solicitude and care of spirit in many gracious souls. How shall
they know their assurance is not a delusion, is not a false persuasion arising
out of an inordinate love to their own selves? For the Devil does not only
transform himself into an Angel of light, as light is taken for holiness; but
also as it is taken for comfort. Now amongst other characteristical
differences, this is one, the persuasion of a godly man is more full, plenary
and powerful. Even as sanctifying grace enters efficaciously into the heart,
so also does this sealing grace; whereas what hypocrites feel is in a confused
general and flashy way; neither is it drawn out upon permanent and enduring
motives. Although doctrinal characters given by the most able Ministers of the
Gospel, are not enough to make us find out this difference in our selves,
without a rectified constitution of the powers of the soul within, unless we
attain to that qualification spoken of by the Apostle, Heb. 5. 14. who by
reason of use or habit, or perfection, as the word may be rendered, have their
senses exercised to discern between good and evil. This Text is much to be
pressed upon you. For it is not every godly man at first that can separate the
precious from the vile in his soul; but there must be an habitual use of the
senses this way. Where mark also the Apostle attributes to the soul (...), in
a metaphorical manner: That as the taste, when well constituted, is able to
discern between bitter and sweet; the eye between white and black, the ear
between what is melodious, and what is harsh and displeasing: Thus the soul of
a godly man, being used to heavenly and spiritual things, can know what is of
God, and what is of Satan, or of nature in him. For you must know, there may be
four principles of operations in us.

1. Nature, and that when polished with education, and moral principles, may
appear very glorious.

2. Satan, insinuating himself as a subtle Serpent, as an Angel of light,
imitating the works of God, though he cannot efficaciously work the heart to
any thing; all that he does is by suggestion, and moving the imaginative and
sensitive part of a man.

3. There is the Spirit of God, and that works in us either in a common way
by gifts and assistance, or by a sanctifying way. Now is there not required
much spiritual skill and experience to discern which is which of all these? So
that it is no wonder, if he require these senses to be exercised (...), a word
from those who did exercise themselves in the Heathenish games, and that naked,
thereby to fit and prepare themselves to be more agile, and expedite for that
service. In this dispute therefore, enquire not only for doctrinal symptoms,
and signs of this sealing of Gods Spirit, but heartily pray for these
exercised senses in spiritual things. The other subject is, the subject of
predication, of whom it is affirmed, that they have this sealing of Gods
Spirit, and that is sanctified persons. We speak of adult persons; for it is
plain, that infants, though they may be sanctified, yet because not having
actual faith, they neither have this sealing. And if you ask, Have all the
sanctified persons of God this sealing? Have none the sanctification of the
Spirit, but they must also have the witnessing of the Spirit? I answer this
Question, because of great practical importance, shall (God assisting) be
handled by it self, after the description has been explained. That which I
shall here take notice of, is, That sanctification is necessarily presupposed
to this sealing. A great Prince will not set his seal to dung, to make an
impression there; neither will God to an heart unsanctified. For as in matter
of Doctrine, God will not vouchsafe miracles to confirm that which is a lie;
neither in practicals will the Spirit of God witness to that heart, which is
not made holy. For indeed it should witness a lie in such a case, informing
such they are the sons of God, when indeed they are the children of the
Devil. This order of Gods Spirits first sanctifying, and then sealing is clear,
Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after ye believed ye were sealed. Those eminent Divines,
who defined faith to be assurance, making it the same with the sealing of Gods
spirit, are gravelled at this Text, and therefore make this Objection, If faith
be assurance, be the sealing, how does the Text say, After we believed, we were
sealed. To this therefore Piscator answers, not yielding that the word (...),
should be rendered, Having believed, as of a thing past, but believing, as in
the present: but there is too much forcing in this interpretation. Others, they
consider of faith, as it has two parts, Illumination of mind, and fiducial
assurance. Now (say they) the Apostle means by faith, the former work of
faith; and so the meaning is, After you were enlightened to know the truth, you
were confirmed and assured: but that opinion making faith justifying to be an
assurance, that Christ is mine, is justly refused. It is plain then, that when
the Spirit of God has in order of nature (for in time they may be both
together) sanctified a man throughout, whereby he is made a new creature, then
the Spirit of God, makes this glorious stamp upon him, then he gives him this
seal, as an honorable privilege, whereby he may know himself to be the Lords.
Even as in antiquity, none might have seals, but persons of honor and dignity.
So that the natural and unregenerate person is to stand aloof off; thou have
nothing to do in this privilege; thou art not the man, whom the great King of
Heaven and earth, does purpose thus to honor.

We proceed in the Description, and there we meet with the formal Nature of it,
wherein it does essentially consist with the object thereof. The Nature of 4.
It confirms and establishes the heart.
it is, In confirming and establishing the heart of a man. For this is the
chief and usual end of seals, to ratify a thing, and to make it no longer
uncertain and doubtful: And to this property does the Scripture chiefly
attend. For whereas the soul, though sanctified; is apt to be in daily fears
and doubts, about Gods favor and grace toward it; it fluctuateth up and down,
having no subsistency; the Spirit of God comes and consolidateth the soul,
inabling it to rest satisfied in this, that God is his God, that his sins are
pardoned, that he is become a reconciled Father in Christ. And if you say, Why
do we not need the Spirit of God to do this? Cannot we by our graces, by our
repentance and holy life, sufficiently establish our own souls in peace? No, by
no means; we need the Spirit of God to comfort, as you heard, as well as to
sanctify; and that for these Reasons,

First, It is very hard for a man, whose guilty conscience does press him
Reasons why we cannot confirm our selves. 1.
and condemn him daily, telling him, that he has deserved at Gods hands to be
eternally tormented in hell; not to think, because God may do thus, that
therefore he will do so. In such terrors and affrights we look more to what we
have deserved, we look more to what God may do, then what he will: we are
naturally suspicious, and think the worst of God, even as we do to man. If we
have offended a man greatly, and it lies in his power to undo us, we are never
quiet, we cannot but think, when ever the opportunity is, he will be avenged,
and therefore we dare not trust him. Yea though we have given no just cause, if
others have taken up an unkind spirit toward us, we expect nothing else from
them, but our ruin, when it is in their power. Therefore for all Readiness tears
and good works to David, yet he would never trust him. Now although there be no
cause for us to have such suspicious thoughts about God; for he has graciously
promised that he will receive us: insomuch as not to believe him herein, is to
give more credit to a man, whose words many times satisfy us, than to God, who
is truth it self: yet the heart being guilty and full of fears does work in
this doubtful manner about God. How hard is it to bring the afflicted sinner
to good persuasions about God, and that though by promises, and other ways God
has so abundantly provided against such distrust? Here then is the reason, why
we need the sealing of Gods Spirit, we cannot persuade our selves but God will
do what he may do, and what we have deserved. And

A second Reason follows upon the former, We can hardly be persuaded, that
the great and good things which we stand in need of, God will ever bestow upon
2.
us, who are so unworthy of them. Can a beggars daughter be persuaded, that a
great King will marry her? But here is a far greater disproportion. What will
the great God of Heaven, so holy, so full of majesty, look graciously upon me,
and not only forgive me my sins, but advance me to eternal glory? These
things are very improbable. Shall Joseph be freed not only from the prison, but
promoted to the greatest honor in the Land, next to the King? Who would have
believed it? And thus it is here; the soul having low and humble thoughts of it
self, cannot be persuaded, that the great God of Heaven will look upon such
despicable wretches as they are.

3. The way of evangelical confidence, with the comfortable effects thereof,
are wholly supernatural. And therefore no wonder, if we need the Spirit of God
3.
to help us therein. Not only holiness and grace is supernatural, but
assurance and joy are likewise supernatural. As we cannot pray without the
Spirit helping our infirmities; so neither are we able to call God Father. If
faith in Christ, by which we are justified be supernatural, then also is the
comfort and peace flowing from the knowledge thereof. As the Doctrine of the
Gospel is by divine revelation, flesh and blood has not revealed this unto us,
that Christ is the Son of God: so neither can flesh and blood enable us to
the persuasion of this Mediator, as loving me, and giving himself for me.
Certainly, if it be the gift of God, to have a dogmatical faith, to be kept
from heresy: it is no less to have this fiducial application with the sense
thereof upon our souls. Wonder not then, if we make it the Spirits work to
have this assurance.

4. We need the Spirit to confirm us, because the flesh within us, is full of
objections, 4.
and brings many plausible arguments against it. Insomuch that what
Bellarmine and other subtle Papists bring as Engines to demolish this
foundation, are very suitable to the corrupt heart. For they think, the heart is
very deceitful, there is much hypocrisy; I may think I do that for God, which
I do for vainglory; that I am humbled for sin, when worldly motives only
afflict me. Again, flesh does does suggest, there may be much unknown evil in
thee, thy heart may be worse than thou take it to be. Though the Sea seem
calm sometimes, yet there are dangerous Rocks under the water: and thus though
outwardly there may appear much tenderness, yet there may be a rock in the
bottom. Furthermore, the flesh may suggest, Will thou be persuaded of Gods
favor to thee in particular? Is not this to enter into Gods secrets? Is not
this to climb up into Heaven in an arrogant manner? Yea, is not this the way to
nourish security in thee, and make thee presume of Gods favor, though thy
iniquities be never so many and gross? Lastly, The flesh tells thee of
former sins, thou did once wallow in, as also the present failings, that thy
own soul does frequently condemn thee for. Now are not these very plausible? Do
they not importune to diffidence? And certainly these would overwhelme thee,
did not the Spirit of God overcome all, and support thee against them. Yea

5. We need the Spirit of God to seal us, because the Devil is very busy 5.
and active in destroying this persuasion. He knows that those who enjoy this
privilege, walk with joy, peace, thankfulness, with strength and activity in
the ways of God; therefore to weaken them herein, that their graces may
wither, he tempts about their comforts, that they may wither: thus the Devil
as he opposes the Spirit of God in its holiness, called therefore the unclean
spirit; so he does also in its comforting effects, and therefore is called the
tempter. Yea 2 Cor. 2. we read how active he was to have the incestuous person
humbled for his sins, even swallowed up with too much sorrow. And do not many
of Gods people feel this experimentally? Do they not see they should sink and
fall into all horror and despair, did not the Spirit of God support? Little
do the natural men of the world apprehend what the agonies and spiritual
conflicts are, which a tempted soul endures in this case.

Lastly, The Spirit of God must seal us, because this assurance is not obtained
in 6.
a natural way, as if we had perfectly obeyed the will of God, and therefore we
merited pardon; but it is by the gracious promises of God made to a believer,
though accompanied with infirmities. Indeed if it were thus, that we could
purge out all sin from our selves, and be perfect in every good work, then
assurance would naturally follow: as the Saints in Heaven, because cleansed
from all sin, cannot doubt of Gods favor: but our establishment is more upon
the promises of grace without us, than any thing that is within us; while we
behold our own unworthiness, and are deeply humbled under it, yet even then
are we enabled to assure our selves of the grace of God toward us.

SERMON. CXXXVI.
Of the Object, Manner and End of the Spirits sealing.

2 COR. 1. 22. Who has also sealed us.
THe next particular considerable in this Description of the Spirits sealing,
The Spirit seals the promises of grace to a believer.
is the Object about which it is conversant, and that is said to be the
Promises of Grace, as belonging to a sanctified person in particular; and
herein does the most express and efficacious effect of this sealing appear,
that it particularizeth the Promises of grace; what is spoken generally, that
it does bring home in a peculiar manner to our own breast. What is it to hear
of health, if it be not thy health? What of wealth, if not thy wealth? So what
comfort is it to hear of a Christ, if not thy Christ? To know there are blessed
and precious promises, if they do not belong to thee? Do not the Devils know
in the general, that Christ is a Savior, that there are excellent promises
declared in the Word? But they are miserable and wretched howsoever, because
not applicable unto them.

We may therefore divide Faith according to the object thereof. The division of
faith as to the object, it is 1. General.


First, Into a general Faith, whereby we are carried out to believe the whole
word of God upon a divine motive, whether it be the historical or comminatory
part, as well as the promissory. Thus whatsoever is revealed in the Scripture,
though it be but an appendix to any History, as that Saul's father had asses,
though we cannot call it an Article of the faith, yet when sufficiently
propounded to us, then not to believe, argues a wicked, and an obstinate
spirit, because we despise the authority of God, and his testimony in that
particular, though but little.

Secondly, There is a special Faith, and that I call, The work of Gods 2.
Special.
grace (for all faith is the gift of God) whereby a man is enabled to believe
the promissory part in the Scripture, whereby he believes this truth, that
Jesus Christ is a Savior to those that believe in him. And this the Papists,
yea and others too, make all the faith that is required of us; that this is it,
which does justify us; but very absurdly.

Thirdly, There is a particular Faith, and that is, When the Spirit of 3.
Particular.
God does enable us to receive Christ as our Christ, to apply the promises as
belonging to us in particular. To say with Thomas, My Lord, my God: And with
Paul, Galat. 2. Who loved me, and gave himself for me. Such a particular faith
is not only possible, but a duty, of which much excellent and profitable
Discourse might be made; but I forbear, because I am to treat of it (God
assisting) upon another account. Therefore for the present, you are to know,
that this work of Gods Spirit in confirming and sealing of us, is especially
manifested in this particular, and appropriating way of the promises of grace,
as our portion. Therefore it is said to cause us to call God Father; which
implies, our peculiar interest and propriety in him. Do not then be
discouraged from this Canaan, because of the Anakims that are in the way. Fear
not to call God thy Father, though thou find many discouragements within
thee. The Devil would not have thee taste of this honey.

But I proceed; and the next particular in the Description, is the Manner, How
the Spirit seals, even by the means that God has appointed.
how the Spirit of God comes thus to witness unto us, how we come to be
sealed, and that is said to be,

First, By the means God has appointed thereunto. This is very observable;
for hereby this gracious work of God is differenced from all Enthusiastical
delusions; or from those prophetical ecstasies, which the Prophets of God
sometimes did partake off from that rapture Paul was in, when he said, Whether
he was in the body, or out of the body, he did not know. No, we are not to
expect such immediate operations of the Spirit upon us, where the Spirit shall
be both the efficient cause, and the object also. Neither may we hearken after
some voice of Gods Spirit, or immediate testimony within, saying to us, as
sometimes a voice spoke to Christ, This is my beloved Son. We may not expect,
that Christ should say to thee after some visible manner, as he did to Mary
Magdalen, Be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. We are not to
hearken to such Doctrines that may press for such a witnessing; but we must
give care to what the Spirit of God speaks in the Scripture, and so expect to
have this confirmation and sealing, by those means which he has appointed.
Even as it is in the Doctrine of the Scripture; it is the Spirit of God that
does fully assure the hearts of believers, that it is Gods word. But how does
it thus persuade the soul? Not by any immediate testimony, but by these
implanted arguments therein, as the holiness of the matter, the majesty of the
style, etc. by which this undoubted persuasion is wrought in us. Thus it is in
this work of sealing; the Spirit of God, though it be the efficient cause of
it, yet it is in such an order and way, as he has appointed. For we must not
think, that it is suitable to the workings of Gods Spirit, that we should have
a blind persuasion in us, whereby we are assured; only we know not why, and
we are not able to give any reason, that we are assured, but because we are
assured. The Spirit of God attemperateth its operations to our rational nature.

But what are those means and ways whereby the holy Spirit does thus Which
means are either external, as 1. The Sacraments.
assure us? They are either External, or Internal. External are twofold:

First, By the Sacraments in the right use of them, the Spirit of God does
assure us. Hence you heard, the Sacraments are called seals; neither may we
think that Christ has appointed these Ordinances in a barren, formal, and
empty manner. No, God will accompany his own Ordinance to the right receiver;
and therefore as truly, as he received the bread and wine, so truly is he also
made partaker of Christ's body and blood. Whereas then the promises are
indefinitely propounded, the Sacraments they are particular applied, and by
these the Spirit of God does assure us of our interest in the promises.

Secondly, Another External way, is, By those notes and marks which 2. By the
marks of such to whom the promises belong.
are given of such, to whom the promises do belong. The Scripture does not
only declare the promises, but characterizeth the persons to whom they do
infallibly belong. Insomuch that he who finds, he does truly believe and
repent. He that finds he is made a new creature, such an one may as
undoubtedly conclude, being enabled thereunto by the Spirit of God, that the
promises do in particular belong to him, as if he were named, as if it were
said, Thou Thomas, and Thou John, thou art received into the favor of God. So
that this particular does evacuate all those boasts and confidences which many
may have of Gods love toward them, seeing the marks and signs are not
applicable unto them, which the promises do require. But these I call External.

There are Internal Qualifications, by which the Spirit of God does thus
persuade and assure us, not that they are a cause, or that we are Or else
internal.
to put confidence in them, but by them as signs and effects of Gods gracious
love, we come to be assured of the love it self: As by the Rainbow, we come
to be assured, that God will not drown the world again.

I shall not enlarge upon these, having had opportunity from some passages in
this Chapter to speak thereunto.

The first particular sign or mark by which the Spirit of God does interest
or seal unto, that I shall instance in, is, The sanctified and savoury The
signs whereby we may know the spirit witnesses our interest in the promises.
1. The sanctified improvement of afflictions.
improvement of afflictions. Such as are chastened from the Lord, and taught by
him, these may unquestionably conclude Gods special love toward them. Hebr.
12. Revel. 3. The Scripture does in those places abundantly evidence, that
whosoever is a son of God, is afflicted by him: Insomuch that he who has no
chastisements, is to think that he is a bastard, and not a son. Now this is
not to be understood of afflictions themselves merely as so, but as sanctified,
as working to our spiritual good. And when they have this blessed fruit, it is
as comfortable an argument, to be assured of Gods grace toward us, as any may
be thought on. The Apostle makes this a sure effect of Predestination, Romans
8. 26. He did also predestinate us to be conformed to the image of his Son,
which is partly in suffering, as he did, that so we might be glorified, as he
was. Look then with a more comfortable face upon afflictions, than thou have
done. Do not fly from them with fear, as Moses from his Rod, when turned into
a Serpent. For when these do work to thy spiritual good; when they are like
fire to make the gold less drossie; when they are like winnowing, to purge the
wheat from its chafe; then know, this is an assured testimony of Gods favor.
Thou need not say, Who will go up into Heaven? What messenger will come
immediately from God to persuade my soul of Gods favor toward me? For the
testimony is on earth, it is near thee, do not cast thy eyes from it.

Secondly, A second sign or means, by which we come to this sealing, is, The
observation and experience of Gods gracious presence in us, and with 2. The
experience of Gods gracious presence with us.
us, whereby we are preserved from some, and kept either from, or in such
temptations, that might have undone us. When we find that grace accompanying
of us, which David prayed for, Psalm 19. to keep us back from sinning. As the
child of God has the Angels of Heaven, to take care of him; they have it in
charge, to hold him (as it were) in their arms, as a Nurse does her little
child: so is he also inwardly fortified by inherent grace, to keep him in his
ways to Heaven, he has habitual grace, and actual grace, and he has
preventing grace, and cooperating, he has exciting and persevering grace. Now
that man who observes how richly and mercifully the grace of God puts it
self forth in these several effects; how often, when he is ready to go
astray, the grace of God seeks him out; how often grace prevented and excited
him, else he had been swallowed up in such deep gulphs of sin; he (I say)
that finds such prevenitng, concomitant, and subsequent grace of God; he that
finds this Rock Christ to follow him with gracious effects (as some say) the
waters out of the Rock followed the people of Israel in the wilderness to
refresh them; this man may say, verily God is here, verily God is with me. 3.
The antecedent works of sanctification.


Lastly, The Spirit of God does give us Consolation, by the antecedent works
of sanctification, Romans 8. 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his. But the godly they have received the Spirit of God. And if the
soul, which is the spirit of a man, manifest it self present in the body by its
operations; shall we not much rather think, that the Spirit of Christ, where
it dwells in a man, will make known it self? Shall we have these coals of
fire in our bosom, and not perceive them?

Now there is an order in the works of Gods Spirit, which we also must attend
unto, and not think to have one before the other. The order is this, the Spirit
of God does

1. Enlighten the mind.

2. It does sanctify the will and affections.

3. It does witness and seal to us these blessed effects. To look therefore
for consolation before sanctification, is preposterous. Oh how happy is it,
when the child of God earnestly seeks after all these effects upon his
soul, and that in the order God has appointed! These few qualifications may
suffice; by these and the like the Spirit of God does confirm. Only you must
know, these do but objectively offer themselves, if the Spirit of God does not
rightly constitute our inward man, and enable us, all these blessed effects may
be upon our souls, and yet we be disconsolate, as if we had them not. Even as
there may be pleasant flowers in a garden, yet if we have not light, we cannot
see them. So that the cause of assurance is more from the Spirit of God
efficiently establishing the heart, than from these qualifications, which do
objectively only declare themselves: Even as in faith dogmatically assenting
to divine truths, the work of Gods Spirit is more upon the understanding,
giving firmness and steadfast adhesion, than upon the motives of credibility in
the truths themselves. But what is necessary to a fuller clearing of this, will
upon another occasion be considered. Of the end of the spirits sealing, even
that we might live godly and thankfully.


I proceed to the last thing in this Description, and that is, the final cause,
which is, That under the sense of this we might live boldly, etc. I say, under
this sense. For this sealing of Gods Spirit, does make such a divine impression
upon the soul, that we feel it, and perceive it not indeed bodily, as we do
the fire that burns, but rationally and spiritually in our inward man. So
that not only grace is from Gods Spirit; but the experimental feeling of it,
is likewise from the same. Hence it is not to be called an humane, but divine
sense. For a gracious constitution is required to feel what is grace, and to
discern the effects thereof. But I hasten.

This sense and apprehension of Gods sealing being thus experimentally in us,
we find a threefold advantage thereby.

First, We walk boldly, confidently: Insomuch that we can cry Father, Ephesians.
3. 12. We have boldness and access with confidence. There is (...), We are
able to speak any thing in the presence of God; whereas in fears and doubts
our prayers are interrupted, we question whether we may say this or that.

Secondly, Hereby we walk comfortably: Yea, it is called, Joy unspeakable, 1
Pet. 1. 8. and Romans 14. 17. Peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. The Kingdom of
God is there said to consist in this. Alas, how contrary do the people of God
walk to this Text, for want of sealing, as if godliness lay in doubts, in
fears, and dejections of spirit? Surely the people of God are to bewail their
ignorance and low principles in these things. Thou make thy self to be like
an heir under age, as the Apostle alludeth, Gal. 4. 1. and so not differing
from a servant; whereas the Gospel Light and Evangelical principles set home by
the Spirit of adoption, should fill thee with liberty and exceeding great joy.

Lastly, Hereby we also live thankefully, never satisfying our selves with
admiring, and commending the unspeakable and unsearchable riches of Gods grace.
Two great gulphs the Spirit of God has delivered thee out of; the sinful
lusts and corruptions thou did once wallow in; and the slavish, sad,
tormenting fears thou wast once almost overwhelmed with. Oh what cause is here
of thankefullnesse! How sorry art thou that thou art no more enlarged? That
thou have but one heart, and one tongue to be exercised in this matter? And the
aggravation of all this is, that we may be thus bold, joyful and thankful,
notwithstanding all discouragements to the contrary; for they are many and
dreadful. How many failings within? How many temptations without? What fiery
darts from Satan? And yet a sealed Christian is able to look upon these with
as much joy, as the Israelites did upon the Egyptian carcasses, that lay dead
upon the Seashore. But if God should let open these floodgates upon the most
sanctified person, he would be immediately swallowed up with them, as Dathan
and Abiram were suddenly in the earth. And then

Lastly, You have the term till which this sealing shall last, and that is,
Till we are made happy completely in Heaven. So Ephesians. 4. 30. We are sealed,
till the day of redemption. This way of faith and assurance will then cease, it
will be turned into the immediate vision and fruition of God: Then there will
be no fears, no doubts, any more than lusts and corruptions. How merciful
then is God, that gives us such manna in the wilderness, which will cease
when we come into Canaan?

SERMON. CXXXVII.
Whether all the People of God are his Sealed ones?

2 COR. 1. 21. Who has also sealed us.
THe nature of this sealing being largely described, I shall conclude with an
answer to that Question, Whether all sanctified ones are Gods sealed Whether
all Gods people be his sealed ones.
ones? for it might seem to be true of all, seeing the Apostle speaks
universally in the person of believers, who has sealed us; and Ephesians. 1. 13.
those that believed were sealed: there is no difference made, neither are any
exempted. And not only by Scripture, but by the testimony of many learned
Protestants it should also seem so, especially of such who defined faith to be
an assurance; for then, if no assurance, no faith. To this purpose Calvin
seems to speak on this very Text, which Stapleten looks upon as depraving
the meaning of the Apostle. Whosoever says Calvin, has not the spirit of God
a witness within him, so that he can say Amen to God calling him to the
certain hope of salvation; he does falso Christianum nomen obtendere, pretend
only to a Christian name; not being so indeed. To the same sense also in his
Institutions, lib. 3. cap. 2. par. 16. Vere fidelis non est, etc. he is not
truly a believer who is not persuaded with a solid persuasion, that God is a
propitious and reconciled Father to him, whereby he does promise to himself all
things from his bounty. By these passages you would think, that unless a man
has this assurance that he is not truly godly, yea, that the very difference
between an hypocrite and a true believer lies in this particular about a solid
persuasion of Gods love in Christ. Then on the other side, if you do consult
with the experiences of these whom we have cause to judge truly godly, we shall
meet with few that say they have this sealing. They have good hopes (they will
tell you) in the favor of God, and sometimes they find such supports of soul,
that they walk with much peace and comfort; but to say that they have
ordinarily this sealing of Gods Spirit, that they dare not, what then shall be
answered to the Objection? I shall not in this place enlarge on it, only I
shall speak some things to satisfy the doubting soul in this Point.

And first, You are to know, That this privilege of sealing is spoken of in
the 1. It belongs to all the godly.
Scripture as belonging to all the godly. There is none excluded: It is the
duty of every one to endeavor after it, to make all diligence in prayer, and
in other means to obtain it. We are not to conceive, as Papists do, that some
may have it by a special revelation, as Paul, and other eminent Saints,
although we grant, that whosoever has this sealing, has it by a special
revelation, but not in the Popish sense. that is, the Spirit of God does in a
special manner evidence unto a believer, by the fruits of faith, that he does
belong unto Christ. This sealing then the Scripture speaks of as a mercy
vouchsafed to every sanctified person, at least, that he may be made partaker
of it: for not only the Texts forementioned, but that also Gal. 4. 6. does
demonstrate this truth; Because year Sons. he has sent the Spirit of Adoption
into your hearts: Because you are Sons, now a quatenus ad omne valet
consequentia, is a known Rule: and Romans 8. The Apostle speaks generally, The
Spirit witnesses with our spirits, that we are the Sons of God. You are not
then to think that this admirable favor is destined only for some choice
servants of God: No, this scep^er is held out to every believer, such honourall
his Saints may have.

But yet in the second place, It is no wonder, if the primitive Christians, who
2. Primitive Christians did more partake of it then Christians do uow.
lived in the Apostelical days, did partake of it more powerfully and
plentifully then believers generally do in this latter age. The Apostle in his
Epistles might speak of this sealing as partaked of by all, because then
believers had a greater measure, not only of extraordinary gifts (many of them
I mean) but also of the sanctifying graces of Gods spirit; They lived up to
higher degrees of fervency, of zeal, of heavenly-mindednesse, then ordinari y
we do. Again, their conversion was more eminent and remarkable, and that by the
Apostolical Ministry, which was accompanied by signs and wonderful miracles;
so that as their dogmaticall faith had greater means to heighten it then ours,
so likewise their salvifical and special faith. They were wonderfully coverted
from Gentilism, both from idolatry and profaneness, whereby their change was
the greater, and so were more sensible of Gods Spirit working upon them.
Lastly, They were exposed to great persecutions, they lived under constant
tribulations, there were no outward encouragements for them. Now it is Gods way
to vouchsafe this inward comfort and peace most to those that are bereaved of
all outward. Thus the Martyrs even in these latter days, did in a great
measure enjoy this Sealing of Gods Spirit; else they could not have been
carried through those bitter trials with such unspeakable joy and consolatton,
as they were. These things considered, no wonder if the primitive Christians
might have an higher measure of this sealing then we have; although it must be
confessed, that even in those days there were many hypocrites, and several
temporary believers, who had only vanishing apprehensions in these great
things, not solid persuasions.

Thirdly, Although this sealing be propounded in the Scripture as common to 3.
It is not so necessary to happiness as sanctification.
all, yet it is not of the same absolute connection with eternal happiness, as
sanctification is, without holiness no man shall see God: without this sealing
a man may; Insomuch that the promises of pardon and glory are not made to this
assurarce and consolation, but to grace and holiness. It is not said, Thou
shall not be saved, unless thou have this; for if it were so, then many of
Gods Children had cause to be greatly amazed, but it is not in the same way of
necessity as sanctification is. Seeing therefore it is more than a temporal
mercy, and yet not so high as an absolute spiritual mercy to salvation; it is
to be reckoned in the number of such mercies that are spiritual, but yet not
of peremptory necessity; such are degrees of grace: These are promised to the
godly; but not as absolutely necessary, for then all believers should be
equally godly: but they are distributed according to the wisdom of God. Thus
it is also in this matter of sealing.

Hence in the fourth place, Sealing does not follow sanctification as a
natural, 4. Sealing does not follow sanctification of necessity, but by Gods
appointment.
necessary property, but by divine appointment and order. It is not as when
there is fire, there must necessarily be heat; or as when there is the Sun,
there might be light, only God has appointed such an order. There is a great
aptness and fitness, for sealing to follow sanctifying. Hence it is commonly
Gods way, to make one follow the other, but yet this chain may sometime be
broken; if God sometimes hinder natural agents from their effects, as when the
fire did not burn the bodies of the three Worthies. No wonder, if in mere
positive and instituted ways of God, sometimes there may be an interruption
made, so that experience does unquestionably demonstrate this, that many truly
sanctified ones may yet for a season at least want this sealing; yea, go bowed
down and afflicted with thoughts clean contrary, as if they had received the
spirit of bondage only: Their love is so far from casting out tormenting
fea^, th^^ their slavish fears do cast out Evangelical love. But how may this
honeycomb cease to drop? how may this Conduit of wine come to How may this
sealing be stopped. 1. On Gods part, for reasons known to himself.
be stopped? I answer.

First, On Gods part, for some special and peculiar reasons not known to us
always. The Lord has wis^ and just reasons to leave his people in darkness;
To bring them into the Whales belly, as it were, out of which they cannot find
any escape. It was thus with Christ his only begotten Son, that he might
accompish the bitter work of redemption for us, he was left to those strong
agonies and fears, the Scripture speaks of; he had not consolation nor joy,
when he cried out, My God, My God, why have thou for saken me? his enemies gave
him gall to drink, and his soul tasted of gall within: his enemies set a crown
of thorns upon his head, and he had sharp thorns in his heart, in so much that
an Angel was sent to comfort him. This might make us wonder, that God should
not spare his own Son, but it was necessary for our redemption: for as he
could not have wrought our reconciliation for us, unless he had a passible
body that could suffer death; so neither unless he had a suffering soul by
fears and grief, though all without sin. It was Jobs case likewise to be
without sealing, for he could have no comfort in his heart, while he
complained, the Arrows of the Almighty did stick fast in him; while he was
terrified with dreams and visions in the night. Thus the Lord still does
exercise his sovereignty therein, he withdraws the light of his favor from
many choice sanctified ones; They wander in a wilderness, their lives are a
burden to them, they cannot meet God in any ordinance, as if they were become
like so many rejected Saul's, when yet the favor of the Lord is exceeding great
to them, only they perceive it not.

But then secondly, On our part many times, yea, too often when the cause is;
2. On our part
that we have not this sealing. We may thank our selves for bloaching the Paper
so, that no comfortable thing can be written upon it. I shall instance in one
or two ways, how we come to keep off this sealing.

And the first is. by falling into some grievous and gross sins; if such do
1. By falling into gross sins.
drive away the natural peace of a mere natural conscience, as is plain in
heathens, how much more the supernatural peace of a tender enlightened
conscience? David's penitential Psalm 51. does fully speak to this; he there
complains of his broken bones, he prays to have joy restored to him; all
which argues, that by sin he had lost all comfortable enjoyment of God; That
he was in a chaos and dark confusion: and truly if there were no hell, no
damnation to threaten the people of God with, to keep them from gross sins:
This of Gods iron turnace to be cast into, is enough to make our hearts
tremble. Oh the woeful condition that godly manis in, who in stead of the
spirit of Adoption he once enjoyed, is now delivered up to Satan, to be under
his fears, his black temptations; No outward comfort in the world can then give
him a drop of case. Oh then come not near any gross sins, fly from the
appearance of it, for this sealing cannot consist with that.

Secondly, Any careless and remiss walking, though we do not fall into 2.
Careless walking.
gross sins, is enough to put this Sun into an Eclipse: Any angry and bitter
words to another will do it; Any loose and wanton discourse may bring thee into
this deep dungeon: For so you may see, Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not the spirit by
which year sealed. But how is that done? for so you may see the verse before,
by corrupt communications, by unsavory, graceless words: and then see the
subsequent Verse; Let all bitterness, all wrath and anger be put away. Do
thou then complain thou have not this sealing? how can it be otherwise? How
many frothy, foolish speeches have thou? How many angry, bitter words come from
thee? If you hereby grieve Gods spirit, no wonder that he leave thee to thy
grief.

Thirdly, By any inward security, and secret self-confidence, we may deprive 3.
Self-confidence.
our selves of this sealing. For seeing this is a Gospel-privi edge, a ray from
the Sun of righteousness, it is only conveyed in an Evangelicall method:
Now all Gospel-dispensations are to the broken in heart, to the poor in spirit,
to the humbled sinner, renouncing all righteousness and worth of our own; so
that as it is in the work of sanctification, no sooner has a man any secret
confidence in his own power, but sanctifying grace in some measure leaves him:
As we see in Peter, when he said, Though all men should for sake Christ, yet he
would not. Thus it is also in the way of consolation, no sooner does a man
begin to be lifted up within, because he has these comfortable refreshments,
but presently they are substrated from us. Thus David did but say, his mountain
was established that he should not be moved; and immediately God hid his face,
and he was troubled, Psa. 30. 6, 7. Therefore that man who would enjoy this
desirable privilege, must walk with a tender, humble, and yet an Evangelicall,
fiducial frame of heart.

Fourthly, When we speak of Gods sealing, you must rightly understand the 4.
This sealing does not exclude all doubts.
meaning of it; It is not as if thereby such a certainty were wrought in the
soul, that it does exclude all fears and doubts. No, that is a proper
privilege to heaven: as the flesh lusts against the spirit in matter of
sanctification, so it does also in consolation. As therefore when the spirit of
God sanctifies on the spirits part, grace is pure and perfect, but on the
subjects part which does receive it; so it has much dross and imperfection
cleaving to it. Thus it is also in this sealing, though the testimony and
witness on the spirits part be infaliible and undoubted; yet as we receive it,
so there is much unbeleef and doubting adhering to us. This sealing therefore,
and many fears and doubts may consist together, because it is not absolutely
predominant and prevalent; only here is a conflict; we are to strive against
these doubts, we are to pray against these fears, till the Lord cause light to
arise out of this darkness: Therefore the godly may have this sealing, and yet
not attend to it, nor perceive it, because the corruptions of our heart are
most perceived by us, and we are so exercised by them, that we do not consider
what the spirit of God does witness at that time, This then makes the godly
think they have not this sealing at all, because they have it not with that
dominion, as they desire to exclude all conflicts and troubles within; and so,
as in respect of sanctification there is some grace under much corruption, so
there is also this certainty under many fears. And if you say, that it is a
contradiction, that a man should be assured, and doubt also. I answer, No, no
more than that a man should be sanctified, and yet have some corruption in him,
for they do not respect the same thing; Certainty arises from the Promises of
God, set home by his spirit upon us; ahd fears arise from the sense and feeling
of our own weaknesses. So that what the holy Apostle speaks concerning the
work of grace in him, with the oppositian thereunto, the good he would do he
does not, and he finds evil present with him. Thus it is here; the sealing,
the assurance, the comfort he would have he cannot obtain, but the doubts and
slavish fears which he hates, they carry him away captive.

Lastly, Suppose a godly man has not this sealing, yet let him not limit God
to 5. They that have it not are to submit to God.
the times and seasons he would, but leave all to the merciful dispensation of
a wise and righteous God. Thou have not assurance, yet no more thou have not
perfect grace yet, thou have not perfect holiness yet, but thou waitest upon
the Lord till it be accomplished, and so do here. Oh but I am afraid I shall
never have it, I shall dye without it! that is more than thou know: how
suddenly and graciously does God use to rebuke these winds and waves, when we
little think of it? yet know thy interest to heaven is not shaken: Thou will
indeed want much comfort, but not thy title to heaven; Thou art as sure to go
to heaven, as if thou were assured of it: And withal remember, that the faith
of dependence and recumbency upon Christ only, is more noble than assurance, in
that thou give God most glory. In this thy own interest is satisfied. And
lastly know, that heaven is coming to thee, and thou going to it, when not only
sin, but all fears shall be removed away; Thou shall then dispute thy condition
no more, thou shall not then question thy graces, or Gods grace to thee, but
shall put on the Crown of glory, never to be molested, and disquieted any more.

SERMON. CXXXVIII.
Of Grace, as it is the Earnest of Eternal Glory.

2 COR. 1. 22. And given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.
THis is the third and last similitude, by which that gracious confirmation of
believers in Gods promises, is declared; and if we consider them relatively to
the discourse precedent, we shall easily see, what great reason there is that
the promises should not be only yea and Amen in themselves, but in bs also.
Seeing we have this special work of Gods spirit, anointing, sealing, and giving
us an earnest of the things that are promised. Now, as you heard, though the
same prividedge be meant under this threefold similitude, yet every one has
its proper notion; and therefore the earnest here spoken of may differ from
sealing, thus: That the sealing of Gods Spirit does assure of us that which is
already wrought in us, as seals confirm contracts that are already made (though
hereby also is employed a certain continuance and perseverance in that state,
which is sealed;) but the earnest spoken of in the text, does principally
relate to the future: So that whereas the child of God might object, what if I
be sealed and assured for the present of my good condition, yet who knows
what may fall out thereafter? I may apostatize, I may provoke God to leave me,
and so this seal be as it were defaced. But though the word sealing does also
imply continuance, (for it is till the day of redemption) yet the word
(earnest) does more properly speak to that Objection; Thou have the earnest
given thee of that inheritance which shall be hereafter.

So that in the words we may take notice of the mercy it self, the efficient
cause of it, and the subject receiving it. The mercy it self is said to be an
earnest, (...): It is used in two other places in the New Testament, as is to
be showed. It is properly an Hebrew word, though from the Hebrews communicated
to the Phenicians, which being great Merchants brought it into Greece, so that
the Grecians adopted it for their ordinary wood; yea, some Latinists, as
Plautus and Terentius do use it; as Grotius on the place affirms. Varro
speaks of it, lib. 4. de ling. latina. where he says, the same money, for
diverse respects may be called dos, merces, arrabo, and corollarium, and adds,
the word arrabo is brought from the Grecians; but Scaliger in his Notes upon
the place corrects him for that saying, Ne graecum verbum quidem sed merum
Syriacum. The Hebrew root from whence it grows, is gnarub, to mingle, and so
by a metaphor it signifies to buy and sell, to make contracts, and to assure
them by earnests; because in this action, the buyer and the seller are as it
were mingled together: Some have translated it pignus, which the Grecians call
(...) a pledge, pignus; It is so called either a pugno, (say some) because the
pledge is delivered by the hand, or else as Martinius Lexi. pignus from pago or
pango, because in such covenants and contracts there is an agreement
established. But Hierom of old, and others of late do no ways approve of
rendering it a pledge, but an earnest; for there is this difference in the civil
law, between arra and pignus, an earnest and a pledge: an earnest is part of
the price that is to be paid down, and so goes to make it up; but a pledge is
given for security by the debtor to the creditor, and taken away again when the
debt is paid. Now this metaphor does no ways hold in this case, for God is not
a debtor to us: when he gives us his grace, he does not borrow of us; neither
when the promise is fullfilled, is this grace taken away; for in heaven grace
is not abolished, but perfected. Indeed Aquinas upon the place makes this
Observation. That as a pledge must be (says he) equivalently worth to the
debt, so it is here; grace wrought in us, especially the Spirit of God bestowed
upon us, is equivalent to glory. But that is false, that in our graces wrought
by Gods Spirit, there is an intrinsecall condignity and equality to everlasting
glory. It Is therefore more proper and suitable to call it an earnest, which was
commonly used two ways, either in civil commerce or matrimonial contracts,
called therefore in the latter subarrhatio: The end and use of it was to secure
the full payment of the debt, or fullfilling of any promise made; and in this
sense it is true in the Text, God knowing our pronenesse to doubt about his
promises, as also how uncertain and fearful we are, does give us his grace
here as a sure earnest of our eternal happiness. So that by this earnest, we
are not to understand extraordinary and miraculatous gifts of Gods Spirit; for
many had them who yet never could enter into glory, but the special works of
grace sanctifying. These are fitly called an earnest (though there be also some
dissimilitudes as is to be showed) insomuch that he who finds he has grace
here, may certainly conclude he shall have glory hereafter; for though there be
some who hold, that some may have true faith, and yet totally fall off, and
that only the elected believer shall persevere, yet that is built upon a sandy
foundation.

In the second place, you have the efficient cause of this, and that is the
spirit of God; Some indeed make this by way of apposition: The earnest, which
is the spirit; as if the spirit it self, both in this and the other Text, were
the earnest, which may be received, provided, that by the spirit we mean not
only the person of the spirit, but the gracious operations thereof; for the
people of God partake of both, Ephesians. 1. 13. They are said to be sealed with that
holy spirit of promise, called so, not because it is the spirit promised, for
that is too frigid, though it be true; but because it is the spirit that does
apply the promises to the soul, and make us assured of them, as he is called
the holy spirit, because he is the author of holiness: But then Ephesians. 4. 30.
there we are said to be sealed by the spirit, denoting the spirit of God to be
the efficient cause of it: So that it is a blasphemous wresting of the
Scripture by a Socinian; when by the holy Ghost thus sealing unto us, is (says
he, Small. disp. de promisso spiritus sancti.) meant no more than a sure hope of
eternal life: He denies the holy Ghost to be God, and a Person, it is only
(says he) a sure hope within us: but this is to confound this effect with the
cause: faith, and love, and hope, are the effects of Gods Spirit, they are not
the spirit it self. So that from hence, viz. because the spirit of God does
seal us, we may gather a sure argument, that he is truly God, for the spirit is
said to confirm us, and God is said to confirm us, whereby it is employed, that
to confirm our hearts is a divine operation, as well as to sanctify it. It is
true, how the spirit of God is God, and how it proceeds from the Father and
Son, cannot be comprehended by reason; It is enough that by faith we are to
believe so, for no wonder the doctrine of the Trinity is inexplicable, seeing
the nature of God is ineffable. To this purpose Austin having discoursed about
the Trinity, concludes, that he perceived only he had spoken something of God:
Si autem dixi, non est hoc quod dicere volui hoc unde scio, nisi quia Deus
ineffabilis est? Quod autem a me dictum est, si ineffabile esset, non esset
dictum, ac per hoc ne ineffabilis quidem dicendus est Deus. quia and hoc cum
dicitur, aliquid dicitur, and fit nescio quae pugna verborum, quoniam si illud
est ineffabile quod dici non potest, non est ineffabile, quod velut ineffabile
dici potest. De Doctrina Christiana. lib. 1. But that by the way.

Lastly, Here is the subject wherein, and that is said to be in our hearts: So
that as God does write his Law in our hearts; Thus he does also infuse his
comfort and assurance, which does demonstrate the sovereign power of God over
our hearts, he can make them holy when he pleases; he can comfort them when he
pleases: No Potentate in the world can do thus: That heart of thine which is
not in thy own power, which no man can tame, the grace of God can tame it, that
heart which thou desire may be filled with holiness and consolation; God
alone can do it. The Observation is.

That grace wrought in the heart is a sure earnest of glory hereafter. Grace is
a sure earnest of glory.


He that is holy here, must needs be happy hereafter. If thou can find grace
in thy soul, thou have found the Pearl, thou may rejoice, not doubting but
heaven will be thine hereafter. The people of God are not only to look upon
grace as grace, but as it is an earnest of a greater happiness: yet how often
do the children of God consider it without thiis respect? what courage, joy,
and holy boldness would it work in thee, to think thou have within thee that
which assures of eternal glory, as if thou were already in heaven? This is a
reviving truth, that grace is an earnest of glory, thou mindest grace as it
subdueth thy corruptions, as it makes thy heart to be carried out more holily
and delightsomely to God, but then thou do not attend to it as an earnest.
There is a great deal of difference between a shilling as a single piece of
money, and as an earnest, it may be of twenty pound more to come. Thus it is
very much rejoicing to find grace at all in thy soul, as it is grace; but it
does much more rejoice as it is an earnest of more fullness. Adam had grace,
the angels had grace, but grace was not given them, as part of an inheritance,
for they fell from it,

Let us consider two Texts of Scriptures, where we have this earnest spoken
Places of Scripture where this earnest is spoken of. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 5.
of. The first is by our Apostle in this Epistle, cap. 5. 5. Now he that has
wrought us for the self same thing is God, who also has given unto us the
earnest of his spirit. What is that self same thing he speaks of? it is a
groaning and an earnest desire after immortality; we would gladly be out of
this burden here, and in heaven; yea, as we groan and desire, so we are assured
and know, that when we shall dye, we shall go to heaven. But now because these
are things far above the power of nature, we naturally are afraid of death, we
are unwilling to be taken from our relations, we have not such assurance of
heaven. Therefore says the Apostle, He that does work us, frame and polish us,
for this great thing it is God. We could never do it without his supernatural
assistance: But then how does God work this admirable frame of heart? it is by
the earnest of his spirit; we have the beginnings of heaven already. So that as
the Israelites by the bunches of raisons, had some foretast of Canaan, so have
believers some taste of heaven by what they feel already; and as Moses from
Mount Pisgah could behold Canaan, though he did not enter into it: thus thou
have a sight of heaven, and an entrance into it by the grace begun in thee.

The other Text is, Ephesians. 1. 14. where the Apostle having said, That we were
sealed by the spirit of promise, he adds, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, 2. Ephesians. 1. 14.
until the redemption of the purchased possession. We are not yet brought into
heaven, into Canaan; We are yet in the wilderness, we meet with many dangers
and temptations threatening us, that we shall never come there, but only this
earnest does assure us and satisfy us: So that as among the Israelites, an
inheritance was not to be alienated from the Tribe, in the year of Jubilee it
would return again to the true owner. Thus this inheritance of heaven will
never be taken from thee. Thou may be in some dangers and fears of losing of
it, by thy unwise carriage, but shall not be deprived of it.

Before we enlarge on this subject, it is good to take notice of the
dissimilitude How grace and an earnest differ?
as well as the similitude; for though grace wrought in us be compared to an
earnest in this respect, as it does assure us of future glory, yet in other
respects it greatly differs from earnest among men.

As in the first place, An earnest in bargains is to assure the buyer that
gives it as well as the seller, they mutually hereby are confirmed; so that
the buyer 1. An earnest assures both buyer and seller.
cannot honestly fly off any more than the seller: But now when the spirit of
God works this earnest in us, it is only for our good, it is that we may be
assured and confirmed. As for God, he does it not to assure himself of us, but
that we may be assured of him: Indeed by consequent this assures us to God,
for having this earnest we are preserved from Apostasy, but the chief end is to
confirm our faith in God, that we may be able with Paul to triumph, because
nothing shall separate us from the love of God in Christ. It is then Gods
gracious goodness to condescend to us, he knows our temper, and our
temptations; he sees how one doubt arises up after another; he takes notice
how apt we are to perplex our selves about the future, and therefore he gives
us this earnest, not for his own security, but ours: This is more than his mere
promise, therefore the Civilians define an earnest to be a real security, in
opposition to that which is verbal or conventionall only. Gods promise is
enough to secure us: but because we walk much according to sense, therefore he
does indulge thus far, as to work in us, while in this valley of tears, the
beginnings of eternal glory hereafter. In which respect, we are already said
to sit down with Christ in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2. 6. and certainly if to a
godly man's sense and experience, the foretasting of heaven be so great and
refreshing, what is heaven it self? If an earnest be so wonderful a matter,
what is the possession and inheritance it self?

Secondly, This heavenly earnest differs from a worldly one, because amongst
2. An earnest is done in a communitative way of justice.
men this is done in a commutative way of justice. There is a strict equality
between the payment to be made, of which the earnest is part, and the thing
purchased thereby: So that in humane contracts, an earnest is given as part of
that payment which is equivalent to the thing purchased thereby. So that this
whole way of commerce belongs to the common place of justice. Thus those who
write de Jure and justitia, do under that treat, De pignoribus and hypothesis,
but (alas) in this earnest God gives us, here is no bargain, here is no
justice, all is of free grace; God does bestow both the earnest and the whole
sum, as it were, hereafter upon us freely. Both grace here, and glory
hereafter, do alone proceed from the sole bounty and free-love of God. Insomuch
that the child of God is both begotten, nourished and perfected by free grace
alone.

Thirdly, There is another dissimilitude flowing from the former, for he who 3.
By an earnest a man intends to advantage himself.
gives an earnest, intending thereby a full payment for something he would
have, does thereby purpose to advantage himself. He would not give an earnest,
but because he needs the thing he buyeth, and thereupon would profit himself;
but it is far otherwise with God and us in this respect; God gives us not
this earnest, this grace, no nor glory hereafter, because he needs us, but it
is only for our good and consolation. It is true, that Christ gave no less
than his own blood as a price to purchase us for a people to himself: But why
was this? Was this to advantage himself? Was it such purchasings as when men
buy houses and lands to enrich themselves and their posterity? No, but only to
do us good thereby; So that herein is the goodness of God exceedingly
commended unto us, that both the purchasing of us, and giving us an earnest to
secure us of future glory, all is from his own munificence. In all this we are
unprofitable and useless as to him.

Lastly, Here is this dissimilitude, and that is a great one; Amongst men when
4. An earnest is often lost.
the earnest is given, yet there is sometimes upon a just cause, and more often
upon unjust grounds, a breaking of the bargain. They will lose the earnest
rather than pay the whole sum; So that the Casuists dispute to whom the earnest
in conscience belongs, if the covenant be not made good. Thus because man is a
liar and deceitful, an earnest is not such security, that we may absolutely
depend upon it: Men are mutable, and are apt to break their engagements, but it
is far otherwise in this particular; God that has given the earnest, is not
as man to repent and to change his mind; No, this is given us on purpose to
assure us that he will never alter: and if it be said, though God does not
alter, yet we may; We may abuse this earnest, yea, we may lose it, all which
the Arminians plead. It is more fully to be cleared, that this earnest is to
assure not only God to us, but us to God, whereby he will so preserve us, that
nothing shall deprive us of eternal glory.

SERMON. CXXXIX.
What is employed in Gods giving us the earnest of his Spirit?

2 COR. 1. 22. Who has also given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.
THe Spirit of God with the graces thereof (as we have heard) received and
perceived by a believer, are a sure earnest of future glory.

In the handling of which hitherto, we have only treated of the dissimilitude
that is between this heavenly earnest, and an earnest amongst men: our work is
now to show positively, wherein the resemblance does consist, or what is
comprehended in this metaphorical expression. What is employed in the earnest of
Gods Spirit. 1. Gods will to bring us to salvation.


And First, Hereby is declared Gods will and infallible purpose to bring us
unto eternal glory; of which this grace received is an earnest. For (as you
heard) it is not grace as grace, but grace as an earnest, that does deserve an
accent, as it were, upon it: The emphasis lies in this. So that by these
beginnings of Gods Spirit upon me, I may unquestionably conclude my future
glory. And this Chrysostom upon the place does well observe: He does not
(says he) singly and barely call it the spirit, but an earnest, (...), that
from this thou may have boldness and confidence upon the whole, for if he
did not intend to give thee all (says he) he would not have given thee this
earnest in vain, and so as to lose it. Thus Macarius also an holy Writer, from
this similitude gathers, that such who have this earnest may rejoice, and be
as confident as if they were already crowned with glory, and reigning in
heaven. Homil. 17. (...); oh then the unspeakable happiness of such who do
find this earnest in their hearts! God would be found unfaithful, and to break
his promise, if as he has begun, so he should not also finish this work of
grace in thee. So that the Arminian exception is very frivolous and absurd,
saying, It is true, this is an earnest, but we may lose it: We may fall into
such sins as shall wholly cast us out of the favor of God: for this earnest
is given us on purpose, to assure us that God will so preserve us, and by his
grace so guide us, that we shall never fall out of this ark into the waters.
What comfort and encouragement were in this expression, if it did denote no
more then a conditional security; No, it is a positive and absolute security.
Therefore that learned Vossius was under some temptation surely, when he wrote
that Pelagian History; for in that he has this passage, where speaking of some
Ancients, who from the metaphor of an anchor and earnest conclude the certainty
of eternal life, glosseth after this manner, Histor. Pelag. lib. 6. These. 13.
Certos nos dicunt, quamdiu habemus arrhabonem spiritus sancti sed arrhabonem
hunc siquis abjiciat, hinc certitudinem simul salutis amittere: We are certain
of eternal life, as long as we have this anchor, this earnest; but if we lose
it, we lose our certainty also of salvation. How inexcusable is this, though
some learned men, great friends to that excellent Author say, that he promised
to review that History of Pelagian heresy in time? For therefore is this
earnest given us to take away our fears about the future: Whereas in their
sense we must needs be as uncertain as before; and besides this earnest would
need another earnest, and so in infinitum. The Scripture then by calling it an
earnest would hereby inform us of Gods will, that he who has given us the
first fruits will in time also give us the lump or harvest it self: he will so
preserve us, that not only any thing without, as the devil and the world, but
also any thing within us, our own hearts, our own lusts shall not betray us,
and become our destruction: and certanily that reason of Chrysostowe, which is
also grounded upon the Scripture, is among others very remarkable. If God of
his free grace did (while enemies) convert us, and bestow his spirit as an
earnest upon us, will he not much rather do it for us, since he has received
us into his friendship? To this purpose the Apostle also argues very strongly,
Romans 5. 9, 10. While we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us, much more then
being now justified by his blood, shall we be saved from wrath through him: for
if when we were enemies we were reconciled by death of his Son, much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his lise. If then God has done the
greater, will he not do the less? when we wallowed in our lusts, when we
tumbled in our filth, even then the grace of God did speak unto us to live,
even then it did put comeliness and beauty upon us, and shall he not much more
do it since he has made us his own? So that the same grace of God which
received us, though unworthy, will preserve us, though unworthy: and as our
rebellious heart did not finally withstand converting grace, but was overcome
by it, so will the grace of perseverance watch over us, that this earnest shall
not be totally lost. For this end we have many glorious promises to encourage
us in this particular; we must not then look upon our own dead womb, but the
power and promise of God, concluding by this, Lord, I know thy will is, that I
shall be saved, by this I am persuaded, that nothing, no, not I my self, shall
separate my self from thy love, for thy grace will always prevent my will.

Secondly, In that it is called an earnest, there is employed, that grace here
and 2. That grace and glory are of the same nature.
glory hereafter are of the same nature; that they differ only gradually: Even
as in an earnest amongst men, that is part of the full payment, and of the same
nature with it. Thus grace is nothing but glory begun, and glory grace
perfected; for which cause it is called glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. We are changed
into the same image from glory to glory, that is, from grace to grace, till we
come to inhabit glory: For which cause also the Apostle compares our state of
grace here to the state of a child, and that of glory hereafter to a virile
estate, 1 Cor. 13. Now as a child differs from himself when made a man but
gradually, he is the same individual person still. Thus it is here, thy grace
will not be abolished thou have here, but perfected: We do but think and
understand in heavenly things as children only; comparatively to what shall be
done in heaven. Even as these individual bodies shall put on immortality and
incorruptibility: They shall not be new bodies, but changed bodies. It is true,
there are some graces which suppose an imperfection in the subject, while he is
here in the way, at least in their actings, and so far as there is
imperfection, it shall be abolished: as 1 Cor 13. Thus says, as it justifies,
as it is opposed to vision, and hope as opposed to enjoying; repentance
likewise as it is sorrow for sin, and patience which supposes afflictions.
These things cannot be put forth in heaven, but probably the habits of these
graces may continue there, as being an ornament and perfection of the soul; it
being extrinsecal only, and by accident, that the occasion of the exercise of
those graces is removed, Hence (some say) but not probably, that the Spirit of
God is a pledge in respect of faith and hope, because they shall cease, but an
earnest in respect of charity, which abides for ever. Salmeron in loc. No
wonder then if grace be an earnest of glory, seeing they are the same thing in
nature, and differ only as perfect and imperfect; yet when we say, that grace
is only glory begun, that must be understood in a sound sense: for some of the
Papists make an inward condignity between grace and glory: we are not then to
think, that grace of it self would in a natural and necessary way spring up
into glory, as an Acorn would (in a physical manner) breed up into an Oak,
being seminally and causally contained in it. No, but in a moral sense, by the
gracious appointment and order of God; grace is glory begun, otherwise such is
the imperfection and dross that is in our graces while in this life, that when
we have arrived to the highest pitch, we might justly be deprived of glory.
Grace in the Apostate Angels formerly, was not glory seminally and radically,
for then they had not missed it: But if we do now regard the covenant of Gods
grace, he has so appointed it, that whosoever has grace here, that shall be
preserved and kept so faithfully, that it shall be perfected into glory
hereafter. And thus the earnest is of the same nature with the full payment it
self.

Thirdly and lastly, This similitude does not only declare Gods purpose and 3.
That heaven shall as certainly be ours as if we were already in it.
effectual will concerning us, but it is also to assure and persuade us of
heaven, as if we were already in it: and this is indeed one of the main ends of
this similitude. God will by this inform us of the transcendant excellency of
the covenant of grace above that of works, which he made with Adam; Thus our
Savior says, Joh. 5. 24. He that believes is passed from death to life, he
is already, and therefore is sure of everlasting happiness; so that in this
similitude there is not only the perseverance of the Saints denoted, but also
their assurance and certain persuasion of it. And the truth is, great is the
necessity of this doctrine; for while a godly man looks upon what is to come,
he sees such a terrible wilderness he is to go through, such a Red Sea to
pass over, such Anakims in the way to be destroyed, that had he not this
certain persuasion, that he shall overcome all these difficulties, and that God
would daily hold him in his arms of grace, that he shall not fall, his doubts
and fears would wholly dishearten him. And thus much is comprehended in the
metaphor of an earnest. It is not my purpose at this time to lanch into that
ocean of the doctrine of perseverance, as also the certainty of it. I shall
therefore amplify this doctrine, with some few propositions, and so conclude
it; for the excellency and comfortablenesse of it will not let us wholly pass
it by: This precious flower can be found only in the paradise of the Scripture;
Therefore Austin was weary of Platonical Books, because they had not these
excellent things in them, the Scripture has, whereof this arra spiritus, the
earnest of the spirit is one he instanceth in, lib. confess. cap. 7.

As first, We must know, that comfort of perseverance is only improved by 1.
The comfort of perseverance is only to be improved by those that are certain of
the work of grace in them.
those, that are certain of the present work of grace in their souls. He that
finds grace for the present in his soul, may undoubtedly conclude of his
salvation hereafter; but if a Christian do lie in doubts, whether he has grace
or no, this doctrine will not be as the honeycomb to him, for he has not laid
the foundation that this must be built upon: but if his thoughts about the
present work of grace be hopeful only in him, then also are his thoughts about
perseverance hopeful only: He may have some comfort, but not such a certainty
as the Scripture propounds: Neither can he use those triumphing expressions
of holy confidence, which Paul Romans 8. speaks not of himself, by any peculiar
revelation, but of all the children of God, that nothing shall separate him
from the love of God in Christ.

Secondly, There are some Doctors and Teachers, who make the certainty 2. There
are diverse opinions concerning this nearness.
of our present grace, and of perseverance therein, two distinct, yea, and
separable things. They will grant that a man may be certain of the present
grace he has, but then they deny he is to be certain that he shall continue
and persevere in this; for they affirm, that a man may have true grace, and yet
totally and finally fall from it; others say, that a man may have grace, and
not be elected, and such may lose it, but he that has true grace and elected,
that man shall never lose his interest in heaven: Nay, some of these Teachers
do not only deny any such certainty of perseverance in our present grace either
ordinarily possible or necessary. But say such a certainty would be very
dangerous and destructive to all vigilance and carfulness in an holy life;
for what a man is assured of, he cannot fear he shall lose, let him live how he
will; but this upon another account is in time to be more largely debated.
Therefore for the present I only add this third Proposition, viz.

That the certainty which the godly have, is not such an absolute abstracted
one, 3. Certainty of perseverance does not exclude means.
as that it does not include the means leading to salvation, but rather does
necessarily connote them. Insomuch that if any godly man should be left to such
a desperate frame of heart, as to say, I am sure of heaven, let me fall into
the most abominable impieties that are, these shall not hinder salvation; such
an one would certainly be damned: but that is not to be supposed, that such who
have the true seed of grace, will ever be given up to such a profane spirit.
The certainty then that a believer has, is in the use of means to attain their
desired end; So that it is like, the assurance that Paul had concerning the
preservation God would vouch safe to all his fellow-passengers in the ship with
him, which yet did relate to the necessary use of means, as Paul exhorts
them; or like that of Hezckiah, to whom God promised the addition of fifteen
years longer to his life. Now he was assured of this, God could not lie, yet he
did not neglect to eat and drink; he knew Gods promise employed the use of the
means, so that the adversaries to this Truth do fully mistake, when they say,
we preach such a certainty of perseverance, that though a man fall into any
enormous crimes, yet he shall enjoy this still: This is oppositum in apposito
to suppose, that if fire be water, it will refrigerate.

Fourthly, We are further to distinguish of a twofold certainty in this matter
of 4. This certainty is either 1. dogmaticall, or
salvation and perseverance in the way therein. The first I call a dogmaticall
certainty, and that is when a man is fully convinced out of the Scripture of
this truth in the general, that whosoever has once had true grace, shall
never fall from it, but certainly shall be saved; and he that has this,
differs from those corrupt and erroneous Teachers that affirm the contrary,
as the Arminians and their complyers in this respect: for there is no more
reason to doubt of this doctrinal point, than others that are maintained by the
Orthodox against that party; so that there is no more reason to make this a
problematical point, wherein learned men may dissent from one another, then any
other in the Arminian controversies. But 2. there is a personal or reflexive
certainty; 2. Personal.
and that is when a man does not only believe this position as a truth, that he
who has true grace cannot fall from it, but also is persuaded, that he has
true grace in his own heart, and therefore that he is built upon such a rock,
that no storms or tempests shall be able to overthrow him, and this is that
every godly man is to press after: This text is a special furtherance in this
work, for the spirits fealing persuades of the grace already wrought in us,
and the earnest does assure us of that which is to come. If you ask, what
grounds there are, why Reasons why they who have this earnest cannot fall away.
1.
he who finds grace in himself may thus conclude infallibly for heaven
hereafter? I shall amongst many give three only, which is such a threefold cord
that can never be broken.

As first, That all true grace is the proper effect of predestination; so that
whosoever is effectually called in time, is thereby declared to be
predestined before the world began. Thus the Apostle, Romans 8 30. whom he did
predestinate, he called; and those he justifies, and those he glorifieth. You
see it is a chain of Gods making, and so cannot be dissolved; therefore Tit. 1.
1. it is called the faith of Gods elect: so Ephesians. 1. 4. he has chosen us before
the foundation of the world, that we should be holy. We see then, that
holiness and true faith is proper to the elect only, and therefore to
distinguish of a twofold Sonship of God; some by present grace only, and some
by election also, and that there are persevering sons and apostatizing, wherein
election makes the difference (which opinion some attribute to Austin) is
wholly inconsistent with Scripture, and Austin himself in other places, if that
were his opinion. The godly then are to look upon the grace of God wrought in
them as the effect of Gods immutable and unchangeable love, which will
certainly obtain its end.

Secondly, Their certainty of salvation, and so of perseverance therein, is 2.
built upon the many promises of God, which are made to this very end, as that
famous one, Jer. 32. 40. I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I
will not turn away from them to do them good, but will put my fear in their
hearts that they shall not depart from me. What can be more pregnant than this?
God covenants he will not turn from them; and withal to put such fear in their
hearts that they shall not turn from him. So also Phil. 1. 6. being confident
of this very thing, that he who has begun a good work in you will also finish
it. His confidence was not in them; for alas, we should prove the prodigals,
and lose all; but it is in Gods grace, and that because he had begun; for none
shall say of him, he began to build, and could not finish: So that the wisdom,
mercy, and glory of God is interested in our perseverance, and indeed if our
sins should hinder him from continuance of his grace, why did they not from
the beginning at first? were we not then objects of his displeasure? So that in
our conversion the greatest work was done; then we had, as Chrysostom says
upon the place, the beginning and root of what was to come.

Lastly, The union that is between Christ and a believer being indissoluble,
does necessarily infer the certainty of his salvation, a member of Christ's body
shall 3.
not be taken from him, and thrown into hell; for from this union as their
bodies shall necessarily rise to glory, so their souls also shall be prepared
for the same.

SERMON. CXL.
Of Swearing.

2 COR. 1. 23. Moreover I call God to record upon my soul, that to spare you, I
came not as yet to Corinth.
THe Apostle having made a short, but happy and admirable digression,
occasioned from his discourse, verse. 17. about the calumny of levity and carnal
reasonings, and motives concerning his promise to come to them, does in this
verse return to that matter again, plainly informing of them, that it was not
any inconstancy or carnal respect in himself, that made him delay his coming;
but the fault was wholly in themselves, they were not yet prepared for his
coming, which for the greater confirmation and authority he does attest, with a
solemn and sacred Oath. It is true, Chrysostom does begin the second Chapter
at this Text, and so the Syriack. Yea Beza says, We ought to begin the
second Chapter here. In which respect Calvin and Musculus comment upon it
accordingly: but the matter is not worth a contest.

In the words you may observe,

1. An Oath. And 2. The Matter of an Oath.
1. The Oath is a very complete and perfect one, I call God to witness upon my
soul.

Of the Oath first. As for Pelagians and others, who affirm an Oath to be
unlawful, under the Gospel at least, and that in these or the like
expressions; Paul does not swear, because he does not use the Preposition per,
or by, or (...) and (...), in the Greek, it is an absurdity afterward to be
refelled.

The Oath in the Text is an Assertory Oath, wherein God is expressly called upon
as a witness; and withal an Execration is added, Upon my soul, that is, Let
God damn my soul, if it be not true: he does not mention his soul, as part of
the Oath, as if that were a witness as well as God; but he mentions it as a
pawn or pledge; and so it is lawful to name some creatures that we love, or
are dear to us, in an oath; not that we may swear by them, but as pledges. So
that this Oath is both Assertory and Execratory; not that these make two
distinct kinds of Oaths; for one does necessarily imply the other: He that
calls upon God as a Witness, does thereby imply him a Judge and an Avenger,
if he swear falsely. Only I call it an Execratory Oath, as well as an
Assertory, because the Execration is mentioned; whereas for the most part in
Oaths it is not expressed.

If you say, What reason or urgent necessity was here for Paul thus to make
such a deliberate and solemn Oath?

I answer, Very great. The adversaries of Paul did accuse him and traduce him
for a vain and inconstant person, which hereby did redound to the dishonor of
the Ministry, the hinderance of the Gospel, the destruction of Christ's Church;
therefore it was necessary for him to take this Oath, That no carnal motive
made him delay his promise, but a wise and spiritual consideration of their
good. Thus at another time, speaking of his earnest affections to his brethren
after the flesh, Romans 9. 1. he swears after this manner, I speak the truth
in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing witness in the Holy Ghost. So
in this Epistle again, 2 Corinthians. 11. 20. As the truth of Christ is in me. Romans
1. 9. For God is my witness that I make mention of you always in my prayers.
Gal. 1. 20. The things that I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not.

Thus you see by many instances, the holy Apostle making use of an Oath, but
always upon necessary occasions for Gods glory, and the edification of others.
From whence observe,

That it is lawful even under the Gospel, to swear after a right and godly
manner, It is lawful under the Gospel to swear after a right manner upon
necessary occasions.
upon necessary and urgent occasions.

I say, under the Gospel; for some have granted it lawful under the Old
Testament, as (they say) to circumcise, to sacrifice was; but under the Gospel,
they hold it absolutely forbidden.

So that the handling of this truth about swearing, or a lawful oath, is of
great importance, both for doctrinal information against Pelagians, Socinians,
some Anabaptists, who hold it unlawful under the Gospel: As also of direction,
to know wherein an Oath does consist; and whether many forms used commonly by
people are oaths, or no. And then withal, it is of great practical use, if
possible, to remove that ungodly and wicked custom of ordinary swearing,
without any due consideration of the nature of an oath. For how general and
epidemical is this sin? Old and young, yea little children can swear as soon
as speak; rich and poor; yea men glory in their oaths, and deride at the
strictness of such, who will be so precise, as to abstain from them. They
look upon oaths as the glory of their speech, and becoming a Gentleman. But
Solomon's description of a godly man will abide good, when such profane
miscreants, shall lie for ever roaring in hell, viz. That he is one who fears
an oath, Eccles. 9. 2. A righteous man, a good man, and he that fears an
oath, are synonymous expressions. You see then what a fruitful field we are
plowing up: but I shall not venture upon all the cases about Oaths, which would
require a great volume; only limit my self to my Text, which contains only
an assertory Oath, not a promissory. And indeed because it is the most formal
and express oath that we meet with in the Scripture, we must improve it
according to the desert of it.

Two sorts of persons there are who have run into extremes about an Oath.

First, Such who out of a great reverence to God, and because every man's word
should be as good and as firm as an Oath, have therefore wholly refused to use
it. To such we shall prove the lawfulness of it; Yea the necessity and duty of
it in some cases. On the other extreme are many profane and wretched men, who
use these sacred Oaths in all ordinary discourse, vainly, irreverently; yea
sometimes arise to such high impiety and wickedness, as not only to swear
rashly and vainly, but also falsely, so as to forswear themselves, and become
guilty of perjury; a sin so contrary to the light of nature, that Heathens
have severely punished it. And God does seldom let such perjured persons go
unpunished in this world without some remarkable punishment. For that terrible
threatening will not prove false or a lie, Zech. 5. 3, 4. where a flying roll,
that is, the curse of God, is said, To enter into the house of him that
swears falsely, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall
consume it with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof.

But before we come to these particulars, let us first consider of the nature
of What an oath is.
an Oath (an assertory one especially, for that is my subject) what it is, and
we may define it to be,

First, A religious calling upon God, as a witness, for the confirmation of
any thing in doubt or controversy. The Latins call it juramentum, or
jusjurandum, which is all one, though some would make a difference; because
that an Oath does jus, or l^gem dare; it declares the right, and law (as it
were) of a thing, after which we are not to dispute any more: Or else because
it does Jus dare Deo, or because Jure introductum: All Heathens concluding on
this remedy by an oath, against controversies, as most expedient. The Greek
word (...), some make to come of (...), an establishment, or of (...), to
constringe and bind, because an oath brings a bond or strict obligation upon a
man's soul. Thus Numb. 30. 2, 3, 4. In a vow, which in this respect agrees with
an oath, therefore it is added, Or swear an Oath, a man or woman are thereby
said, To bind their soul with a bond. The Hebrew word is ordinarily Shebugna,
which they derive from Shebang, the number of seven, because an Oath uses to
be amongst many witnesses: and withal it is observed, that the word to swear
is used in Niphal, a passive voice, signifying thereby, that a man is not to
swear, unless he be (as it were) solemnly compelled unto it.

Now this definition given of an Oath, has in it four parts:

The generical Nature, the Form, the Matter, and the End.

1. The generical Nature, it is a religious calling. 2. The Form, upon God as a
witness. 3. The Matter, which is doubtful and controversal.
Lastly, The End, or the Effect (as some dispute) which is the confirmation of
this. For after Oaths there is to be no more arguing. Hence Aquinas says well,
That what first principles are in speculatives, the same is an Oath in
practicals. Now as first principles are indemonstrable, and none may deny them,
or go to prove them, so is an Oath; it is an artificial argument to prove a
thing indemonstrably. And thus Aristotle defined, That it was an indemonstrable
argument or word without proof, with a reverent and sacred use, (...),
Rhetorica ad Alex. cap. de Jurejurando.

Let us consider this definition, upon which some Cases and Questions of
Conscience are afterward to be built. And

First, We say, It is a religious calling upon God. Hence an Oath is the 1. It
is a religious calling upon God.
worship of God; when a man swears in a right manner, he gives honor and
glory to God, believing him to be Omniscient, and a searcher of the heart; as
also an holy Judge, who will punish and be avenged upon all such, who shall
take his Name in vain. Hence it is reckoned in Scripture as part of Divine
Worship, Deuter. 6. 10. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and
shall swear by his Name. So Deuter. 10. 20. Thou shall cleave to him, and
swear by his Name. Yea the whole worship of God is sometimes synecdochically
contained in this action only, Isaiah 45. 23. To me every tongue shall swear.
Thus it is made a prophetical promise in Gospel Times, That he who swears,
shall swear by the God of truth, by which all Gospel Worship is intended, Isa.
65. 16. Oh how little is this considered by common swearers, whose mouths are
filled with daily oaths. Do you consider what an Oathis? Do you remember it
is a solemn worship of God? If God were an Idol, yea a man, you could not more
abuse and despise his holy Name than thou do. Is this to worship God? Every
oath should be with holy fear and trembling at the Majesty of God: But thou
tramplest his honor profanely under thy foot. Judge ye, how profane you your
selves would think men to be, if they should be so vain and customary in other
holy worship. Should a man take the holy Psalms, and sing them as idly, and
as vainly, as he does ordinary songs, would you not call such a man a profane
man? Prayer also that is a worship of God, should a man in his prayer be no
more reverent than in his merry tales, or idle discourse, would you not say,
such a man was a vile wretch? Take the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Should a
man receive that with no more reverence than he does his ordinary food; should
he make no difference between the Lords Cup, and a Cup of Ale at the Alehouse;
Would ye not gnash your teeth at such a man, as an atheistical person? And is
it any less profaneness, when you make oaths, and your ordinary discourse
all one? The very word Sacrament was taken from an Oath, as the learned show:
What shall be done unto thee then thou swearing and cursing tongue? Every
trifle, every passion sets thy tongue thus on fire from hell.

Secondly, Again I say, It is a religious calling upon God. For an Oath may be
either pronounced speculatively, and enuntiatively, or practice, and
invocative; practically, and by way of invocation: As for example; when I read
this Text, I call God to witness upon my soul; while I do so, I do not
swear; yet Paul when he expressed them, he did swear. For I only repeat them
enuntiatively, and by recitation; I do not practically call upon God. Thus
when a Magistrate, or any inferior Officer reads a form of an Oath to him
who shall swear, this reading of it does not make him swear, because he does it
not by calling upon God.

In the next place, There is the Form of this Oath, and that is, Calling upon
God, as a witness. A twofold form we may speak of in an Oath, Internal, 2.
It is a calling upon God as a witness.
and that is, when God is called to witness: Or External, and that is a form
of words. Of which in its time, because many Disputes are, whether such forms
be Oaths or no? For the present, The Internal, is God called upon as a
witness. Insomuch that all oaths made by creatures, or swearing by them, is
utterly unlawful. For seeing to swear is (as you heard) a divine Worship, it
must needs be Idolatry to give this worship to any other but God. Neither will
the Popish distinction of swearing by a creature transitive, or relative, with
reference to God; and terminative, or absolute, be able to make escape from the
jealousy of God in this matter, as is to be showed. Although not only Pagans
and Papists, but even many Protestants, are guilty of this Idolatry, to swear
by Saints and Angels, by creatures irrational, and rational. But woe be to
such, because of their horrible offenses in this kind! Now when we say, God is
called upon as a witness; hereby is declared, That an Oath in its nature tends
to the glory of God; for it is built upon this fundamental Article of Faith,
That God has an all-seeing eye, as also an avenging one, where men deal
perfidiously, God is called as a witness, and so by consequence as a Judge.
And in this an Oath differs from a Vow. For though a Vow be also a religious
worship of God, yet in that God is considered (as it were) a party, with whom
we make a sacred promise; but in an Oath, we attend to God as a witness, as he
that knows all things. And therefore how highly do these common swearers
sin? For while they swear, they make use of his name, who knows all things,
who observes those very words and expressions at that time. Certainly this
consideration of Gods witnessing at that time, should fill thee with much
terror.

In the third place, There is the Matter, and that is doubtful and
controversal, 3. It is in a doubtful matter.
Whether it be a thing past, present, or future. For an assertory Oath may be
about future things; as if a man should swear the infallible event of such a
thing, which yet he does not promise to accomplish. This the Apostle shows,
when he calls an Oath, Heb. 6. 6, The end of a controversy. Therefore to use an
Oath about manifest and evident things, is an abuse of the end of it. Had Adam
continued in the state of innocence, there had been no need of Oaths, because
there would have been no doubts, no controversies, there would have been no
falsehood or injustice amongst men. But after sin came into the world, then
man became sinful and false, as the Devil, that did deceive him. So that
although Oaths are lawful in some cases, yet it is because of sin: they
become necessary, because of man's transgression. And therefore Divines say
well, That although an Oath be a worship of God, yet it is not as other worship
is, of it self to be desired, and constantly exercised, as to pray unto God,
and to praise God; but only it is to be desired propter aliud, supposing sin
in man going before. Even as Physic is not in it self to be desired, but
upon supposition of a disease; so that if mankind were as honest, faithful
and righteous, as they ought to be, there would be no need of Oaths; and
frequent use even of lawful and necessary Oaths, suppose a distempered Nation,
even as continual use of Physicians, demonstrate a diseased people.

Lastly, Here is the End of swearing, and that is (...), says the 4. The end
of it is for confirmation.
Apostle, (Hebrews 6. 6.) for confirmation; and therefore called (...), the Ne
plus ultra of any controversy: not that always it does confirm the truth.
For how many ungodly and graceless persons do swear falsely? But in the
nature of it it is for that end. It is true, your common swearers, they do so
grossly abuse an Oath, that the end is wholly frustrated, no sober man giving
them the more credit, because they swear: yea the more they swear, the more
they suspect them for lying.

SERMON. CXLI.
Of Oaths and several expressions used in Swearing.

2 COR. 1. 23. Moreover I call God to record upon my soul, etc.
THe Definition and lawfulness of an Oath in necessary and urgent motives
being declared, I shall proceed to answer some Cases or Questions, and that
from the Description given. Only

First, It is good to take notice, that there are these four things may be used
to the confirmation of any thing that is said.

The first is, A bare Affirmation, or Negation, according to that command, Let
your communication be yea and nay.

2. When we to this affirmation add an Asseveration or Attestation. Thus our
Savior many times, Verily, verily; which is not an oath, as learned men show
against those, who have thought so: so when we say truly, or indeed, this is an
asseveration.

3. There is an Obtestation, and that comes near to an Oath, but is not an
Oath; and that is, when we do appeal (as it were) to the creatures, to
witness such a thing, as Moses to affect the senseless Israelites, said, Hear,
O Heavens, and hearken, O Earth. Thus Paul, (1 Timothy 5. 21.) I charge thee
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels. He does not there
swear, but use an Obtestation, and that not only before God, and Christ, but
Angels also; for they are present with us, and bear witness of us.

Lastly, There is an Oath, and that is, When we call upon God as a witness, to
confirm what is spoken. I say, When we call upon him as a witness. For when
there is a mere allegation of some Text of Scripture, to confirm a truth,
there is a witness of God made use of, he is then brought as a witness; but
it is not an Oath, because it is not by way of Invocation.

In the next place, Oaths may either be completely and perfectly expressed, as
here in the Text: Or else elliptically or defectively, which is very ordinary,
If they enter into my rest; God do so to me, and more also. Many times the
creature that is dear to us, we mention, as exposing it to Gods curse, if we
say not truth, and the name of God is not mentioned. This is good to be
remembered, because many use execratory speeches, and think, because God is not
named, here is no swearing, whereas they are terrible oaths, such are, Would I
might never stir, would I might be hanged, etc. These are horrible execratory
oaths, though God be not named.

These two things premised, let us consider, What doubts may be raised from the
forementioned definition of an Oath? And

First, In that an Oath is said to be a religious calling upon God, it may be
1. Whether words be necessary to an oath. Answ.
asked, Whether words be necessary to an oath? May it not be by other signs?

The Answer is, That a man may swear mentally, and in his heart only, because
God is a searcher of that, and knows every thing which moves in us.

And again, Dumb men, as Zacharias for instance, no doubt might have sworn by
some signs he might make. Hence the Comical Poet, cited by Covarruvias and
Grotius, (...), It is a firm Oath, though I do but nodde with my head. A man
also may swear by writing; and thus the Apostles Oath is here in the Text by
writing. Yea Austin's observation is, That he does not remember, that ever the
Apostle did swear any otherwise than in writing, not in speech or discourse, he
delivered by mouth: And hereby an Oath is made more deliberate. If no men would
swear, but first write it down, it would be a special means to stop much
ungodly swearing.

The second Question is, We define an Oath to be a religious calling upon 2.
Whether it be not lawful to swear by the creature.
God as a witness; Whether then it be not lawful to swear by the creature?
What is more ordinary, not only amongst Papists, but Protestants also, than to
swear by the light, by this bread, by their faith and truth; and these are
creatures?

To this it is answered,

First, That the Papists (Covarruvias part. prima relect. de juram.) though
Answ.
they hold an Oath to be a religious worship of God, yet they say, we may
swear by creatures; but with this distinction, not absolutely and
terminatively staying in them, but relatively to God, whose power and goodness
is eminent in the creatures. But this is an empty distinction. For our Savior
does absolutely prohibit to swear by the creatures (Matthew. 5.) and the command
is often, to swear by God alone; they are reproved also, who swear by God and
Baal, God and Milchom. For although they were Idols, yet the reason of the
prohibition is, because they are not Gods, and every creature is not a god;
therefore it is not lawful to swear by any creature, neither terminatively
nor transitively; for all is Idolatry, giving the worship due to God, unto the
creature. It is true, though a man swear by the creature (which is unlawful)
yet it is an Oath for all that, and does oblige, as our Savior informed
against the Pharisees. Non te audit lapis loquentem, sed Deus te punit
fallentem, says Austin, speaking of the Heathenish custom, which was to hold
a flint in their hands, while they did swear, saying, If I do deceive, let me
be cast out of the City, as I throw away this stone. This they called swearing,
Pexr Jovem lapidem. Therefore it is a foolish and senseless evasion of many, to
say, they do not swear by God, they are but petty oaths (as is to be showed.)
For here is the more Idolatry, when you swear by a creature: Is your Faith a
God. Is your Troth a God? Is the Light and Bread you swear by a God? These
oaths were usual amongst Heathens. Socrates, whether it was to deride the
Heathens opinions about their gods, would swear by a Cock, and by a Dog. It
cannot be denied, but that it might be, men at first out of a superstitious
reverence to God, did forbear to swear by him; but herein they did more
dishonor God, while they thought to honor him, which is always the fruit of
superstition. Some Protestants indeed (Calvin and Peter Martyr) are said in
some sense to allow swearing by creatures, as the symbols of Gods presence and
power: but that is not safe; and there is no creature, but in it the power and
wisdom of God does appear, so that then we might swear by every creature. God
then only is to be sworn by; for he alone is the all-seeing witness of all
that we do, and omnipotent to punish such as shall take his Name in vain. So
that thou art not to think thou art clean from the dishonor of God, because
thou swearest, but do not name him.

It is true, two ways learned men say, we may mention a creature in an Oath,
though we do not swear by it. And How we may mention a creature in an oath, and
not swear by it. Answ. 1.


The first is, when we mention it as a pledge, in which we desire God would
punish us, if we say not the truth. As here in the Text, Paul does name his
soul, though he does not swear by it. And in this sense some excuse that
speech of Joseph's, By the life of Pharaoh, Genes. 42. 15. For (say they) his
meaning is, As dear as Pharaoh's life is unto me, which I would have God
constantly preserve, it is thus and thus. Even as in the primitive times,
though the Christians refused to swear, Per genium Imperatoris, yet they did
swear per salutem, as that which was dear unto them. Although for that fact of
Joseph, some say, it was his sin, and condemn him therein, as if by living in
Pharaoh's Court, he had contracted this sinful custom.

In the second place, it is lawful to mention a creature in an Oath, and Answ.
2.
not swear by it, When we make a collation, and comparison (as it were)
between the truth of one thing, and another. As when David said to Jonathan,
As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, there is but a step between me
and death, 1 Samuel 10. 3. Thus Hannah said to Eli, O my Lord, as thy soul
lives, I am the woman that stood here praying, 1 Samuel 1. 26. Thus Abner said
to Saul, when he asked him, Whose son David was? he answered, As thy soul
lives, O King, I cannot tell, 1 Samuel 17. 55. In these places, they do not
swear by the soul of a man, but make a comparison, as sure as they live;
which is plain and manifest, so surely is such a thing true. And in this sense
likewise some defend that Oath of the primitive Christians, By the safety or
life of the Emperor, if thereby they did not mean God himself; as David often
calls God, The health and light of his countenance, yea his life also. Now
although in these respects a creature may be named lawfully, yet the latter way
is not to be used by Christians. For it is offensive to godly ears, especially
that is a wicked and most ungodly comparison, which some men use, when they
will say, Such a thing is as true, as God is true. For that is blasphemy to
compare a creature, and the infinite Majesty of God together in matter of truth.

In the third place, Concerning this Definition of an Oath, that is, A 3.
Whether it is lawful to say, I vow it is so.
religious calling upon God; we may question concerning some form of speeches,
which are frequently used amongst us, whether they be Oaths, or no. As

First, Many have this ordinary expression, I vow to God it is so. Is this
lawful?

To which Suarez answers, (Disput. de Juramento) saying, That it is not only
an improper and absurd speech, but also very ungodly, and highly Answ.
wicked. It is improper and absurd, for it confounds a vow with an oath. A vow
is not properly used to confirm a thing, for that is the nature of an Oath.
But if there were impropriety only in it, that were not so heinous; but it is
abominable irreverence, making such things the object of a vow, which are light
and trivial. And thereupon some conclude, There is more profaneness and
irreverence in it, then in using an oath: yea (they say) it is a very great
Oath.

But then secondly, The great Question is, Whether these expressions (in faith)
Whether in faith, and by faith be oaths. Answ.
and (by faith) are oaths, or not?

To which I say,

First, When there is a doubt and dispute, whether such a form of speech be an
Oath? then the safest way for thy conscience, is to abstain from expressions,
as the Apostle argues, (Romans 14.) Whatsoever is done doubting, is a sin.
If then there be a dispute, and that amongst learned men, Whether in faith (for
most grant by faith to be one) be an Oath? Is it not far better for thee to
leave off such form of words? If there were nothing but the scandal to
others, it is a just cause to make thee avoid such expressions: So that the
disputes about the thing, is argument enough to make thee leave these words,
there being no necessity to use them.

But in the second place, lest you might say, Perhaps they are some Precisians
and Doctors of that strictness that may think in faith, to be Oaths: Even
amongst the Popish Authors, there are those who judge so. Only they
distinguish about faith, What faith do you mean (say they) when you say in
faith? If the Christian faith, that is a sacred thing, and so it is an Oath; if
a moral faith, that is nothing, but humane veracity, or a civil faith, as we
may call it, the faith of a Nobleman or Gentleman; then (they say) it is no
Oath. But who is there that says in faith, does consider what faith he
means? Nay some perhaps, if they were asked that Question, could not tell how
to answer it. Only because not only men of the greater rank, but of the
inferior sort, do use that expression, and because they do it for further
confirmation; it is to be presumed, that they mean the Christian faith; and if
so, according to some Popish Authors, it is an Oath. Neither is that any thing
considerable to say, we do not use the Preposition by; we do not say by
faith, but in faith; as Soto the Papist says, To say by faith is an Oath, but
not to say in faith. For Suarez an acuter Jesuit says, (Disp. de Juram.) That
such an exception is vain; and that by faith, and in faith is all one. Neither
does the Preposition make an Oath. We conclude then, that in faith, as well as
by faith, are Oaths. It Is true, Doctor Ames opinion is, That in faith is no
more, than an asseveration. Only he adds, We must abstain from the
Preposition by. But (as I said) in and by are all one, in this case. And if you
say, Why should in faith be more an Oath, than in deed, or in sincerity? To
this Doctor Sanderson gives a considerable answer, (De Juram. Praelect. 1.
Sect. 8.) he makes four (...), or marks, by which we may discover some
forms of speech to be Oaths; and one of them is, The custom and use of the
Countries language, where we live. So that although it may fall out, that if
we do regard the words, there is no reason, why one should be not an Oath,
more than another, yet the custom and use of the Country must carry it,
because words do not signify naturally, but by mere institution. So that as
that may be money in one Country, which may not be in another: Thus that
expression may signify an Oath, in one Country, which does not in another. We
grant therefore, that if we do respect the mere words, there is no argument
can be given, why in deed should not be an Oath, as well as in faith; but the
custom of speech in this Land, at least amongst those who are more sober, and
desire to fear an Oath, is to judge of it as an Oath. And no doubt but those
that use it, do for the most part intend so. Yea, why do many use that
expression in faith, but because they would not be thought too precise? For by
this they would be distinguished from others, who are more strict. This is the
Shibboleth (as it were) by which they would be notified. Besides, it is a Rule
amongst Casuists, That Juramentum est stricti juris, because of the danger that
may be therein. And, Quando verbum est ambiguum, praesumendum est in salutem
animae. It being better, if we do err to abstain from words, that may be an
Oath, than to venture upon them, because of our particular persuasion.

I shall therefore conclude this, with that Author abovementioned, He that
while he does attend only to the form, or force of words, indulgeth himself
in a liberty of using such expressions in his common discourse, without any
choice or scruple, which by long use have obtained with us the esteem of an
Oath, does violate the command of Christ concerning not swearing; gives a
scandal to his brother, and exposes himself to the danger of perjury. This
is very good and grave counsel. Therefore whatsoever the Dispute may be about
these terms, whether oaths, or not, let him who loves his soul, who would
not give a just scandal to his brother, and is known by his character, that he
fears an Oath, with all diligence and circumspection avoid such expressions
for the future.

SERMON. CXLII.
It is lawful in some Cases to swear; how and when it is thus lawful?

2 COR. 1. 23. Moreover I call God to record upon my soul, etc.
THe definition of an oath being delivered, we now come to satisfy that party,
which holds an oath is absolutely unlawful under the Gospel: as also to show
you, how it is lawful, and when it is lawful, that so common swearers may be
ashamed and confounded, to see what guilt they daily bring upon themselves, and
yet never lay it to heart. As for those who have abstained from an oath as
unlawful, we find the sect of Essen's among the Jews reckoned by learned men
as remarkable. This sect was at the same time with the Pharisees and Sadduces,
whose manners and way Josephus relates at large. yet (say some) our Savior
did not reprove their superstitions, because they lived solitary in places
remote from Towns and commerce of men: Eusebius upon a mistake does suppose
them to be Christians. Now their opinion was, that it did not beseem a man to
swear. They thought a man's word should be as firm as an oath, yet that they
were not absoluely aagainst swearing, appears in that they took an oath of
every member admitted into their society, to walk according to their rules. The
Pelagians besides their doctrinall heresies, had two practical Positions,
which seemed to savor of much piety and religion. The one was, that a rich man
abiding rich, couldnot be saved; whatsoever was above necessity he was bound to
abdicate. The other was, that it is wholly unlawful to swear upon any
occasion; and as for Paul's examples, they denied them to be oaths; and as for
the instance taken from God himself, that he did swear, their answer was, that
though God the Master might swear, yet it did not follow that servants might,
especially when their Master forbids them. The Papists some of them, though
they hold it lawful to swear, yet they judge abstinence from it a counsel
belonging to perfect men, and not a precept. They usually likewise charge it
upon the Waldenses, as if they judged an Oath absolutely unlawful. The
Socinians they indeed grant an Oath lawful in necessary cases; only their
error is, That whereas rash and vain swearing was not forbidden in the Old
Testament; The Jews in their ordinary discourse might swear, so only false
swearing was prohibited: Now Christ as a more perfect Lawgiver does not only
forbid forswearing, but that common rash swearing. But this is built upon their
false foundation, That Christ persected the moral Law, not by explication and
declaration only, against Pharisaicall glosses, but by addition of new
precepts. Some Anabaptists in this latter age have positively condemned all
Oaths, and therefore refused to swear before Magistrates, thinking that our
Savior, Matthew^ 5. did forbid it, because he says, Swear not at all, but let
your yea be yea, and nay nay, etc. Yea, some of the Fathers, as Tertullian,
Basil, Chrysostom, and others, do seem as peremptorily to condemn all kind of
swearing, as can be expressed; some of them thinking it was allowed the Jews no
otherwise than he Bill of Divorce was, even for the hardness of their hearts.
There are indeed learned men, as Sixtus Senensis, and others, who labor to
excuse them; but by their words nothing seems to be more plain: yet
Tertullian who said, Qucmodo pejerare quibus ne jurare est licitum? how shall
Christians for swear, to whom it is not lawful to swear? acknowledges, that
though the Christians, as Polycarpus would dye rather than swear per genium
imperatoris, which they judged a devil; yet they did, per salutem imperatoris,
by the life, or safety of the Emperor, or rather God the cause of it. But
whatsoever the thoughts of men might be, yet that in some urgent and necessary
cases it is lawful, appears, It is lawful in some cases to swear. Arg. 1.


First, From the examples of it in Scripture, and that of God; of Angels, of
godly and holy men; yea, of Chaist also, say some. That God did swear,
appears by many places in the Old Testament; and the Apostle improveth it for
the comfort of the godly, Heb. 6. 13. only his Oath is peculiar, as his Majesty
is infinite; for he swears by himself, because he has no greater to swear
by. Some Learned men indeed have thought, that it is but an improper and
metaphorical expression, when God is said to swear, and that it is not truly
an Oath, but the Apostle does expressly make his promise, and his Oath two
things: Not that there is a need on Gods part, to confirm his word, but on our
part, who are subject to evil. Therefore it is our evil, that makes God to
swear. In some of those Oaths, there is an ellipsis, or defect; as Psalm. 95.
11. Unto whom I swear in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest. If, some
make the supply of this Oath to be by execration, then let me not be God; but
others more probably make it only for a more vehement attestation, conceiving
such an execration undecent to the Majesty of God; as also because his infinite
perfection is such as is not capable of any such execration. That Angels did
swear, appears, Revel. 10. 6. where one is said to swear by him that lives
for ever. The eternity of God is the attribute there mentioned, because of the
fitness of it to the matter in hand, the Angel declaring what would befall the
Church in future ages: although it is not likely that Angels swear to one
another for the confirmation of any thing; for this was done to John, for
confirmation of the things foretold. That Christ did swear, some affirm in that
expression, Amen, Amen, but other Learned men judge not that to be an Oath: but
though he did not, it must be granted, that he might, both because as man he
was capable of swearing as well as praying to God; and also hereby he might
confirm the words that he said, but his wonderful miracles did abundantly
establish that; That holy men also have upon necessary occasions taken an oath,
appears by many examples of Paul. So that if our Savior had intended an
absolute prohibition of all Oaths, this Apostle would have often offended
against that command. It is true we told you, that all Oaths suppose sin,
therefore in the state of integrity there would have been no oath; yet Suarez
Disput. de Juram. thinks there might have been in that condition, though not
so often, because many contingent things might have been known to one, which
were not to another. Therefore he would have an Oath, not necessarily to
suppose sin but lesser perfection. It is not worth the while to contend in
this. By these examples we see plainly the lawfulness of swearing upon urgent
occasions.

The second Argument is from the commands in the Old Testament, as Deuteronomy. Arg. 2.
6. 13. Deuteronomy. 10. 20. The third Commandment in forbidding all irreverent use
of Gods Name, especially in swearing, does thereby command the lawful and
reverent use of his Name in Oaths; yea, there are promises of it under the
Gospel-time, not indeed that it is a duty commanded absolutely, and for it self
sake; so it is not commanded as prayer is, but upon supposition, where there is
need: Thus in some difficult cases, in contracts between men for purgation of
themselves, or discovering the truth, an oath is required, Number. 30, Lev. 5. 4.
Number. 5. 19, 21.

Lastly, The Apostle is clear for this, Heb. 6. 16. For men verily swear by
Arg. 3.
the greater, and an oath for confirmation is to them ahend of strife: That
does not weaken the proof, because he says to men, as if he meant only the men
of the world, they use such a custom, but Christians do not; for one kind of
men is not there opposed to another; men of the world to believers, but men to
God: Therefore you heard believers did swear, as Paul upon many occasions. Thus
Athanasius did by an oath solemnly purge himself to Constantius the Emperor,
that he had not spoken any thing against him to his brother Constans. Thus you
have Scripture-ground for the lawfulness of it: Neither does any thing in
reason, or the nature of an oath, make it unlawful: yea, on the contrary God
is thereby glorified, and the public edified. For if you do regard the
original or rise of an Oath, that is for the honor of God; it being
introduced upon a faith, that God beholds all things, that he loves truth, and
will be a severe avenger of all those who take his Name in vain. And then if
you consider the end of it, it is to establish righteousness between man and
man; and so is a bond of humane society: And if you say, there is this
unfitness in an Oath, because a spiritual thing is ordained to that which is
temporal, a superior for an inferior, the worship of God to decide an humane
business. Because therefore of the awe and reverence to an Oath, some though
they have thought it lawful to swear in sacred things, wherein Gods honor is
immediately concerned, yet judge it unlawful about many Controversies, and such
humane contracts. Hence Basil. Homil, de legend. lib. Gent. commends Clinias
a Pythagorean, who being fined a very great sum of money, the paying whereof
he might have escaped, by taking an oath, yet refused, and would rather suffer
that great loss rather than take an oath. But the true answer is by
distinguishing of the proxime and ultimate end, though an oath, which is a
worship of God have for its proxime end a confirmation of some temporal
matter, yet the ultimate end is to glorify God. Again, there may be this in
reason against an Oath, that it seems to be a tempting of God, for can we
make God witness to a thing when we will? To this the answer is, that if the
intention of the swearer in his oath should be so, to call God to witness,
that he should immediately by some sign in a sensible manner demonstrate his
notice thereof; This indeed would be to tempt God, though some times Gods
judgments do immediately and visibly fall upon such as take his Name in vain,
or invisibly by terrors and horrors of conscience; but that is not, or ought
not to be the scope of him that swears, but thereby to commit the truth of
God, who in his due time here or hereafter will be avenged upon such as swear
not aright. Well then, you will say, all this may be granted, but what shall we
say to those two places of Scripture, which seem as clearly to forbid all oaths
at any time, as clearly, as can be expressed.

The first is, Matthew. 5. 33, 34. etc. But I say unto you, Swear not at all,
etc. where first our Savior does universally prohibit, (...), at no time, in
no thing, as it might seem. 2. He says, Let your yea be yea; and nay, nay:
that is, use no more than a bare affirmation, without calling God to witness.
And lastly, he adds, Whatsoever is more, is of sin. Now if you compare the
Apostle James, who alludeth to this of our Savior, he speaks more
positively, Jam. 5. 12. Above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by
heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath, lost you might think:
He forbids swearing by creatures, he adds, neither by any other oath, lest
ye fall into condemnation; or as Grotius, who shows the word (...) is used
for falsehood and a lie left by swearing you come to forswearing. Thus you see
how fairly these Texts seem to carry it against any kind of swearing; and by
this private Christians are to be admonished, to compare one place of Scripture
with another, and panciora per plura; for the minding of some Texts only, not
comparing them with other, has caused much error. As in the doctrine of
Universal Redemption, because some places say, Christ dyed for all, they run
away with them, not considering other places which do restrain them, and show
in what sense that Universality is to be understood: So because it is said,
Swear not at all, nor by any other oath, therefore they conclude, that no
swearing is lawful, And how guilty then must Paul be, who yet bid us follow
him as he did Christ, for he swears often? It is certain then, that our
Savior Christ does not forbid swearing in the general, for he says at that
time, he came not to destroy the Law, and swearing was lawful in the Old
Testament: But the Pharisaicall opinions and glosses for they had brought in
corrupt positions.

1. That it was lawful to swear by creatures as well as God.

2. If a man did swear by creatures and not by God, he was not guilty of
perjury, if he did not fulfill it. Our Savior therefore does expressly condemn
both these. This is the sum of this Prohibition, We are not to swear by
creatures, but yet if we do, because they relate to God, it is by
interpretation, as if we did swear by God himself: Grotius indeed thinks,
that this place, with that of James, is to be understood of promissory oaths:
and Volkelius the Socinian, he seems to say, That though this place may not
forbid all assertory oaths, when necessity requires, yet promissory oaths are
not allowable, when the thing is not certain, and it may not be in our power to
fulfill it. But the Texts comprehend both. It is true, Learned Interpreters go
contrary ways, though they both meet in the end. For some say, Our Savior
does not forbid all oaths, but all oaths by creatures; and some make the Word
(...) not to relate to swearing, but the words following, Neither by heaven or
earth, as if it were a distribution of that (...). In this sense, the swearing
not at all, or no other oath, is to be limited to creatures, not at all by the
creatures, not any oath by them; he does not forbid us to swear by God in just
causes, or before a Magistrate, but by the creatures, and that in our ordinary
discourse. For the Jews did not think it lawful to swear by any thing but God,
in their solemn Judicatories. Thus it is like that universal All; Whatsoever
they bid you observe, do, Matthew. 23. 3. that is, all lawful things: So when
Paul says, I became all things to all men, that is, in things lawful and
indifferent; he did not become an Idolater: Others they grant, that our Savior
forbids all oaths, as well those by God as by the creatures, because he
gives this reason, That whosoever swears by the creatures swears by God in
effect; and then they say, the meaning is, Swear not at all, that is, in
unnecessary and causeless matters. The swearing is not so much forbidden, as
the frequent and unncecessary use of it. As much as lies in you, Swear not at
all; and this is every man's duty.

Thus we have briefly vindicated that Text. In the next place, how may we swear
lawfully? And in this the Prophet Jeremiah informs us of three necessary How
we may swear lawfully.
concomitants of every oath, which all Writers almost upon this Subject take
notice of, Jer. 4. 3. Thou shall swear, the Lord lives, (therefore not by any
creature.)

1. In truth, that is, be sure that the thing thou swearest be true, not only
in it self, but to thy conscience, that thou know the truth of it; or if
thou have not the certainty of it, that thou beleevest it to be so upon good
grounds; and against this offend all those who swear falsely, and will bring, as
much as lies in them, God to witness a lie.

2. In judgment, that is, with prudence, deliberation, and caution. Be well
advised before thou swearest: and against this offend all common swearers, that
swear rashly, and for ordinary things; as also those who swear in passions, and
when moved by anger.

3. In righteousness, that is, be sure the matter thou swearest, especially in
promissory oaths, be lawful and just, such which is agreeable to Gods Word. To
these we may add two more.

1. That we swear in faith, believing not only that there is a God, but also
that he is an observer of all that we speak or do, and an avenger of such who
shall pollute his Name.

And then 2. that we do it with holy awe and reverence of God upon our spirits.
We are to fear an oath: Oh what trembling and confusion may this work upon rash
and passionate common swearers? How often has the name of God been taken into
thy mouth rashly and profanely? Thou who when thou art to do with a great man
in place and honor, do with all reverence approach to him, how comes the
Majesty of the great God to be thus contemned by thee?

In the last place, When may we swear? and that is in the general, when
necessity When we may swear.
does compel, when the truth cannot be found out any other ways; for an oath
is to be used when other means are deficient; and more particularly we are then
only to swear, when the honor of God is concerned, or Religion and
Christianity is falsely accused; and these are public grounds. To which we may
add the good of the Commonwealth: or we are to swear upon a particular
occasion to clear our selves from false accusations and crimes charged upon us,
if otherwise our innocence cannot appear; or in the behalf of others, when they
shall suffer either in name, life, or estate, and we are required (...) unto by
the Magistrate, that so justice may proceed.

SERMON. CXLIII.
Ordinary Swearing reproved and put to Silence.

2 COR. 1. 23. Moreover I call God to record upon my soul, etc.
I Shall now conclude the Subject, which the former part of this verse has An
use of reproof against swearing.
afforded unto us. From what has been delivered concerning an Oath, I proceed
to an Use of severe Reproof against that common Epidemicall sin of ordinary
swearing. It is a National sin; it is the City-sinne, it is the
Village-sinne, it is the Family-sinne, it is the rich man's sin, the poor man's
sin, the old man's sin, the young man's; yea, the child's sin, who learneth to
speak and swear together. But if an oath be a religious calling upon God as a
witness, if it be a sacred worship of his holy Name, where will such profane
contemners of the honor and glory of God appear? What mountains shall cover
them from the wrath of God? What shall be done unto thee thou cursing swearing
tongue? Not coals of juniper, but of hell fire shall be powered upon thee. We
may be amazed and wonder, why such a sin should be thus universal; for other
sins have either pleasure or profit, but this has none at all. Certainly the
custom of such a sin comes from the mere wickedness and profaneness of a
man's heart, having no fear of God in our souls; for there is no earthly
advantage that tempts to this common ordinary swearing: yet it has been a
general sin in the former ages of the Church, as well as now. How zealous
and frequent is Chrysostom against that ungodly custom of swearing? Adhuc
timeo, quia nullus timet, says he. With no less godly affection does Austin
also set himself against it; yea, it seems there were such profane wretches
in his days as are in ou^s, who did account juramentum in ore, magnum and
suave aliquid. And have not we many who judge an oath to be a grace to their
language, and deride at such who are so precise as to be offended at such
passages? Oh therefore that God would so bless this Discourse at this time to
you, that the profane swearing tongue may be converted into a praying tongue,
a repenting and confessing tongue: that he who has sworn may never do so more,
but fear an oath as much as hellfire; and for this purpose consider these
motives thereunto.

First, That there is an express precept and command against such ordinary,
rash Motives against swearing. 1. There is an express command against it.
swearing: and therefore you cannot with any forehead plead for the
lawfulness of it: neither can you say, we did not know that it was a sin to do
thus; for Christ has set a command like a Beacon upon an hill, none can but
see it. And it sp^aks almost as loud as the Trumpet at the day of judgment,
none can but hear it. It is Mat. 5. 34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all,
and ver. 37. Let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay: he says, Swear not
at all; so that if it be but once an unlawful swearing in all thy life, thou
have transgressed this command; and as one tile of the house neglected, may in
time make the whole covering consume; and one rent in the garment let alone,
may at last destroy the whole: so even one sinful oath not repented of or
humbled for, may bring on the damnation of the whole man. You see this command
is laid down so strictly both in the negative and affirmative part, that some
have judged it wholly unlawful to swear in any case; but that you heard was an
error on the right hand: yet so far the command extends, as to forbid all
customary, idle, rash, and unnecessary swearing. So that the common swearer may
as much fear to come near this command, as the Israelite did to the mount, when
the Law was given. Shall not this command of Christ be more to thee than all
custom and example? But I say unto you (says Christ) Swear not at all; who
dares then thus contradict Christ? Why do thou not all the daylong mind thy
self of this? Why does not thy conscience put thee in remembrance of this
command? Say, when thou risest, when thou walk, when thou go to bed, this
commandment to thy self, Swear not. The Apostle James also because of the great
necessity and utility of this precept does repeat it to believers. For as
Luthers saying is, principum literae sunt bis vel ter legendae, Princes letters
and commands are to be read twice or thrice. And thus we are daily to meditate
on this duty: by this gemination, it should appear, that the heart of man is
very ready to break out into this filthy profaneness, though there be no
alluring motive: Therefore he adds, Above all things, my brethren, Swear not;
above all things look to your tongue, set a watch before your lips, that you be
not found guilty of this sin. And whereas the Apostle in the Verses following
is to describe the suitable and particular duties to a man afflicted, and to a
man merry, he does seem to remove this sin of swearing in the first place,
prohibiting that; for experience tells us, that when men either are sadly
afflicted, and in discontents, or joyful and merry, then they are most prone to
forget themselves, and fall into this sin of swearing: therefore the Apostle
by way of caution, says, above all things swear not.

A second motive against this common sin of swearing, is from the character 2.
A godly man is described to be one fearing an oath.
and description that is given of a godly man in this very particular; he is
one that fears an oath: he dare not swear in his ordinary discourse, and in
unnecessary occasions. Therefore it is a presumptuous thing in thee to flatter
thy self, that though thou fallest into this sin now and then, yet thou have
a good heart, and hopest that thou shall do as well as the most precise, whom
thou slanderest with that ordinary calumny, that though they will not swear,
yet they will lie; whereas a godly man hates both the one and the other. But
to our purpose: Let a man pretend never so much devotion, let him be never so
confident of his good heart: yet if an ordinary swearer, thou can not have a
principle of grace in thee. For Solomon making an opposition between a godly
man and a wicked, describing them by contrary characters, Eccl. 9. 2.
concludes with this, he that swears, and he that fears an oath: So that a
common swearer is the same with a wicked man and an unclean man: but then the
godly man is deciphered by this, that he fears an oath: observe that he does
not say, he that swsareth not, but he that fears an oath. So that a gracious
man does not only abstain from all customary swearing, but he has an awe and a
reverentiall fear in his soul about it; so that the profane swearer is
directly opposite to this character. The Psalmist likewise, Psa. 24. 4. when he
had propounded this Question, who shall ascend to the holy hill of God, and
stand in his holy place? that is, who is a true member of the Church of God? he
answers by giving several properties of such; two whereof are, He who has
not lift up his soul to vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. By lifting up the soul
to vanity, some learned men understand vain swearing; and then follows
another and greater sin, which is perjury and false swearing, which commonly
follows upon the frequent use of the former sin.

The 3d motive is, From the nature of the sin, it is a very heinous and
grievous sin. 3. It is a great sin.
For this is a rule, all sins against the first Table, are more heinous than
those against the 2d, caeteris paribus, because they are immediately against
God; these against our neighbor; and so by consequence against God. Though
therefore oaths fall frequently from thy mouth, without any fear and trembling,
yet they are sins of a bloody nature, as appears from the 3d Commandment,
thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. It Is Gods Name who is
infinite in Majesty, who is to be named always with a holy fear and reverence,
and shall thou pollute it in thy wicked mouth? This Commandment does not only
forbid ordinary swearing, but all light and irreverent using of Gods Name; as
you have many will say, O God, O Lord, and O Jesus: these are great sins,
though thou do not tremble under them. Let the common swearer then know, that
his sin is a very heinous one, he contemns the glory and worship of God.
Observe that expression, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. that thou may fear this glorious and
fearful Name, the Lord thy God. Do not then flatter thy self, make not this
common swearing a light sin, for sins are weighty, according as God judges
of them, and this he accounts an immediate contempt of his Majesty. You would
not make use of the name of a great man to witness every babble and trifle.
Chrysostom says, Common swearers show more respect to their new garments,
than they do to Gods Name; for they will not wear them but upon solemn
occasions. Whereas these in every trifle, and upon every passion, do highly
dishouour God.

Fourthly, As the sin of common swearing is grievous in its nature, so it is
threatened in a special manner with more than ordinary judgments. Even in this
life God 4. It has very great judgments threatened against it.
many times does punish remarkably the common swearer: Hence in the 3d command,
the threatening is added, the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his
Name in vain. It is a figure (...), less is said, and more is intended, that
is, he will certainly deal with such a man as a guilty person, he shall find
that sin does provoke God in an high manner. The Apostle likewise, Jam. 5. when
he had prohibited swearing, adds, lest ye fall into condemnation; the
judgment of God lies at thy door, and will find thee out. The place also
formerly mentioned, Zech. 5. 2, 3. is very dreadful. There is a flying roll,
full of curses, and it is said to go into the house of the swearer, and to
continue in the midst of his house, till it has consumed all. The Septuagint
and Greek Expositors for a flying roll read a flying hatchet, taking maggall
for megillah; howsoever it is as terrible, as if an Angel should come with an
hatchet, and cut down such a man's house. It Is flying, therefore it comes from
heaven, and so all thy power cannot withstand it: and then it is very broad and
long, it will meet with every swearer: and then it is an utter consumption, God
will make him such an example, that all who go by, shall say, here lived such a
profane swearer: and see what misery and ruin he and his are brought to.
Suarez speaks of a profane blasphemous Proverb, that the Spaniards have to
excuse their common oaths, Qui been jurat (by been is meant multum) been
credit, he that swears much, believes well. It is a sign he believes there
is a God. And indeed an Atheist cannot swear properly unless it be by
derision; but that proverb has blasphemy in it, because the swearer
discovers faith in God rashly, and irreverently: Neither does he intend in
his common discourse to profess faith in God, when he does swear.

Fifthly, This sin of swearing is of so great a guilt that it polluteth a land,
it brings public judgments as well as private. Now all those sins that
make 5. It pollutes a nation, and brings Gods judgments upon it.
the public obnoxious to Gods judgments, are sins of a gross nature, Jer.
23. 10. because of swearing the land mourns: and Hos. 4. 2. for swearing and
lying, etc. therefore the Lord had a controversy with the land. Thus you see
swearrers are like Jonahs in a Ship, they bring the Tempests of Gods wrath upon
the Land; only when Magistrates make good and severe Laws against swearing, and
the Underofficers are diligent in execution (for good laws without execution
are like a Bell without a clapper, as one said) then the guilt is taken off the
land. And therefore it would be cruelty to the Nation, to spare a particular
person; you are unwilling to make the swearer mourn, and thereby you make the
land mourn. Therefore let justice be executed upon swearers, that so the nation
may not incur Gods displeasure.

Lastly, This sin or common and irreverent swearing is condemned by the very 6.
It is condemned by the light of nature
light of nature. Heathens as the Pythagoreans have thought it a reproach to a
man to swear; his word should be as good as an oath. It is noted of Hercules,
that he did never swear, and therefore judged by the Heathens most religious.
The more inexcusable are those Christians, of whom Hierom complains, that
would use those Latin Oaths, mehercule, medius fidius. Plutarch reports, that
when some were to swear among the heathens, they took them out of the house,
and made them swear in the open air; one reason whereof was to make them
deliberating, and considering before they did so. Will not these heathens rise
up in judgment against our common swearers, who yet glory in this Title of
Christianity? But let us hear their excuses and cavils, such swearers use to
make.

1. They say, It Is a custom they have got, and they cannot leave it. But 1.
the The excuses and cavils for swearing answered.
more desperate and incurable is thy disease; the more a sin is habituated,
the worse it is; This is not an excuse but an aggravation. Does a custom in
drunkenness or uncleanness, alienate, and not rather inhance? And

2. Why may not this custom be left? Of all customs we might think this might
be parted with most easily; for (as you heard) here is no profit or pleasure to
tempt thee. Chrysostom answering this very cavil, says, That many who have
had a custom to stammer, have yet by diligence left it; yea, he speaks of
one who had a custom of lifting up one shoulder higher than another, that by
naked swords upon the place to cut him, if he should do so any more, did
thereby leave that ill use; and may not this custom of swearing be parted with
upon easier terms? Bid thy Wife tell thee of it, thy children, thy servants;
says the same Ancient: and then at last, as many joining together, do so stop
a beast that they catch him, thus (says he) they will at last we ary thee out
of this custom.

In the next place, Many do so, even all generally (except some few Precisians)
do swear, and why should not I do as most do? But to answer this, the command
is clear, thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, Exo. 23. 2. Most men go
in the broad way to hell, most men will be damned, and therefore this is no
plea. Again, we are not to live by examples, but by precepts. What though all
use to swear that live by thee? yet the command of Christ is to be more than
the examples, even of holy men and Angels themselves; much more then of wicked
and ungodly men.

In the third place, I think no hurt, I do no body any wrong. But 1. there is
no man that sins, intends to sin, the will of man cannot be carried out
to will evil as it is evil; and so every sinner might excuse himself. Again, if
thy oaths do not hurt others, yet they do thy own soul, thou art a murderer of
that; and as much as lies in thee, thou hurtest God, robbing him of the glory
due to him. And lastly, thou do hurt others, for if a father, thy children
learn to swear from thee; if a Master, thy servants do; or thy neighbors are
encouraged, and the godly they are grieved at it.

In the fourth place, Some plead, they swear but sometimes, it is when they
are in a passion, when they are provoked. But, 1. Once is too much, any sin
once committed is enough to damn for ever without repentance. And whereas thou
say, It is in thy passion, that will not excuse; if thou killest a man in thy
passion, does that free thee before God? The stronger thy passions are, the
weaker thou art in grace, yea, in reason: Therefore thy condition is the more
dangerous, because so easily moved into passion; many grievous sins are
sometimes committed in passion, which may make thee ashamed and mourn all thy
life long. Again, art thou in a passion? therefore the more unfit to take the
Name of God in thy mouth, the greater thy irreverence, by how much more violent
the passion is.

In the fifth place, But when I have sworn in my passion, and do recall my
self, I am sorry for it, and ask God forgiveness. But 1. seeing the sin of
irreverent swearing is a very grievous sin, committed immediately against the
Majesty of God: it is not an ordinary confession, a transient [Lord have mercy
upon me] that can be accounted repentance in this case: There must be a serious
and solemn setting of our selves to humiliation for sins of this nature. And 2.
if ye be so sorrowful as never to fall into such passionate swearing again,
then it is good: but upon the very next provocation, the next passion, you fall
a cursing and swearing again, as formerly: so that it is plain thou have not
repented. Thou sinnest, and then ask God forgiveness, and then thou sinnest
again: what is this but to play the hypocrite with God, and to mock him.

In the sixth place, say some, I would not swear, but they will not believe me
else. To this it is answered, happily it is thy fault, they do not think thee a
man of truth and honesty; if they did, thy bare word would be enough: and in
the next place, who will believe thee the more for thy ordinary swearing? they
think it is so common with thee, that thou do not matter it; and withal, he
that is not afraid to dishonor God, I cannot believe him though he should
swear a thousand oaths: and indeed who does regard the word and speeches of a
common swearer that is wise and prudent?

Lastly, Some excuse themseves, That they are but petty oaths, they do not take
Gods Name in vain; their oaths are petty oaths, by their faith and troth; and
is that such an offense? To answer this, 1. there is no petty oath, no more
than a petty God, or a petty damnation. And 2. While you think to honor God,
you dishonor him; out of reverence you will not swear by him, but by a
creature; this is more highly to offend him, while you give that which is due
to him, to a creature. And therefore 3. here is not only unlawful swearing in
those oaths, but idolatry also. Is your faith a God? Is your troth a God? Is
your faith an alseeing witness? Can that damn thee, if thou swear falsely?
Therefore in these oaths you do not only sin, but commit idolatry also.

SERMON. CXLIV.
Of the holy Prudence that Ministerial Power is to be managed with.

2 COR. 1. 23. That to spare you, I came not as yet to Corinth.
THe next thing to be considered in this Text, is the Matter of the Oath, which
is indeed a full answer to the calumny charged upon him, verse. 17. about his
lightness and inconstancy in altering of his purpose concerning his coming to
them. In this he shows the true reason, that there was no fault in him; but
the blame that was, was to be laid at their doors; they were not prepared, and
fitted for his coming; therefore he says, To spare you, I did not yet come to
Corinth. It was not then any mutability or carnal principles that moved him
herein; but a prudent and merciful ordering of his coming to them, for their
spiritual good. Should he have visited them according to his promise, he would
have come with a rod, and not in the spirit of meekness, as 1 Cor. 4. 21. and
so his presence would have been very ungrateful, and therefore he forbeareth a
while, to see whether his former Epistle might work a full humiliation and
reformation amongst them, being unwilling to proceed to further and more severe
censures. And although there were some only of the Corinthians, who had thus
sinned, and were accordingly to be censured, yet he says you in the general,
because the matter did concern the whole Church. The reason then given of
delaying his coming, is, That he might spare them. This denotes the paternal
authority and power that Paul had, to admonish and censure obstinate offenders.
For it is an expression from a father, as Mal. 3. 17. I will spare them, as a
father spares his own son. Thus it is often applied unto God, who rules in
the world, as a Judge. Jon. 4. 11. Should I not spare Ni^eveh? And he is said,
Not to spare the Angels, and the old world, 2 Pet. 2. 4. So that you see the
Apostle does hereby declare that power which God has given him: but because he
says afterward, 2 Cor. 10. 8. that this authority is given for edification
and not destruction, which he repeateth, 2 Cor. 13. 10. as being very memorable
and considerable, therefore he manageth this power with all wisdom and
tenderness, that so he may attain his end of edification, that in stead of
converting, he does not more harden men in impiety, as an indiscreet and
unseasonable exercising of ministerial power may do. But you will say, This
seems to be no good reason. For if Paul had gone to Corinth, he might have
spared them: howsoever Paul surely did not fear his passions would prevail over
his judgment, or his zeal devour his prudence. That is true, but yet if he had
gone to Corinth, and found them obstinate and unhumbled, as he feared he
should, 2 Cor. 12. 21. then if he did not put forth the power God had given him
to punish their disobedience, his authority would have been contemned, and
withal the wicked would have been hardened more in their impiety, and the
godly who desired godly order in the Church would have been discouraged.
Therefore to prevent this necessary severity, he does in this Epistle, as in
the former, admonish them, and warn them; so that if possible, they might of
themselves reform, and so prevent the exercise of his power amongst them. For
observe what he says, 2 Cor. 13. 2. I told you before, and foretell you, as if
I were present the second time; and being absent now, I write to them, which
heretofore have sinned, and to all other, that if I come again, I will not
spare. As then it is Gods goodness and patience to threaten us with hell and
damnation, that so we might prevent them: Thus does the Apostle imitate the
patience of God herein, threatening them with the exercise of Church Power upon
them, that being thereby awakened, and repenting, there may be no need of it.
From whence observe,

That the ministerial power, which God gives the Officers of his Church,
Ministerial power ought to be managed with much holy prudence and commiseration.
ought to be managed with much holy prudence and commiseration.

The end of their power is always to be in their mind; which is edification,
and so are accordingly to use means proportionably thereunto, lest in stead of
edification there be destruction.

That God has given the Ministers of his Gospel an ecclesiastical or
Church Power, as also what the nature of it is, the acts and exercise of it; as
also the objects to whom it extends, I shall here take for granted; there will
be a more seasonable occasion to treat of these things in some ensuing passages
of the Epistle. I shall only at this time briefly speak to this particular
manner of managing it, which is specified in the Text; and that is, with holy
prudence and pity, with much long-suffering and meekness. And

First, When we call it an holy prudence and moderation; let us consider what
is 1. What is meant by holy prudence. 1. Hereby is excluded all wordly policy.
meant hereby. And

First, We exclude carnal craft, and worldly policy. When men make use of
Church Power, and the Ordinances of Christ only for carnal ends, and to
advance themselves and their party thereby. It was far from Paul to make use
of any such profane policy; therefore he often proclaims the integrity of
his heart and intentions, that he was not in the number of those, who did
corrupt the word of God, 2 Cor. 2. 17. and Chap. 3. 2. he there renounceth the
hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, -- but commending our
selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. So that there is a vast
difference between godly prudence, which studieth to use the choicest means,
and most fit for the spiritual good of others, and a crafty politic way,
indulging men in their lusts, that so they may obtain their corrupt intentions.
Our Savior speaks very notably, when he says, (Luke 16. 8.) The children of
this world are wiser in their generation, than the children of light. Though
they be light, yet they have not that subtle eyesight in the things of the
world; but yet do far surpass the greatest Ahitophel in the world in
spiritual things: crafty and worldly wise men, are like the owls that see best
in the dark; but when the Sun shines, then their eyes are dazelled. Thus
such men in outward affairs, in evil contrivements, are very subtle, but as
dull as stocks and stones in any heavenly things. Let not then any under this
pretense of holy prudence in Church Power, encourage himself in carnal and
worldly craftiness: the Church of Rome is justly branded for this. For in
antiquity, when any Church had excommunicated some for their profaneness and
ill demeanours, who appealing to the Church of Rome for redress, hereby to
advance their power, they would encourage such, and maintain them against those
Church Officers who had cast them out. This carnal craft and ungodly policy, is
used by too many Officers in the Church, that contemn Christ's order, that
despise all wholesome means to true piety, that thereby they may satisfy their
earthly ends. It is true, when the faithful Ministers of Christ do effectually
move for the purity of Ordinances, and the promoting of godliness among their
people, there are those who will maliciously traduce them for carnal and
selfe-seeking ends, as if they proceeded wholly upon subtilty and policy, but
the searcher of hearts witnesses to their sincerity, and so they comfortably
proceed in Christ's work, maugre all opposition. It Is holy prudence then, not
carnal policy, which must manage ministerial power.

Secondly, When we require holy prudence and meekness, we do not hereby 2.
Zeal is not excluded.
exclude zeal; as if a man should not with much fervency and ardour of spirit
set himself for the truth of God, as also against the kingdom of sin and
Satan. No, it cannot be heavenly prudence, unless it be accompanied with this
zeal. As zeal must be with knowledge and discretion; so must knowledge be
with zeal. They must be as Castor and Pollux, always appearing together,
which was represented in the Sacrifice, which was to have salt, as well as
fire. Thus (Romans 12.) We are to be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. And it
is the Lord Christ, who said, The zeal of thy house has eaten me up, Joh. 12.
17. Here is a notable example for all godly Ministers. The zeal for Gods
glory, is even to consume them (as it were) as the fat of the Sacrifice was
burnt in the fire to the Lord: to which some think our Savior does allude in
that expression. We are to come in the spirit of Elijah, even to be carried in
a fiery Chariot. And truly without this zeal for God, a man is but a lump of
earth. It is true, we must distinguish holy zeal from our own passions, and
choleric distempers, but that which is the pure fire of Gods Spirit kindled in
our hearts, as it does greatly conduce to Gods glory, so it does exceedingly
tend to our own comfort. Let therefore those be magnified for wise and moderate
men; let them be admired, as so many Angels, that live in a lukewarm and
neutral way; they will reprove no sin; they will provoke no man to frown
upon them; but (alas) the issue will discover their folly. Oh the throbs and
pangs of conscience some have had, when going out of the world, for this very
particular, because they did not with more zeal and forwardness appear for
God. And on the other side, that Minister who has with faithful zeal,
according to the words direction, behaved himself in his ministerial labors,
though great ones have frowned at him, though malicious people have vexed him,
yet he dies full of comfort. For they that are filled with the Spirit of God
by zeal in their life time, are many times filled with heavenly consolations in
their death.

Lastly, This holy prudence, is not to be confounded with that sinful
man-pleasing, 3. It is not to be confounded with man-pleasing.
which is in many, indulging men in their lusts, and hardening them thereby in
their impieties. Though the Apostle said, 1 Corinthians. 10. 33. That he pleased
all men, in all things, not seeking his own profit; yet that is not to be
understood in sinful things; for in that respect he says, Galat. 1. 10. If he
pleased men, he should not be the servant of Christ; but in lawful things he
did condescend to those that were weak, and would not always use his own
liberty, which he might, being strong in judgment; but this does nothing
advantage such who have a flattering, complying way with men in their
wickedness, like those false prophets of old, that daubed with untempered
mortar, and cried Peace, peace to him, whom God has promised no peace. This is
highly offending God. Yet how many are admired, because they have the love of
wicked and ungodly men, that they can keep in with them? Whereas this is not,
because they have large parts, but a large conscience; and that which some make
to be a very wise man, is indeed to be a man without any conscience. But I must
not enlarge in this.

In the second place therefore we are to show, Wherein this holy prudence does
Wherein holy prudence does consist. 1. In discovering our love to their persons
to be the ground of all our proceedings.
consist. And

First, In discovering our love to their persons, to be the ground of all our
proceedings. If we reprove them, it is love; if we admonish them, it is love;
if we do not admit them to the dreadful mysteries of Christ, it is love.
Dilige and loquere quod vis, says Austin; Love, and then say what ye will.
This made the Apostle use a sacred oath at this time, to show it was his love
to them, and no sinful end, that made him forbear his coming; so great a
matter is it to be persuaded that what the Ministers of the Gospel do, though
it distaste and displease us, yet it is out of their conscience to God, and
love to us.

Secondly, Holy prudence lies in this, when we observe the fit seasons and 2.
In observing the fittest seasons for the exercise of power.
opportunities for exercising our power, which God has given us; otherwise if
unseasonably administered, it may do more hurt than good. It is special
prudence to time it well; in this sense it is good to be a time-server, as some
read that passage, (...), Romans 12. applying it to this sense. Abigail would not
speak to her husband in his drunken senseless fit, Isai. 50. 4. The tongue of
the learned is to speak a word in season; though that be chiefly to be
applied, to a word of comfort, yet a word of reproof in season, does more good
than ten thousand unseasonably spoken. Such a word so spoken, is said to be
like Apples of gold in pictures of silver, Prove. 25. 11. wherein is employed
both preciousnesse and excellency, as also delight and refreshment. A fit word,
is called in the Hebrew, A word upon the wheels (as some think) because of
the smoothness and readiness of it to enter into the hearts of others. Some
render it, A word with its two faces, as looking on both sides, which is the
property of prudence: and the next verse following shows how happy it is,
when a wise reproof, and an obedient ear meet together; such an obedient ear is
more comely and glorious, than any ear-jewel. As then the Be does not every
day, but in fit seasons gather its honey; so does a prudent Minister of the
Gospel. Thus Solomon, Eccles. 12. 9, 10. Because the preacher was wise, he
sought out acceptable words. Some trees that blossom last, are yet said to
have their fruit first; which shows, that it is not the first or sudden
speaking, but the most opportune, that does the greatest good; especially in
reproof this is most necessary, because it is said, Genus quoddam Martyrii est,
etc. It is a kind of Martyrdom to take a reproof patiently.

Thirdly, Our prudence is seen, when we discern of sins, not judging 3. In
our discerning of sins.
little and great alike. To excommunicate for lesser faults, is (says Gerson)
To strike off a fly from a man's forehead with a beetle. The remedy is more
dangerous than the disease. They were gross sins that the Apostle is thus
zealous against in the Corinthians. Again, great sins are to be
distinguished, whether personal in some few, or public and over-spreading all.
For when sin has infected a multitude, though it be a Ministers duty to
bring them out of such an epidemical disease, and to withstand the torrent of
such impiety, wherein God many times gives unexpected and wonderful success,
as appears in Luther, to whom one said, Abi in cellam, and dic miserere mei
Domine, thinking it in vain to stir, though God vouchsafed unexpected effects
to his labors, yet we are with more prudence to endeavor the reformation of a
multitude, and not to be overhasty, lest we hinder that good which otherwise
might be done. This was Austin's known counsel to a Bishop, who desired his
advice about the sin of drunkenness, which was general in all, he advises
him to proceed by degrees, and Monendo magis quam minando, etc. But the next
Chapter may give occasion to greater enlargement in this point.

Fourthly, Prudence is seen about the order of the means which God has 4. In
the ordering of means.
appointed to reclaim others. In private or personal sins, that is a golden
ru^e full of wisdom, which our Savior prescribes, Matthew. 18. 15, 16, etc. To
deal with such an offending brother first alone, and as we find him
obstinate, so to proceed to a more public way. To give Ellebore or Opium at
first, is too violent a remedy; such that do so, are no wise Physicians to men's
souls.

Fifthly, It Is a special part of prudence in our reproof of others, or other
distasteful 5. In the mingling of due praise.
exercises to flesh and blood, to mingle a due praise, for what is lovely and
good in them. To acknowledge any gift that God has bestowed upon them, as Paul
does often, joining himself with other believers, sometimes as if they were not
inferior to him; he does not only use loving compellations of brethren and
children, but also does with much sympathy take their infirmities and sins as
it were upon himself.

Lastly, Holy prudence does not only make a Minister look to the good that 6.
In looking to the evil as well as the good that may come.
may come, but the evil also that may probably issue. For although our duty is
to be done, though the world shall fall upon our heads, yet we must consider,
whether when so many evils are in great probability attending the action,
whether it be a duty then, or no. It Is a known passage of one Audas a Bishop,
who out of great zeal, set a Persian Temple on fire, wherein they worshipped
(...), or fire, as a god, which did so enrage the Persian King, that he
commanded the Bishop to build the Temple again, or else he would put him to
death. But the Bishop refusing, not only he himself suffered, but thereby
brought a most cruel persecution upon many Christians. Now this fact is justly
condemned, as a most indiscreet and rash action; he did not consider what evil
would fall upon it. Although Sozomene says of him, That he condemned his
indiscretion that he demolished the Temple, but admired his zeal and
constancy, that he would die rather than build it up again. Many good actions
seeming full of zeal, for want of a due consideration, have brought more evil,
than done good: yea have increased that evil the more, which they have
endeavored to extinguish. Hence our Savior gives us wise counsel, Matthew. 7.
6. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, nor cast ye your pearls before
swine, lest they trample them under feet, and turn again and rent ye. Many
times both the pearl, and the Minister also, at least the exercise of his
Ministry is destroyed, because he did not consider that some persons are swine
and dogs, maliciously endeavoring all evil against you, if they be provoked.

The first Use is Of Direction, to such who intend the Office of the Ministry,
not only to labor after learning and godliness, but prudence also. Even
Luther himself, though raised up by God for so great a work, does sometimes
bewail his imprudence and folly. I many times (says he) do rashly; and while
I think to do good, I do hurt, and then I am troubled, beseeching God to
forgive me this imprudence. If a man have not so much learning, yet if he have
godliness and prudence, he may do more good than more eminent Scholars. As
it is noted of Atticus Bishop of Constantinople (one of the successors of
Chrysostom) that he was far inferior to Chrysostom for learning and
abilities, yet did more good in his Office by his prudence, being a very wise
man, than he did. For Chrysostom, though so excellent a man, was very subject
to passion; and being of a plain, single heart, did not discern of men, as he
should do; by which means his adversaries prevailed over him, so to have him
ejected from his place at last. But Atticus continued many years in that place,
by his prudence and wisdom, yet a godly man also.

But how shall we have this wisdom?

We must earnestly pray to God for it, as the Apostle directs, James 1. and
Solomon practiced. And withal, we must read and study the Scripture much,
following that as a star.

And lastly, It is good to be acquainted with Ecclesiastical History. For both
from the godliness, wisdom, and also from the miscarriages of those that are
mentioned, we may get experience, and they may be as so many pillars of salt to
season us. Lege Historiam, ne fias Historia. And if those who would get civil
prudence, be required to read humane Histories, and to observe all occurrences
therein, how much rather are the Ministers of the Gospel to exercise themselves
in Ecclesiastical History, not only to know what was done formerly, or to be
able to speak about the Ancients, when they lived, and what their Doctrine was;
but also to get prudence, by observing either their wise deportments, or
imprudent miscarriages.

Use 2. Of Instruction. Of what consequence it is for a people to be persuaded
of the love and faithful intentions of their Pastors to their souls good; not
to think they seek themselves, they ambiciously affect great things over
them. For this made Paul take this solemn Oath in the Text, which he would not
have done, had not the occasion been urgent. What is it that makes the
ministerial labors, either in preaching or establishing good order among their
flock be so disgusted and disrelished, but because they will not be convinced
of the Ministers faithful aims, and their great love in all this?

SERMON. CXLV.
Of Ministers power over the People.

2 COR. 1. 24. Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers
of your joy; for by faith ye stand.
THis Text is brought in by way of correction, as the Rhetoricians figure is
called. For having said, That to spare them, he did not yet come to Corinth,
and he that spares may also punish; lest he should seem hereby to assume to
himself some absolute dominion, and lordly power over them, he adds, Not that
we have dominion over your faith. Because in the Greek it is (...); Erasmus
thinks the Preposition (...) is to be understood; as if the sense were, We
have not dominion over you, for your faiths sake. Whereupon he enlarges
himself, that none is to be compelled to the faith; and those (says he) who
are vehement herein, it is that their Kingdom might be more enlarged. Hence he
wishes that Text in Peter, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Not being lords over Gods heritage,
etc. were written upon all Bishops halls or palaces, Vel aureis literis, even
in golden letters. The Greek word is (...); therefore when we urge that place
of our Saviors, reproving the ambition of the Disciples, (Mat. 20. 25. The
Gentiles exercise dominion, but so shall not ye) against the political dominion
of the Pope and his Bishops, Bellarmines solution is frigid. It is (says he)
(...) in the Greek, which signifies a tyrannical exercise of any power; as if
such an imperious abuse of power, not the power it self were condemned. But
though (...) does sometimes aggravate, yet that it does not there, appears in
that the same passage, in Luke 22. 25. is related by the simple Verb (...), and
here in the Text is not (...), but (...). The Apostle then does here disclaim
all absolute dominion over their faith, all lordlinesse over their consciences;
he may not dictate; or prescribe to them what he pleases. Now if Paul, so
eminent an Apostle, made so not by men, but having immediate revelation from
God, who was also infallible in his Doctrine, does yet disclaim this dominion;
What mortal man may do it? What Minister is equal to Paul? Yea this Church of
Corinth, was wholly planted by him, they were converted by him; and therefore
he might plead more sovereignty over them, being not an instructor, but a
father, rather than other; yet for all that he challenges no such primacy. So
that this Text confounds all Papal Church Government, with the upholders
thereof. For how abominable are the expressions of the Popish flatterers?
affirming; That the Pope has the same tribunal with Christ, that he can
dispense against Paul' s Epistles, that he can do any thing, praeter, super and
extra jus; and that he is to judge all, but to be judged of none, with such
kind of blasphemies. Yea Bellarmine does apply that prophecy of Isaiah, Behold
I lay in Sion a foundation-stone, which does directly belong to Christ, even
unto the Pope, though secondarily, but most blasphemously. The Observation is,

That though Christ has invested the Officers of the Church, with some
Ministers have no dominion over the faith of believers.
kind of ministerial power, yet they have not thereby any dominion over the
faith of believers.

They may not preach what they will, nor command, and dictate what they will.
Insomuch that although their Pastors say, Virtue is a vice, and vice a virtue,
yet the people are bound to believe it, as Bellarmine in his first Edition
affirmed, but afterward left it out. That all such dominion by compulsion and
force is excluded from the Ministry, appears plainly by those two Texts, Luke
22. 15. and 1 Pet. 5. 2. Those places do not forbid such a fatherly pastor-like
power, that Christ has bestowed upon his Church Officers, but a civil
domination, as also an ecclesiastical-magisterial power in the Church, as if we
were to believe, because they say so. No our Savior absolutely prohibiteth
that, when he says, Be ye not called masters, for one is your master, even
Christ, Mat. 23. 10. Where also we are commanded, to call no man father. Hence
the Papists exceedingly err, in calling those Ancients Fathers, thereby urging
their dominion over our faith, as if we were bound to believe, what ever a
Father says. Indeed if by Father we mean no more, than an Ancient, who has
lived long before us; so the word may be allowed; but they call them so in a
doctrinal and authoritative respect, as if we might not gainsay them, no more
than sons their father; but this does contradict our Saviors command. Christ
then is the only Lord, and Head of his Church; whatsoever he says, we are
commanded to hear him, and that for his own authority; there is no disputing,
no doubting, no examination allowed of what he says: but all Ministers since
the Apostles days are subject to error, and may be deceived, and withal by
their office they are stewards, not lords in the family; they are Ambassadors
only, not Princes: Now such have a limited power, they cannot do any thing of
themselves, any further than their Commission extends, their power does not
extend. And truly (as was said) if the Apostles, though infallible, would not
challenge such a dominion, such a commanding power in the Church, (1 Cor. 7. 6.
I speak this not by commandment) but refers all his doctrine, his power, and
what he did to Christ, as the original; yea Christ as Mediator referred his
doctrine and will to the Father. What shall become of those ambitious
Diotrephesses, who affect a greater power in the Church? But the Doctrine
needs explication in several particulars. And

First, Let us see negatively, What is not forbidden or disclaimed by the
Apostles, 1. What is not forbidden in this doctrine. 1. Not the lawful
ecclesiastical power in dispensing ordinances.
and then positively. What is for the negative,

1. The Apostle does not here exclude that lawful Ecclesiastical power which
the Ministers of God have after a spiritual manner in dispensing of the
Ordinances appointed by Christ. Some indeed think it is not power or authority,
but a gift. Others, that all their power is swallowed up by the Magistrate,
when he becomes Christian; but certainly Christ appointed Pastors and Teachers
in his Church till his second coming, and gave them power to preach the Word,
to administer Sacraments, to exercise Church Discipline, as might at large be
proved, if this were a fit occasion. The Apostle attributes to himself a power
once or twice; only he says, it is for edification, not destruction, 2 Cor.
13. 10. And he tells these Corinthians, If he come again, he will not spare,
2 Cor. 13. 2. and 2 Cor. 10. 6. he says, He was in a readiness to revenge all
disobedience: And that command of his, To cast out the incestuous person,
argued his power. Yea the names given them, that they are called Pastors and
Rulers, and that the people are to obey them, argue plainly there is a
spiritual ministerial power appointed by Christ in his Church. Of which more
largely (God assisting) in subsequent passages.

2. Neither does this expression imply, That the Ministers of the Gospel have
their power from the people. As if they were Embassadonrs in their name, and 2.
Neither does it imply, that Ministers have their power from the people.
acted with a power derived from them, as some have pleaded; for the office is
of Christ, the designation and application of the person to the office, is by
the Ministry of the Church, but they have not the office it self from them.
It Is true, they are sometimes called, The servants of the Church, but that is
finaliter, not originaliter, because the end of their office is for the good of
the people; They have not these Offices for their own honor and dignity, but
merely for the good of others. So that although in respect of Christ, they are
merely Ministers and servants, yet in respect of the Church and the people,
they are Fathers and Pastors, having a spiritual rule over them.

3. Neither does this expression encourage a licentious boundless questioning
of 3. Neither does it encourage a boundless questioning of a Ministers
doctrine.
the Doctrine, that the Ministers of the Gospel do deliver, because they are
not infallible, because they are not commanded absolutely to depend on them.
Therefore some run into a disorderly extreme, cavilling and questioning every
thing that is taught. But you must know, that although every Christian be
allowed a judgment of discretion, and he is by his own faith to be saved.
Hence the Bereans are accounted more noble, because they compared the Doctrine
delivered with the Scriptures; yet withal they are commanded to hear the
Ministers, highly to esteem of them for the works sake; To obey them, and to
submit themselves to them. So that the liberty a believer is allowed must not
tend to the overthrow of the office of the Ministry. It is true, here is much
wisdom and grace required in bounding the peoples liberty; and yet asserting
their dependence upon the Ministers whom God has set over them, and from whom
they are to seek direction and guidance: but this work is not to be done here.
It is certain, they may mutually stand together; yea they were appointed by God
for the mutual good of each other; and therefore it is nothing but corruption
that makes a contrariety herein; sometimes by the Ministers pride, and
affectation of power; and sometimes by the peoples pride and conceitednesse,
whereby they refuse humbly to submit to such order and officers as God has
commanded them. But this deserves a large Tractate. For all evil arises in
the Church, because these bounds are transgressed. In some ages the officers
tyranny, in other ages the peoples licentiousness have much hindered the power
of godliness, and the beauty of Ordinances.

Lastly, By this is not excluded that duty, whereby Ministers ought with holy
4, Here is not excluded the Ministers duty to reprove sin.
zeal and courage, reprove sin, and that in the greatest of men. Yea and
whosoever are obstinate and impenitent sinners to refuse the administration of
the seals of Church Communion unto them. When the Apostle commanded this
incestuous person (whom some think to be a man of great place among the
Corinthians) to be cast out, when he delivered Hymenaeus and Philetus up to
Satan; when he commands, If any walk disorderly, to withdraw from such, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Yea and if any obey not his word, to note, or signify such a man.
All these are demonstrations of power, but not lordly dominion; yea where
reproof, admonition, and excommunication are rightly administered to a spiritual
heart awakened, they become more dreadful than civil, or bodily punishments;
because what is done this way, God binds in Heaven; God casts such out of
his communion, and commands them, as David to Absalom, not to come in his
presence. Thus the Apostle does not exclude these necessary ministerial duties,
although distasteful to flesh and blood. Yea though corrupt persons account
them nothing, but the expression of lordlinesse. Even as when Lot reproved
those wicked Sodomites, they replied, He would be a Judge over them, Genesis 19.
9. and Moses, when he rebuked the Hebrews, striving one with another. How
scornfully did the injurious person answer him? Who made thee a Prince and a
Judge over us? Exodus 2. 14. By this we see, how imbred a thing it is in all
sinners, if they be reproved and controlled in their wickedness, to account
all nothing but dominion and lordlinesse. Even the holy Government of the
Church appointed by Christ for spiritual and supernatural ends, and so wholly
for the good of those that go astray, yet by evil men has been complained of,
as worse than Turkish slavery. How little do such men consider, what their
Christianity obliges them unto? What it is to be baptized into the name of
Christ, and to acknowledge him the Head, Lord, and Governor of his Church? For
if they did, they would not say, Let us break his bends, and cast his cords
away from us. Is not the Discipline of Christ to be received, as well as his
Doctrine? Did not the Apostle rejoice to behold the faith and order of the
Colossians? Col. 2. 5.

Thus you see what is not excluded. Let us then consider in the next place,
What the Apostle does positively shut out by this negative expression, Not that
we 2. What is forbidden in it.
have dominion over you. And

1. It does exclude all abuse and excess even of lawful power. For those who
1. All abuse of lawful power
are true officers of Christ, having a lawful power committed to them, may yet
abuse it, they may show much rashness, too much austerity in the exercise of
it. Therefore in the next Chapter, we see this holy Apostle, though zealous to
have this incestuous person cast out, yet when truly humbled and repenting, he
is no less careful to have him received again, requiring them to confirm
their love to him, lest he should be swallowed up with too much grief. Some
learned men have thought, that the primitive Bishops did exceed in their
austerity herein, as appears by many Canons made against some sinners, who
for two or three years were not to be received into Church Communion, though
truly repenting; yet some excuse them, because the condition of the times did
then, they say, require it, that the Churches zeal against sin, might
vindicate her against those abominable calumnies cast upon her by the Heathens,
as if she did secretly nourish all impiety. And although she was thus severe,
yet the Novatians did refuse communion with the Church, as being too remiss,
in that she would at any time receive such, who through fear apostatized in
time of persecution, though never so sincerely manifesting their humiliation.
Thus all unlawful austerity, even in lawful power, is excluded.

2. By this the Apostle does disclaim all civil and political Government. Hence
2. All civil and political government.
the word (...), signifies one in (...), says Varinus; and one that has
(...), says Budaeus. The Apostles did not invade the Magistrates office,
neither would Christ the fountain of all Church Power, be a divider of an
inheritance. A civil power is coactive and compelling by force, which
Church Power is not. And although Bellarmine say, Ecclesiastical power is
ridiculous and in vain, if it may not civilly compel. Yea a profane Papist
says, Our Lord Christ had been indiscreet, if he had not given this temporal
power also. Yet they speak this according to their humane apprehensions,
transforming Christ's kingdom into an earthly and external one.

3. Hereby he excludes a magisterial power, though in an ecclesiastical way,
over consciences. That is, he does not assume to himself to be Lord in the
Church, 3. All magisterial power over consciences.
but an Ambassador or Steward only. He does not say, his Doctrine is his, the
Sacraments are his; but as he received of the Lord, so he delivered to them.
And this is that, for which the Protestants accuse the Roman Church, That their
Officers arrogate to themselves a Magisterial power in the Church, pleading an
infallibility in Doctrine, by which they anathematize all as heretics, who
will not subscribe thereunto. The Protestants do acknowledge a ministerial
power, but they will have a magisterial one. There must be a supreme visible
Judge in the Church (say they) as there is in Commonwealths; else Christ has
not wisely provided in his Church a sufficient remedy against all heresies and
schism^.

Lastly, By this he does exclude any sinful or wicked end. As if he did make
the Church subservient to any corrupt interest of his own. Officers are 4. All
wicked ends.
for the Church, the Church is not for them. He that has a lordly government
or despotical, says Aristotle, administreth it, (...). It Is not the public
good, but the personal good he looks at: it is not Res publica, but Res
propria. All tyrannical administrations are for the tyrants profit, they Non
praesunt ut prosint; whereas good Governors, they relate to the public good,
knowing they are for it, not it for them. And thus it is in Church Officers,
all their names are names of care, of diligence and labor. God has not set
them there for their carnal advantages, as if the people were made for them;
but they are to promote the Kingdom of Christ, and to advance the souls of
their hearers. Alas, the Church is Christ's Spouse, not theirs; it is Christ's
flock, not theirs; they died not for it, they were not crucified for it;
neither are believers baptized into their name, but the name of Christ.

Use of Instruction. How happy and blessed a thing it is to see the Church of
God in unity between Pastors and people; the Officers not abusing their power
to ambition and tyranny, nor the people their liberty to licentiousness and
wantonness; when Pastors and people strive not about their respective power,
but who shall most faithfully discharge their duties to one another. All
disorder in the Church has for the most part come in at this breach. If a
Church be Plebs adunita clero, as Cyprian said, Church and people united
together, then what goes to the dissolving of this, tends to the destruction
of the Church it self. How much does Ignatius (if they be his genuine Epistles)
press this subjection of people to Pastors? And the Apostle Peter does as
earnestly press a loving and meek government in Officers. And no doubt, when
God is angry with a people, then he sends an evil spirit, as between Abimelech
and the Shechemites, which tends to the consumption of both. Let Ministers
therefore carefully avoid all affectation of unlawful power, and people of
unlawful liberty. Let Pastors look upon their people, as the Spouse of
Christ, as purchased by his blood, and this will keep them from lordly
dominion; and let people look upon Pastors, as the Officers of Christ, coming
in his name to them; and this will make them honor them, and have them in high
esteem, both for their office, and works sake. But other parts of this Epistle
will provoke to greater enlargement herein.

SERMON. CXLVI.
The Comforting of the afflicted, one great part of a Ministers work.

2 COR. 1. 24. But are helpers of your joy.
THe Apostle having removed the negative in his Ministerial power, he comes to
affirm the positive, which is, That we are helpers of your joy; (...), helpers
or co-workers; for the word relates to a concurrence with others, and
therefore by some is made to respect the Corinthians themselves, as if he did
work with them for the establishing of their joy. Others relate it to his
fellow-Ministers and workmen in the Lord, in which sense he often speaks of
his (...), Romans 16. 21. Phil. 1. 2. and 24. Phil. 4. 3. and this is very
probable. But then 3. others make it to refer to God, as if the Apostles did
work with God but ministerially and subordinately, to the salvation of men; and
this the Apostle plainly affirms, 1 Cor. 3. 9. This also may be granted; and
then the Apostles scope is to show that they have not indeed any dominion; but
yet lest any should judge them therefore useless, and conclude they have no
power at all, therefore he adds, We are helpers and Ministers under God. For
though God immediately created the world, without any instruments, yet he does
not so in propagation of the Gospel. Therefore Stapleton need not be in such
rage at Calvin, for not taking notice of the word, or at Beza for rendering it
helpers; seeing that Beza does not thereby exclude a ministerial help, but a
magisteriall authority, which the Papal party plead for, calling it (...),
whereas it is rather (...) or (...). Neither does the Ministry immediately
produce spiritual effects in the hearts of hearers, though subordinately only,
but does externally apply the means of grace, in the exercise whereof God does
put forth his glorious power. The next thing considerable is the object of
this, We are helpers of your joy. We might have thought he would rather have
said your grace, or your faith; but he says joy, by which some understand
heaven and happiness, as the word is used, Heb. 12. 1. Matthew. 25. 23. This
indeed is necessarily employed, and so must not be excluded: but the proxime and
immediate sense is their spiritual joy and comfort. For this is made opposite
to that imperious and austere exercise of Church Power, which some being guilty
of, do exceedingly grieve and discourage the hearts of such who fear God, as
the Prophet Ezekiel complains of such fiery Pastors. Hence he speaks of
heaviness and sorrow so much in the next Chapter, from whence observe,

That the ministerial work in a great measure of it consists in administering
The administration of comfort is a great part of the ministerial function.
comfort and consolation to such as stand in need thereof.

Our work is not only to endeavor the conversion of such who are turned aside
from God, but also the comfort and consolation of such who are sadly dejected.
We see our Savior himself, after whose example all Ministers are to walk, was
very careful heerin, Joh. 17. 13. These things have I spoken that my joy might
be fullfilled in you, not only joy, but perfected and completed joy. Therefore
when his Disciples were cast down with sorrow about his departure from them,
how ready and willing is he to suggest all such arguments as might administer
joy, yea, and promises his spirit as a Comforter, which would effectually set
home those arguments upon their hearts? This Apostle also, how frequent is he
in pressing this duty, ingeminating of it? Rejoice in the Lord always, again I
say rejoice. Phil. 4. 4. Hence he says to these Philippians, cap. 1. 25. that
he had confidence of abiding with them for the furtherance and joy of their
faith: where you see the more growth and increase in grace, the more joy; and
it is called the joy of faith, because by believing we come to partake of this
joy. Let not then any people nourish prejudices in their hearts against the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, as if they endeavored only to discourage
men, to fill the hearts of people with despair, to drive them into me^ancholy,
and turn them out of their wits, as profane persons calumniate: for our great
work is to provide comfort for such as are fit Subjects to receive it. That
must always be remembered, oil is for the wounded in soul: this wine is not for
such who are transported with feverish lusts of their sins, but if thy
sins be a burden to thee, and thou have cast them off, then manna is
prepared for thee in this wilderness; then a year of Jubilee is to be
proclaimed to thee who did mourn under thy spiritual debts. But let us
explicate this Truth.

And first, There is a twofold joy, a carnal and worldly joy, whereby men
delight 1. There is a twofold joy, carnal and spiritual.
in the pleasures of ^in, and the jolly pastimes and customs that are in the
world; and there is a spiritual joy arising from Gods love in Christ, whereby
we are quickened to all holiness with great delight; now God forbid that any
Ministers should be helpers of the former joy. There have indeed been such
unsavory salt, profane Ministers of the Gospel, whose work has been to
strengthen the hands of wicked men, to preach peace and mercy to them while
wallowing in their sins; but woe to such Pastors, and such a people. These are
sharply reproved in the Scripture, for there always will be such men-pleasers,
such daubers with untempered mortar, as Jer. 6. 14. They heal the hurt of my
daughter slightly, saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no peace. Would you have
such a Physician that should flatter you about the wounds of your body, saying,
it will heal, it will heal, when thou feel it to putrify more and more?
Such spiritual Mountebanks the Prophet Ezechiel complains of also, cap. 13.
10. They have seduced my people, saying, peace, peace, especially at 22. verse.
these wicked Prophets are said to make sad the hearts of such whom God would
not have made sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked by promising them
life. Thus you see what an unfaithful Minister will do, all that he can and
dare, he will uphold and encourage a profane person; and all that he can and
dare, he will uphold and discourage, vex and grieve such who fear God, and whom
God would have comforted: but such men in time meet with an overflowing storm
and great hailstones fallling upon them, as v. 11. which shall destroy them,
and rend the wall down they have daubed up. Do not then think this is the joy
we should help you in: in your profane pleasures, in your superstitious and
vain customs to encourage you; no, this were to deprive both our selves and
you of true solid joy.

Hence in the second place, We are to help the joy of those whose grace we have
2. Ministers are to help their joy whose graces they have before helped.
helped before. Joy cannot be the first stone in Gods building, grace and
holiness is first, and then consolation; The spirit of God is first a
sanctifier, and then a comforter. So that many people take a preposterous
method; if they be sick, they look the Minister should presently give them
comfort; there must not a word be said of their sins, of the necessity of
repentance, this will make them despair. Fond and foolish people, why would ye
be tickled into hell? why would ye be pleased into damnation? oh it cannot be
that thou should have comfort before godliness, this would be to falsify
the covenant of God, to abuse the seal of pardon, applying it to him; whom God
does still hold guilty, Understand then Gods method, and submit thereunto,
saying, I do not expect comfort; I would not have the promises of grace applied
to me while thus obstinate and impenitent in my sinful ways, but if thou art
found godly, then we are to comfort and to comfort, as Isa. 40. 1. again and
again, not giving over till that evil spirit of unbeleef be cast out: And this
spiritual comfort is seen in two particulars.

1. Comfort under the guilt of sin, and truly herein we do a most acceptable
work. Then it is indeed the tongue of the learned, when we speak a word in
season to such afflicted spirits; how ready and willing are the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel to bring the balm of Gilead to such persons? how
pitiful and compassionate because they know the terror of the Lord? God has
commanded us to be Messengers of peace, and like Noah's dove to come with an
Olivebranch, assuring them that the waters are abated; and oh that God would
provide such comforting work for us; It is very seldom to meet with such: we
have work enough to reprove the profane, to instruct the erroneous; but how
few do need comfort because their sins are a heavy burden upon them.

In the 2. place, we are to help the comfort of the godly in respect of their
outward afflictions. For they are more chastened than other men; there is no
godly man but God has appointed a cross for him; yea, sometimes many crosses
together. Now how necessary is it to have a faithful and wise comforter in such
cases? for alas, our own hearts are full of discouragements, and every thing is
ready to appear more terrible than it is, and the devil he is very ready to
make the waters overflow more than they would do. So that to administer comfort
to such disconsolate persons, is the best act of love, and the most suitable
alms that can be desired. Seeing then that grace must be laid, as a foundation
for comfort;

Hence in the third place, Before the Ministers of the Gospel can administer
comfort to unregenerate persons, they must necessarily use sharp and bitter
means, 3. Sharp means are to be used before comfort.
as preparatory there unto. Neither are we then to be blamed, or judged too
cruel and austere, but sin is to be condemned as the cause of it. It is your
sin that makes all bitter things necessary. When the Physician administreth
bitter Physic, which makes thee exceeding sick, is he to be blamed? and not
rather those peccant humors within us. The ground must be plowed up, and have
its bowels as it were moved, ere the good seed can be sown into it: The wool
must be carded, and torn as it were in pieces, ere it be made for a garment.
The stone must come under the hammer and saw, ere it be prepared for the
building. And thus ere the heart of man be fit to receive Gospelcomfort, it
must be humbled and broken by the Law of God: So that we are making way for
your comfort even while we denounce the curses of the Law: To preach of hell
and damnation, though it be grievous to you, yet it is wholesome; Therefore do
not thou cry out against such men that have the Law, hell and damnation so much
in their mouths, for this is the way to polish and prepare thee for comfort; we
do not forget the Gospel while we preach so: neither are we to be accounted as
legal Preachers; and not such as preach Christ, for hereby we level the
mountain for Christ to come, hereby we streighten the camels back, that it may
go through the eye of the needle; yea, all those spiritual censures inflicted
upon offenders, are for comfort; if thou art reproved, and that sharply and
zealously, it is for thy comfort: yea, if thou art for thy scandalous and
impenitent ways cast out from Church Communion, and denied the seals of
comfort: yet all this is medicinal, and makes a way for comfort. The
incestuous person is by Paul cast into spiritual sorrow, that so he may
partake of spiritual joy and consolation; of which blessed effect more in ^^s
time, when we come (God willing) to the next Chapter.

In the next place, let us consider the grounds, why Ministers are to promote
Why Ministers are to comfort the people. 1. Because they are Ministers of the
Gospel.
the comfort of such who are fit subjects for it.

And first, Because they are Ministers of the Gospel: and what is that but the
glad tidings of pardon of sin, of reconciliation, and of everlasting
happiness? (...) is noted to signify not only glad tidings but the reward
also given unto the messengers thereof. What then is more suitable to the
Ministers of comfort but to bring comfort, that we may say, as David of
Ahimaaz, he is a good man, and brings good tidings? If a Minister be a
Boanerges, a son of thunder, it is that he may be a son of consolation. It is
not contrary to their commission to preach of sin, and of the day of
judgment, for so Paul did to Felix, which made him tremble; only we are not to
stay here; we must not keep you allwaies under this Schoolmaster, but bring you
at last to Christ. Insomuch that all our duties tend to this, even to advance
the Gospel in the hearts of hearers; yea, every doctrine of Christ, as it is a
doctrine after godliness, so it is also after consolation. And therefore if
any opinion do properly make against godliness, we may reject it: and so if
any do truly make against solid comfort, we may refuse that, as not being of
Christ. It is true, many heretical and erroneous persons may pretend to great
comforts and ravishments; They usually say, they never had so much comfort as
since they engaged in such ways; but then you must remember that the devil may
be transformed into an angel of light: and as there is a counterfeit pie y, so
there is also a counterfeit comfort. It is not enough then to have comfort, but
it is to be judged and tried by Gods word. Neither may we say, this is a
comfortable doctrine, therefore I will embrace it, but first see it be a true
Scripture-doctrine, and then receive it, for such to be sure will also be
comfortable.

2. We are to help forward the godly man's comfort, because the heart of man
awakened for sin is very much indisposed to receive it, and the devil he is a
vehement 2. Because an awakened heart is much indisposed to it.
opposer of it. That the heart of man wounded for sin does difficultly receive
consolation, is plain, because joy is the fruit of Gods spirit, and the spirit
of God is given not only to sanctify us, but to vouchsafe consolation also, so
that as a man has a dead womb, in respect of grace, he is not able to have one
good thought without Gods spirit, so he has also a dead womb in respect of
comfort, he is not able to have one comfortable thought, unless God who is
called the God of all consolation, infuse it into him: and then the devil is a
daily opposer of our comforts as well as our graces; as he is a tempter to
sin, so to unbeleef and discouragements: he loves to keep us as he did the
lunatic person about the tombs, in thoughts of our hypocrisy and damnation,
that God does not love us, that he has cast us off. Is it not then necessary
to endeavor the comfort of a godly man, when it is so greatly gainsaid both
within and without?

3. Our duty is to persuade to comfort, because hereby the heart is more
enlarged 3. Because hereby the heart is more quickened to godliness.
and quickened unto all godliness: The joy of the Lord is our strength, as
Nehemiah said, Nehem. 8. 10. It is like oil to the wheels. With what delight
and gladness does a joyful believer exercise himself in all holihesse? with
what courage and confidence does he discharge all the duties required of him?
The spirit of God did come upon the Prophet when he played upon the harp; The
more cheerful, the more prepared to receive power from God; as the drier the
paper is, the fitter to receive characters; whereas upon wet paper none can
write. As it does thus enable us to do, no less also does it fortify us to
suffer: We see with what readiness and undaunted courage the Martyrs endured
the most exquisite torments; and why so? but because they were filled with
unspeakable joy: insomuch that their condition was sar better than the most
prosperous and flourishing estate of any wicked men. They were infeliciter
felices, and these were feliciter infelices, as Austin said: So that in
promoting holy joy we advance grace and godliness also.

Use first of instruction to the Ministers of the Gospel, to answer the main
end of their office, which is to be comforters; not to be Marahs but Naomies:
Spiritual consolation is the proper fruit of the spirit of Adoption, and
therefore a pearl highly to be esteemed: and that they may do this, they must
attend to their doctrine and their practice: Their doctrine, and thus in Popery
in stead of building up they destroy comfort; the doctrine of uncertainty and
doubting about the state of grace; the doctrine of satisfaction and merits,
these are uncomfortable doctrines. Indeed some adversaries say, the doctrine of
absolute predestination, and that Christ died but for some only, and not all,
is an uncomfortable doctrine. Hence their saying is spiritus Calvinianus est
spiritus Melancholicus. The Antinomians they also say, to preach the Law and
repentance, thereby as in a way to obtain remission of sins, is a method of
preaching, that destroys all comfort, but these might easily be confuted if
it were our business. It is a Ministers duty to see the doctrine he preaches,
does not in its own genius, and as a proper effect work despair or
discouragement; And then for their practice, they must be careful that all
reproofs, admonitions, and spiritual censures be so managed, that though for
the while they may seem bitter, yet at the last they will bring much comfort;
and that though they be in pain for a while, yet they shall at last rejoice to
see a manchilde born.

2. Use of Exhortation, to be such a prepared people, as that comfort may be
applied to you; how can ye have comfort if ye live in the ways of sin? do
not any thing that may chase away this comfort; if we preach never such
comfortable truths, if thou by thy negligence and unmortified walking do
deprive thy self of consolation, then know the blame lies in thy self, and not
in the Ministry: Thou criest give me a word of comfort, how can we comfort
him, whom God would not have comforted?

SERMON. CXLVII.
God only the Lord of our Christian Faith.

2 COR. 1. 24. For by faith ye stand.
THis last clause (says Calvin) other Interpreters either take no notice of,
or else do not clearly instruct about it; for whereas it is plain by the
causall particle (...), it is brought in as an argument of something preceding,
it is very difficult to find out the reason: Those Interpreters that take
notice of it are divided, Some do make it a reason of the words immediately
foregoing: Paul was a helper of their joy, because they stood firmly in the
faith; for although there were some who denied the resurrection, yet that was
not the doctrine of the Chuch in general, nor was it puhlikely professed by
them: It is true, many abuses there were in practice both civil and religious,
yet because they did firmly retain the true faith, therefore it was that he
would not wholly cast them off as no Church; Their true doctrine which they
professed made him the more hopeful of them; and certainly the pure sound faith
professed by a Church, though otherwise greatly corrupted, makes it to have
the essence and life of a Church, and withal suggesteth hope, that God in time
will make them an holy practical Church, as well as a sound Orthodox one, Hence
Paul in his first Epistle to the Thessalonians, c. 3. v. 5, 6, 7. does much
rejoice in their faith, that they stood steadfast therein; When I could no
longer forbear I sent to know your faith. As also Timotheus brought him glad
tidings of their faith: And again, we were comforted in our affliction by your
faith, and this interpretation is very probable, and not to be wholly rejected.
But then a second is more probable, and that makes it a reason of the former
part of the verse. We have not dominion over your faith, for by faith ye stand
steadfast: Insomuch that if I Paul, or an Angel from heaven should preach unto
you another doctrine, yet you believe in the truth, as Gods truth, and not man's
truth; So that God alone has the dominion over your hearts in believing. Thus
it is a very fit and proper reason. Hence Heinsius thinks there is a
transposition of the words, which is usual with Paul, and that they should be
inserted before the later clause, thus; Not that we have dominion over your
faith, for by faith you stand; Whether we read it objectively, you stand in
the faith; or instrumentally, by faith you stand; it is not much material:
Neither are we to render it in the past signification, you have stood, because
it is (...) in the Greek, as if the Apostle did imply they formerly had indeed
stood in the faith, though lately they grew wavering: for it is usual to use
the preterperfect for the present, especially when a continuance or
perseverance is intended, as Matthew. 20, Why stand ye here ((...)) idle all the
day long? Both these interpretations may be conjoined, but because the latter
is the most considerable: Therefore I shall insist on that, and observe,

That the Christian faith is of that nature, that it does respect and relate
The Christians says relates only unto God.
unto God only.

We believe not in men, but in God. Whether we speak of dogmatical or fiducial
faith, they cannot have any other bottom to stand upon, but the authority of
God himself, Thus says the Lord, Thus it is written, is the ground of all true
Christian faith; which truth deserve^h explication in some particular
Propositions. As

First, There is an humane, and there is a divine faith, which only deserves
1. There is an humane and a divine faith.
the name of Christian faith, and to which only the promises of God do
belong. An humane faith, I call that, when men do believe principles of
Religion merely upon humane motives; that is the ultimate reason and motive,
into which their faith is resolved. These humane motives are manifold, as the
Authority of the Church, the Authority of Ministers and Pastors, our education
by parents, custom and universality, as also the Laws and Edicts of a
Magistrate, commanding such a Religion to be received, and no other. Now
whosoever makes this the chief reason of the profession of his faith, is upon
no better ground than the Turks, is for their Mahumetan, the Papists for their
Popish faith. Insomuch that many Protestants, Turks and Papists, though they
exceedingly differ in the materials of Religion, yet agree in the formali
motivo; they believe so and so, because brought up in it, because commanded by
their Civil Magistrates. It is that which the Papists upbraid us with, that our
Religion is but a Parliament-Religion, or a Queen Elizabeths-Religion, because
when they established it, the Land generally received it. Now to this we say,
That no doubt the generality of people, except such as are enlightened by Gods
Spirit, do receive even the Christian or true Religion, but upon civil and
humane respects; and therefore when Emperors have been Arrians, the people
have been Arrians; when the Kings of Israel were Idolaters, the inhabitants
became Idolaters. And thus when the Kings of the Earth have been Papists, the
people have been Papists also. So that they cannot object any thing more
against the Protestant Religion, than we may against the Papist. Only we add
a further position, which introduces a divir^e faith, which they overthrow,
and so by consequence teach no more than an Lumane faith. For we hold, That
every private believer is bound to have an explicit faith, of the things
necessary to salvation; and this faith we say is knowledge, the ground whereof
is, the Authority and Testimony of God in the Scripture. So that we do not
believe in Magistrates, nor in Ministers, nor in the Church, trusting our faith
and salvation upon them, but the word of God only; whereas the Papists do
expressly affirm, That a private Christians faith is enough to salvation, if he
content himself with this, That he believes as the Church believes, never
troubling himself in reading of books, or searching of the Scripture. As
Valentia's known instance of a Merchant, brought in by him, disputing, What
Religion he should be of? does evidently declare. So then, a Papist, as a
Papist, cannot reach any higher than to an humane faith. For though they will
not yield the Authority of the Church to be an humane Authority, yet both
reason and experience does fully convince that. But let us come to our own
people, and sadly bewail the ignorance and stupidity of Protestants in general,
who are not moved by any divine motives or Scripture-respects to embrace their
Religion, but only are persuaded herein by external motives, very few being
able to give a reason of the faith or hope that is in them, which yet the
Apostle Peter requires of every man and woman, 1 Pet. 3. 15. What reason have
they, but their fathers example, and the Laws of the Land? So that it is
merely accidental, that they do receive a true Religion; for it had been
Heretical and Idololatrical, it had been all one to them, they would have
entertained it however. But to this particular, you must observe one Caution:
It Is one thing to speak of the Introductory and Preparatory means of faith; and
another thing of the ultimate and formal motive or reason, why I do believe. We
do readily grant, That the true Churches Ministry may prepare for a divine
faith: What is Paul, and what is Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believe?
says the Scripture (1 Corinthians. 3.) Thus Timothy had his faith by the godly
education of his Mother and Grandmother. Yea (John 4.) we read of the woman of
Samaria, instrumental to bring many people to believe on Christ only; yet
observe that expression, verse. 42. Now we believe not, because of thy saying,
for we have heard him our selves. Godly Ministers then, and godly parents may
be greatly helpful to us in true believing; but then the reason and chief
motive is, from the Divine Authority of the Scripture, declaring this truth. We
do not believe in Ministers, nor in the Church. And thus you must understand
that passage of Jehoshaphats, (Chron. 20. 20.) Believe in the Lord your God, so
shall ye be established: believe the Prophets, so shall ye prosper. Believe in
God ultimately, but believe the Prophets ministerially. So that it would be a
fanatic presumption, out of a persuasion that only works faith, thereby to
cast off those useful helps and means which he has appointed for the
producing of faith.

In the next general place, we are to know, That two things are necessarily Two
things required to the working of a divine faith. 1. The principle that works
it in us, God.
required to the working of a divine faith: The one Effectively; The other
Objectively: The principle that works faith in us, and the reason or motive
thereof: The principle that works faith in us, is God alone. None can make
the heart of man to believe Scripture-truths, but God only. Hence Faith is the
gift of God; so some are said, To believe through grace, Act. 18. 27. Is it not
plain in the Pharisees, notwithstanding they heard our Savior preach, and also
saw his wonderful miracles, yet to them it was not given to believe, or to
know the mysteries of God; but to others more unlearned and contemptible it
was. Hence it falls out, that the most learned men are many times most
Atheistical, or at least Skeptical and doubting in Religion. Insomuch that we
are to be importunate with God in prayer, that he would both work and increase
faith in us. Hence Christ is said to be, both the author and finisher of our
faith, Hebr. 12. 2. It Is the mighty power of God, so enlightening and enabling
thee, that thou do adhere to the truth. For how many specious arguments may
be produced against the faith? How mutable are many in forsaking the faith they
once professed, and turn Heretical? So that it is a special work of Gods grace
to make thee stand firm in the faith, especially in times of temptation. To be
a pillar in the Temple of the Lord, and not a reed shaken with every wind, is
a glorious preservation. For it is plain, that it is fancy, error, or humor
that lead many in Religion, and not this holy precious faith.

Again, The second thing necessarily concurring to a divine faith, is a 2. A
divine testimony, Gods word.
Divine testimony; it must be Gods word. We must have the Doctrine from Christ,
else our faith is but an humane faith, and so our Religion, but an humane
Religion. The Thessalonians are commended by Paul, That they received the Word,
not as the word of men, but as it is indeed the word of God; and when so
received, it effectually works in those that believe. Alas, what is the
reason, there is so little holiness, so little godliness? It is because there
is so little divine faith. The truths we preach are not received as the word of
God; we look no further or higher than to a man in these things: we do not
hear and tremble, we do not believe and tremble; we rise not up with
heart-reverence, as Eglon, though an Heathen did to Ehud, when he said, He had
a message from the Lord.

In the third place, In that the true Christian faith flows from such a
divine 3. Hence it is that none can have a sovereignty over the faith of a
believer.
principle, and arises from such a divine motive, Hence it is that no kind of
persons have an absolute Sovereignty over the faith of a believer; and
whosoever do arrogate it to themselves, they assume the property of the
Almighty, and most infinite God. They arrogate to themselves the peculiar and
incommunicable property of Christ, which is to be the Head of the Church, and a
Lawgiver in respect of any Doctrine, Worship or Ordinances. It is true, there
have been such, especially the Pope of Rome, who has thus arrogated to
himself, setting himself in the Temple of God, as God; but the blasphemies of
such have been written (as it were) in their foreheads, and hereby they are
justly deemed to be a Political, or Church-Antichrist, as there is a Doctrinal
Antichrist. But we affirm, That no kind of persons can have dominion over a
man's faith, seeing it has such a peculiar reference to God.

First, Not spiritual and Church Rulers, or Ecclesiastical Governors. If 1. No
Churchgovernours.
the Apostles would not assume it, who then may? It is true, there are several
Texts in Scripture, which command us to hear our Pastors, to obey them, to
submit unto them, to have them highly in esteem for their works sake. Such as
do not hear them, are to be accounted as Heathens and Publicans. They are
endowed with power to Admonish and rebuke sharply: Yea, where obstinacy is in
sinners, To cast them out of the Church. But all this does not arise to a
Magisterial Domination over men's consciences. And although they have power to
bind and loose, which God himself promises to confirm in Heaven; yet all
this is declaratively and ministerially only. How far there is a decisive
power in Councils to extinguish all errors and heresies, is not here to be
debated. This is enough, that as no particular person, so no Councils, though
never so oecomenical can say, we have dominion over your faith. And

Secondly, No civil power has dominion over any man's faith. No Magistrate can
make Articles of Faith, can appoint another worship of God, or 2. No civil
governors.
other Sacraments than Christ has appointed. Faith is not Caesar's gift,
neither can any man believe, Praecise quia vult, as Mirandula declares, merely
because he will. How far Magistrates have power in matters of Religion is
greatly disputed and determined by the excess in some, and by the defect in
others. But however no Kings or Emperors can say, We have dominion over your
faith, no more than they can say, We are the true and great Jehovah. They
cannot make a Religion, make Sacraments, but enjoin the observance of that
which is required in the Word; and the reason which excludes both spiritual
and civil Governors, is general to all. We are not baptized into any man's
name, neither has any Emperor or Church Officer died for us; they have not
been crucified for us; neither have they power over our hearts, to impose a
command upon them, which must necessarily be in the duty of faith; neither can
they damn or save men. Hence the Apostle says, There is one Lawgiver, which
is able to save and to destroy, Jam. 4. 12.

Fourthly, Although divine faith be such a noble and excellent work, coming
from Heaven, and ascending up to Heaven again, Yet it does admit 4. Faith
admits of degrees.
of degrees in the subject where it is. Some have stronger faith, some weaker,
some have more explicit and extensive faith, than others; yea and the most
settled believers are subject to temptations; they are often assaulted, and that
even in their faith about the principles and fundamentals, about God, about the
Scriptures, about the immortality of the Soul, about the state of Glory, and
eternal Torments. Fiery darts are sometimes injected, for which the people of
God do abhor and loath themselves. Therefore we must distinguish between
little faith, and no faith, between doubtings and Atheism. And truly for this
end does God suffer errors and heresies to arise in his Church, that truth may
be more confirmed, and the approved may be made manifest. It Is to exercise the
spiritual wisdom and faith of the godly, whether they can discern of things
that differ, and can tell which is the strangers voice, and which is the true
shepherds. It is a very grievous temptation to be assaulted about fiducial
faith, whether the promises belong to thee in particular; but in some respects
it is far more terrible to be exercised in doubts about dogmatical faith: for
this tends to the razing of the foundations, and the arguments or remedies to
cure this distemper are more difficult.

Use of Instruction. Is faith thus immediately respecting God above all
instruments, though making use of them? Then

First, Theirs is not faith, which does wholly depend upon the Authority of a
man, though never so eminent. We may not rely on Austine, on Chrysostom;
neither do we own those expressions of Lutherans and Calvinists. For although
we acknowledge them eminent instruments in propagating of the Gospel, yet we
believe not upon their authority merely, because Luther and Calvin says so. It
is true, nothing is more ordinary, than to admire men's persons, and while we
extol their gifts and abilities, we are secretly enticed to think of worthy
men^, above what we ought, and find an awe in our consciences to recede from
any opinion they have delivered: But we must take heed, we do not hereby
become guilty of spiritual Idolatry, setting up men as Idols in our hearts.

Secondly, This instructs, that gross ignorant men cannot have any divine
faith; for they feel nothing of any work of Gods Spirit, or illumination upon
their understandings; hence they believe as other men believe, as if a man were
not to be saved by his own faith.

Thirdly, It shows the Skeptical and Pyrrhonian man in Religion, the mere
Seeker, that he has no faith. If he had the substance of things hoped for, and
the evidence of things not seen upon his soul, he would not be tossed up and
down, as he is.

Fourthly, It shows, that the mere carnal Politician has no divine faith,
for he looks upon Religion, but as an humane device, or a State-engine, and
therefore can transform into all shapes and times. How contrary is this to
true faith?

FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table CONTAINING The chief Heads of this Treatise.
A
Administrations.
THe godly sometimes deceived about Gods Administrations toward them, page
293, 294, 295, 296, 297 Reasons of it, 298 Rules for the preventing it, 299,
300
Afflictions.
God comforts his people in all their Afflictions, both spiritual, 167 And
temporal, 168
It Is a special duty to comfort the Afflicted. See Comfort. The most eminent
Saints when Afflicted need comfort, 188, 189, 190 See Sufferings.
It Is of great use to know what are the Afflictions of the people of God, 256
Reasons of it. ibid.
What use is to be made of preaching about those Afflictions which Paul and
others suffered from the Heathens, 257, 258, 259 The Afflictions of the godly
heavy and yet light, 270 Faith and flesh pass different judgments upon
Afflictions, 270, 271 Propositions clearing it, 271, 272
How we may know when flesh and when faith speaks in Afflictions, 274, 275
276 It Is very useful to know that, 277
Natural strength not able to carry a man through all Afflictions, 280
Propositions clearing it, 280, 281, 282 See Troubles and Sufferings.

Anointing.
All true believers have a spiritual Anointing from God, 620 Propositions
clearing it, 620, 621

Apostle.
What an Apostle was, 15 Two kinds of them, ibid. They were appointed by Christ
in the first building of the Church, 16
The properties of an Apostle, 16, 17, 18 19 Of the difference betwixt the
Office of an Apostle, and of an ordinary Pastor, 506, 507
Assurance.
A believer may be Assured he performs duties with an upright heart, 394 What
is required to an Assurance of our being in a state of grace, 395, 396 The
impediments of Assurance, 400, 401 Gods command to look after it, 401, 402 The
effects of it, 402 Cautions about it, 403

B
Blessing.
A Threefold Blessing mentioned in Scripture, 127 Christians ought to Bless
God for all his mercies, ibid. What is required to our Blessing God aright,
128, 129, 130, 131 We should Bless God more for spiritual mercies than for
other, 134 See Praising God.

C
Call.
THe divine Call of Ministers necessary to be known, 19 Two things premised
concerning a Ministers Call, 20 What are the practical concernments which will
follow those who have a true Call from God to the Ministers, 21 To the people,
22
The Call to Church-offices proceeds merely from the will and pleasure of God,
33, 34 What is there meant by the will of God, 34, 35, 36

Changing.
Of Changing in matters of Religion, 546
Christ.
Why our Savior called Christ, 36 What it does imply, 27 He is the Son of
God, 135
Propositions explaining how Christ is the Son of God, 136, 137. 561, 562,
563, 564 This truth is the foundation of all Christian comfort, 138, 139
Christ the only object of all preaching, 557 When Christ is preached, 557,
558, 559, 560 Jesus is the Christ, the anointed of God, 569 See Jesus.

Church.
Of the name Church, 50, 51 The nature and description of a Church, 51 It is a
society 52 Called of God, 52, 53, 54
By the preaching of the Word, to the profession of Christ and
Church Communion, 55, 56 Wherein Church communion consists, 56, 57 The notes
and signs of a Church, 58, 59 Why necessary to be known, ibid. All are not of
equal necessity, ibid. A latitude to be granted in the application of them, 60
Of the twofold form of the Church, internal and external, ib. The marks of the
visible, not to be confounded with the properties of the invisible Church. 61
Why Paul writes to the Church, and not to the Churches of Corinth, 63 A Church
is Gods people in a more peculiar manner, 64 Seven things implied in the
Churches being said to be of God, 64, 65, 66, 67 A Church sometimes gathered
amongst the most profane people. 69 A Church may be a true one, though defiled
with many corruptions, 70 Three propositions clearing it, 73 Three reasons
demonstrating it, 76
What corruptions were in the Church of Corinth, 71, 72 The soundness and
purity of a Church admits of degrees, 73 The Church of God, as it is a Church
does far surpass all civil societies and temporal dignities, 77 Three
propositions clearing it, 78, 79 The grounds of it, 79, 80
It Is hard for Churches to keep within their proper bounds about Church
administrations, 80 It Is a Ministers duty by all lawful means to promote the
Church he is related to, 81 All that are in the Church are Saints by
profession, 83 What is comprehended under Church-Saintship, 84, 85 All Saints
ought to join themselves to Church communion, 91 Yet some causes may excuse
them, 91, 92
What are those sinful grounds why many do not join themselves to Church
communion, 93, 94 The best Churches changeable in their affections to their
guides, 464 Propositions clearing it, 464, 465 The causes of it, 466, 467
The Church esteems many things which the world despises, 31, 32
Church Officers.
Church Officers appointed by Christ as the head. 28 Propositions clearing it.
29, 30
Two things Church Officers are to take heed of, pride and idleness, 30, 31
How it concerns Church Officers to agree in matters of Religion, 46 Three
propositions clearing it, 46, 47 Three things conducing to that happy
agreement, 47, 48

Comfort.
God a God of all Comfort to his, 148 What is implied in that expression, 149
What in the word Comfort, 150, 151 Propositions about the Comforts of God, 152
It is so to be managed as to be made an antidote against despair, and yet a
curb to presumption, ib.
Comfort not to be judged of without Scripture Light. 153 God actually Comforts
his people, 157 How God comforts his people, 158, 159, 160 God a God of Comfort
only to believers, 161 Six propositions clearing the truth, 162, 163, 164, 165
God Comforts his people in all afflictions, 166, 167 No Philosophers ever had
the true art or grounds of Comfort, 169 God Comforts only by the Scriptures,
170 What are the grounds of Comfort in Scripture. 171, 172, 173 How God is said
to Comfort his people in all their afflictions, notwithstanding they are often
disconsolate, 174, 175, 176, 177 Comfort not absolutely necessary to salvation.
175 These only are fit to Comfort others who have the experimental work of Gods
grace upon their own hearts, 182 Four propositions clearing it, 182, 183, 184
Four reasons confirming it, 184, 185, 186
It is a special duty to Comfort the afflicted. 187 Propositions clearing it,
187, 188, 189, 190
Two things required to the Comforting others in a right manner, 190, 191 The
same grounds of Comforts which revive one, may revive another also, 191 What
are the general grounds of Comfort in afflictions, 192, 193 Reasons of it, 193,
194, 195
Our Comforts are and abound by Christ, 209, 210 How Christ makes our Comforts
to abound in our sufferings for his sake, 210, 211, 212 God commonly
proportions our comforts to our sufferings, 214 And sometimes makes them to
exceed 215 The reasons of it, 216, 217
Why God often denies Comfort in trouble 217, 218 Our Comfort is promoted by
others suffering for Christ, 223, 224, 225, 226 227 It Is universal holiness
that is the ground of Comfort, 443
Communion.
Two sorts of Communion, 251 Communion with the sufferers for Christ a good way
to interest us in their glory, ibid.
Confidence and self-confidence.
Self- confidence a great sin, 302 Propositions clearing the nature of Self-
confidence, 302, 303, 304 A godly man sometimes guilty of it 309, 310 Of the
sinfulness of it, 313, 314, 315 Confirm, vide Establish.

Conscience.
Of the Conscience, 384 The witness of a good Conscience a great ground of
comfort, 385 What is required to a good Conscience, 385, 386, 387, 388, 389 How
the Spirit witnesses with our Consciences, 389 What are those effects of the
Spirit by which our Consciences are rightly guided in witnessing to us, 390,
391 Distinctions concerning Conscience and its testimonies, 392, 393
Consolation, vide Comfort.

Conversation.
Of a twofold Conversation, 443 What is required to a good Conversation, 445,
446
Conversion.
A great deal of difference in the persons the Converted, 42 And in the manner
of their Conversion, 43 The reasons of both, 44

Corinth.
Of the City Corinth, 68
D
Day.
CHrist has a solemn Day wherein great changes will be made, 479 Wherein these
great changes will be, 479, 480, 481, 482, etc.

Dead.
Of Gods raising the Dead, 326 What it implies, 328, 329

Death.
The natural fear of Death not removed by grace, 284 Propositions clearing it,
285, 286
Of what use the natural fear of Death is, 286 There is a natural fear of Death
in all, though in some more, in some less, 288 When the fear of Death is
sinful, 289, 290, 291
Deliverance.
Deliverance both temporal and spiritual from God, 341, 342
Despair.
Whence Despair arises, 352
Dispensation.
All Gods Dispensations further the salvation of his people, 242, etc. Two
sorts of Dispensations which conduce to that end. 244 Vide Administrations.

E
Earnest.
GRace the Earnest of glory, 651 How grace and an Earnest differ, 652, 653
What is implied in the Earnest of Gods Spirit, 654, 655, 656 They who have the
Earnest of the Spirit cannot fall away, 657, 658
Education.
Education not to be rested upon, 44, 45
Ends.
What are these inferior Ends interposing betwixt God and us, which we are apt
to look upon, 416, 417
Enjoyments.
Temporal Enjoyments as well as spiritual mercies are the gift of God, 369
Propositions clearing it, 370, 371, 372 Reasons for it, 373

Establish.
Wherein the Establishing work of Gods grace lies, 607, 608, 609, 610, 611,
612 Arguments proving all Establishing to be from God, 613 The most eminent
need Establishment as well as the we^kest, 614 Demonstrations of it, 615, 616,
617
It Is in Christ alone that we are Established, 617, 618 Reasons why we cannot
Establish our selves, 636, 637
Experience.
Experience in former, should encourage to trust in God for future mercies, 345
Propositions clearing it, 346, 347

F
Faith.
OF the different judgments which Faith and flesh put upon afflictions, 274,
etc. The division of Faith as to the object, 638 Whether in Faith, and by Faith
be oaths 665 Ministers have no power over a Christians Faith, 684 A Christians
Faith relates only to God, 694 Propositions clearing it, 696, 697

Father.
What is implied in Gods being our Father, 120 What in the expression Our
Father, 121 God is the Father of mercies, 140 What is employed in Gods being the
Father of mercies, 141, 142, 143, 144 Fear of Death, vid. Death.

Flesh.
Faith and Flesh pass different judgments upon afflictions, 274, etc. Of the
phrase; walking according to the Flesh, 520 VValking by principles of Flesh
makes men unconstant, 521 What are the principles of Flesh, 521, 522, 523
Form;
How the Form of a thing may be a note or mark of it, 61
G
Glory of God.
It Is the duty of all Christians, especially Ministers, to lay out themselves
for the Glory of God, 500, 501 Propositions clearing it, 501, 502, 503
What is required to enable us to do all things for Gods glory, 504 Glorying,
vid. Rejoicing.

God.
Of the Names of God, 117 God alone can give grace and peace to his people.
118, 119 God a Father, especially to true believers, 120 What it implies, ib.
He is a Father to the weakest as well as strongest believer, 121
He is a true God, 536 He is the Father of mercies. V i de Father.


Godly.
Truly Godly, though eminent, yet humble, 37 Godliness and a Godly life is
very convincing, and of great advantage, 455, 456 Why often not convincing, 456,
457

Grace.
Four acceptions of the word Grace, 66 Grace to be desired before all other
things 100 Seven propositions discovering the nature of the Grace of God, 100,
101, 102 What are the opposites of Grace, 102 Who are fit subjects of the Grace
of God, 103, 104, 105 Many err about the Grace of God, and yet are extremely
opposite one to another 105 Four Scripture-characters of the Grace of God, 106,
107 What is requisite to a certain knowledge of our being in a state of Grace,
395, 396 What to an experimental discerning of our Graces, 397, 398 The godly
ascribe all to Grace, 433 Propositions clearing it, 433, 434
What is that Grace which the Apostle exalts above fleshly wisdom, 434, 435
436 What are the Graces which the Apostle acknowledges in his Ministay, 434,
435, 436, 437, etc. Grace the earnest of glory. Vid. Earnest.

Growing.
In what things believers are to be always Growing, 497, 498
H
Hope.
OF Paul's Hope concerning the Corinthians. 245 Hope Divine and Moral. 246 It Is
great encouragement in a Minister to see good grounds of Hope in his people.
ibid. What things are they which made Paul have such an Hope of the
Corinthians, and other Ministers of their people, 247, 248, 249
Humility.
Humility in the godly, though eminent 37 Wherein it discovers it self, 38, 39
What are the grounds of it, 39, 40

I
Jesus.
OF the name Jesus, 24 How Christ is a Jesus a Savior, 25, 565 What kind of
Savior he is. 26 He is a Lord. 122 Four propositions clearing it. 123, 124,
125 What is employed in his being a Savior. 565, 566, 567 To whom he is a
Savior, 567, 568

Inconstancy.
Inconstancy a great sin in all, especially in Ministers, 510, 546, 547, 548,
etc. Of its sinfulness in civil respects. 511, 512 Its aggravations, 513, 514
Its sinfulesse in spiritual respects, 515, 516 Motives against it, 517, 518 The
causes of it, 553

Joy.
A twofold Joy direct or reflex. 175. It Is either spiritual or corporeal. 176
Judgement-day, vid. Day.

K
Knowledge.
CErtain Knowledge, vid. Assurance.
L
Learning.
LEarning an excellent qualification, 7 Sometimes through the corruption of man
it is made use of for the promoting the Devils kingdom. ibid.
It Is not from the nature of Learning. 8 Learning not sufficient without the
Spirit for the understanding of the Scriptures ib
Lord.
Christ our Lord, vid. Christ.
Lying.
Lying not consistent with godliness, 530 Propositions concerning the nature
and kinds of Lying. 531, 532, 533 Means against it, 534 The causes of it. 534,
535

M
Means.
MEans to be made use of notwithstanding our trusting in God, 355 Two
propositions clearing it, 355, 356
How we should make use of Means, and yet rely wholly upon Christ, 356, 357 358
Meditation.
Meditation upon Gods mercies very useful, 133
Mercies.
Of the variety of Gods Mercies, 144, 145, 146 The properties of Gods Mercies,
146 Who are the fit object of Gods Mercies, 147 It Is dangerous to conceive of
Gods Mercies without Scripture Light, 155 Mercies acknowledged by believers,
not only in general, but with all their aggravations, 330, 331 Wherein they
use to aggravate their Mercies, 331, 332, 333, 334 Mercies not only positive,
but privative, and preventing, to be accounted of. 335 Propositions clearing
it, 335, 336, etc.
Rules to affect our hearts concerning preventing Mercies, 337, 338, 339
Mercies are not only bestowed, but continued by God. 340 Reasons of it. 342, 343
All Mercies come from God. 369 God is the Father of Mercies, vid. Father.
Minister.
It is a Ministers duty by all lawful means to promote the Church he is
related to. 81 Ministers meet with much opposition from worldly professors,
260, 261 Mercies vouchsafed to Ministers, are to be accounted as
Church-mercies. 378 Ministers ought not to use fleshly wisdom. 423 Godliness
in a Minister especially advantageous. 454, 455, 456 It Is an happy thing for
Minister and people to rejoice in one another, 468 Propositions clearing it,
469, 470
How a people ought to rejoice in their Minister, 470, 471 Wherein a Minister
has cause to rejoice over his people. 473, 474, 475, etc. Where a Minister
has hopes of doing good, he is encouraged to abide. 490 Propositions clearing
it, 490, 491, 492
A Ministers hope of doing good should be matter of joy to him. 493 Ministers
especially ought to lay out themselves for the glory of God, 501, 502, 503 A
Ministers changeableness makes his Ministry useless. 546 Propositions
clearing it, 546, 547, 548, etc.
Where there is any fault in one Minister, the people are apt to lay it upon
all. 572 It Is an happy thing when all Ministers agree to advance Christ, 273
The effects of that agreement, 573, 574
The true Ministers of Gods truth always the same. 575 Ministers have no
dominion over their peoples faith. 684 What is not implied in that truth. 684,
685 What is, 686, 687
Ministers ought to comfort their people. 689 Propositions clearing it, 689,
690 Reasons of it. 691
It Is of great consequence that the young Ministers should have the guidance of
the more experienced. 49
Ministry.
What are the graces the Apostle acknowledged in his Ministry, 435, 436, 437,
438, etc. Gods presence with the Ministry, renders the people inexcusable, 448,
449 Propositions clearing it, 450, 451
Wherein the success of a faithful Ministry is seen, 451, 452 A constant
Ministry necessary for every Church. 495 For what ends. 495, 496, 497
Where the Ministry has wrought spiritually it is esteemed highly. 509 The
failings of Ministers are often cast upon the Ministry, 541 Propositions
illustrating it, 541, 542 543
Where the work of the Ministry is great the help of others is required. 571
Ministerial power is to be managed with much prudence. 678 The Ministerial
work consists in a great measure in comforting the afflicted. 689
N
Names.
THe prefixing of a Name is not a sufficient argument to prove the Authority of
any Scripture. 11
Note.
What things are necessary to make a Note 59
O
Oath.
WHat an Oath is, 659, 660, 661 Whether words be necessary to an Oath, 663
Whether in faith, and by faith be Oaths, 665 Officers of the Church, vid.
Church Officers.

Ordinances.
Public Ordinances useful and acceptable, 374 375 Reasons for it. 375, 376,
377

Oil.
The properties of material Oil compared with spiritual. 621, 622, 623
P
Patience.
It Is Patience in sufferings that makes them conduce to our salvation, 232
Patience commended by all. 233 What goes to the producing of it, 234, 235
Motives to Patience. 236, 237, 238, 239
Paul.
Why Saul called Paul, 2 Paul's sins, 3 His serviceablenesse, 3, 4 His
learning. 6
Of the Name Paul being prefixed before his Epistles. 10, 11 That argues them
to be of Divine Authority. 11 Why he styles himself an Apostle of Jesus Christ.
31

Peace.
Peace from God and Christ earnestly to be prayed for. 108 Wherein it
consists, how wrought and preserved, 109, 110, etc. What are the effects of
it, 114, 115 Directions for the attaining of it, 116 People as related to
Minister, Vide Ministers.

Perseverance.
It Is Perseverance that is the crown of holiness. 458 Hopeful beginnings in
the ways of Religion are not enough without Perseverance. 459 Propositions
clearing it. 459, 460, 461

Prayer.
The most eminent in gifts and graces still need the Prayers of the meanest.
359 Reasons of it, 360
People ought to Pray for their Minister, 361, 362, 363 Prayers to be made not
only privately but publicly. 375 Reasons of it. 375, 376

Praising.
It is our duty to Praise God for all his mercies, 364 What is required to our
Praising God. 365, 366, 367 Motives to it. 367, 368

Vide Blessing.
Public Praises, vid. Public Prayer.
Preaching.
Christ is the only object of our Preaching, 557 When Christ is Preached, 557,
558, 559
Presumption.
Signs of Presumption. 350, 351
Principles.
Two distinct Principles in every regenerate man. 271, 272 Of Principles in
general. 525, 526, 527 Of the Principles of a godly man. 527, 528, 529
Principles of flesh, vid. Flesh.

Professors.
Carnal Professors make great opposition to the Ministry. 261, 262, 263 Who
are they which Profess Religion merely upon carnal ends, 263, 264, etc.
Promises.
God has made many Promises to us in Christ. 581 Propositions clearing it.
581, 582, 583, 584
Of the several sorts of Promises. 585, 586 Promises are the executions of Gods
Decrees. 587 No wicked man has any right to the Promises. ibid. The Promises
suppose faith. 588 God has sealed them to us. ibid.
It Is great skill to make use of the Promises. 589 The Promises are all
confirmed in Christ, 591 Propositions clearing it, 591, 592, 593
What a Christian should do that doubts whether the Promises belong to him, or
no. 596, 597, 598 The Promises of God will never be altered. 598, 599 The
Promises give glory to God, both as made by him, and as believed by us. 600,
601 Wherein the glory of God is manifested in his Promises. 601, 602 How faith
in the Promises gives glory to him. 602, 603 Our establishment in the Promises
is the work of G^lone 605 Propositions clearing it. 606, 607
Signs of our interest in the Promises. 640
Prudence.
What is that holy Prudence that Ministers are to use in the exercise of their
Ministerial power. 678, 679 Wherein it does consist. 680, 681

R
Raising.
WHat is employed in Gods Raising from the dead. 328, 329
Rejoicing.
An holy Rejoicing and glorying in the graces of God lawful, 380 What is
required to this holy Rejoicing, 380, 381 In what respect it is lawful. 381
Wherein unlawful. 382, 383

Religion.
Religion opposed by two sorts of people, 262 Who are those who profess
Religion only upon carnal grounds. 263, 264, etc.
S
Saints.
GOd of great sinners often makes eminent Saints. 2 Reasons for it. 4, 5
All that are of the Church are Saints by profession, and ought to be so by
conversation. 83 Of the nature of real Saintship. 86, 87, 89 Two motives to it.
88, 89
Saints ought to join themselves in a Church Way. 91 Yet some reasons may
excuse them 90 What those reasons are, 91, 92 What reasons are not justifiable.
93, 94
The soul of the poorest Saint not to be neglected. 94
Salvation.
The Salvation of believers is promoted by their suffering for Christ. 228
There is a twofold Salvation, temporal and spiritual. 241 The Salvation of
Gods people is furthered by all his dispensations. 242 What this Salvation does
imply. 242, 243 Two sorts of dispensations whereby Salvation is promoted. 244
Savior.
Our Savior how called Jesus Christ. 1, 24, 26 How Christ is a Savior. 25
What kind of Savior he is, 26 Vide Jesus.

Saul.
Why Saul was called Paul. 2
Scripture.
The Penmen of the holy Scriptures were instruments, not the authors. 12 We are
to rest satisfied with the style and method of Scripture, 12 The authority of
Scripture not to be questioned, 13. Four considerations whereby to arm our
selves against the opposers of Scripture 13, 14
Sealing.
The people of God are his Sealed ones, 625 Propositions clearing it, 625, 626
What the Sealing of the godly implies, 626, 627, 628, 629 The description of
the Sealing of Gods Spirit, 632, 633, 634, etc. Whether all the people of God
be his Sealed ones, 645, 646 How this Sealing may be stopped, 647, 648
Self-confidence, Vide Confidence.

Simplicity.
Godly Simplicity affords much comfort, 404 Of the nature of Simplicity, as it
relates to God, 405, 406, 407, 408, etc. As it relates to man, 411, 412

Sincerity.
How it is called godly Sincerity, 413 Godly Sincerity carries a man above all
other things to God himself, 414 What it is in God that a Sincere heart looks
upon, 415, 416 Propositions discovering the nature and effects of godly
Sincerity, 418, 419, 420
Spirit.
How the Spirit witnesses with our consciences, 390
Spiritual.
Spiritual mercies to be desired before temporal, 96 A natural man cannot
desire Spiritual things, ibid Only the regenerate, 97
What ars the qualifications which provoke the godly to esteem Spiritual
favors before others, ibid. The reasons of it, 98
Gods Spiritual works upon his people are not only for their, but also for
others good, 179 Two kinds of Spiritual gifts, ibid. What are these Spiritual
things whereby we may be serviceable to others, 180, 181
Suffering.
What is implied in the Sufferings of Christ, 196, 197 What in the Sufferings
of Christ abounding, 197 The profession of Christ is accompanied with
Sufferings sometimes excessive, ibid. Propositions clearing it, 198, 199, 200
What is required in our Suffering for Christ ex parate objecti, 201, 202, 203
What ex part subjecti, 205, 206, 207, 208
How Christ makes our comforts to abound in our Sufferings for him, 210 The
advantages of our Suffering for Christ, 213 Our Sufferings for Christ are for
the Churches good, 218, 219 Four Propositions clearing it, 220, 221
The general good of such Sufferings is Gods glory, and the Gospels enlargement
222 Others Sufferings for Christ may much conduce to our comfort and salvation,
223 Three things premised concerning such Sufferings, 223, 224 How our
Sufferings for Christ work our comfort, 225, 226, 227 How they promote our
salvation, 228 229, 230
Sufferings not barely in themselves, but as improved by patience, conduce to
our salvation, 232 Communion with those that Suffer for Christ a sure way to
interest us in their glory and comfort. 251 Two propositions clearing it, 251,
252 The reasons of it. 253, 254 Vid. Afflictions.


Swearing.
It Is lawful to Swear under the Gospel upon urgent occasions after a right
manner, 658, 668, 669 Whether it be lawful to Swear by any creature, 663 How
we may mention a creature in an oath, and not Swear by it. 664 How and when we
may lawfully Swear. Motives against ordinary Swearing, 672 673, 674, 675 The
excuses and cavils for Swearing answered, 675, 676
T
Thankfulness to God, vide Blessing and Praising God.
Timothy.
OF the name Timothy, 41 Two things observed concerning him. 41, 42

Trouble.
Trouble whence it arises. 113 God is both able and willing to help his people
in hopeless Troubles, 325, 326, 327
Truth.
God is a God of Truth, and a true God, 536 Propositions clearing the nature
and kinds of Truth, 537, 538, 539, 540 The truth of God is always the same,
575, 576, 577, 578
Trust.
Two sorts of Trust humane and divine, 301 What are the sinful objects we are
apt to Trust in, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308 God always the proper object of our
Trust. 315 Propositions concerning our Trusting in God. 315, 316, 317, 318 What
is the matter for which we Trust in him, 318 What is required to our Trusting
in the Lord, 320, 321, 322 Of the excellency of this grace of Trusting in the
Lord, 322, 323, 324 There are motives to Trust in God, both from personal and
general privileges. 349 Of the opposites to Trusting in God. 350 The grace of
Trusting in God cannot be perfect in this life. 352 Trusting in God, and the
use of means not to be separated. 355
W
Wisdom.
WHy the Wisdom of this world is called fleshly Wisdom, 423 Ministers ought
not to use fleshly Wisdom, 423, 424, 425 Principles of fleshly Wisdom, 426,
427, 428, 429, 430, 431
FINIS.

