THE Water of Life: OR, A DISCOURSE SHOWING The Richness and Glory of the Grace
and Spirit of the Gospel, as set forth in Scripture by this Term, The Water of
Life.

By JOHN BUNYAN.

And whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely, Revel. 22. 17.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ponder, at the Peacock in the Poultrey, 1688.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have now presented thee with something of a Discourse of the Water of Life
and its Virtues, therefore thou may, if thou will, call this Book, Bunyan' s
Bill of his Masters Water of Life. True, I have not set forth at Large the
Excellent Nature and Quality thereof, nor can that SO be done by the Pen or
Tongue of Men or Angels. Yet this I have said, and so saying, said truly, That
whosoever shall drink of this Water, shall find it in him a Well of Water; and
not only so, but a Well springing up in him to Everlasting Life, let his
Disease be what it will. And as Men in their Bills, for Conviction to Readers,
do give an Account to the Country of the Persons cured, and the Diseases that
have been removed by Liquors and Preparations they have made for that end, so
could I, were it not already By Holy Writ.
done by an Infallible Pen to my Hand, give you accounts of numberless Numbers
that have not only been made to live, but to live for ever by drinking of this
Water, this pure Water of Life. Many of them indeed are removed from hence, and
live where they cannot be spoken with as yet, but abundance of them do still
remain here, and have their abode yet with Men.

Only, if thou would drink it, drink it by it self, and that thou may not
be deceived by that which is counterfeit, know it is as it comes from the hand
of our Lord, without mixture, pure and clear as Crystal. I know there are many
Mountebanks in the World, and every of them pretend they have this Water to
sell. But my Advice is, that thou go directly to the Throne thy self, or Heb.
4. 18.
as thou art bidden, come to Isa. 55. 1.
the Waters, and there thou shall be sure to have that which is right and good,
and that which will certainly make thee well, let thy Disease or Trouble, or
Pain, or Malady be what it will. For the Price, care not for that, it is cheap
enough, this is to be had without Money or Price. I will give, says God and
the Lamb, to him that is a thirst Revel. 21. 6.
of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely. Hence be says again, Whosoever
will chap. 22. 17.
let him take the Water of Life freely; so that thou have no Ground to keep
back because of thy Poverty: Nay, for the Poor it is prepared, and set open, to
the Poor it is offered, the Poor and Needy may have Isa. 41. 17* 18.
it of free cost.

But let it not be slighted because it is offered to thee upon terms so full,
so free. For thou art sick, and sick unto Death if thou drinkest not of it, nor
is there any other than this that can heal thee, and make thee well. Farewell.
The Lord be thy Physician: So prays

thy Friend, John Bunyan.

OF THE River of Water OF LIFE.
Revel. 22. 1. And he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as
Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb.
THese words are part of that Description that one of the Seven Verse. 9.
Angels, which had the Seven Viols full of the Seven last Plagues, gave unto
John of the new Jerusalem, or of the state of that Gospel Church that shall be
in the latter days. Wherefore he says, and showed me; HE, the Angel showed me
it.

In the Text we have these things to consider of,

I. the Matter, the Subject matter of the Text, and that is* The water of Life.
He showed me the water of Life.

II. We have also here the quantity of this Water showed to him, and that is,
under the notion of a River. He showed me a River of water of Life.

III. He shows him also the Head, or Wellspring from whence this River of
water of Life proceeds, and that is, The Throne of God, and of the Lamb. He
showed me a River of water of Life, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of
the Lamb.

IV. We have also here the nature and quality of this Water, it is pure, it is
clear, it is clear as Crystal. And he showed me a pure River of water of Life,
clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb.

We will begin with the first of these* to wit, with the matter, the Subject
matter of the Text, which is, The water of Life. These words, [Water of Life]
are Metaphorical, or words by which a thing most excellent is presented to, and
amplified before our faces: And that thing is the Spirit of Grace, the Spirit,
and Grace of God. And the words, Water of Life, are words most apt to present
it to us by; for what is more free than Water, and what more beneficial, and
more desirable than Life? Therefore, I say, it is compared to, or called, the
Water of Life. He showed me the Water of Life.

That it is the Spirit of Grace, or the Spirit and Grace of God, that is here
intended. Consider,

First, The Spirit of Grace is in other places compared to Water: And,

Secondly, It is also called, The Spirit of Life. Just as here it is presented
unto us, He showed me the Water of Life.

1. The Spirit of Grace is compared to Water. Whosoever, says the Lamb,
drinks of the Water that I Joh. 4. 14.
shall give him, shall never thirst. But the Water that I shall give him, shall
be in him a Well of Water springing up into Everlasting Life. What can here by
Water be intended, but the Spirit of Grace, that this poor Harlot the Woman of
Samaria wanted, although she was ignorant of her want, as also of the excellency
thereof? which Water also is here said to be such as will spring up in them
that have it, as a Well into Everlasting Life.

Again, in the last day that great Day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried
saying, If any man thirst let him Joh. 7. 37, 38, 39.
come unto me and drink. But of what? why, of his Rivers of Living Waters. But
what are they? why, he answers, This he spoke of the Spirit, which they that
believe on him should receive.

Yea, the Prophets and Servants of God in the Old Testament, did take this
Water of Life for the Spirit of Grace that should in the latter days be poured
out into the Church. Hence Isaiah calls Water Gods Spirit, and Blessing, and
Zechariah, the Spirit of Grace.

I will pour water upon him that is Isa. 44. 3*
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground. I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed,
and my Blessing upon thy Offspring. And Zecharias says, I will pour upon the
House of David, and upon the Inhabitants Zech. 12. 10.
of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and they shall mourn, etc.
Behold, in all these places the Spirit of Grace is intended, and for our better
understanding, it is compared to Water, to a Well of Water, to Springs of
Water, and to Floods of Water.

2. It is also called the Spirit of Life.

1. More closely. 2. More openly.
First more closely, where it is called Joh. 4. 10, 11* 14. chap. 7. 38.
Living Water, that Living Water, and Water springing up to Everlasting Life.

Secondly, Then more openly or expressly it is called the Spirit of Life. And
after three days and an half, The Spirit of Life from God Revel. 11. 11.
entered into them, and they stood upon their Feet.

From hence therefore I conclude, that by these terms, Water of Life, is meant
the Spirit of Grace, or the Spirit and Grace of the Gospel. And the terms are
such as are most apt to set forth the Spirit and Grace of the Gospel by. For,

First, By this term WATER, an opposition to Sin is presented unto us. Sin is
compared to Water, to deadly Waters, and man is said to drink it, as one that
drinks waters. How much Joh. 15. 16.
more abominable and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like water? So then
that Grace and the Spirit of Grace is compared to Water, it is to show what an
Antidote Grace is against Sin; it is as I may call it, Counter-Poison to it. It
is that only thing by the virtue of which Sin can be forgiven, vanquished and
overcome.

Secondly, By this term WATER, you have an opposition also to the Curse, that
is due to Sin, presented unto you. The Curse is compared to Water, the Remedy
is compared to Water. Let the Curse come into Psalm. 109. 18.
the Bowels of the damned, says the Psalmist, like water. The Grace of God
also as you see, is compared to Water. The Curse is burning, Water is cooling;
the Curse does burn with Hellfire, cooling is by the Grace of the Holy Gospel:
but they that over-stand the Day of Grace, shall not obtain to cool their
Tongues so much of this Water as will hang on the tip of ones Finger.

Thirdly, Water is also of a spreadieg Luke 16. 24, 25.
nature, and so is Sin; wherefore Sin may, for this, be also compared to Water.
It over-spreads the whole Man, and infects every Member; it covers all, as
does Water. Grace for this cause may be also compared to Water, for that it is
of a spreading nature, and can, if God will, cover the face of the whole Earth;
of Body and Soul.

Fourthly, Sin is of a fouling, defiling Nature, and Grace is of a washing,
cleansing Nature: therefore Grace, and the Spirit of Grace is compared to
Water. I will, says God, sprinkle Ezekiel. 36. 25.
clean Water upon you (my Spirit, ver. 27.) and ye shall be clean, and from all
your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.

Fifthly, Water: The Element of Water, naturally descends to, and abides in low
Places, in Valleys and Places which are undermost; and the Grace of God, and
the Spirit of Grace, is of that Nature also; the Hills and lofty Mountains,
have not the Rivers running over the tops of them: no, tho they may run among
Pro. 3. 34. Jam. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5.
them: but they run among the Valleys: And God resists the Proud, but gives
Grace to the humble, to the lowly.

Sixthly, The Grace of God is compared to Water, for that it is it which
causes fruitfulness, Water causes fruitfulness, want of Water is the cause of
barrenness, and this is the reason why the whole World is so empty of Fruit to
Godward, even because so few of the Children of Men have the Spirit of Grace
in their hearts. But,

Secondly, As there is a special signification in this term [Water,] so there
is also in this term [Life:] Water of Life. He showed me the Water of Life. In
that therefore there is added to this word [Water] that, of [Life] it is, in
the general, to show what excellent virtue and operation there is in this
Water. It is aqua vitae, Water of Life, or Water that has a Health and Life in
it. And this term shows us,

First, That the World of graceless Men are dead: dead in Trespasses Joh. 5.
21, 25. Ephesians. 2. 1. Colos. 2. 13.
and Sins. Dead, that is, without Life and Motion Godward, in the way of the
Testament of his Son.

Secondly, It also shows us, That there is not any thing in the World, or in
the Doctrine of the World, the Law, that can make them live. Life is only in
this Water, Death is in all other things. The Law, I say, which is that that
would if any thing in the whole World, give Life unto the World, but that yet
kills, condemns, and was added that the Offense might abound: wherefore
there is no Life, either in the World, or in the Doctrine of the World: It Is
only in this Water, in this Grace of God, which is here called the Water of
Life, or God's aqua vitae.

Thirdly, It is also called the Water of Life, to show, That by the Grace of
God Men may live, how dead soever their Sins have made them. When God will say
to a Sinner, live; tho he be dead in his Sins, he shall live. When thou wast in
thy Blood, I said unto thee, live; yea, when thou Ezekiel. 16. 8, 9.
wast in thy Blood, I said, live. And again, The Dead shall hear the Voice of
the Son of God, and they that hear, Joh. 5. 25.
shall live.

That is, when he speaks Words of Grace, and mixeth those Words with the Spirit
and Grace of the Gospel, then Men shall live: for such Words, so attended, and
such Words only, are Spirit and Life. The Words that Joh. 6. 63.
I speak unto you, says Christ, they are Spirit, and they are Life.

Fourthly, In that this Grace of God is here presented unto us under the Terms
of Water of Life, it is to show, that some are sick of that Disease, that
nothing can cure but that. There are many Diseases in the World, and there are
also Remedies for those Diseases; but there is a Disease that nothing will,
can, or shall cure, but a Dram of this Bottle, a Draught of this aqua vitae,
this Water of Life. This is intimated by the invitation; let him take the Water
Revel. 21. 6. chap. 22. 17. Mark. 2. 17.
of Life freely. And again, I will give to him that is a thirst of the Fountain
of the Water of Life freely. This is spoken to the Sick, to them that are sick
of that Disease that only Christ as a Physician with his Water of Life, can
cure.

But few are sick of this Disease, but few know what it is to be made sick of
this Disease. There is nothing can make sick of this Disease, but the Law and
Sin, and nothing can cure but* the Grace of God by the Gospel, called here the
Water of Life.

We come now to discourse of the second thing with which we are presented by
the Text: and that is, The quantity that there is, of this Water of Life. It is
a River. He showed me a River of Water of Life. Waters that are Cordial, and
that have in them a Faculty to give Life to them that want it, and to maintain
Life where it is, are rare, and scarce, and to be found only in close Places,
and little quantities; but here you see there is abundance, a great deal, a
River, a River of Water of Life. In my handling of this Point: I will show you,

First, What a River of Water of Life this is:

Secondly, And then draw some inferences therefrom.

1. What a River this is; this River of Water of Life.

1. It is a deep River. It is a River that is not shallow, but deep with an, O
the depth! I will make their Ezekiel. 32. 14. chap. 34. 18.
Waters deep, says God. And again, They have drunk of the deep Waters. A River
of Water of Life, is much; but a deep River, is more. Why, soulsick Sinner,
sin-sick Sinner, thou that art sick of that Disease that nothing can cure but a
Potion of this River of the Water of Life: here is a River for thee, a deep
River for thee. Those that at first are coming to God by Christ for Life are of
nothing so inquisitive, as of, Whether there is Grace enough in him to save
them. But for their comfort, here is abundance, abundance of Grace: a River, a
deep River of the Water of Life for them to drink of.

2. As this River is deep, so it is wide and broad. Wherefore as thou Ephesians. 3.
18. Job 11. 9.
art to know the depth, that is, that it is deep: So thou art to know its
breadth, that is, that it is broad. It is broader than the Sea: A River that
cannot be passed Ezekiel. 47. 5.
over. Never did Man yet go from one side of this River to the other, when the
Waters indeed were risen: and now they are risen, even now they proceed out of
the Throne of God and of the Lamb too. Hence Ephesians. 3. 8.
this Grace is called the unsearceable Riches of Christ. Sinner, Sick-sinner,
what say thou to this? would thou wade, would thou swim? here thou
may wade, here thou may swim, it is deep, yet fordable at first entrance.
And when thou think that thou have gone through and through it, yet turn again
and try once more, and thou shall find it deeper than Hell, and a River that
cannot be passed over. If thou can swim, here thou may roll up and down,
as the Fishes do in the Sea. Nor needst thou fear drowning in this River: it
will bear thee up, and carry thee over the highest Hills, as Noah's Waters did
carry the Ark. But,

3. As this River of Water of Life, is deep and large: so it is a River that is
full of Waters. A River may be deep, and not full. A River may be broad and not
deep. Ay, but here Psalm. 65. 9.
is a River deep, and broad, and full too. Thou waterest it; thou greatly
enrichest it with the River of God which is full of Water. Full of Grace and
Truth. Fill the Water-Pots, says Christ, (up to the brim.) The Waters of a
full Cup the wicked shall have, and a River full of the Water of Life, is
provided for who indeed has a desire thereto.

4. As this River is deep, broad Ezekiel. 47. 5. Psalm. 147. 18.
and full, so it still abounds with Water. The Waters, says the Prophet, were
risen. Hence the Holy Ghost says, God causes the Waters to flow: And again,
And it shall come to poss in that Day (the Day of the Gospel) that the
Mountains shall drop with new Wine, and the Hills shall flow with Milk, and all
the Rivers of Judah shall flow with Waters, and a Joel 3. 18.
Fountain shall come forth of the House of the Lord, and shall water the Valley
of Shittim. When a River flows, it has more Water than its Banks can Psalm. 78.
20.
bound; it has Water. Behold, he smote the Rock that the Waters gushed out, and
the Streams over-flowed.

This River of Water of Life, which is also signified by these Waters, is a
River that abounds, and that over-flows its Banks in an infinite and
unspeakable manner. Thus much for the River, to wit, what a River of Water of
Life it is. It is a River deep, broad, full and abounding with this Water, with
this Spirit and Grace of the Gospel.

Secondly, Now I shall come to draw some Inferences from it, that is from this
term, a River. A River of Water of Life.

First then, a River is Water that is common, common in the Streams, tho
otherways in the Head. This River proceeds out of the Throne, and so, as to its
rise, it is special; it is also called the Water of Life; and as it is such, it is
special; but as it is a River, it is common, and of common use, and for common
good. Hence the Grace of God is called, The common Salvation; for that by the
Jude 3.
Word there is no restraint, no denial to, or forbiding of any that WILL from
receiving thereof.

And whosoever will, let him take Revel. 22. 17.
the Water of Life freely: what can more fully declare the commonness of a
thing. Yea, this River is called at the very Head of it, an OPEN Fountain, a
Fountain opened to the House of Judah, and Inhabitants of Zech. 13. 1.
Jerusalem. And by Judah and Jerusalem is comprehended every Soul that would
drink of the Water of Life, or living Water. And hence it is, that this River
is said to go Ezekiel. 47. 8.
down to the Desert and to the Sea, where all kind of Fishes are. By Sea is
meant the World, and by Fish the People, and thither shall run this River of
Water of Life. But,

Secondly, Tho a River, in the Streams of it, is common, yet a River, as it
passes through a Country or Province, will choose its own way. 'Twill run in the
Valleys, in the Plains, not over Steeples and Hills. 'Twill also fetch its
compasses and circuits; 'twill go about and reach hither and thither; and
according to its courses, 'twill miss, by its turnings, what Places, and People
it lists; yet it is common, for that it lies open; yet it is common for all the
Beasts of the Field. There is therefore a difference to be put betwixt the
commonness of a thing and its presence. A thing may be common, yet far enough
off of thee. Epsom, Tunbridge Waters, and the Bath, may be common, but yet a
great way off of some that have need thereof. The same may be said of this
River, it is common in the streams, but it runs its own circuit, and keeps its
own water Courses. He sends Psalm. 104. 10.
the Springs into the Valleys, which run among the Hills. Indeed he opens his
River in high Places, in his Throne, and of the Lamb, but still they run in the
midst of the Valleys to water the humble and the lowly. Wherefore, they that
thirst, and would drink, are bid to come down to the Waters: Ho, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the Waters; and he that has no Money, come ye, buy, etc.
And again; If any Man Joh. 7. 37.
thirst, let him come unto me and drink. The Waters are common, but you must
come to them, to them where they are, or you will be nothing the better for
them. Come ye to the Waters.

Thirdly, This Water of Life is called, a River, to intimate to you, by what
store of the same, it is supplied. All Rivers have the Sea for their Original:
All the Rivers run Eccles. 1. 7
into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full: unto the place from whence the Rivers
came, thither they return again. And so this River of Water of Life is said to
proceed out of the Throne, as out of a place where it breaks out, but the
Original is the Sea, the Oceon of Grace, which is in an infinite Deity. Thou will cast all our Sins Mic. 7. 19.
into the depths of the Sea, into the depth of the Sea of thy Grace. Rivers,
when they are broken up, do with their glideing Streams carry away a great deal
of the Filth, which from all Parts of the Countries through which they run, is
conveyed into them; and they carry it away into the Sea, where it is
everlastingly swallowed up. And oh the Filth that is cast into this River of
God* and oh how many dirty Sinners are washed white therein for by their
continual gliding away, they carry that filth into the midst of the Sea.

A River will take away the very stink of a dead Dog, nor does all the Soil and
Draught that is cast into Rivers, cause that those that can should be afraid to
make use thereof: All that have need do betake themselves to this River
notwithstanding. But how much more virtue is there in this sweet River of Grace
that is designed, yea opened on purpose to wash away Sin and Uncleanness in, to
carry away all our Filth, and to remain as virtuous still?

IV. It is called a River, to show that it yields a continual supply, as I may
call it, of new and fresh Grace. Rivers yield continually fresh and new Water.
For tho the Channel or Watercourse in which the Water runs, is the same, yet
the Waters themselves are always new. That Water that but one Minute since,
stood in this place or that of the River, is now gone, and new and fresh is
come in its place. And thus it is with the River of God, which is full of
Water; it yields continually fresh Supplies, fresh and new Supplies of Grace
to those that have Business in these Waters. And this is the reason that when
Sin is pardoned, it seems as if it were carried away. These Waters have with
their continual Streams, carried away the filth of the Sinner from before his
Face. It is not so with Ponds, Pools and Cisterns; they will be foul and stink,
if they be not often emptied, and filled again with fresh water. We must then
put a difference between the Grace that dwells in us, and this River of Water
of Life. We are but as Ponds, Pools and Cisterns that can hold but little, and
shall also soon stink notwithstanding Jer. 48. 11.
the Grace of God is in us, if we be not often emptied from Vessel to Vessel,
and filled with fresh Grace from this River. But the River is always sweet, nor
can all the filth that it washed out of the World, make it stink or infect it:
It Is water runs with a continual gliding Stream, and so carries away all
annoyance, as was said, into the depth of the Sea.

V. The Grace of God is called a River, to show, That it is only suited to
those who are capable of living therein. Water, tho it is that which every
Creature desires, yet it is not an Element in which every Creature can live.
Who is it that would not have the benefit of Grace, of a Throne of Grace? but
who is it that can live by Grace? even none but those whose temper and
constitution is suited to Grace. Hence, as the Grace of God is compared to a
RIVER; so those that live by Grace are compared to FISH, for that, as Water is
that Element in which the Fish lives; so Grace is that which is the life of
the Saint. And there shall be Ezekiel. 47. 9.
a very great Multitude of Fish, because these Waters shall come thither* for
they shall be healed, and every thing shall live whither the River comes; art
thou a Fish, Man, art thou a Fish? can thou live in the Water? Can thou
live always, (and no where else but) in the water? Is Grace thy proper Element?
the Fish dies if she be taken out of the water, unless she be timely put in
again; the Saint dies if he be not in this River. Take him from his River and
nothing can make him live: Let him have water, water of Life enough, and
nothing can make him die.

I know that there are some things besides Fish, that can make a shift to live
in the water; but the Water is not their proper, their only proper Element. The
Frog can live in the Water, but not in the Water only; the Otter can live in
the Water, but not in the Water only. Give some Men Grace and the World, Grace
and Sin; admit them to make use of their Lusts for Pleasure, and of Grace to
remove their Guilt, and they will make a pretty good shift, as we say: They
will finely scrabble on in a Profession; but hold them to Grace only, confine
their Life to Grace, put them into the River, and let them have nothing but
River, and they die; the word, and way, and nature of Grace, is to them as
light Bread, and their Soul can do no other but loath it; for they are not
suited and tempred for that Element. They are Fish; not Frogs, that can live in
the River, as in their only proper Element: Wherefore the Grace of God, and
Spirit of Grace is compared to a River, to show, that none but those can live
thereby, whose Souls and Spirits are suited and fitted thereto.

VI. The Grace, and Spirit of Grace of God, is called or compared to a River,
to answer those unsatiable desires, and to wash away those mountainous doubts,
that attend those that indeed do thirst for that drink. The man that thirsts
with spiritual thirst, fears nothing more than that there is not enough to
quench his thirst: All the promises and sayings of Gods Ministers to such a
man, seem but as Thimbles instead of Bowls. I mean so long as his thirst and
doubts Psalm. 42. 2. Psalm. 63. 1. Psalm. 143. 6.
walk hand in hand together. There is not enough in this Promise; I find not
enough in that Promise to quench the drought of my thirsting Soul. He that
thirsts aright, nothing but God can quench his thirst. My Soul thirsts for
God, for the living God. Well, what shall be done for this man? will his God
humor him, and answer his desires? Mark what follows, When the Poor and Needy
seek water and there is none (and they can find none, when all the Promises
seem to be dry, and like Clouds that return after the Rain) and their tongue
fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not
forsake them. Ay, but Lord, what will thou do to quench their thirst? I will
open Rivers, says he, in high places, and Fountains in the midst of the
Valleys. I will make the Wilderness a Pool of Water, and the dry Land Springs
of Water. Behold! here are Rivers and Fountains, a Pool, and Springs, and all
to quench the thirst of them that thirst for God.

Wherefore, as I said, such provision for the thirsty, intimates their fears of
want, and the craving appetite of their Souls after God, Right Spiritual thirst
is not to be satisfied without abundance of Grace. And Psalm. 36. 8.
they shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy House, and thou
shall make them drink of the River of thy Pleasures.

VII. The Grace of God is compared to a River, To show the greatness of the
Family of God. He has a Family, a great Family, and therefore it is not a
little that must be provided for them. When Israel went out of Egypt, and
thirsted by the way, God provided for them a River, he made it GUSH out of the
Rock; For Psalm. 78. 20.
alas! what less than a River, could quench the thirst of more than Six hundred
thousand men, besides women and children?

I say what less than a River could do it? When the people lusted for Flesh,
Moses said, shall the Flocks and Herds be slain for them to suffice them, or
shall all the Fish of the Sea be gathered together for them to suffice them?
even so could not less than a River sustain and suffice that great People: Now
his People in Gospel-days, are not to be diminished but increased, and if then
they had need of a River, surely now of a Sea; but the River is deep and broad,
full, and abounds, or rises with water, so 'twill suffice.

VII. The Grace of God is compared to a River, perhaps to show of what a low
esteem it is with the rich and the full. The destitute indeed embrace the Rock
instead of a shelter, and the poor and needy, they seek Water, but they that
can drink Wine in Bowls, that can solace themselves with, as they think, better
things, they come not to THIS River to drink; they never say they shall die if
they drink not of this Water. It Is therefore for the poor and needy, God will
lead THEM to his living Fountains of Waters, and will wipe away Revel. 7. 17.
all tears from THEIR eyes. And thus I pass the second, and come to the third
particular, and that is to show the Head and Spring from whence this River
proceeds, or springs.

Rivers have their heads from whence they rise, out of which they spring; and
so accordingly we read this River has; wherefore he says, He showed me a pure
River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal proceeding out of the Throne of God,
and of the Lamb.

1. God is here to be taken for the whole Godhead, Father, Son, and Spirit,
for that Grace proceeds from them all. The Grace of the Father, the Grace of
the Son, and Grace of the Spirit is here included. Hence, as the Father. is 1
Pet. 5. 10. Joh. 1. 14, 16. Heb. 10. 29.
called, the God of Grace; so the Son is said to be full of Grace, Grace to be
communicated; and the Holy Ghost is called, The Spirit of Grace. So then by
this we perceive whence grace comes. Were all the World gracious, if God were
not gracious, what was man the better? If the Father, or the Son, or the
Holy Ghost are gracious, if they were not all gracious, what would it profit?
but now God is gracious, the three Persons in the Godhead are gracious, and so
long they that seek Grace are provided for; for that there proceeds from them a
River, or Grace like a flowing Stream. Indeed the Original of Grace to sinners
is, the Good Will of God; none can imagine how loving God is to sinful man. A
little of it is seen, but they that see most, see BUT a little.

But there is added, And of the Lamb. The Lamb, is, Jesus as sacrificed, Jesus
as man, and suffering. Hence you have the Lamb, at the first Vision of the
Throne, set forth unto us thus, that is, as slain: And I beheld, Revel. 5. 6.
and lo in the midst of the Throne, and of the four Beasts, and in the midst of
the Elders, stood a Lamb as it had been slain.

Wherefore by this word Lamb, we are to understand, who, or by what means Grace
does now run from the Throne of God, like a River to the World. It is because
of, or through the Lamb. We are justified Romans 3. 24.
freely by the Grace of God through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ whom
God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his Blood. And again,
We have redemption through his Blood even the forgiveness of Ephesians. 1. 7.
sins, according to the Riches of Gods Grace.

Nor does the Lamb of God, by becoming a means through death, of the conveyance
of Grace to us, at all darken the nature or glory of Grace, but rather does set
it off the more. For wherein can Grace or Love more appear, than in his laying
down his Life for us? I speak now of the Grace of the Son. And wherein could
the nature and glory of grace of the Father more appear than in giving his Son
to death for us, that grace might in a way of Justice as well as Mercy be
bestowed upon the World? Wherefore, as he says here, that the River of Water
of Life proceeds from God, so he adds, that the Lamb, because he would have
us, while we are entangled and overcome with this River of Gods pleasure, not
forget what it cost the Lamb of God that this Grace might come unto us.

For the Riches of Grace and of Wisdom is, that Grace comes to us not only in a
way of Mercy and Compassion, but in a way of Justice and Equity; but that could
be by no other means, but by redeeming Blood. Which redeeming Blood came not
from us, nor yet through our contrivance or advice; wherefore whatever it is to
the Lamb, still all is of Grace to us. yea, the higher, the greater, the richer
is Grace by how much the more it cost the Father and the Lamb, that we might
enjoy it. When a man shall not only design me a Purse of Gold, but shall
venture his Life to bring it to me, This is Grace indeed. But alas! what are a
thousand such short Comparisons to the unsearchable Love of Christ?

The Lamb then is he from whom, by, or through whom the Grace of God does come
to us. It proceeds from the Throne of God and of the Lamb. And it proceeds from
him, now as a Donator; from him, not only as a means of Conveyance, but as one
that has power to give Grace; Power as he is the Son of Man. For as the Son of
Man, he is the Lamb; and as he is the Lamb, it comes from him. The Son of Man
had power on Earth to forgive Sin, and Matt. 9. 6. 1 Cor 1. 3. 2 Cor. 1. 2.
Gal. 1. 3.
that before he had actually paid to God the Price of our Redemption. But how
much more now? Wherefore Paul in his Prayer for Grace and Peace for Saints,
supplicates both God, and the Lamb. Grace to you Ephesians. 1. 2.
from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

Proceeding out of the Throne.] Formerly this River of Waters is said to Ezekiel.
47. 1.
come from under the Threshold of the House of the Lord. And it is said again,
they shall go out from Jerusalem, that is the Church or Zech. 14. 8.
House of God still. In that they are said to come out from under the
Threshold, it may be to intimate that they ran but low formerly, if compared to
what they do now. Which might also be signified by this, that they issued out;
that that issues out ordinarily comes forth but slowly. Also the Prophet says,
the first time he went through the Waters Ezekiel. 47. 3, 4.
they were but up to the Ancles. But what is Ancle deep, to that which
follows after? It Is said also to come out from Jerusalem, where I perceive
were no great Rivers, to intimate that as long as the first Priesthood, first
Temple, and Type were in their splendour, only the shadow of Heavenly things
were in use, and that then Grace ran but slowly, nor would run much faster,
because Jesus was not yet glorified. For the Spirit and abundance of Grace was
to be given, not before, but after his Ascension.

Wherefore, now Jesus is ascended; now he is glorified; now Grace proceeds from
the Throne, not from the Threshold of the House. He showed Exo. 25. 17.
me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal, proceeding from or out of
the Throne of God, and of the Lamb.

The Throne] That of which the Mercy-Seat was a Type: that which is called the
Throne of Grace. And it Heb. 4 16.
called the Throne of Grace even therefore, because it is that from, or out of
which proceeds this River of Water of Life; this overflowing Grace of God. Now
it may be asked, What is the Throne of Grace? And I Isa. 22. 22, 23.
shall answer, It is the Humanity of Christ. He is the Throne, He is the Jacob
in which God sits. And Revel. 3. 7.
he shall be for a glorious Throne to his Fathers House. The fullness of the
Godhead dwells in him bodily, and God was in Christ reconciling the World unto
himself, nor can Grace come to men but by Christ, nor can God rest as to our
Salvation but in him. But because I have spoken of this thing more particularly
upon that Text, [Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of Grace, etc.] I
shall therefore here say no more.

Only methinks it is a glorious Title that the Holy Ghost has given to the
Humanity of Christ, in that he calls it the Throne of God; and methinks he
gives it the highest preference, in that he says, Out thence proceeds a pure
River of Water of Life: We will a little therefore speak something to this Word
[the Throne, the Throne of God.]

1. A Throne is the Seat of Majesty and greatness; it is not for things of an
inferior quality to ascend or assume a Throne. Now then, since this River of
Water of Life proceeds from the Throne, it intimates that in Grace and Mercy
there is great Majesty; (for Grace, as it proceeds, has a Voice from the
Throne.) And indeed there is nothing in Heaven or Earth that can so AWE the
Hose. 3. 5.
heart, as the Grace of God. It Is that which makes a Man fear, it is that Jer.
33. 9. Exo. 34. 6, 7, 8, 9.
which makes a Man tremble, it is that which makes a Man bow and bend, and break
to pieces. Nothing has that Majesty, and commanding Greatness in, and upon the
Hearts of the Sons of Men, as has the Grace of God.

So that, I say, when he says, that this River of Grace proceeds out of the
Throne of God: It is to show us, what a Majesty, what a commanding Greatness,
there is in Grace. The Love of Christ constrains us.

When Moses went up to the Mount the first time to receive the Law, he did
exceedingly fear and quake. Why? because of the Fire and Smoke, thick Darkness
and Thunder, etc. but when he went up the second time thither, he made haste,
and bowed his head toward the Earth and worshipped. But why? because it was
before proclaimed, that the Lord was gracious and merciful, long suffering and
abundant in goodness and truth: keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving
Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, etc.

There is nothing over-mastereth the Heart like Grace, and so obliges to
sincere and unfeigned Obedience as that. Examine me, O Lord, Psalm. 26. 2, 3.
said David, prove me and try my Reins and my Heart, for thy loving kindness is
before my Eyes, and I have walked in thy truth. Therefore he says again, O
Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy loving kindness in all the Earth! And,
that loving kindness is mavelous, for it has that Majesty, and that excellent
Glory in it, as to command the Heart and subdue Sin. And therefore Grace has
given to it the title of Sovereignty, or of one that reigns. The Heb. 4. 16.
Throne is called, the Throne of Grace, that on which it sits and reigns, as
well as that from whence it proceeds. Grace reigns thorough righteousness Romans
5. 21.
to eternal Life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Secondly, As a Throne is a Seat of Majesty and Greatness, and so can awe: so
it is the Seat of Authority, and legislative Power, and so will awe; This is
confirmed from what was said but now, Grace reigns. Wherefore it is expected,
that they that hear the Word of God's grace, should submit thereto, and that at
their peril. He that believes not shall be damned, is a Word of Power, of Law
and Authority; and the Contemner shall find it so. Grace proceeds from the
Throne, from the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. Wherefore, Sinner, here is
laid a necessity upon thee, one of the two must be thy lot, either thou must
accept of God's Grace, and be content to be saved freely thereby,
notwithstanding all thy undeservings, and unworthiness, or else thou must be
damned for thy Rebellion, and for thy rejecting of this Grace. Wherefore
consider with thy self, and think what is best to be done. Is it better that
thou submit to the Grace and Mercy of God, and that thou acceptest of Grace to
reign for thee, in thee, and over thee, than that thou should run the hazard
of eternal Damnation, because thou would not be saved by Grace? Consider of
this, I say, for Grace is now in authority, it reigns, and proceeds from the
THRONE. Now, you know, it is dangerous opposing, rejecting, dispising or
disowning of them in authority: Better speak against twenty* Pro. 16. 14.
than against one that is in authority. If the wrath of a King, is as
Messengers of Death: If the wrath of Chap. 19. 12.
the King is as the roaring of a Lion: what is the wrath of God? And you know,
to despise Grace, to refuse Pardon, to be unwilling to be saved from the Guilt
and Punishment due to Treasons the King's way, since that also is the best way,
how will that provoke? how hot will that make Wrath? but to accept of Grace,
specially when it is free Grace, Grace that reigns, Grace from the Throne; how
sweet is it? His Favor is as due upon the Grass.

This therefore calls for thy most grave and sedate thoughts. Thou art in a
strait, will thou fly before Moses, or with David fall into the hands of the
Lord? will thou go to Hell for Sin, or to Life by Grace? one of the two, as was
said before; must be thy lot; for Grace is King, is upon the Throne, and will
admit of no other way to Glory. In and by it thou must stand, if thou have Romans
5. 2.
any hope, or can at all rejoice in hope of the Glory of God.

Thirdly, As the Throne is the Seat of Majesty and Authority, so it is the
highest Seat of Authority. There is none above the Throne, there is no Appeal
from the Throne. There are inferior Courts of Judicature, there are
under-Governors, and they may sometimes perhaps be faulty; wherefore in some
Cases an Appeal from such may be lawful, or permitted; but from the Throne,
none can appeal. Now grace is upon the Throne, reigns upon the Throne, proceeds
from the Throne: A Man may appeal from the Law to the Throne, from Moses to
Christ; from him that spoke on Earth, to him that speaks from Heaven; but from
Heaven to Earth, from Christ to Moses, none can appeal. Moses himself has
forbid it. For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, a Prophet shall Acts 3. 22,
23.
the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your Brethren like unto me, him shall
ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you, and it shall come to
pass, that every Soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from
among the People.

See here, this NEW Prophet-judges in the highest Court, he is Master of Grace,
the Throne by which Grace reigns; and even Moses admits, that from himself an
appeal may be made to this Prophet; yea, he allows that Men may flee from
himself, to this Prophet for refuge; but there must be no appeal from him. Thou
must hear him, or die. How shall we escape, if we turn away from him, that
speaks Heb. 12. 25.
from Heaven?

This therefore is to be duly weighed, and deeply considered by us. It Is not a
Saint, nor a Minister, nor a Prophet, nor an Angel that speaks, for all these
are but Servants, but inferiors: No, it is a Voice from the Throne, from
Authority, from the highest Authority; it is the Lord from Heaven. This Grace
proceeds from the Throne; and therefore Men must stand and fall by what shall
come from hence. He that comes not hither to drink, shall die for thirst. He
that refuses this Water now, shall not have so much as will hang upon the tip
of his Finger (if 'twould save his Soul) hereafter. How shall we escape, if we
neglect so Heb. 2. 3.
great Salvation?

Apostates will therefore from hence find griping Pangs and burning Coals, for
they have turned themselves away from this Throne, and from the Grace that
proceeds therefrom; nor is it to any purpose whatever they plead for
themselves. They are fallen from Grace, and what can help them! Christ is
become Gal. 5. 4.
of none effect unto such, whosoever is, that is, seeks to be justified by the
Law, they are fallen from Grace.

Fourthly, The Throne, is the Seat Matt. 25. 31.
of Glory (when the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the holy Angels
with him; then he shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory.) And if the Throne of
Judgment is the Seat of Glory, much more the Throne of Grace. We will venture
then to say, that the Throne of Grace, is the Throne of God's Glory, as the
Throne of Judgment will be the Throne of Christ's Glory, and that Grace
proceeds from his Throne, that both IT and HE, might have Glory, Glory in a
way of mercy.

1. That it might have Glory: therefore has he designed, that Grace shall be
effectual in, and to the salvation of some; even to the praise of Ephe. 1. 5, 6.
the Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved.

He has designed, not the glory of Man's works, but the glory of his own Grace:
and therefore has put Man's works, as to Justification before God, under his
feet, and counts them as filthy Rags; but has set his Grace up above, has made
it a King, given it Authority to reign, has provided for it a Throne, and
called that Throne, the Throne of Grace; from whence it also proceeds to its
own praise and glory, in and by the effectual salvation of those that receive
it, and receive it not in vain.

2. As Grace is exalted, and made proceed out of the Throne to its own praises,
to its own glory; so is it also thus exalted and made flow to us like a River,
that we should be to the praise of the glory of him that has exalted it. We
that receive it, and submit unto the Throne whence it proceeds, have thereby
obtained an Inheritance, being predestined according Ephesians. 1. 11, 12.
to the purpose of him who works all things after the counsel of his own
will, that we should be to the praise of his glory. So that this Throne is a
Throne of Glory. A glorious high Throne from the beginning is the place of our
Sanctuary; now what follows from this, but that they that accept of this Grace,
give glory to God, to his Grace, and to the word of his Grace; such I say,
glorify God for his mercy: They glorify God by Romans 15 9. 2 Cor. 9. 13. Acts
20. 24. Romans 4. 20. Acts 13. 48.
their professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, which is the Gospel, or
good tidings of the Grace of God. They with Abraham believe and give glory to
God, and with the Gentiles they glorify the word of the Lord.

But to slight Grace, to do dispite to the Spirit of Grace, to prefer our own
works to the derogating from Grace; what is it, but to contemn God? to contemn
him when he is on the Throne, when he is on the Throne of his Glory? I say
again, it is to spit in his Face even then when he commands thee to bow before
him, to subject unto him, and to glorify the Grace of his Glory, that proceeds
from the Throne of his Glory. If men in old time were damned because they
glorified him not as God, shall not they be more than damned, if more than
damned can be, who glorify him not for his Grace? And, to be sure, none
glorify him for his Grace but those that close in therewith, and submit
themselves thereto. Talkers of Grace are but Mockers of God, but Flatterers of
God. Those that only talk highly of Grace, and submit not themselves unto it,
are but like to those that praise a look, or flatter him in his own conceits.
Grace God has exalted; has set it upon the Throne, and so made it a King, and
given it authority to reign; and thou go by and hear thereof, but wilt
not submit thy self thereto, neither thy Soul, nor thy Life: why, what is this
more than to flatter God with thy Lips, and than to lie unto him with thy
Tongue? what is this but to count him less wise than thy self, while he seeks
glory by that, by which thou will not glorify him; while he displays his Grace
before thee in the World from the Throne, and as thou go by, with a nod thou
call it fine thing, but followest that which leads therefrom? Tremble,
tremble, ye sinners, that have despised the riches of his goodness. The day is
coming when ye shall behold, and wonder, and perish, if Grace prevails not
with you to be content to be saved by it to the praise of its Glory, and to the
glory of him Acts 13. 38, 39, 40, 41.
who has set it upon the Throne.

Fifthly, The Throne is the Seat of Wisdom. Hence he is called the Ancient Dan.
7. 9.
of days, that sits on this Throne, the Throne of God. Infinite in wisdom,
whose Garments were white as Snow, and the hair of his Head like pure Wool: By
ancient of days, and in that it is said the hair of his Head is like the pure
Wool, his wisdom is set forth unto us. Wherefore when we read that out of the
Throne proceeds a River of Grace, when we read this proceeds out of the
Throne of God, it is as much as to say, the wise God, who most perfectly
knows all ways, counts in his wisdom, that to save men by Grace is the
best, most safe, and sure way. Therefore it is of faith that it Romans 4. 16.
might be by Grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the Seed. And
again forgiveness is according to the riches of his Grace, wherein he has
abounded toward us, in all wisdom and prudence. Wherefore to set Grace Ephesians.
1. 7, 8.
upon the Throne, to let Grace proceed out of the Throne as a River, is by the
wise God, the only wise God, counted the best way, the safest way, the way that
does best suit the condition of a sinful man, and that tends most to the utter
disappointment of the Devil and Death, and Hell. Grace can justify freely,
when it will, who it will, from what it will. Grace can continue to pardon,
favor and save from falls, in falls, out of falls. Grace can comfort, relieve
and help those that have hurt themselves. And Grace can bring the Unworthy to
Glory. This the Law cannot do, this Man cannot do, this Angels cannot do, this
God cannot do, but only by the Riches of his Grace, through the redemption that
is in Jesus Christ. Wherefore seeing God has set Grace on the Throne, and
ordered that it should proceed from this Throne to the World. Yea, seeing he
has made it King, and granted to it, to it only, the Authority and Sovereignty
of saving Souls; he has 2 Samuel 14. 14. Prove. 8. 11, 12.
magnified, not only his Love, but his Wisdom, and his Prudence before the Sons
of Men. This then is his great Device, the masterpiece of all his witty
Inventions: And therefore it is said, as was hinted before, in this thing he
has proceeded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence.

So then, he that comes to, and drinks of this Water, glorifies God for his
Wisdom, praises God for his Wisdom. Such an one says, that God is only Wise,
and bowing his head, says again, To God only Wise, be Glory, both now and for
ever, Amen.

But he that shall contemn this Grace, confronts the highest Wisdom even Wisdom
upon the Throne. He says of himself, I am wiser than Daniel, than the Judgment
of God. I could have found out a more safe way to Heaven my self, and had I
been of God's Counsel, I would have told him so. All this so horrible
blasphemy, naturally proceeds from him that likes not that Grace should be
king on the Throne, and should proceed out of the Throne to the World. But
shall he that contendeth with the Almighty, instruct him; he Job. 49. 2.
that reproves God, let him answer it.

The Text says, that this very Doctrine 1 Cor. 1. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
to the Greeks, to the Wise, is foolishness, and the preaching of it a foolish
thing to them: But it will appear even then, when the conclusion of all things
is come; and when these wise ones by their Wisdom have fooled themselves to
Hell, that this foolishness of God, is wiser than Men, and the weakness of God
stronger than Men.

Christ Jesus, because he was low in the World, is trampled upon by some, but
he is a glorious Throne to his Father's house. For since his Humility was the
lowest of all, now he is exalted to be the Throne of God; yea, is made the
Fountain whence Grace continually flows, like the Rivers, and comes down to us
like a mighty stream. Wherefore, I will conclude this with both comfort and
caution; with comfort, and that because of the security that they are under,
that indeed have submitted themselves to Grace. Sin shall not have dominion
over you, for you are not under the Law, but under Grace. And let it be caution
to those that despise take heed, it is dangerous affronting of the Wisdom of
God. Now here is the Wisdom of God, even Wisdom upon the Throne. It pleased
God, for the glory of his Wisdom, to make this the way; to wit, to set up Grace
to reign. I have often thought, and sometimes said, If God will be pleased with
any way, surely he will be pleased with his own. Now this is the way of his own
devising, the fruit and effect of his own Wisdom. Wherefore Sinner please him,
please him in that, wherein he is well pleased: Come to the Waters, cast thy
self into them and fear not drowning, let God alone to cause them to carry thee
into his Paradise, that thou may see his Throne.

Sixthly, The Throne is the Seat of faithfulness, the place of performing of
engagements and promises. When I shall receive the Congregation, Psalm. 75. 2.
says Christ, I will judge uprightly, that is, faithfully. And now he has
received it, and is made head over all things to it; and for this cause is
Ephesians. 22. 23.
he upon the Throne, yea, is the Throne from whence proceeds all this Grace,
that like a River does flow, and glide from Heaven into the World. This River
then is nothing else, but the fulfilling of Promises, the faithful fulfilling
of Promises. If I go not away the Comforter Joh. 16. 7.
will not come; but if I depart I will send him unto you. This is that Acts 2.
16, 17, 18.
which was spoken of by the Prophet Joel: and it shall come to pass in the last
days (says God) I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh, etc. Now this
River is the Spirit, the Spirit and Grace of God, which was promised by the
Father and the Son, and now it comes running from the Throne of God and of the
Lamb. For being v. 33.
now by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the
promise of the Spirit, he has shed forth that which ye now see and hear.

Behold then how mindful, how careful, how faithful our Father and the Lamb of
God is! It Is not Exaltation, nor Glory, nor a Crown, nor a Kingdom, nor a
Throne, that shall make him neglect his poor ones on Earth. Yea, therefore,
even because he is exalted and on the Throne, therefore it is that such a River
with its golden Streams, proceeds from the Throne to come unto us. And it shall
proceed to be far higher than ever was the Swellings of Jordan. True, it runs
not so high now, as in former days, because of the Curse of God upon
Antichrist, by whose means the Land of God's People is Isa. 32. 13, 14, 15, 16,
17.
full of Briars and Thorns; but when the Tide is at the lowest, then it is
nearest the rising; and this River will rise, and in little time, be no more so
low as but ancle deep. 'Twill up to the knees, to the Ezekiel. 47.
loins, and be a broad River to swim in. For there the glorious Isa. 33. 21.
Lord shall be unto us a place of broad Rivers and Streams, and there shall
Revel. 22. 3. 6.
be no more Curse in the Church, but the Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be
in it, and his Servants shall serve him, that is, without molestation.

These sayings are faithful and true, and in faithfulness shall they from the
Throne of God and of the Lamb, be performed to the Church. Faithfulness in him
that rules, is that which makes Sion rejoice; because thereby the Promises
yield Milk and Honey. For now the faithful God, that keeps Covenant, performs
to his Church, that which he told her he would. Wherefore our Rivers shall Job
20. 17.
run, and our Brooks yield Honey and Butter.

Let this teach all God's People to expect, to look, and wait for good things
from the Throne. But oh, me thinks, this Throne out of which good comes like a
River! who would not but be a subject to it? who would not but worship before
it? But,

Seventhly, A Throne is the Seat Psalm. 89. 14.
of Justice. Justice and Judgment are the habitation of thy Throne. And it is
also from Justice that this River of Grace flows to us. Justice to Christ, and
Justice to those that are found in him. God declares that Romans 3. 24.
he can justy justify, justly forgive: now if he can justly justify and justly
1 John 1. 9.
forgive; then can he give Grace and cause that it should proceed to, yea, flow
after us as a River. The River that gushed out of the Rock in the Wilderness
ran after the People there, wherever they wandered therein. They drank of the
Rock 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4.
that followed them (the Rock was not removed out of his place) but the flood
followed them whither they went. He opened the Rock, Psalm. 105. 41.
and the Waters gushed out, they ran in dry places like a River.

This Rock, says he, was Christ, that is, figuratively, and this Throne is
Christ really. And the Water gushing out of the Rock, and the following of them
in the Wilderness, was to show, how when Christ became a Throne, Grace and
Goodness should follow us in the Wilderness from thence so long as here we
abide. Wherefore David considering this said, surely Goodness and Psalm. 23. 6.
Mercy shall FOLLOW me all the days of my life, and I will dwell in the House
of the Lord for ever.

But whence must this come? The Text says, from the Throne; from the Throne,
the Seat of Justice; for from thence by reason of what HE has found in Christ
for us; he in a way of Righteousness and Justice, lets out to us, Rivers of his
Pleasures; whose Original is that great and wide Sea of Mercy, that flows in
his infinite Heart beyond thought.

All is paid for both US and Grace. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Heb. 9. 12. Joh. 7. 39.
We are bought with a price. He has obtained eternal Redemption for us: yea,
and as we are made his, and Heaven made ours thus; so this River of Grace has
been also obtained by him for us. Wherefore all comes to us in a way of Justice
and Righteousness. Hence we are said to obtain Faith through the righteousness 2
Pet. 1. 1.
of God; that is through the Justice of God, and of Jesus our Lord. Mark, here
is the Justice of God, and the Justice of Jesus our Lord: and we have our Faith
from the Justice of God, because of the righteousness of Jesus our Lord. That
is, Jesus answered with Works of Justice the demands of Justice: and therefore
in a way of Justice, Grace reigns and comes to us like a River, as if signified
for that it is said to come to us out of the Throne.

Again, Grace is said to reign through righteousness unto Eternal life. Through
Romans 5* 21.
what righteousness? the righteousness or justice of God by Jesus Christ our
Lord. By Jesus Christ, or for his sake. For for his sake, as I said, we are
forgiven, and for his sake have all things pertaining to Life and Godliness.
Which all things, come to us, through, or down the Stream of this River in a way
of Justice, and therefore it is said to come from the Throne.

Eighthly, This Throne, is the Seat of Grace and Mercy: and therefore it is
called the Mercy-Seat, and Throne of Grace. This Throne turns all into Grace,
all into Mercy! This Throne makes all things work together for good. It is said
of Readiness Sons, they were not buried, after they were hanged, 2 Samuel 21: 10, 14.
until water dropped upon them out of Heaven. And it may be said of us, there
is nothing suffered to come near us, until it is washed in that water that
proceeds from the Throne of Grace. Hence afflictions Psalm. 119. 67, 71. 1 Cor.
3. 22. Revel. 3. 19. Heb. 12. 5, 6, 7.
flow from Grace; Persecutions flow from Grace, Poverty, Sickness, yea Death it
self is now made ours by the grace of God through Christ. O Grace! O happy
Church of God! All things that happen to thee are for Christ's sake turned into
Grace. They talk of the Philosophers Stone, and how, if one had it? it would
turn all things into Gold. Oh! but can it turn all things into Grace? can it
make all things work together for good? No, no, this Quality, Virtue,
Excellency, what shall I call it, nothing has in it, but the Grace that reigns
on the Throne of Grace; the River that proceeds from the Throne of God. This,
this turns Majesty, Authority, the highest Authority, Glory, Wisdom,
Faithfulness, Justice and all into Grace. Here Is a Throne! God let us see it.
John had the honor to see it, and to see the Streams proceeding from it. O
sweet sight! O heart ravishing sight! He showed me a pure River of Water of
Life, proceeding out of the Throne of God.

Indeed, as was hinted before, in the days of the Reign of Antichrist there
are not those Visions of this Throne, nor of the River that proceeds
therefrom; now he holds back the face of his Throne, and spreads a Cloud
upon it; but the preserving saving benefits thereof we have, as also have all
the Saints in the most cloudy and dark day. And since we can see so little we
must believe the more; and by believing give glory to God. We must also labor
for more clear Scripture-Knowledge of this Throne; for the Holy Word of God is
the Perspective-glass, by which we may, and the Magnifyingglass 2 Cor. 3. 18.
that will cause us to behold with open face the glory of this Lord.

But methinks I have yet said nothing of this Throne, which is indeed none
other but the spotless, and glorified Humanity of the Son of God. This Throne
is the Lord Jesus, this Grace comes from the Divine Majesty as dwelling bodily
in the Lord Jesus. Wherefore let us fall down before the Throne, and cast our
Crowns at the foot of the Throne, and give thanks to him that sits on the
Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

O how should Jesus be esteemed of! The Throne of the King is a Royal Seat.
It Is said of Solomon's, 1 King. 10. 20.
there was not its like in ANY Kingdom; but of this it may be said, there is
not its like in Heaven and Earth. At the setting up of this Throne the Angels
flocked round about it, and Revel. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
the Beasts and the Elders gathered together to see it. When this Throne was
set in Heaven, there was silence, all the Heavenly Host had no leisure to talk;
they were surprised with sight and wonder. When this Throne was set in Heaven,
what talk there was, it was as the Music of the Trumpet.

And behold, says John, a door was open in Heaven; and the first voice that I
heard, was as it were of a Trumpet talking with me, which said, come up hither,
and I will show thee things which must be hereafter. And immediate y I was in
the Spirit, and behold A THRONE WAS SET IN HEAVEN, and one sat upon the Throne.

This Throne, was Jesus Christ exalted, SET, that is, lifted up, not as upon
the Cross, to the contempt and scorn of his Person: but, as I said, to the
wonderment of the four Beasts, and the Elders, and all the Angels in Heaven. A
Throne was set in Heaven, and one sat on the Throne; that is God. And this
intimates, his desirable rest for ever: for to sit, is to rest, and Christ is
his rest for ever. Was it not therefore well worth the seeing? yea, if John had
taken the pains to go up thither upon his Hands and Knees; I say, to see the
Lord Jesus as a Throne, set in Heaven, and the glory of God resting and abiding
upon him, and giving out by him all things, not only his Word but all his
Dispensations and Providence to the end of the World; and this blessed thing
among the rest, Even a pure River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal.

But I leave this, and proceed to the fourth and last thing; namely, to the
Nature and Quality of this Water. It Is said to be pure and clear, pure and
clear as Crystal; And he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as
Crystal. I know that there is a twofold quality in a thing, one with respect
to its nature, the other with respect to its Operation. The first of these is
inherent and remains in the Subject being as such and so, for the most part
useless. The other is put forth then when it meets with fit matter on which
it may freely work. As to instance, Aqua vitae, the very Metaphor here made use
of, has a quality inherent in it, but keep it stopped up in a Bottle and then
who will may faint notwithstanding; but apply it, apply it fitly, and to such
as have need thereof, and then you may see its quality by the Operation. This
water, or River of Grace, is called I say, The Water of Life, and so
consequently, has a most blessed inherent quality, but its Operation is seen by
its working, the which it does only then, when it is administered, and received
for those ends for which it is administered. For then it revives where life is,
and gives life where it is not. And thus far in the general, have we spoken to
it already. We will therefore in this place more particularly, tho briefly
speak a few words unto it. First then, This Water of Life is the very
groundwork of Life in us, tho not the groundwork of Life for us. The
groundwork of Life for us is the Passion and Merits of Christ, this is that
for the sake of which Grace is given unto us, as is intimated by the Text: It
proceeds from the Throne of God, who is Christ. Christ then having obtained
Grace for us, must needs be precedent as to his merit, to that Grace he has SO
obtained. Besides it is clear that the Spirit and Grace come from God through
him: therefore as to the Communications of Grace to us, it is the Fruit of his
Merit and Purchase. But I say, in us, Grace is the groundwork of Life: For tho
we may be said before to live virtually in the Person of Christ before God; yet
we are dead in our selves, and so must be, until the Spirit be poured upon us
from on high; for the Spirit is Life and its Graces are Life, and when that is
infused by God from the Throne, then we live, and not till then. And hence it
is called as before, living Water, the Water of Life springing up in us into
Everlasting Life. The Spirit then, and Graces of the Spirit, which is the River
here spoken of, is that, and that only, which can cause us to live; that being
life to the Soul, as the Soul is life to the Body. All men therefore, as was
said before, (tho elect, tho purchased by the Blood of Christ) are dead, and
must be dead until the Spirit of Life from God and his Throne shall enter into
them; until they shall drink it in by vehement thirst as the parched Ground
drinks in the Rain.

Now when this living Water is received, it takes up its Seat in the Heart,
whence it spreads it self to the awakening of all the Powers of the Soul. For
as in the first Creation the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters,
in order to putting of that Creature into that excellent fashion and harmony
which now we behold with our Eyes: even so the new Creation, to wit, the making
of us new to God, is done by the over-spreading of the same Spirit also. For
the Spirit, as I may so say, sits and broodeth upon the Powers of the Soul,
as the Hen does on cold Eggs, till they wax warm and receive life. The Spirit
then warmeth us, and brings the dead and benumbed Soul (for so it is before
Conversion) to a godly sense and understanding of States, of States both
natural and spiritual: and this is the beginning of the work of the Spirit by
which the Soul is made capable of understanding what God, and himself is.

And this drinking in of the Spirit, is rather as the ground drinks in Rain,
than as a rational Soul does through sense of the want thereof.

The Spirit also garnisheth the Soul with such things as are proper for it to
the making of it live that life that by the word of God is called for.

It implanteth Light, Repentance, Faith, Fear, Love, Desires after God, Hope,
Sincerity, and what else is necessary for the making the man a Saint: these
things I say, are the fruits and 2 Cor. 4. 13. Gal. 5. 22. 2 Timothy 1. 7.
effects of this Spirit, which as a River of Water of Life proceeds forth of
the Throne of God and of the Lamb. Hence the Spirit is called the Spirit of
Faith, the Spirit of Love, and the Spirit of a sound mind; for that the Spirit
is the Root and Original of all these things by his operations in, and upon the
face of the Soul.

But again, as this living Water, this spirit, and the Grace thereof, does
thus; so it also maintains these things, once planted in the Soul, by its
continual waterings of them in the Soul. Hence he says, I will water it every
moment. Isa. 27. 1, 2, 3.
Water IT; his Vineyard, the Soul of the Church, the Graces of the Church; and
so the Soul, and Graces of every godly Man.

And because it so happens, sometimes, that some of those things where with
the Holy Ghost has beautified the Soul, may languish to a being, if not quite
dead, yet ready to die; Revel. 3. 1, 2, 3.
therefore he does not only refresh and water our Souls, but renew the face
thereof, by either quickening to life that which remains, or by supplying of us
with that which is new, to our godly Perseverance and everlasting Life. Thus
thou waterest Psalm. 65. 9.
the Earth, and waterest it; thou greatly enrichest it with the River of God.

For this must be remembered, that as the Herb that is planted, or Seed sown,
needs watering with continual Showers of the Mountains; so our Graces implanted
in us by the Spirit of Grace, must also be watered by the Rain of Heaven. Thou
waterest the ver. 10.
Ridges thereof abundantly, thou set the furrow thereof, thou make it
soft with Showers, thou blessest the springing thereof. Hence he says that our
Graces shall grow. But how? I will be as the Dew unto Israel, he shall grow as
the Lily, and cast forth his Roots as Lebanon. His Branches shall spread, and
his beauty shall be as the Olive Tree, and his smell as Lebanon. They that
dwell under his Hos. 14. 5, 6, 7.
shadow shall return, they shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, the
Scent thereof shall be as the Wine of Lebanon: Or as he says, in another
place; The Lord shall guide Isa. 58. 11.
thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul in droughts, and make fat thy bones:
and thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a Spring of Water whose Jer.
31. 12.
Waters fail not.

There is besides this, another Blessing that comes to us by this living Water,
and that is the blessing of Communion. All the warmth that we have in our
Communion, it is the warmth of the Spirit. When a company of Saints are
gathered together in the Name of Christ, to perform any spiritual Exercise, and
their Souls be edified, warmed and made glad therein, it is because this Water,
this River of Water of Life, has in some of the Streams thereof, ran into that
assembly. Then are Christians like those that drink Wine in Bowls, merry and
glad; for that they have drank into the Spirit, and had their Souls refreshed
with the sweet Gales, and strong Wine thereof. This is the Feast that Isaiah
speaks of, when he says, In this Mountain Isa. 25. 6.
shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all People a Feast of fat things, a Feast of
Wines on the Lees, of fat things full of Marrow, of Wines on the Lees well
refined. This is called in another place, The Communion of the Holy Ghost. Now
he warmeth Spirits, 2 Cor. 13. 14.
uniteth Spirits, enlightneth Spirits, revives, cherishes, quickens,
strengthens Graces; renews Assurances, brings old Comforts to mind, weakens
Lusts, imboldeneth and raises a Spirit of Faith, of Love, of Hope, of Prayer,
and makes the Word a Blessing, Conference a Blessing, Meditation a Blessing,
and Duty very delightful to the Soul. Without this Water of Life, Communion is
weak, flat, cold, dead, fruitless, lifeless; there is nothing seen, felt, heard
or understood in a spiritual and heart-quickening way. Now Ordinances are
burdensome, Sins strong, Faith weak, Hearts hard; and the faces of our Souls
dry, like the dry and parched ground.

This Drink also revives us, when tempted, when sick, when persecuted, when in
the dark, and when we faint for thirst. The Life of Religion is this Water of
Life; where that runs, where that is received, and where things are done in
this Spirit, there all things are well: the Church thrifty, the Soul thrifty,
Graces thrifty, and all is well. And this hint I thought convenient to be given
of this precious Water of Life, that is with reference to the operative quality
of it.

I shall come in the next place, to speak of it, as to the other descriptions
which John does give us of it.

He says it is, 1. Pure. 2. Clear. 3. Clear to a Comparison. And he showed me a
pure River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal.

First, You read here, That this Water of Life is PURE, that is, alone without
mixture, for so sometimes that word [PURE] is to be understood. As where it
says pure, pure Exo. 27. 26. chap. 30. 34. chap. 25. 11, 17. Deuteronomy. 32. 14.
Oil Olive; pure Frankincense; pure Gold; pure Blood of the Grape, and the
like: so then, when he says, he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, it is
as if he had said, he showed me a River of Water, that was all living, all
life; and that had nothing in it but life. There was no death, or deadness, or
flatness in it: Or as he says, a little after, And there shall be no more
Curse. A pure River. There is not so much as a grudge, or a piece of an a
upbraiding speech found therein. There is in it nothing, but heart, nothing but
love, nothing but grace, nothing but life. The Gifts and Calling of God are
without Romans 11.
repentance.

Secondly, [Pure] is sometimes set in oposition, to show or appearance: as
where he says, The Stars are not Job 25. 5.
pure, that is, not so without mixture of darkness, as they seem to be: So
again, If thou wast pure and upright, chap. 8. 5.
that is, as thou seem to be, or as thou would have us believe thou art.

Now take [pure] in this sense here, and then the meaning is, It Is Grace
without deceit, without guile; its show, and its substance is the same; it has
nothing but substance in it; it is indeed what it seems to be in bulk; it is a
River in show, and a River indeed. It comes from God and from his Throne in
appearance, and really it comes from his very heart.

The great fear of the Tempted is, that there is not so much Grace in God, and
that he is not so free of it, as some Scriptures seem to import. But this word
PURE, is levelled against such Objections and Objectors, for the destroying of
their doubts, and the relieving of their Souls. There is no fraud, nor guile,
nor fable in the business; for tho God is pleased to present us with his Grace,
under the notion of a River, it is not to delude our fancies thereby; but to
give us some small illustration of the exceeding Riches of his Grace, which as
far for quantity out-strips the biggest Rivers as the most mighty Mountain does
the least Ants Egg, or Atom in the World.

Thirdly, But again this word [pure] is set in opposition to that which is
hurtful and destructive. I am pure from the blood of all men; that is, I have
hurt no body. The Acts 20. 26. Jam. 3. 17. Mich. 6. 11.
Wisdom that is from above is first pure, it is not hurtful. Do you count them
pure with the wicked balances? how can that be, since they are hurtful?

Now take [pure] in this sense here, and then it intimates that the Grace of
God, and the Doctrine of Grace, is not a hurtful thing. It is Ephesians. 5. 18.
not as Wine of an intoxicating nature. If a man be filled with it, 'twill do
him no harm. The best of the things that are of this World are Prove. 25. 16,
27. Chap. 20. 1. 1 Timothy 6. 10.
some way hurtful. Honey is hurtful, Wine is hurtful, Silver and Gold are
hurtful; but Grace is not hurtful. Never did man yet catch harm by the
enjoyment and fullness of the Grace of God. There is no fear of Excess, or of
surfeiting here. Grace makes no man proud, no man wanton, no man haughty, no
man careless, or negligent as to his duty that is incumbent upon him, either
from God or Man: No, Grace keeps a man low in his own Eyes, humble,
self-denying, penitent, watchful, savory in good things, charitable; and makes
him kindly affectionated to the brethren, pitiful and courteous to all men.

True, there are men in the World that abuse the Grace of God, as some are said
to turn it into wantonness, and into lasciviousness. But Jud. 4.
this is, not because Grace has any such tendancy, or for that it works any
such effect; but because such men are themselves empty of Grace, and have only
done, as Death, and Hell has done with wisdom, heard the Fame thereof with
their Ears. Job 28. 2
It Is a dangerous thing for a man to have the notions of Grace while his heart
is yoid of the Spirit and holy Principles of Grace; for such a man can do no
other than abuse the Grace of God. Alas, what can be expected of him that has
nothing in him to teach him to manage that knowledge of Grace which he has, but
his Flesh, his Lusts, and lustful Passions? Can these teach him to manage his
knowledge well? Will they not rather put him upon all tricks, evasions,
irreligious consequences and conclusions, such as will serve to cherish Sin?
What Judas did with Christ, that a graceless man will do with Grace, even make
it a stalking horse to his fleshly and vile designs; and rather than fail
betray both it and the profession of it, to the greatest Enemies it has in the
World.

And here I may say, tho Grace is pure, and not hurtful at all; yet one
altogether carnal, sinful, and graceless, having to do with the Doctrine of it,
by the force of HIS Lusts which tamper with it, he will unavoidably bring
himself into the highest ruins thereby. An unwary man may destroy himself by
the best of things, not because there is in such things, an aptness to destroy;
but because of the abuse and misuse of them. Some know the way of Life, 2 Pet.
2. 20, 21, 22.
the Water of Life, by knowledge that is naked and speculative only; and it had
been better for such if they had not known, than to know and turn from what
they know; then to know and make that knowledge subservient to their Lusts.
Some receive the Rain of God, and the droppings o his Clouds, because they
continually sit under the means of his Grace. But alas! they receive it as
Stones receive Showers, or as Dung-hills receive the Rain: They either abide as
hard Stones still, or else return nothing to Heaven for his mercy, but as the
Dung-hills do, a company of stinking Fumes. These are they that drink in the
Rain that comes often upon them, and that instead of bringing forth Herbs meet
for the dresser, bring forth Briars and Thorns: and Heb. 6. 7, 8.
these are they who are nigh unto cursing whose end is to be burned.

Fourthly, By this word [pure] I understand sometimes the chiefest good, the
highest good. There are many things that may be called Romans 14. 20. Genesis 1. 31.
good, but none of them are good, as Grace is good. All things indeed are pure
that is, all Creatures in themselves are good and serviceable to man, but they
are not so good as Grace. There is a Generation Pro. 30. 12.
that are pure, that are good in their own Eyes. There are good Men, good
Consciences, good Works, good Days, good Angels, etc. but none so good as
Grace, for it is Grace that has made them so. Grace, this Water of Life,
therefore is good, superlatively good, good in the highest degree; for that it
makes all things good: and preserves them good. And whatever it be that this
Water of Life washes not, it is evil and given to the Curse, as the Prophet
intimates where he says, But the miry Ezekiel. 48. 11.
places thereof, and the Marshes thereof, shall not be healed, they shall be
given to salt.

But who understands this, who believes it? Its goodness is kept close from the
Fowls of the Air: Men, most men are ignorant of the goodness of it nor do they
care to enquire after the enjoyment of this pure, this good Water of Life. The
reason is, because tho it is good in it self, good in the highest degree, and
that which makes all things good; yet it is not such a good as is suited to a
Carnal Appetite. There is good; and there is suitable good: now suitable good
is of two sorts; either such as is Spiritual, or such as is Temporal. That
which is Spiritual, is desired only of them that are Spiritual; for Temporal
good will satisfy a Carnal Mind. Now Grace is a Spiritual good; this River of
Grace, is the goodness of Spiritual good. It Is the Original Life of all the
Grace in our Souls: No marvel then, if it be so little set by of those that are
carnally minded. Hay will serve a Horse, and Mire will serve a Sow; so things
of this Life suit best with the men of this World, for their Appetite is gross
and carnal, and they savor not the things that be of the Spirit of God. The
natural man receives not the things that be of the Spirit of God; (The things
that be of this River of God) for they are foolishness unto him: neither can 1
Cor. 2. 14.
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. This is the River of OIL
which the Prophet speaks of, the River of Spirit. Were it a River of Gold and
Silver, there would be old fishing on the Banks thereof. But it is a River that
runs like Oil, Ezekiel. 32. 14.
says the Lord God. This Rock pours us out Rivers of Oil, fresh Oil, soft Oil,
sweet Oil, the Oil of Joy, the Job 29. 6. Psalm. 92. 10. Psalm. 55 21. Isa. 61.
3. Isal. 45. 7. Eccle. 9. 8. Psalm. 104. 15. Judge. 9. 11.
Oil of Gladness, Oil to anoint the head withal, Oil to make the Face to shine,
Oil by which thou will be made able to honor both God and Man in some good
measure as becomes thee.

I might have enlarged upon this head, and have showed you many more
particulars wherein this term of [pure] might serve for the better setting
forth of the Excellency of this Water of Life, but I shall proceed no further
upon this, but will come to that which remains.

Secondly, As this River of Water of Life, is said to be PURE, so it is said to
be [clear.] He showed me a pure River of Water of Life, CLEAR. This term has
also its particular signification, and therefore ought to be heeded.

1. [Clear] is set in opposition to dark, therefore some are said to be clear
as the Sun. And again, The Song 6. 10.
Light shall not be clear nor dark. Zech. 14. 6.
In both these places [CLEAR] is to be taken for light, daylight, Sunlight;
for indeed it is never day, nor Sunshine with the Soul, until the streams of
this River of Water of Life come gliding to our doors, into our Houses, into
our Hearts. Hence the beginning of Conversion is called Illumination: yea, the
coming of this River of Water of Life unto us is called the dayspring from on
high, Heb. 10. 32.
through the tender Mercy of our God. It Is also called the dawning of Luke 1. 78.
the day. And hence again, these men unto whom this River of Water 2 Pet. 1. 19.
of life comes not, are said to be dark, darkness. Ye were sometimes darkness,
Ephesians. 5. 8.
but now are ye light in the Lord. Wherefore this Water is like Jonathan's
honey, it has a faculty to open the Eyes, to make them that sit in darkness
see a great light. The light of 1 Samuel 14. 27.
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. God who Mal. 4.
16.
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts to
give the light (the Spirit that enlighteneth 2 Cor. 4. 6.
and gives the light) of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. This River casts Beams where it goes, like the Beams of the
Sun; it shines, it casts out Rays of Glory unto those that drink thereof. The
streams of this Grace were they that overtook Saul when he was going to
Damascus, they were the Waters of this Flood that compassed him round about.
And if you will believe him, he faith Acts 9. 3. chap. 22. 6. chap. 26. 13.
this Light from Heaven was a great light, a light above the brightness of the
Sun, a light that did by the glory of it, make dark to him all the things in
the World.

2. Clear] is set in opposition to that which is not pleasing: For to be
[clear] is to be pleasant. Hence it is said Exo. 7. 19. 20.
truly the Light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the Eyes to behold
the clear Sun. I read of Rivers that looked red as blood, that stank 2 King. 3.
22, 23.
like the blood of a dead man: but this is no such River. I read of Rivers
whose streams are like streams Isa. 30. 33. Dan. 7. 7, 10. Isa. 34. 9.
of Brimstone, fiery streams, streams of burning Pitch: but this is none of
them. There is a River besides all these, clear and pleasant, The streams Psalm.
46. 4.
whereof shall make glad the City of God.

These are the Waters that the Doves love to sit by, because by the clearness
of these streams, they can see their pretty selves as in a Glass. Song 5. 12.


These be the streams where the Doves wash their Eyes, and by which they solace
themselves, and take great content. These streams are instead (as I said) of a
Looking-glass; their clearness presents us with an opportunity of seeing our
own Features. As in fair Waters, a man may see the body of the Sun, and of the
Moon, and of the Stars, and the very body of Heaven; so he that stands upon the
Bank of this River, and that washes his Eyes with this Water, may see the Son
of God, the Stars of God, the Glory of God, and the habitation that God has
prepared for his People. And are not these pleasant sights? is not this
excellent Water? has not this River pleasant streams?

3. Clear] is set in opposition to dirty Water and muddiness. I read of some
Waters that are fouled with the Feet of Beasts, and with the feet of Men, yea,
and deep Waters too. Yea, says God to some, ye have drunken of the deep
Waters, And have fouled the residue with your feet, and again, As for my Flock
they eat that which ye have trodden with your Ezekiel. 34. 18, 19.
feet, and they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet. These Waters
are Doctrines contained in the Text, muddied and dirtied by the false glosses
and sluttish opinions of erroneous Judgments; of which the poor Sheep, have
been made to drink. And verily this is apparent enough, by the very color and
hue of those poor Souls: for tho the truth of God was in them, yet the very
stain of Tradition and Superstition might be also seen in their Scales. For as
the Fish of the River receive, by being there, the changeable colors of the
Waters, so Professors, what Doctrine, they hear and drink, do look like that.
If their Doctrines are muddy their Notions are muddy; if their Doctrines are
bloody, their Notions and Tempers are bloody: but if their Doctrines are clear,
so are their Notions, for their Doctrine has given them a clear understanding
of things.

Now here we have a River of Water of Life, that is clear, clear without dirt,
and mud. Clear without the humane Inventions and muddy Conceptions of
unsanctified, and uninstructed Judgments; yea, here you have a River the
streams whereof lie open to all in the Church, so that they need not those
instruments of Conveyance that are foul, and that use to make Water stink if
they receive it to bring it to them that have need.

4. By [clear] we sometimes understand purgation; or that a thing has purged it
self, or is purged from those Soils, and Imputations of evil wherewith
sometimes they have been charged. [Then shall thou be Gen 24. 8, 14. chap. 44.
16.
CLEAR from this thy Oath, or how shall we clear our selves.] Something of this
sense may be in the Text, for if men are not afraid to charge God with folly,
which is intimated by [That thou might be clear when Psalm. 51. 4.
thou art Judged,] will they, think you, be afraid to impute evil to his word,
and Grace, and Spirit? no verily; they are bold enough at this work. Nay, more
than this, even from the Foundation of the World, men have cast slanders upon,
and imputed base things unto the blessed Grace of the Gospel. But not to look
so far back, Paul was one of the Pipes through which God conveyed this Grace to
the World: and what was he counted for his so doing, but a pestilent fellow and
a mover of Sedition Acts 24. 5, 6.
throughout the whole World?

But behold no imputation can stick on the Grace of God, not stick long, for
that, like Honey, will purge it self of what Filth is put into it, and of all
bad imputations of evil men. Springs and Rivers are of a self-purging quality:
Now here we have to do with a River, a River of Water of Life: but a River more
slandered then ever did Naman the 2 Kings 10. 11, 12*
Syrian slander the Waters of Israel, in preferring those of Abana, and Pharpar
Rivers of Damascus beyond them. But behold, now at last, when all the World
have done what they can, and have cast what reproaches and slanders upon it
they are able, it is a River pure and clear. It has purged it self before Kings,
it has purged it self before Princes and Judges, and all the Naamans in the
World. It Is still a River, a River of Water of Life, a River of Water of Life
clear.

5. By [clear] we sometimes understand Purity manifest, or Innocence and
Goodness made known. [In 2 Cor. 7. 11.
all things you have approved your selves to be clear in this matter.] That is,
you have made it appear, and stand upon your justification, and are willing to
be searched, and sounded to the bottom by those that have a desire to
under-take that work. So this River of Water of Life in the Fountain, and in
the streams thereof, offer themselves to the consideration and conscience of
all Men. To this end, how often does God, the head of this River, and he out of
whose Throne it proceeds, call upon Men to challenge him if they can, with any
evil or mis-doing toward them, either by presence or doctrine; Hence he says?
Isa. 43. 26:
put me in remembrance, let us plead together, declare thou (if thou can)
that thou may be justified (and I condemned.) So again, What iniquity Jer.
2. 5:
have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked
after vanity, and are become vain. So Christ, Which of you convinces me of
Sin. And if I have Joh. 8. 46. chap. 18. 23. 1 Cor. 4. 2^
spoke evil, bear witness of the evil. So Paul, We have renounced the hidden
things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, not handling the word of God
deceitfully; but by manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every
Man's conscience in the sight of God. All these sentences are chiefly to be
applied to Doctrine, and so are, as it were, an offer to any, if they can, to
find a speck, or a spot, or a wrinkle, or any such thing in this River of Water
of Life.

Some Men fly from it, as from a Bear; and some are afraid to drink of it, for
fear it should be poison unto them. Some again, dare not take it, 'cause it is
not mixed, and as they, poor Souls, imagine, qualified and made toothsom by a
little of that which is called the Wisdom of this World. Thus one shucks,
another shrinks, and another will none of God. Mean while, who so shall please
to look into this River, shall find it harmless and clear. Yea, offering it
self to the Consciences of all Men to make trial, if it be not the only chief
good, the only necessary Waters, the only profitable for the health of the
Soul, of all the things that are in the World, and as clear of mischief, as is
the Sun of spots.

Thirdly, As John saw this River pure and clear, so he saw it clear to a
comparison. Clear, to the best of comparisons, clear as cristal. Cristal is a
very clear stone, as clear as the clearest glass, if not clearer; one may see
far into it, yea thorough it, it is without those spots, and streaks, and
smirches that are in other precious Stones. Wherefore when he says, that this
River is clear as cristal: it is as if God should say, Look sinners, look to
the bottom, of these my cristal streams. I have heard of some Seas, that are so
pure and clear, that a Man may see to the bottom tho they may be forty foot
deep. I know this River of Water of Life, is a deep River: but tho it is said
to be deep, it is not said we can see no bottom. Indeed as to the wideness of
it, it is said to be such as that it cannot be passed over: But I say, it is no
where said that we cannot see to the bottom: nay the comparison implies, that a
Man with good eyes may see to the bottom. It Is clear, as clear as Cristal. So
then we will a little look down to the bottom, and see thorough these cristal
streams, what is at the bottom of all.

First, Then, the bottom of all is, That we might be saved. These Joh. 5. 34.
things I say, says Christ, that you might be saved; and again, I am come that
ye might have life, and that chap. 10. 10.
you might have it more abundantly. This is the bottom of this great River of
Water of Life, and of its proceeding from the Throne of God and of the Lamb: it
is that we might be saved: it is that we might live. What a good bottom is
here! What a sound bottom is here! But few deep Rivers have a good bottom. Mud
is at the bottom of most Waters in the World, even the Sea it self when it
works, casts up Mire and Dirt, and so do the hearts of Sinners: but the
bottom of this Grace of God, and of the Spirit, and Word thereof, is that we
might be saved, consequently a very good bottom.

Secondly, As the bottom of all is, that we may be saved; so that we may be
saved by Grace, and this is a bottom sounder and sounder. Our Salvation might
have bin laid upon a more difficult bottom than this. It might have bin laid in
our works, God might have laid it there, and have bin just, or he might have
left us to have laid it where we would, and then to be sure we had laid it
there, and so had made but a muddy bottom to have gone upon to life. But now,
this River of Water of Life, it has a better bottom; (the Water is as clear as
Cristal, Romans 3. 24.
look down to the bottom and see) we are justified freely by his Grace Ephesians.
2. 5. 8.
By Grace are ye saved; there is the bottom. Now Grace, as I have showed you is
a firm bottom to stand on, it is of Grace that Life might be sure. Surely David
was not here, Romans 4. 16.
or surely this was not the River that he spoke of, when he said, I sink in
Psalm. 69. 2. 14.
deep Waters where there is no standing, I am come into deep Waters where the
floods overflow me: deliver me out of the Mire, and let me not sink. I say, to
be sure this could not be the River: No, David was now stragled out of the way,
was tumbled into some pit, or into some muddy and dirty hole; for as for this
River, it has a good bottom: a bottom of Salvation by Grace, and a Man needs
not cry out when he is here, that he sinks, or that he is in danger of being
drowned in mud or mire.

Thirdly, The bottom of all is, as I said, that we might be saved, saved by
Grace, and I will add, through the Redemption that is in Christ. This is still
better and better. We read that when Israel come-over Jordan, the Josh. 2. 17.
feet of the Priests that did bear the Ark, stood on firm ground in the bottom,
and that they set up great stones for a memorial thereof. But chap. 3. 1, 2, 3.
had Jordan so good a bottom, as has this most blessed River of Water of Life,
or were the Stones that Israel took out thence, like this tried Isa. 28. 16.
Stone, this sure Foundation? O the Throne! this River comes out of the Throne,
and we are saved by Grace through the redemption that is in him. We read that
there is a City Heb. 11. 10.
that has Foundations, Grace is one, Christ another, and the truth of all the
Prophets and Apostles, as to their true Doctrine another, etc. and again, all
these are the very bottom Ephesians. 2. 19, 20.
of this goodly River of the Water of Life.

Fourthly, There is another thing to be seen at the bottom of this holy River,
and that is, the Glory of God; we are saved, saved by Grace, saved by Grace
through the redemption that is in Christ, to the Praise and Glory of God. And
what a good bottom is here. Grace will not fail, Christ has bin sufficiently
tried, and God will not lose his Glory; therefore they that drink of this River
shall doubtless be saved, to wit, they that drink of it, of a spiritual
Appetite to it: and thus much for the explication of the Text.

I now come to make some use of the whole.

You know our Discourse has bin at this time of the Water of Life, of its
quantity, head-spring and quality: and I have showed you that its nature is
excellent, its quantity abundant, its head-spring glorious, and its quality
singularly good.

First, Let this then in the first place, be a provocation to us to be more
free in making use of this Water. There are many now adays, that are for
inventing of Waters, to drink for the health of the Body: and to allure those
that are ill, to buy, they will praise their waters beyond their worth. Yea,
and if they be helpful to one Person in a hundred, they make as if they could
cure every one. Well here you have the great Physician himself with his Water,
and he calls it the Water of Life, Water of Life for the Soul; this Water is
Probatum est. It has been proved times without number: it never fails, but
where it is not taken. No Acts 26. 18. Isa. 5 4, 5.
Disease comes amiss to it, it cures blindness, deadness, deafness, dumbness.
It makes the lips of them that Song. 7. 9.
are asleep to speak. This is the RIGHT Holy Water (all other is counterfeit)
it will drive away Devils and Spirits, 'twill cure Enchantments, and
Witchcrafts, Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3. Mar. 16. 17, 18. Ezekiel. 36. 26. Colos. 4. 6. Ezekiel.
36, 25.
it will heal the Mad and Lunatic: it will cure the most desperate Melancholy,
it will dissolve doubts, and mistrusts, though they are grown as hard as Stone
in the heart: It will make you speak well, it will make you have a white Soul,
and that is better than to have a white Skin. It will make you taste well, it
will make you disrelish all hurtful Meats; it will beget in you a good Isa. 30.
22.
appetite to that which is good; 'twill remove Obstructions in the Stomach and
Liver: It will cause that what you receive of Gods Bread, shall turn to good
nourishment, and make Joh. 4. 14.
good Blood. In a word, it preserves Life: They that take this Water shall
live longer than did old Methusalem; and yet he lived a Genesis 5. 27.
great while.

Wherefore let me continue my exhortation to you, be more free in making use of
this Water. It Is the Mat. 20. 3, 4, 5, 6.
wholesomest Water in the World, you may take it at the third, sixth, ninth, or
eleventh hour, but to take it in the morning of your Age is best, for Eccle.
11. 1, 2, 3, 4.
then Diseases have not got so great a head as when they are of long
continuance: consequently they will be removed with far more ease: besides,
those that thus do, will receive endless Life and the comfort of it betimes;
and that you know is a double life to one.

This Water, gently purges; and yet more effectually than any others. True,
where bad humors are more tough and churlish, it will show it self stronger of
Operation, for there is no Disease can be too hard for it. It will as we say,
throw the House out of the Windows, but will rid us of the plague of those most
deadly Infections that otherwise will be sure to make us sleep in death, and
bring us with the multitude down to Hell. But 'twill do us no hurt, it only
breaks our sleep in security, and brings us to a more quick apprehension of the
Plague of our Heart and Flesh. It will as I said before, provoke to Appetite,
but make us only long after that which is wholesome. (If any ask why I thus
allegorize, I answer, The Text does lead me to it.)

Secondly, I advise therefore in the next place that thou get thee a dwelling
place by these Waters, The Deuteronomy. 32. 12.
beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him, and the Lord shall cover him
all the day long. If thou ask, where that dwelling is? I answer, in the City of
God, in, and among the Tabernacles of the most High. This River comes from the
Throne, to water the City of God: and to that end it is said to run in the
midst of the street of it. If ye will enquire, Revel. 22.
enquire, return, come. The Seed also of his Servants shall inherit it, and
they that love his name shall Psalm. 69. 34, 35, 36.
dwell therein. Get thee a dwelling in Jerusalem, in the midst of Jerusalem,
and then thou will be seated by this River.

In old times the Ancients had their Habitations by the Rivers; yea, we read of
Aro^r that stood upon Josh. 13. 9.
the brink of the River Arnon. Balaam also had his dwelling in his City Pethor,
by the River of the Land of the Children of his People. Oh, by a River side, is
the pleasantest dwelling in the World, and of all Rivers, the River of the
Water of Life is the best. They that dwell there, shall not hunger nor thirst,
neither Isa. 49. 10. Psalm. 1. 3. Jer. 17. 8.
shall the heat or Sun smite them, for he that has mercy on them shall lead
them, even by the Springs of Water shall he guide them. Trees planted by the
Rivers, and that spread out their Roots by the Rivers, they are the flourishing
Trees, they bring forth their Fruit in their Season. And the Promise is that
men that take up their dwellings by this River of Water of Life, shall be
fruitful as such Trees.

If thou be'st a Christian, thou have more than an ordinary call, and occasion
to abide by these Waters, thy things will not grow but by these Waters. Weeds,
and the excellencies of most men, we may find in the barren Wilderness, they
grow under every hedge: but thine are Garden, and so choice things, and will
Jer. 31. 12.
not thrive without much Water, no, not without the Water of Gods River: dwell
therefore here that thy Isa. 21. 1, 2, 3.
Soul may be as a watered Garden. And when thou sees how those that are loath
to die, make provision at Tunbridge, Epsom, the Bath and other places, and what
houses they get that they may have their dwellings by those Waters, then do
thou consider of thy spiritual Disease, and how nothing can cure thee but this
blessed Water of Life: be also much of desires to have a dwelling place in
Jerusalem that thou may always be nigh to these Waters. Be often also in
watering thy Plants with these Waters. I mean, the blessed Graces of God in thy
Soul, then shall thou grow and retain thy greenness, and prove thy self to be a
Disciple indeed. And herein is Joh. 15. 8.
God, and thy Father glorified that thou bear much fruit.

Thirdly, My third word is, bless God for providing for man such Waters. These
only can make us live; all others come out of the dead Sea, and do kill: there
is no living Water but this. I say, show thy acceptance of it with
thanksgiving; if we are not to receive our Bread and Cheese, but with
thankfulness, how 2 Cor. 9. 14, 15.
should we bless God for this unspeakable gift. This is Soul life, life against
sin, life from sin; life against the Curse, Life from the Curse; Life beyond
Hell, beyond Desert, beyond thought, beyond desires. Life that is pleasing;
Life, that is profitable; Life everlasting. Oh my Brethren! bless God! who does
good, and gives us such Rain, filling our hearts with food and gladness. When
Moses would take the heart of Israel, and took in hand to raise up their
Spirits to thankfulness, he used to tell them that the Land that they were to
go to, was a Land that God cared for, and that was watered with the Dew of
Heaven. Yea, a land of Brooks Deuteronomy. 8. 6, 7, 8. Exo. 3. 8. chap. 13. 15. Lev.
20. 24. Numb. 14. 8.
of Water, of Fountains and Deeps that spring out of the Valleys and Hills: a
Land that flowed with Milk and Honey, which is the glory of all Lands. But yet
in his Description he makes no mention of a River of Water of Life: a River the
Streams whereof make glad the City of God.

This River is the running out of God's heart, the letting out of his very
Bowels, for God is the Living God. This is his Heart and Soul. Yea, I will
rejoice over them to do Jer. 22. 41.
them good, and I will plant them in this Land assuredly, with my whole Heart,
and with my whole Soul. I say, if ever Gods heart and soul appeared, it showed
it self in giving this Water of Life: and the Throne from whence it proceeds.
Wherefore all the reason of the World that in the reception of it, thy heart
and soul should run out and flow after him in Thanksgivings. See how David
words it in the hundred and third Psalm, all the five first Verses, and do
likewise.

Fourthly, By the Characters that are given of this Water of Life, thou art
capacitated to Judge, when a Notion, a Doctrine, an Opinion comes to Whine
Ears, whether it is right good, and wholesome, or how. This River is pure, is
clear, is pure, and clear as Crystal. Is the Doctrine offered unto thee so? or
is it muddy and mixed with the Doctrines of men? look man, and see if the foot
of the Worshippers of Bell be not there: and if the Waters be not fouled
thereby. What Water is souled, is not the Water of Life, or at lest not the
Water of Life in its clearness. Wherefore if thou find it not right, go up
higher to the Springhead, for always the nearer to the Spring, the more pure;
and clear is the Water. Fetch then thy Doctrine from a far, if thou can not
have it good nearer hand Job 36. 3.
Thy life lies at stake, the counterfeit of things is danggrous, every body
that is aware, is afraid thereof. Now a counterfeit here is most dangerous, is
most destructive, wherefore take heed how you hear what you hear, for, as I
said before of the Fish, by your color 'twill be seen what Waters you swim in:
wherefore look you well to your selves.

Fifthly, Does this Water of Life run like a River? like a broad, full, and
deep River? Then let man, be his transgressions never so many, fear at all, but
there is enough to save his Soul, and to spare. Nothing has been more common to
many, than to doubt of the Grace of God: a thing most unbecoming a sinner of
any thing in the World. To break the Law, is a Fact foul enough; but to
question the sufficiency of the Grace of God to save there from, is worse than
sin if worse can be. Wherefore despairing Soul, for it is to thee I speak,
forbear thy mistrusts, cast off thy slavish fears, hang thy misgivings as to
this upon the Hedge: and believe, thou have an invitation sufficient thereto, a
River is before thy Face. And as for thy want of goodness and works: let that
by no means daunt thee, this is a River of Water of Life; streams of Grace and
Mercy. There is as I said enough therein to help thee, for Grace brings all
that is wanting to the Soul. Thou therefore have nothing to do, I mean as to
the curing of thy Soul of its doubts and fears, and dispairing thoughts, but to
drink and live for ever.

Sixthly, But what is all this to the dead World? to them that love to be dead?
They toss their Vanities about as the Boys toss their Shittle-Cocks in the Air,
till their Foot slips, and themselves descend into the Pit.

Let this suffice for this time.

FINIS.

