THE True Doctrine OF JUSTIFICATION Asserted and Vindicated, FROM The Errors
of PAPISTS, ARMINIANS, SOCINIANS, and more especially ANTINOMIANS.

In XXX. LECTURES Preached at Lawrence-Iury, London.

By Anthony Burgess, Preacher of Gods Word.

The second Edition Corrected and Revised.



LONDON, Printed by A. Miller for Tho. Underhill at the Anchor in
Pauls-Church-yard, near the little North-door, 1651.

TO THE Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of Manchester, Vicount Mandeville, Baron
of Kimbolton.
My Lord,
THE many favors your Honor has vouchsafed unto me, altogether undeserving,
may justly command a public acknowledgement thereof to the whole world; But
that which does especially encourage me to seek for your Protection, in the
publishing of this Treatise, is your unfeigned love of, and steadfast continuance
in the Truth: So that those two things which Pythagoras said, made a man
complete, (...), to do good to others, and to embrace truth, may without
flattery be affirmed to be in your Lordship. And as for the latter, Paul speaks
it as a great commendation, that the true faith did dwell in Lois, 2 Timothy 1*5.
which denotes a stable and firm permanency, as the Apostle elsewhere says,
Sin dwells in him. In some men's breasts, Truth is only a sojourner, and
their assent to it passes away (as the Psalmist speaks of our life; like a
tale that is told. Now herein Christ speaks of a peculiar privilege to the
Elect, that it is not possible for them to be deceived by false Prophets ( if
it were possible to deceive the very Elect) which is to be understood of a
total and final seduction: Mat. 24.24.
Thus also when the Apostle had mentioned the Apostasy of Hymenaeus and
Philetus, he interposeth by way of comfort to the godly, 2 Timothy 2.19.
nevertheless the foundation of the Lord stands sure, having this Seal, the
Lord knows who are his; and no wonder, if the truths of Christ are worthy of
all hearty acceptance, seeing they are wholly by supernatural revelation, in
which sense, some say, Christ is called (...), Ioh. 1.1.
the Word, because he revealed the will of his Father to us; but in another
respect are we to take heed how we decline from the truths of God, because they
are the inlet and first instrument of our Sanctification and Salvation, 1 Timothy*
^.4. Ioh* 1*7.17.
God would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth;
Sanctify them by thy truth, thy Word is truth; and our regeneration is
described pa^tly by the renewing of our mind, Ep^. 4.23.
so as corrupt distillations from the head are apt to putrify the vitals, so
Errors and false Doctrins do quickly corrupt our pract^ce. One thing more I
make bold to recommend to your Lordship, that besides the bare receiving of the
truth, there is (as the perfection of knowledge) the acknowledgement of truth
after godliness, Tit. ^.1. Ephesians. 4.21.
and the learning of truth as it is in Jesus Christ; which is, when the truths
we believe have a savoury and powerful effect upon us, and nothing causes our
abode in the truth so much as the experimental efficacy of it upon our hearts.
Heb. 13 9.
It is good (says the Apostle) to have the heart established with grace and
not with meats. One would have thought the Apostle should have said it is good
to have the heart established with sound Doctrine, because he exhorts them
not to be carried aside with every wind of Doctrine; but he says Grace rather
then knowledge, because this is the choicest Antidote against falsehoods; Tantum
scimus, quantum operamur, we know no more ( viz. favourily, clearly, and
steadfastly) then we have powerful practice of: Now of all supernatural truths
the doctrine of Justification has no mean excellency, this is the article
which Luther said reigned in his heart; In this is a Christians treasury of
hope and consolation: and because the Antinomians, whose opinions may be styled
as those of Epicurus were, (...), (enticing Sirens of a man's fleshly mind)
have put their dead flies in this precious Box of ointment, I have endeavored
to select this precious Gold from their dross. Though the matter I handle be
in part controversall, yet it is also in a great measure practical. The
greatest mercy I can wish to your Lordship, is this glorious privilege of
Justification, in which only, and not in riches, honors, or any earthly
dignity, consists true and perfect blessedness, as David a King, does
heartily, and with much affection acknowledge, Psalm. 32.1. and Paul by virtue
of this Justification, Romans 8. triumphs over all adversity and trouble
whatsoever. Of which glorious happiness that your Lordship may be made
partaker, is the Prayer of

Your Lordships most humble Servant in the Lord, ANTHONY BURGESS.

TO THE Christian Reader.
Christian Reader,
WEre I not already engaged (I know not how) in this public way of
Controversies, I should wholly decline such service; partly because of that ill
fate, (if I may say so) which does accompany books through the various Palates
of those that read them, whereby they are unwilling agnoscere quod Dei est, or
ignoscere quod hominis est; partly because of expectation, (which is an heavy
prejudice) all men judging it reasonable, that now in these latter times there
being the advantage of all the abilities of those who went before us, a man
should not so much libros, as thesauros scribere, write not Books, but rich
Treasuries, as the heathen said; partly because this controversall way does so
possess the intellectual part, that the affectionate part is much dulled, and
made remiss thereby. Even a Papist, Granada (in his way of Devotion) said, A
Learned man that was busied in such kind of employment, should reckon himself
in the number of those wretched Captives that are ad metalla damnati, Though
all the day long they dig up Gold, yet they are not any whit enriched by it,
but others for whom they work: And Rodericus (as I remember) relate^h of
Suarez, De perfec.
that he was wont to say, He esteemed that little pittance of time, which
constantly every day he set apart for the private examination of his own
conscience, more then all the other part of the day, which he spent in his
voluminous Controversies. The Apostle speaks of doting about questions, 1 Timothy
6.4.
but the Greek word (...) signifies to be sick and languishing, which does
declare the nature of needless disputations, that they fret away, and make to
consume the true power of Godliness. God once only spoke out of a thorny bush,
and as the Israelites were to go out of the military Camp to gath^r manna, so
must a man shuntedious disputes, who would enjoy the fat and marrow of
Christian Religion. But notwithstanding these d^scouragements, yet the Apostle
with a vehement obtestat^o^ calls upon Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.10.
and in him all faithful Ministers to preserve that good thing committed to
their Charge, so that it is the duty of Ministers not only by Preaching, but
otherwise as occasion serves, to see that the golden treasure deposited in the
Church, be not debased with drossy errors, Probl. Sect. 9. quae. 2.
or the childrens necessary food mingled with destructive poison. Truth is a
Depositum. Aristotle does rationally conclude, That it is a greater injustice
to deny a little thing deposited, then a great sum that we are indebted for,
because he that depositeth any thing in our custody, trusts in us as a
faithful friend; the other expects only justice from us. Now of all points
of Divinity, there is none that with more profit and comfort we may labor in,
then in that o^ Justification, which is styled by some, articulus stantis and
cadentis ecclesiae, The Church stands or falls, as the truth of this is
asserted, and a modest, sober vindication of this point from contrary errors,
will not hinder, but much advantage the affectionate part of a man, even as the
Be is helped by her sting to make honey. Gods way of Justification is for the
truth of it above natural reason, and therefore there is required a
supernatural Revelation to manifest it: Insomuch that the Divine Authority of
the Scripture is in nothing more irradiant, then in the discovery of this
glorious way of our Justification. But it has been a stumbling block, and a
rock of offense to many men's hearts, who look for a Philosophical
Justification, or righteousness of works, either wholly issuing from our free
will (as they suppose) or partly from it, and partly from the grace of God, and
on this hand, have erred the Pelagians, Papists, Arminians and Socinians: But
while the Orthodox have been diligent to keep this fountain pure from the filth
those Philistims daily threw in, There arose up another error on the right
hand, which the Apostle Paul in his Epistles does many times* Antidote against,
viz. such a setting up of Free Grace in Justification, that should make the Law
as to all purposes useless, and while it extolleth pr^viledges debases duties;
That as the Arminians on the one side, think it most absurd that the same thing
should be officium requisitum and donum promissum, a duty required on our part,
and yet a gift promised on Gods part; So on the other side the Antinomian
cannot at the same time see the fullness of Grace, only in blotting out our
sins, and yet at the same time, A necessity of repentance, without which this
Justification could not be obtained. Hence it is they fix their Meditations and
Discourses upon the promissory part of the Scripture, not at the same time
attending to the preceptive part. But whether it be their weakness or their
wilfulness, they seem to be upon those passages of Scripture, which speak of
Gods grace and Christ's satisfaction, as David in Saul's arms, which were an
hinderance, not an advantage to him. Men destitute of sound knowledge and
Learning, should be afraid lest they do (...) 2 Pet. 3.16. wrest the
Scripture, and that (...) to their own destruction. It is no less a sin (says
Oecumenius) to torture the Scripture by perverse interpretation, then it was to
torment and Crucify the very bodies of the Apostles: but to how many ignorant
men attempting beyond their strength in Controversies of Divinity, has that
fallen out, Adversus indoctum.
which did to one Lucian speaks of, who finding Orpheus his harp consecrated to
Apollo in a certain Temple, bribed the Priest of the Temple, thinking to make
the same melody which Orpheus used to do, which he attempting, through his
ignorance made such an horrid sound, that it enraged all the dogs near him,
which presently fell on him, and tore him in pieces.

It is therefore good for men in all humility and modesty, not to think of
themselves above what they ought, or to affect to be Doctors, before indeed
they have been Disciples.

But to my matter in hand, I shall briefly give an account of my method in this
Treatise. Whereas in Justification many things are considerable, the efficient
and impulsive Cause, Gods grace, the meritorious Cause, Christ's satisfaction,
the isntrumental Cause, Faith; and ev^ry one of these has many Debates upon
it by Learned men; Yet I have insisted upon that where^n the nature of it does
consist, and because that is made by some two fold, partly in remission of
sins, partly in imputation of Christ's righteousness, this Discourse is wholly
upon the former, endeavoring to clear all the Doctrinal and Practical doubts
that are of greatest consequence in this matter. And if God should bless this
part with any good success, to establish the minds of those that waver, I
shall (with Gods assistance) proceed to the other point, viz. The Imputation of
Christ's righteousness; the mistaking of which point, is no mean cause of
Antinomianism. I am not ignorant, how subject to blindness and several
imperfections the best of men are, whereby through after-thoughts, they see
such an argument might have been more strongly managed, and such expressions
better ordered, insomuch that most men may say, as Luther said of his Books, He
could (like Saturn) eat up his own children: It is also to be considered how
difficult it is, with pure ends and godly intentions, aiming only at the glory
of God, and edification of others, to undertake such a business as this is;
therefore in all these exercises, it is good to go out of our selves, depending
upon the strength of God only, and not to boast as if we had not received.
Tutius vivitur, quando totum Deo damus, Et in nihilo gloriandum est, quia nihil
nostrum est.

One thing more I am to inform thee of, which is, that in the former part of
this treatise, I have more remisly spoken of Justification in the general
(because that will more pertinently be handled in the other point of imputed
righteousness) and have endeavored more vigorously to prosecute the other
part which is wholly spent about pardon of sin. These things premised, I leave
thee to the Lord, who teaches his children to profit.

Thine in Christ Jesus Anthony Burgess.

THE CONTENTS.
WHy the doctrine of justification ought to be kept pure. page 3 2 Propositions
clearing the nature of justification. 3, 4 3 What is implied in justification.
6, 7 4 What cautions are to be observed to conceive the nature of
justification. 14 5 Wherein justification consists. 17 6 Propositions for the
understanding remission of sins. 18 7 How sins may be said to be forgiven.
ibid. 8 How sin is to be considered, when it is said to be forgiven. 19 9 What
it is to have sin forgiven. 20 10 How afflictions come upon Gods people after
their sin is pardoned. 24 11 Whether God corrects his people for sin. 26 12 How
the Antinomians prove that God does not chastise his people for their sins. 34
13 Whether any absurdities follow upon that doctrine, that God does correct his
people for their sins. 39 14 What errors the Antinomians hold concerning
remission of sin. 43 15 How it may be proved that God does see sin in a
believer, so as to be offended with it. 53 16 How great the guilt of sin in the
believer is in the sight of God. 69 17 How Gods anger manifests it self upon
his children when they sin. page 75 18 What kind of sins God is displeased
with. 79 19 How God manifests his displeasure against his people in
spiritual and eternal things. 82 20 How the Antinomian would prove that God
does not see sin in a justified person. 88 21 How the Antinomian
distinguishes between Gods knowing and seeing of sin. ibid. 22 How seeing is
attributed to God. 89 23 How Gods knowledge and ours do differ. ibid. 24 How
the Antinomians are contrary to themselves. 93 25 How far Gods taking notice
of sin so as to punish it, is subject to the mere liberty of his will. 95 26
How freedom may be extended to God. 96 27 How the attributes of God, and the
actions of them differ in respect of freedom. 97 28 How Gods justice
essentially and the effects of it differ. 100 29 How Christ satisfied God. 101
30 How afflictions on Believers can agree with Gods justice. ibid. 31 Why sins
are called debts. 105 32 What in sin is a debt. ibid. 33 What is meant by that
petition, Forgive us. 113 34 Whether we pray for the pardon it self, or for the
sense thereof only: 4 Reasons proving the affirmative. 116 35 What is implied
in the petition, Forgive us our debts. 121 1 In the subject, who does pray.
ibid. 2 In the matter prayed for. 126 3 In the person to whom we pray. 128
36 How sin a considered. 130 37 How all sin is voluntary. 132 38 Whether sin
be an infinite evil. 138 39 What remission of sin is. 139 40 Why repentance and
faith is pressed as necessary. 146 41 How our repentance consists with Gods
free grace in pardoning of sin. 147 42 How many do mistake concerning
repentance. p. 150 43 Why God requires repentance seeing it is no cause of
pardon. 157 44 Why repentance wrought by the spirit of God, is not enough to
remove sin in the guilt of it. 161 45 Why repentance should not be as great a
good, and as much honor God, as sin is an evil. 163 46 What harm comes to God
by sin. ibid. 47 What kind of act Forgiveness of sin is, and whether it be
antecedent to our faith and repentance. 166 48 Whether justification precede
faith and repentance. 176 49 Whether infants have actual faith, and are
Believers. 181 50 How we are sinners in Adam. 185 51 How an elect person
unconverted, and a reprobate differ, and what kind of love election is. 188 52
Whether in that petition, Forgive us our debts, we pray for pardon or for
assurance only. 196 53 Why God does sometimes pardon sin not acquainting the
person with it. 200 54 What directions should be given to a soul under
temptation about pardon of sin. 203 55 Whether a Believer repenting, is to make
difference between a great sin and a lesser. 205 56 What is meant by covering
of sin. 216 57 How God by pardoning sin is s^id to cover it. 217 58 Whether the
phrase of Gods covering sin, imply that he does not see it. 219 59 How sins
being in justified persons, can stand with the omnisciency, truth, and
holiness of God. 220 60 How God does see sin in believers when they have the
righteousness of Christ to cover it. 221 61 How a face is attributed to God.
226 62 What sins Gods children may fall into. 230 63 How the sins of Gods
people and of the reprobate differ. 234 64 How far gross sins make a
breach upon justification. 236 65 Why the guilt of new gross sins does not
take away justification. p. 245 66 Whether God in pardoning, does not forgive
all sins together. 246 67 Wherein the compleatnesse of the pardon of sin at the
day of judgment consists. 262 68 Whether the sins of Gods people shall be
manifested at the last day 264 69 Whether we are justified in Christ before we
believe, as we are accounted sinners in Adam before we actually sinned. 186 70
Whether reconciliation purchased by Christ's death, does necessarily infer
justification before faith. 190
OF JUSTIFICATION.
LECTURE I.
ROMANS 3.24, 25., Being justified freely by his Grace, etc.


THE Apostle in the words precedent laid down two Propositions, The Coherence.
to debase man and all his works, that so he might make way for the exaltation
of that grace of justification here spoken of.

The first Proposition is, that By the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be
justified in his sight, where two things are observable.

1. That he calls every man by the word Flesh, which is emphaticall to beat down
that pride and tumor which was in the Jews.

2. He adds, in his sight, which supposes that though our righteousness
among men may be very glorious, yet before God it is unworthy. The other
Proposition is, that, All come short of the glory of God; Some do make it a
Metaphor from those in a race, who fall short of the prize. Whether by the
glory of God be meant the image of God, and that righteousness first put into
us, or eternal life, or (which is most probable) matter of glorying and
boasting before God, which the Apostle speaks of afterward, is not much
material. Now the Apostle having described our condition to be thus miserable,
he commends the Grace of God in justifying of us, which is decyphered most
exactly in a few words; so that you have in the Text a most compendious
delineation of justification. The division and opening of the Text.
First, There is the benefit set down, being justified. Secondly, The efficient
cause, Gods Grace; and here we have a twofold impulsive cause, one inward,
denoted in the word Freely; the other outward, in the meritorious cause,
Christ's death; which is further illustrated by the appointment of God for this
end, (...): Some understand this of Gods manifestation, as if it were spoken to
oppose the propitiatory in the Ark, which was left hidden; some to the whole
polity in the Old Testament, which in the Legal shadows, and the Prophets
predictions did declare Christ; Others (upon better ground) refer it to the
Decree of God. This death of Christ is called (...), which denotes both the
action it self, as also the effect and benefit which comes by it. Chrysostom
observes, that it is called redemption, and not a simple emption, because we
were the Lords once, but by our sins became slaves to Satan, and now God does
make us his again. In the third place you have the isntrumental cause, Faith
in his blood; this is that Hysop that does sprinkle the blood, though it be
contemptible in it self, yet it is isntrumental for a great good; and hereby
is denoted, That Faith has a peculiar nature in this work of Justification,
which no other grace has, for none says Love in his blood, or Patience in his
blood. Lastly, here is the final cause, To declare the righteousness of God In
what sense righteousness is taken here, See Lect. 12.
for the remission of sins past. whether (...) be so well translated remission
of sin, as indulgence and connivance, as B^za rendereth it, you have largely
discussed, Lect. 12.
Some observe those words sins past, as implying, no sin is forgiven till it
be committed; it must be past before it can be forgiven; But the Apostle might
use this speech in reference to sins past before his coming, to show the
efficacy and power of Christ's death, that it was not the blood of Rams and
Goats, but that of Christ, which could expiate our offenses. My intent is to
speak of the benefit first, and then the Causes: the Benefit is Justification:
And for the better understanding of this, Propositions clearing the nature of
Justification.
consider the Propositions following, which will be subservient to clear the
nature of it, although the more exact opening of the word, and the nature of
it, is to be looked for when we come to speak of imputed righteousness.

First, It is of great consequence to have this Doctrine kept pure. 1 The
doctrine of Justification ought to be kept pure.
Luther called it Articulus stantis aut cadentis Ecclesiae, as if this were the
soul and pillar of Christianity. Pighius, though a Papist, calls this the
chief part of Christian Doctrine, confessing that it had been obscured rather
then cleared by their own Writers: yea, this Doctrine about Justification is
that which discerns the Orthodox from Pagans, Papists, Socinians and
Arminians. Now there are diverse reasons why we should keep the Philistims from
throwing in earth to stop up this pleasant spring: And why.
As 1. because herein is the grace and good favor of God especially revealed.
Therefore the Gospel is called glorious, because God did not so much exalt, and
manifest his excellency in creating the world, as he did in providing of a
Savior, and pardon for a poor sinner: Hence its called the riches of his
grace, rather then of power or righteousness. We are therefore sollicitous
(whatsoever the Antinomians say to the contrary) that the doctrine of Gods
grace in Justification may be fully improved to the uttermost, and that every
broken heart may be put into a ravishment and admiration of it. We bewail those
times of Popery, when the name and efficacy of Christ and his Grace, were
obscured by the works and pretended righteousness of men.

2. It is very necessary to keep this pure, because of the manifold truths that
must fall if this fall; if you err in this, the whole truth about Original
sin, Free Will, and Obligation of the Law will likewise perish.

3. It is of great influence into practice; for what does the heart smitten for
sin, and filled with the displeasure of God, but run to this* Doctrine, as the
City of refuge? This is the water that their souls pant after, this is the
bread that their fainting stomachs would* gladly feed on: now if this water be
turned into mud, if this bread be made into stones by the corrupt Doctrines of
men, how must the soul perish for want of sustenance?

Secondly, 2 Satan has endeavored the corrupting of it.
Satan has endeavored several ways the corrupting of it. You may judge of
the preciousnesse and excellency of it by Satan's malicious endeavors to
suppress it: Herod not more diligently seeking to take away the life of Christ
when he was in his Cradle, then Satan's instruments were busy to stifle this
truth in the infancy. Loc* Com. de Just^fic.
Chemnitius relates, that he did saepe cohorrescere, many times tremble when
he thought of a speech which Luther would often say (and it was ominous) That
after his death the Doctrine of Justification would be corrupted: And indeed
when those first Reformers had made the body of this truth in all the several
parts of it like that of Absalom, comely and beautiful, without any blemish,
there presently rose up many perverted in mind, and set upon it, as those
thieves upon the man going to Jericho, leaving it wounded, and half dead. There
are errors about the very nature of it, making it to be the infusion of
righteousness in us, for which God does accept us: Thus they speak of
Justification, as Aristotle would about Physical motions. Some take away the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness; some take away the satisfaction of
Christ; some make Faith to be accounted for Righteousness; some make such a
Justification, that thereby God shall see no sin in those that are justified
whatsoever they do. Thus in the nature, parts, instrument, consequents and
subject, there are manifold errors, and hereby Satan brings much mischief to
the Church, for by this means our lives are spent in disputing about this
benefit, when it were far more comfortable to be enjoying of it. And when
Satan could not overthrow the truth by mingling of our works with the Grace of
God, as in Popery, then he bends himself to errors on the right hand, by
setting it up in such a seeming way, by amplifications of it, that thereby all
repentance and godly humiliation shall he quite evacuated: Even as when he
could not by his instruments, the Pharisees, disprove the Deity of Christ, then
he sets instruments on work to confess that he was the Son of God, thereby to
get in some errors.

3 God in the way of Justification goes above our thoughts and reason.
Thirdly, God in this way of Justification goes above our thoughts. And
certainly, when a Christian will set his heart to think about this truth, he
must lay this for a foundation, that, in this matter of Justifying, Gods
thoughts and his thoughts do differ as much as heaven and earth; so that the
doctrine of Christ's hypostaticall union is not more above our thoughts and
expectation in the truth of it, to be believed, then that of Justification is
above our hearts in the goodness of it, to be embraced. It is in this case
with us, as with Sampson, who found honey in the carkase of a Lion, this could
not be expected how it could come there; had he found it in some holes of a
Tree in the Wood, where Bees will sometimes hive themselves, there had been
some probability, but here is none: Thus thinks the soul troubled, to find
this honey of Justification in the death of Christ, how unlikely is it? If I
should look for it in the works I do, in my holiness, and righteousness that
is wrought by my own hands, this were according to rules of righteousness.

And this is the ground of all that dangerous error in Popery, they look upon
it as against the principles of reason, that we should be accounted righteous
any other way, then by that which is inherent in us; and this made Luther
profess, that when he did rightly understand the doctrine about free remission
of sins, yet he was exceedingly troubled with the word Justify, for that old
opinion had much soaked into him, that it must be to make righteous, as
sanctificare is to make holy, or calefacere to make hot; some positive quality
to be brought into a man, which he might oppose against the judgment of God.
And hereby you may see, that its no wonder if the people of God are so
difficultly persuaded of their Justification; if they be again and again
plunged into fears about it; because this way which God takes is above our
thoughts: It is a great matter to deny our own righteousness, and to be
beholding to Christ only for pardon.

Fourthly, As the Doctrine it self is by peculiar revelation, 4 The Scripture
has proper words to express this doctrine by.
so the Scripture has proper words to express it by, which we must wholly
attend to. This would be a good Pillar and Cloud to direct us; for then men
began to decline from the truth, when they left off a diligent search of the
use of the word in the Scriptures. What makes it so confidently and generally
asserted by Papists, that Justification is a transmutation, a change from the
state of unrighteousness to the state of holiness, but only neglect of the
Scripture-use of this word?

And though this matter was agitated seven months in the Council of Trent,
yet because they did not follow the Star of the Scripture, they came not to the
lodging where Christ was. There are some kind of words, which the Scripture
takes from the common use and custom amongst men, and they are to be
interpreted as commonly they are taken; but then there are other words, which
the Scripture does peculiarly use, as being subservient to express that
peculiar matter, which the holy Ghost only teaches, and such is this word, to
justify, for the greek word (...), is observed by learned men to have two
significations, one to punish a man, or condemn him, which is clean contrary to
the Apostle his use of the word; or else to determine and judge a thing as
just, but then it does not come up to the Apostles meaning; for he speaks of
persons, but the Grecians use it of things themselves: Thus the word justificare
is not used by any approved humane Authors, no more then sanctificare and
glorificare. As therefore we must go to the Scripture* only for the knowledge
of the nature of the thing, so we must express it in such words as the holy
Ghost uses; and this is the ground which has made our learned men call upon
all to consider the Grammatical use of the words in this matter.

1 Justification implies an accounting just.
First, The word does imply an accounting just: And this is acknowledged by the
Papists themselves, as more frequent* though they plead much for such a sense,
as to make just. Now the truth is, there needs not much quarrel even about
that signification, though the Scripture does not manifest it: For we confess
that he is made just, who is justified, and that not only in respect of the
inward renovation of a man, but also in respect of justification; for God does
not account him just who is not so, and certainly to esteem a man just without
righteousness, is as absurd as to account a man learned without learning, or
the wall white without whiteness; only we say this Righteousness that does to
make a man just, is not inherent in him, but reckoned to him by the
satisfaction of another: for a man is accounted righteous two ways, either
when he is not guilty of the crime charged upon him, or when he does make
satisfaction; and in this latter sense by Christ we become righteous. 2 To make
righteous.


2. So that if the word should signify as much as to make righteous, as to
sanctify does signify to make holy, still we could grant it, though not in
the Popish way; and indeed the Apostle Romans 5. says, many are made righteous
by the second Adam, which if not meant of inherent holiness, does imply, that
the righteousness we have by Christ is not merely declarative, but also
constitutive; and indeed one is in order before the other, for a man must be
righteous before he can be pronounced or declared so to be. But the Hebrew word
does not signify this sense primarily; for whereas the Hebrew word in Call does
signify to be righteous by a positive quality; The word in Hiphil according to
that Rule in Grammar, signifies to attribute and account this righteousness
unto a man by some words, or other testimony, even as the word that in Call
signifies to b^ wicked, does in Hiphil signify to condemn and judge a man as
wicked, so that there are these two things in justifying, whereof one is the
ground of the other, first to make righteous, and then to pronounce or declare
so.

From these two follows a third, 3 To deal with as a just man.
which is to deal with a man so justified as a just man, so that condemnation,
crimes, reproach and fear shall be taken away from him. This declares the
admirable benefit of being justified before God, for when this is done, Romans
5.1. We have peace with God, Ephesians. 3. We come with boldness into his
presence, and open face; so that unbelief and slavish fears in the godly are
great enemies to this grace of justification; yea, they are a reproach and
dishonor to it. Thou think if thy heart were not conscious to sin, if
nothing but holiness were in thee, thou would be bold, thou would not
fear or be troubled, but thou do not consider that God walks toward thee
as a righteous man, looks upon thee as so, so that if Christ be bold thou
may, if God will not reject Christ, or thy sins cannot condemn him, so
neither will God reject thee, or shall thy sins overwhelm thee; this is the
sweet consolation of the Gospel, to a sinner brokenhearted, who would give a
world for a perfect righteousness, to make him accepted.

4. This is a judicial word, and taken from Courts of judgment. It is good to
consider this also, 4 It is a judici^ll word.
for this supposes God as a just Judge offended, and man summoned to his
Tribunal to appear before it. This work of Justification may be excellently
compared with that Parable, Mat. 18. where a man owing many talents to his
master, is called upon to pay them, and although the servant prayed his Master
to have patience, and he would pay him all (which we cannot say) yet, it is
said, his Master forgave him all the debt. That the word is a judicial word in
the general appears, Deu. 25.1. where the Scripture speaks of a
controversy between men brought to judgment, and the Judge justifying the
righteous, so 2 Kin. 15.4. There Absalom wishes he were Judge in the land,
that he might justify him who brought his case to him; so Psa. 51. That thou
may be justified, and overcome when thou are judged; As it is thus in
general, so in this particular case, it is a word taken from Courts of
judgment: Thus Romans 3. That every mouth might be stopped, and the whole world
be (...) guilty.

Hence there is an accuser, and our sins called debts, and the opposite to this
justification is condemnation, and the Apostle calls it a charge that is laid
upon men. Therefore Christ is called an Advocate, and he is said to make
intercession; all these expressions denote a judiciary proceeding: Thus David,
Enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight no man shall be
justified, Psa. 143. and Paul, 1 Cor. 4.3. It is a very small thing to be
judged of man's judgment, where a man's judgment is called a day, according to
the Cilician phrase (as Jerome says) and having spoken this, he adds
something of his justification before God; so that there is nothing clearer
then that the word is a judicial word, and with John who in his Epistles never
uses the word justify, the sense of it is expressed, by not to come into
judgment, or to be translated from death unto life. And certainly if to
justify were to make righteous inherently, it would not be an abomination in
that sense to justify the wicked.

5 There can be no Justification but where there is accusation.
Fifthly, There can be properly no justification, but where there is accusation
or a charge: Therefore condemnation is opposite to it. Hence it is that though
it be said that Angels and Adam were justified, and that by works, yet if we
would speak properly, they were no more justified, then they had an Advocate,
or Intercessor. Thus when Christ is said to be justified in the Spirit, that
is, declared to be the Son of God by the Spirit, which was spoken in reference
to those calumnies and reproaches that were cast upon him; so that this
consideration may comfort a godly man even in that particular wherein he is
most troubled; for thus the godly argue, my heart charge me with such folly,
and so the devil does, oh it is too plain! I cannot dissemble it, I cannot hide
it; oh what shall I do? even this very thing may support; for how could there
be Justification, if there were not a charge? What need a Christ to justify,
if there were no fault?

Sixthly, No man can do any thing, 6 No man can do any thing whereby to be
accounted just before God.
whereby he should be accounted just before God. This is the grand truth that
is such a stumbling block to the world; this makes the Papist gibe and scoff;
this makes God (say they) to dissemble; this makes him a liar, to account that
ours, which is his Sons; who will say a lame Vulcan goes upright with another
man's legs? who will compare some deformed Thersites to a fair Absalom, because
of some imaginary beauty which is not in him? But the Scripture is too plain, 2
Cor. 5. to be eluded, Ipse factus est peccatum, sicut nos justitia non nostra
sed Dei, nec in nobis sed in ipso, sicut ipse factus est peccatum non suum sed
nostrum, nec inse, sed in nobis constitutum. He is made sin as we are
righteousness, not our righteousness but the righteousness of God, not in us,
but in him: as he was made sin, not his own, but ours, not in himself, but in
us. Neither do we say, we are made righteous without a righteousness, that
indeed were absurd, but we say it is not in us.

Seventhly, That righteousness whereby we are made just, 7 We are made just only
by Christ.
is only by Christ; of this more hereafter; only the Scripture does carry us
always from our own righteousness to that of Faith, which is by his blood;
this made Bernard say, Quid tam ad mortem quod morte Christi non salvetur, Meum
meritum est miseratio Domini, non plane sum meriti inops quamdiu ille
miserationum non fuerit inops. Though we want, Christ does not want, though we
sinned away our good, yet not Christ his merits: And if a man were made
perfectly holy, yet he could not be justified for all that, but he needs a
Christ to satisfy for his former transgressions.

Eighthly, 8 Terror and comfort in the word justification.
This description of Justification in a judicial way contains much terror,
and also much comfort. It is good for a Christian to meditate, why God
describes the way of pardon by these terms; and first it may be to rouse up
secure and Epicurean consciences. Thy heart will not always be quiet, neither
will thy sin always lie still at the door, but it will awaken thee, and hale
thee to judgment. O the terror thy soul will then be put into! And as it does
thus terrify, so it does the more comfort; nothing is so welcome as a pardon
after a man is condemned, and his head laid upon the block: Thus when all this
charge is laid upon thee, and thou summoned before the tribunal, how precious
must grace then be to thee?

LECTURE II.
ROMANS 3.23. Being justified freely by his grace, etc.


THe ninth Proposition is, concerning the reality and truth of this
Justification: 9 The reality of this justification.
for when we say God does justify, that is, account and pronounce righteous,
this is taken by Papists, as if here were nothing, but a mere fiction and
imagination, without any truth indeed: Therefore the godly are for their
comfort to know that this Justification of theirs, is no less a real and
solid foundation for comfort (yea it is more) then if they had the most perfect
and complete inherent righteousness that could be: for all things that are
constitutive of this Justification, are real; God his gracious accounting and
esteeming of us so, is real: and seeing he is most wise, just and holy, what
he does judge must needs be so; we many times justify our selves, but then it
is sometimes a mere opinion, we are indeed condemned at that present, but it
cannot be so with God. Again the foundation of this Justification, is as solid
and firm as any rock, it being the righteousness of Christ, if therefore the
righteousness of Christ be not a fancy or imagination, no more is this. And
lastly, the effects of this are real, viz. deliverance from wrath, peace with
God, joy in the holy Ghost, and the spirit of Adoption. Now in this treasure
the godly heart may much enrich himself, he is not in a dream when his soul is
ravished with this privilege; thou may be in this transfiguration, and say,
it is good for us to be here, and still know what thou say; What shame then
is it to thee, when if thou had inherent perfect righteousness, thou would
bid thy soul take her spiritual ease, for she has much good stored up for
her, and thou can not do this upon an imputed righteousness: imputed
righteousness and inherent, differ only in the manner, not in reality: it is
all one, as to Gods glory, and as to thy comfort, whether righteousness be
thine inherent, or thine imputed, if it be a true real righteousness.

Tenthly, Consider, the Scripture speaks of this justification, as to us, 10
The Scripture speaks of justification as to us in a passive sense.
still in a passive sense, we are justified, and that whether it speaks upon a
supposition of Justification by works of the Law, or in an Evangelicall manner,
and this it does to show that God only does justify: for sin is only against
him, and therefore none but himself can remit his own offense. Besides, none
can condemn but God, therefore none can Justify. Who can lay trouble on thy
soul, bind thee in chains, and throw thee into hell, but God? and who but God
can command all the tempests and waves in thy troubled soul to be still? When
therefore others are said to Justify, that is only to be understood
declaratively, and no more. Now this particular may suppress all those proud,
Pharisaicall thoughts in us, whereby we are apt to be puffed up within our
selves: what if we Justify our selves, and clear our ways? yet if God does
not, we remain still obnoxious, and bound in Gods wrath.

Again, It is for comfort to the godly, what though Satan, thy own heart, and
the world does condemn thee? yet if God Justify, thou may rejoice; you see
Romans 8. what a challenge Paul there makes, Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods elect? it is God that Justifies. Who shall charge any thing? The
devil, thy own heart, can lay much pride, hypocrisy, sloth fullness to thy
charge: it is true, but God through Christ does Justify. What a Cordial and
reviver would it be to Gods people, to live in the power of this gift bestowed
upon them? it is God that justifies thee, O my troubled soul! who can then
condemn? who can hinder it, or invalidate it? Certainly we are therefore in
dejections, despondencies, and perplexities often, because we drink not of this
water of life. Lay and apply this excellent Doctrine to thy fainting dying
soul, and it will become to it, like Elisha applying himself to the dead
child, cause spirit and life again to return to him; right thoughts here, will
sweeten all thoughts in other things.

11 God in justifying considered as a fatherly Judge.
Eleventhly, Although Justification be a Court action, and drawn from
judicatories, yet God is not in this action, considered merely as a Judge, but
as paternus Judex, a fatherly Judge, having an admirable temperament of justice
and mercy, so that God pronounces this sentence from the Throne of Justice and
Mercy also; of Justice, in that he will not absolve, till satisfaction be made,
and he will not pronounce righteous, but where there is a perfect
righteousness: Therefore that opinion, of making Faith to be accepted of for
righteousness is a dangerous and false assertion. God in this work of
Justification, is never described, as accepting of an imperfect righteousness
for a perfect. No, God does not cease to be just, while he is thus gracious.
Again his Justice and righteousness is herein seen, that none shall be
Justified, but such sinners who feel their guilt, and desire to be eased of
that burden, believing and rolling their souls upon him. It is very hard to
give the right order of the benefits of Vocation, Justification, Adoption and
Sanctification; but yet this may be made good against the Antinomian, that a
man is not Justified, till repenting and believing. Here is Justice then but
there is also a great deal of Grace and Mercy; As in the accepting of a surety
for us, that he would not keep to the Law, of having us in our own persons to
pay the utmost farthing: This was great love; so likewise to find out a way
for our reconciliation; that when the devils had no remedy provided for them,
we have. Further, that when this price is laid down, we have the application of
this benefit, and so many thousands have not. Two in a Bed, in a Family, in a
Parish, one Justified, and the other condemned; What Grace is this?

Twelfthly, 12 Justification in Scripture described by Gods actions not ours.
This grand mercy is described in Scripture by God his giving something to us,
not our doing any thing to him. It is described by Gods actions, and not ours
to him, which may abundantly satisfy the heart against all doubts and fears;
thus the Scripture calls it forgiving, not imputing sin, imputing righteousness,
making righteous, all which are actions from God to us, not ours to him, so
that we are no where said in a good sense to Justify ourselves, or commanded
to it, as we are to repent, or believe, and to crucify the lusts of the flesh,
because it is wholly Gods action; by faith indeed we apprehend it, but it is
Gods action, as the window lets in the light, but it is the Sun that does
inlighten. And from this particular, we may gather much comfort, for when we
look into our selves and see no such righteousness or holiness, that we dare
hold out to God, then we may remember, this is not by our doing to God, but
receiving from him; and in this sense, it is more blessed for us to receive,
then to give. This made the Father say, justitia nostra, est indulgentia tua,
our righteousness is thy indulgence. Therefore let not the troubled heart say,
where is my perfect repenting? where is my perfect obedience? but rather ask,
where is Gods forgiving? where is Gods not imputing? how hardly is the soul
drawn off from resting in it self? it is not thy doing, but Gods doing; thou
must not consider, what do I, but what God does. The Antinomian, he indeed
wringeth these breasts of Consolation, till blood comes, but the true sweet
milk of the word must not therefore be thrown away. Do not then as they sought
for Christ, look for him in the grave, when he was risen out thence. Do not
thou po^r in thy self for this treasure, when it is to be looked for from
heaven; duties, graces will say, this is not in me.

Lastly, 13 The Scripture has phrases equivalent to this of justification.
Psa^. ^2.1, 2.
The Scripture has other equivalent phrases to this of Justification, which
likewise do amplify the comfort of this gift. It is called Blessedness, as if
this indeed were the true heaven and happiness. If thou art justified, thou
carriest heaven about with thee, and thy name may be Legion, for many are the
mercies that do fill thee. Nothing can make thee blessed but this, it is not
Blessed is he to whom the Lord gives many riches and honors, many parts and
abilities, but to whom the Lord imputes no sin; and howsoever those who wallow
in a Laodicean fullness, judge not this such blessedness, yet, ask a Cain, ask
a Judas, demand of the tormented in hell, whether it be not a blessed thing to
have sin pardoned. That thou should be able to look on thy sins as so many
serpents without stings, as so many Egyptians dead upon the shore, as if they
had never been, that thou should be able to say, Lord, where are such lusts,
such sins of mine? I find them all cancelled; Is not this blessedness indeed?

Another expression is of accepting us in Christ, and herein lies much of
Justification, that it is an acceptance of us to eternal life, Ephesians. 1.6. This
must needs imbolden and encourage the heart, when it knows, that both person
and duties are accepted, though so much frailty and weakness, yet God will
receive thee, The third phrase is to make Just, Romans 5.9. For God does not
pronounce that man just, which is not so. Therefore when we are Justified, this
is not absolutely and simply against a righteousness of works, but in a
certain respect, as done by us, and as obedience coming from us, and this must
needs support the soul: for when satisfaction is made, when God has as much as
he desires, why should not this quiet the heart of a man? will nothing content
thee, unless thou thy self art able to pay God the utmost farthing? A fourth
word is not imputing of sin, or imputing righteousness, and this, as you heard
before, is a very sure and real thing, though it be not in us, for there are
many real benefits do come to us, wheh yet the foundation is extrinsecal, as
when a man's debt is discharged by his Surety, he has his real benefit, is
discharged, and released out of Prison, as if it had been his own personal
payment. Now when God does this, he goes not against that text, To Justify
the ungodly, for its an abomination to do so, because it is against Law, but
when God does not impute sin, because of the satisfaction of Christ
intervening, that is most consentaneous and agreeable to Justice. There is one
word more equivalent, and that is reconciliation, some indeed make this an
effect of Justification, some make reconciliation the general, and remission of
sin a particular part; but we need not be curious, where Justification is there
is reconciliation; and this does suppose, that those who were at discord
before, are now made friends, and where can friendship be more prized then with
God?

Having laid down these introductory Propositions, which describe most of the
matter or nature of Justification, I shall now come to show, wherein it does
particularly consist, wherein the true nature is, Cautions concerning
justification.
only let me prem^se two or three Cautions.

1. We must not confound those things, which may be consequent, or concomitant
to justification, I. Caution.
with justification it self, for many things may necessarily be together, and
yet one not be the other; so Justification is necessarily joined with
Renovation, yet a man is not justified in having a new nature put into him: The
water has both moistness and coldness in it, yet it does not wash away spots
as it is cold, but as it is moist. We will not enter into dispute (as some of
the Schoolmen have, and concluded affirmatively) Whether God may not accept of
a sinner to eternal life, without any inward change of that man's heart: It is
enough that by Scripture we know he does not.

2. To place our justification in any thing that is ours, or we do, II. Caution.
is altogether derogatory to the righteousness and worth of Christ. Some there
are who place it partly in our righteousness, and partly in the obedience of
Christ, supplying that which is defective in us; some of late have placed it in
our Faith, as if that were our righteousness, and not for any worth or dignity
of Faith, but God out of his mere good pleasure (say they) has appointed Faith
to be that to man fallen, which universal righteousness would have been to
Adam: and hence it is, that they will not allow any trope or metonymie in that
phrase, Abraham believed, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. But here
appears no less pride and arrogance in this* then the opinion of the
Papists, and in some respects it does charge God worse, as is to be showed in
handling of that point: Therefore let us take heed, how by our distinctions we
put any thing with Christ's righteousness in this great work.

3. In searching out the nature of Justification, III. Caution.
we must not only look to the future, but that which is past. For suppose a man
should be renewed to a full perfection in this life, yet that absolute complete
holiness could not justify him from his sins past. Those committed before
would still press him down, though he were now for the present without any
spot at all. Therefore though now there were no defects, no frailties in thee,
yet who shall satisfy the Justice of God for that which is past, though there
were but the least guilt of the least sin? there is no Sampson strong enough to
bear the weight of it, but Christ himself.

4. The Orthodox sometimes make the nature of Justification in remission of
sin; sometimes in imputation of Christ's righteousness, IV. Caution.
which made Bellarmine charge them, though falsely, with different opinions, for
some make these the same motion, it is called remission of sin, as it respects
the term from which; but imputation of righteousness as it respects the term
to which; even, say they, as the same motion is the expulsion of darkness, and
the introduction of light. But I rather conceive them different, and look upon
one, as the ground of the other; remission of sin, grounded upon the imputation
of Christ's righteousness, so that his righteousness imputed to us, is
supposed to be in the order before sin forgiven; and although among men, where
righteousness is imputed, or a man pronounced just, there is, or can be no
remission of sin, yet it is otherwise here, because righteousness is not so
imputed unto us, as that it is inherent in us; so among men, the more a man is
forgiven the less he is Justified, because forgiveness supposes him faulty,
yet it is not so in our Justification before God.

V. Caution.
Lastly, We must not confound Justification with the manifestation and
declaration of it in our hearts and consciences. This is the rock at which the
Antinomian does so often split, he supposes Justification to be from all
eternity, and that therefore a man is Justified before he does believe; Faith
only justifying by evidence and declaration to our consciences: but this is to
confound the decree of God, and its execution, as shall be proved. Hence it is
a dangerous thing, though some excellent men have done it, to make Faith a full
persuasion of our Justification, for this supposes Justification before Faith;
It is one thing to be Justified, and another thing to be assured of it. It is
true, we cannot have any peace and comfort, nor can we so rejoice in, and
praise God, though we are justified, unless we know it also.

LECTURE III.
ROMANS 3.24, 25. Being Justified freely by his grace, etc.


JUstification consists in these two particulars, Justification consists in
remission of sin, and imputation of righteousness.
Remission of sin, and Imputation of righteousness: Indeed here is diversity
of expressions among the learned, as you have already heard: some thinking the
whole nature of Justification to be only in Remission of sin, and therefore
make it the same with Imputation of righteousness; others make one the ground
of the other; some make Imputation of righteousness, the efficient or
meritorious cause of our Justification, and Remission of sin, the only form of
our Justification; others make Remission of sin the effect only of
Justification. But howsoever we call these two things, yet this will be made
plain, that God in Justification, vouchsafes these two privileges to the
person justified; First, He forgiveth his sins; Secondly, He imputes
righteousness, or rather, this latter is the ground of the former, as I showed
before.

That Justification is remission of sins, is generally received, How
justification can be said to be pardon of sin? Answer.
the great Question is about imputation of Christ's righteousness (but of that
afterward) only here may be a Doubt, how we can properly say, That
Justification is pardon of sin, for a man is not justified, in that he is
pardoned, but rather it supposes him guilty: It is true, Remission of sin does
suppose a man faulty in himself, but because Christ did take our sins upon him,
and we are accepted of through him, as our Surety, therefore may remission of
sin be well called Justification: Indeed pardon can never be called an inherent
righteousness, or a qualitative Justice (but rather it opposes it) but it may
be called a Legal or Judicial righteousness, because God for the obedience and
satisfaction of Christ, does account of us as righteous, having pardoned our
sin; and withal imputing Christ's righteousness to us, Propositions for the
under*standing of remission of sins.
both which make up our Justification* For the understanding therefore of the
first particular, viz. Remission of sins, take these Propositions, which will
be the foundation upon which many material questions will be built.

1. That forgivenes of sin is possible, 1. That for*giveness of sin is possible.
there may be, and is such a thing. Hence in that ancient Creed, we are said to
believe a remission of sins, where faith is described, not in the mere
historical acts of it, but fiducial, the remission of my sins. Now this is some
stay to a troubled sinner, that his sins may be forgiven, whereas the devils
cannot; God no where saying to them, Repent and believe. Vide Gerard* in ^
Epist* Pet.
And although Salmeron holds, that God gave the lapsed Angels space to
repent, before they were peremptorily adjudged unto their everlasting torments;
yet he has scarce a guide or companion in that opinion; were not therefore
this true, that there is such a thing in the Church of God, as forgivenes of
sin; How much better had it been for us, if we had never been born?

2. Sin may be said to be for*given diverse ways.
2. Consider, That a sin may be said to be forgiven diverse ways. First in the
decree and purpose of God, as Christ is called the Lamb slain from the
beginning. Though I do not know where the Scripture uses such an expression,
yet the Antinomians build much upon it. 1. In Gods de*cree.
Secondly, A sin may be said to be forgiven in Christ meritoriously, 2 In
Christ meritoriously through faith.
when God laid the sins of his people upon him, which the Prophet Isaiah does
describe as plainly, Isa. 53. as any Evangelist; hence some have called Isaiah
the fifth Evangelist. Now you must not conclude, such a man's sins are pardoned*
because they are laid upon Christ a long while ago, which is the Antinomians
perpetual* panalogizing, for to this effect of remission of sin, there go more
causes besides the meritorious, faith the instrumental cause, which is as
necessary in its kind for this great benefit, as the meritorious cause is in
its kind, that though Christ has born such a man's sins, yet they are not
pardoned* till he do believe; for as the grace of God, 3. Sin is pardoned when
the guilt is taken away.
which is the efficient cause of pardon, does not make a sin completely
forgiven, without the meritorious cause, so neither does the meritorious
without the instrumental, but there is a necessity of the presence, and the
cooperation of all these. Thirdly, 4. When God gives us assurance of his love.
A sin is said to be pardoned, when the guilt is taken away, and this is
properly, Remission of iniquities. Fourthly, Sin is pardoned in our sense and
feeling, when God takes away all our fears and doubts, giving us an assurance
of his love. And lastly, 5. When temporal affliction is removed.
Sin is forgiven when the temporal affliction is removed, and in this sense the
Scripture does much use the word, forgiveness of sins, and his not pardoning,
is when he will punish.

3. There are several things considerable in sin, 3. Several things
considerable i^ sin, when it is said to be forgiven.
when we say it is forgiven. First, In sin there is a privation of that
innocence which he had before; as when a man is proud, by that act of pride he
is deprived of that innocence and freedom from that guilt which he had before.
This is properly true of Adam, 1. A privation of innocence.
who lost his innocence by sinning: It cannot be affirmed of us but in a
limited sense, thus far, that when a man commits a sin, that guilt may be
charged upon him, whereof he was innocent before. Now, when sin is forgiven,
the sense is, not that he is made innocent again, for that can never be helped,
but that it must be affirmed such an one has sinned, this cannot be repaired
again. It is true, the Scripture uses such expressions, That iniquity shall be
sought for, and there shall be found none, Jer. 51.20. But that is in respect
of the consequence of it. We shall have as much joy and peace, as if we had not
sinned at all.

A 2d thing in sin is the dignity and desert it has of the wrath of God; 2.
Desert of the wrath of God.
and this is inseparable from any sin, if it be a sin, there is a desert of
damnation, and thus all the sins of the godly, howsoever they shall not
actually condemn them, yet they have a desert of condemnation.

Thirdly, There is the actual ordination and obligation of the person sinning
to everlasting condemnation: 3. An actual ordination of the person sinning to
everlasting condemnation.
and forgivenes of sin does properly lie in this, not in taking away the desert
of the guilt of sin, but the actual ordination of it to condemnation. Therefore
its false that is affirmed by some, that reatus est forma peccati, guilt is the
form of a sin: for a sin may be truly a sin, and yet this actual ordination of
it to death, taken away.

Fourthly, There is in sin an offense done unto God, 4. An offense done unto God
or an enmity to him, so that now he is displeased: and this is taken away in
some measure by forgiveness; yet so, as his anger is not fully removed. If we
speak exactly, God does not punish his children, yet as a Father he is angry
with them, and that makes him to chastise them, though the sin be forgiven.

Fifthly, In sin is likewise a blo^ or pollution, whereby the soul loses its
former beauty and excellency, 5. A blot or pollution in sin.
and this is not removed by remission, but by sanctification and renovation.
Hence it is ordinarily said, that Justification has a relative being only, but
Renovation, an absolute inherent change.

6. An aversion, from God.
And lastly, In all sin there is an aversion from God; either Habitual, in
Habitual sins; or Actual, in Actual: and in this aversion from God, the soul
abides, till it be turned to him again; as a man that turns his back on the
Sun, continues so, till he turn himself again: now Conversion, and not
Justification, does rectify this; What it is to have sin forgiven.
so that by this you may see, what it is to have a sin forgiven, not the
foulnes or the disformity of it to Gods Law removed, nor yet the dignity and
desert of Gods wrath; no, nor all kind of anger from God, but the actual
ordination of it to condemnation.

4. There is great difference between original and actual sin.
4. There is a great difference between original sin, and actuals; for that of
original is much more perplexed in the matter of remission, then those of
actuals; when an actual sin is committed, the act is transient, that is,
quickly passed away, there remains only the guilt, which sticks, till God
by pardon does remove it, and then when he has forgiven it, there is all of
that sin past. But now in original sin it is otherwise; for that corruption
adhering to us, cleaving to our nature, like Ivy to the tree (as the Father
expresses it) though it be forgiven, yet it still continues, and that not
only as an exercise of our faith and prayers, or by way of a penal langu^r upon
us, but truly and formally a sin, so that its both a sin, and the cause of sin,
and the effect of sin at the same time. Now in this particular lies the
greatest part of the difficulty, in the doctrine of forgivenes of sin, for here
sin is in the godly, and truly so, yet for all that it does not condemn. The
Papists finding by experience such motions of original sin in us, yet do say,
they are only penal effects, and remain as opportunities by spiritual combat
to increase the Crown of glory: and this they urge as impossible they should be
sins, and yet not condemn the godly, because guilt is inseparable from sin. And
the Antinomian does expressly stumble at this stone; Dr Crisps Sermon. vol. 2. p.
92. For my part (says he) I do not think as some do, that guilt differs from
sin, but that it is sin it self: They are but two words expressing the same
thing. Now if it were so, that sin and guilt, or the ordination of it to
punishment were the same thing, there could be no sin in the godly. It is true,
guilt cannot be but where sin has been, yet guilt of punishment may be
removed, when the sin is past. But this the Author does show, that sin was so
laid on Christ, that from that time he cease to be a sinner any more. Thou
art not a Thief, a Murderer, when as you have part in Christ, p. 89. ut supra.
But of this hereafter.

5. When a sin is forgiven, it is totally and perfectly forgiven. 5. When sin
is forgiven it is totally and perfectly forgiven.
This is to be considered in the next place; for when the Antinomian would have
us so diligently consider that place, Jer. 50.20. where God says, The
iniquities of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none ^^ If (I say)
this were all his meaning, sin shall be as if it had never been in respect of
condemnation, he shall be as surely freed from hell, as if he had never sinned,
all this is true. But they have a further meaning, and that is, That the sin
was so laid upon Christ, that the sinner cease to be a sinner, as if because
a surety pays the debt of some lend bankrupt, that very payment would make
him cease to be a bankrupt, that is false; yet God does so forgive sin, that it
can be forgiven no more perfectly then it is: Those sins cannot be forgiven any
more then they are, which is matter of infinite comfort, and as it is totally,
so irrevocably, God will not revive them again: Hence are those expressions of
blotting them out, of throwing them into the depth of the sea; and howsoever
that Parable, Mat. 18. which speaks of the Master forgiving a servant so many
talents, yet upon the servants cruelty to some of his fellows, his master
calls him to account, and throws him in prison for his former debts;
howsoever (I say) this be brought by some to prove that sins forgiven, may upon
after-iniquities be charged upon a man, yet the ground is not sufficient. For
first, The main scope only of a Parable is Argumentative. The Fathers do fitly
represent Parables to many things; to a Knife whose edge does only cut, yet the
back helps to that: to a Plow whose Plow-shear only cuts, yet the wood is
subservient; so in a Parable, the main scope and intent is only argumentative;
the other parts are but like so many shadows or flourishes in the picture to
make it more glorious; now this instance was not mainly intended by our
Savior, but forgiveness of one another; so that this part does only show,
what is in use amongst men, or what sin does deserve at Gods hands; not that
God revoketh his pardon, or repents that ever he has forgiven us, but this
is more expressly answered afterward.

6. Though sin be forgiven* yet the sense of ^ods displeasure may remain
6. Though sin be forgiven, yet there may be the sense of Gods displeasure
still; for, as though God does forgive, there are many calamities and pressures
upon the godly: so though Christ has born the agonies that do belong unto sin,
yet some scalding drops of them do fall upon the godly; not that the godly is
by these to satisfy the justice of God, but that hereby we might feel the
bitterness of sin, what wormwood and gall is in it, that so we may take heed for
the future, and that we may by some proportion think on, and admire the great
love of Christ to us, in undergoing such wrath. Did thou not judge the least
of his anger falling upon thee more terrible, then all the pains and miseries
that ever thou wast plunged into? And by this then, thou may stand amazed,
and wondering at this infinite love of Christ to stand under this burden for
thee. David is a pregnant instance for the truth of this. As when Saul was
angry with Jonathan, and run a Javelin at him, he escaped, and that run into
the wall; so the wrath of God, which was violently to fall upon thee, missed
thee, and ran into Christ. And that two ways,
But the sense of Gods displeasure for sin, may be retained in us two ways;

1. Servilely.
1. Servilely and slavishly* whereby we run from the promise and Christ, and
have secret grudgings and repinings against God: this is sinful for us to do.

2. Filially.
2. There is a filial apprehending of Gods displeasure, though we are persuaded
of the pardon; this is good and necessary, as we see in David, who made that
Psalm of Repentance, Psalm. 51. though he had his absolution from his sin. Tears
in the soul by the former way, are like the water of the Sea, salt and
brackish; but those in the latter are sweet, like the rain of the Clouds
falling down on the earth.

7. The wicked has no sin f^rgiven.
7. No wicked man ever has any sin forgiven him; for seeing remission of sins,
is either a part or fruit of Justification, no wicked man is more capable of
the one then the other: Indeed we may read concerning wicked men, Ahab and the
Israelites, when they have humbled themselves, though externally and
hypocritically, yet God has removed those judgments, which were imminent upon
them, and thus far their sins have been forgiven them; but God did not at the
same time take off the curse and condemnation due to them. Though they were
delivered from outward calamity, yet not from hell and wrath. This therefore
does demonstrate the woeful condition of wicked men, that have not one farthing
of all their debts they owe to God, paid, but are liable to account for the
least sins, and it must needs be so, for Christ the true and only paimaster of
his peoples debts, does not own them; so that when their sins shall be sought
for, every one in all the aggravations of it will be found out.

8. This remission of sin is only to the repenting, believing sinner. 8.
Remission of sin only to the penitent.
To the repentant, Act. 5.31. To give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of
sins. So Luke 44.47. That repentance and forgiveness of sins should be
preached in his name, Act. 8.22. Repent, and pray, if the thoughts of thy heart
may be forgiven thee, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins he is faithful to
forgive, etc. These, and many other places do abundantly prove, that there is
not forgivenes but where there is repentance* Therefore look upon all those
doctrines, as false and dangerous, which make justification to be before it.
Not that we do with Papists make any merit, or causality in repentance, or that
we limit it to such a measure and quantity of repentance, nor as if we made it
the condition of the Covenant of Grace; but only the way, without which (not
the cause for which) remission of sins is not obtained, neither can there be
any instance given of men forgiven, without this repentance; and the same
likewise is affirmed of faith, though faith is in another notion then
repentance, this being the instrument to apply and receive it. But of this
hereafter.

9. This remission of sin is not limited to persons, times, 9. Remission of
sins not limited,
or the quantity and quality of sins. Indeed the sin against the holy Ghost
cannot be forgiven: we will not explain that (cannot) by difficulty, as if
indeed it might be forgiven, but very hardly. The ordinary answer is, that
therefore it cannot be forgiven, because the person so sinning, will not
confess, humble himself, and seek pardon. God is described by pardoning
iniquity, transgressions and sins. Christ is said to take away the sin of the
world. David and Peter's sins were voluntary, yet God forgave them.

LECTURE IV.
ROMANS 3.24, 25. Being Justified freely by his grace, etc.


How afflictions come on the godly after their sins are pardoned.
THe Doctrine about remission of sin being thus particularly declared, we come
to that great Question, How afflictions come upon the godly after the pardon of
their sins? For the Antinomian goes into one extremity, and the Papist into
another, so true is that of Tertullian, Christ is always crucified between two
thieves; that is, Truth suffers between two extreme errors. Therefore in
prosecuting this point, which is of great practical concernment, I will lay
down, First, What the Antinomian says; Secondly, What the Papist; And lastly,
What the Orthodox. The Antinomian, The Antinomians error therein.
in his book, called the Honeycomb of Justification, explaineth himself in
these particulars, by which you may judge, that his Honey is Gall. Having made
this Objection to himself, That the children of God are corrected by God,
therefore he sees sin in them, makes a large Answer: Distinguishing first of
afflictions, Cap. 7. p. 121.
calling some Legal, and some Evangelical, and then he distinguishes of
Persons, making some unconverted, others converted; the unconverted again, he
makes to be either such as are reprobate, or else elected; now (says he) the
legal crosses have a twofold operation, either vindicative or corrective:
Vindicative are such afflictions as God executes upon the wicked and
reprobates* in which sense God is called the God of vengeance: Corrective, are
such lashes of the Law, as are executed upon those persons that are the
children of God by election, but not yet converted, and so under the Law,
therefore these afflictions are not in wrath, to confound them, but in mercy to
prepare them to their conversion, for God seeing sins in them, lays crosses
upon them. Now these elect persons he calls unconverted, actively and
declaratively, in a very ambiguous, and suspicious manner, as if conversion
were from all eternity, as well as Justification, so that as they say, a man in
time is justified only declaratively, being indeed so from all eternity, thus
he must be said to be converted: and if this be true, then it will likewise
follow, that a man in heaven is glorified likewise only declaratively, but
actually and indeed glorified from all eternity, even while he is in this
miserable house of clay. In the next place he comes to Evangelical crosses,
which fall upon them that are actively and declaratively (as he calls it)
converted, and these he denies expressly to be for their sins, for this were
(says he) to deny Christ's satisfactory punishment, because by his death, we
have not one spot of sin in us: therefore he makes them to be only the trial of
their faith, and to exercise their faith: so that (by his divinity) when a
godly man is afflicted, the flesh would indeed persuade a man has sin in him,
but this is to try whether thou can believe thou art cleansed from sin for
all these afflictions. Therefore if any man yield to this temptation ( viz.
that he has sin in him when he is afflicted) what is this (says he) but to
deny Christ and his blood? Think you this to be the voice of the Scriptures?
Hence he labors to show that twelve absurdities would follow from this
doctrine of Gods afflicting his children for their sins, the strength of which
shall be in his place considered; I have now only laid down his judgment; and
he makes the Doctrine of the Protestants opposing this to be Popish, and
confounding the Law and the Gospel together. Hence intending the Protestant
Authors and Ministers, he says, They paint God like an angry father, ever
seeing sin in us, and ever standing with a rod and staff in his hand, lifted up
over our heads, with which by reason he sees sins in us, he is ever ready,
though not to strike us down, yet to crack our crowns, and sorely to whip us:
whereas the Gospel describes him to be not only a loving Father, but also our
well-pleased Father, at perfect peace with us; so that the upshot of his
position is to show, that they are taskmasters and do degenerate to the legal
teaching in the Old Testament, whosoever preach that God does correct Believers
for their sins: and I have, says he, somewhat the more largely hunted this
Fox, because it is so nourished, not only by the Papists, but also some of us
Protestants, who by lisping the language of Ashdod* do undermine the very roots
of the Lords vine. And that you may see it is not one man's judgment amongst
them, see what their great General says in a Sermon, Dr Crispe.
page 162. Know this, that at that instant, when God brings afflictions upon
thee, he does not remember any sin of thine, they are not in his thoughts
toward thee. Again, whatsoever things befall the children of God, are not
punishments for sins, they are not remembrances of sin, and if men or Angels
shall endeavor to contradict this, let them be accounted as they deserve. The
Papists error concer^ing the same.
Thus the Antinomian. The Papist goes into another extremity, for thus they
hold, Bellar* de poen. lib. 4. cap. 1, and 2. That when God has forgiven a
sin, yet it is according to his Justice, that the sinner should suffer, or do
something to satisfy this justice, not in respect of the sin as it is against
God (for although some say so, yet others reject it) but in respect of some
temporal punishment, either in this life, or in the life to come, which is the
ground of Purgatory. And that this may be made good, they say, When God does
forgive a sin, he does not presently remit the temporal punishment; therefore
men may by some satisfactory penalties voluntarily taken upon themselves,
rescue themselves from these temporal punishments. Now this is a doctrine
extremely derogating from the full satisfaction of Christ's death, The Orthodox
truth is, that God forgiving sin, remits the punishment in order to vindicative
justice, but yet corrects in mercy as a father*
as the Orthodox show against the Papists. Therefore in the third place, the
truth is this, That God when he forgiveth a sin or sins, he does likewise take
off all temporal punishment, properly so called, viz. in order to any
vindicative justice, as if a further supply were to be made to Christ's
sufferings by what we endure: yet we say withal, that God indeed does take
notice of the sins of those that are justified, and does correct them for them:
so that when he chastises them, it is in reference to their sins, they are the
occasion, or the impulsive cause (as we may say, though improperly when we
speak of God.) Although the final cause, and the end why God does so, is not to
satisfy his justice, but for other ends. It is doubted whether we may call
them punishments or no: but we need not litigate about the word, I see
Chemnitius and Rivet calls them so. And if we make a distinction in Gods end,
why he afflicts the godly for their sins, from that when he punishes the
wicked, though both for their sins, we speak the truth fully enough, though we
call them punishments; and certainly the words punish or punishment, used Hos.
4.19. Ezekiel. 9.13. Levit. 26.41. do not take the word punishment in such a
strict sense. The Greek word (...) is used of the damned Angels and men, 2 Pet.
2.9. Mat. 25.46. and this word seems not applicable to the afflictions of Gods
people for their sins, and so the word (...) seems to be an act of some
Judge, who does not attend to mercy, (...), Suidas in voc. But the word (...)
to Judge, is attributed to God when he does correct his children, 1 Cor. 11.31.
where the Apostle uses three words in an elegant paronomasia (...) and (...);
so then when God does afflict his people, he may be said to do it as a Judge,
and afflictions are called judgments, 1 Pet. 4.17. only when God does thus
correct and punish his people, he is paternus Iudex, a fatherly Judge. But the
most expressive word of these afflictions, is (...), which denotes God
afflicting his people, as a father his child; and although he does it, because
of their faultslts, yet he has tenderness in what he does. This is the truth:
and for the proving of it, Propositions proving the same.
consider these Propositions:

First, That God does not afflict any but where there is sin in the subject;
for so was the threatening at first, 1 God afflicts not any but where sin is.
in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die. By death is meant all kind of
evil and punishment, so that had there been no sin going before, there had no
curse, either upon man or creatures followed after. Hence it is that Divines
say, The very hunger and thirst which Adam had, while in the state of
integrity, was without that pain and provocation as it is in us. So that the
state of man in righteousness, was like the heavens that admit of no
corruptive alterations. As for that dispute, 2 Objection answered.
Whether God may not by his absolute Sovereignty adjudge man without the
consideration of sin to everlasting misery, the affirmative decision of it will
not much incommodate this truth, seeing that even then (they say) God does this
per modum simplicis cruciatus, by way of a mere naked trouble and pain: not per
modum poenae, by way of a punishment. As for Christ, he though innocent, was a
man of sorrows, because our sins were laid on him.

2 God sometimes afflicts, yet not in reference to sin.
Secondly, That God may, and sometimes does afflict, yet not in reference to
sin. Thus God does exercise Job, who though he was not without sin, yet God
seems not to do it for sin: Therefore such calamities were rather exercises
of his graces, then correctives of his sins: they were to him, what a storm, or
a tempest is to a skillful Pilate, what a valiant adversary is to a stout
Champion; and to this purpose is that answer of our Savior, when the question
was, Whether the parents, or the blind man himself had sinned, that he should
be born blind? (speaking according to the opinion of some Philosophers, that
was now also received among the Jews (as learned men think) viz. That there was
a prexistency of the souls before they were united to their bodies) our Savior
returns this answer, Neither has this man sinned (because he had no being
before his birth) nor his parents ( viz. some grievous sin, for which God would
punish the child) but only that the works of God may be made manifest. This
also must be granted.

Thirdly, That all afflictions and crosses are to be reduced to the Law. 3 All
afflictions are to be reduced to the Law.
We may acknowledge this truth also, if so be by Law we mean strictly
whatsoever does command and threaten, and the Gospel to be only promissory,
though if largely taken, the Gospel has its curses and afflictions; so God
threatening or afflicting of a godly man, does so far use the Law as an
instrument to make him sensible of his sin: and therefore this is a sure
Argument, that the Law is not abolished as to all uses to the Believer, because
still there do befall afflictions to the godly, not only from sin (as the
Antinomians speak) but for sin; only as the Law without the grace of God
works all evil, so do all afflictions likewise to men that are not godly:
Therefore wicked men in afflictions, are as garlik, or any ill-smelling herb,
the more it is pounced, the worse smell it sends forth; so that there must be
teaching, as well as chastening, to make that affliction blessed.

Fourthly, There is a great difference in the calamities of the godly.
That in the calamities which fall upon the godly there is a great difference,
some are common and absolutely determined, others more special, and not
necessary. This distinction must be attended, for God has so peremptorily and
irrevocably concluded upon some miseries as the fruits of sin, that no
repentance or humiliation can ever take them off. Thus though a man should have
as much faith as Abraham, as much meekness as Moses, as much uprightness as
David, as much zeal and labor for the Church, as Paul; yet all this would not
free from death, nor could it remove the curse that is upon the ground; so a
woman's holiness and humiliation cannot take away the pains and throbs in
childe-bearing, for these are absolutely decreed. But then there are special
calamities, which many times by turning unto God are taken away; yea, and God
very frequently when he pardons sin, he takes also away those outward
miseries, as we see in many whom he healed both in soul and body at the same
time. So that we say not God is bound always when he does pardon sin,
outwardly to afflict for it.

Fifthly, 5 Some calamities for sin, others for other ends.
There are again some calamities that come upon them because of sin, others for
other ends. We acknowledge it as clear as the sun, that many troubles upon the
godly, are by way of trial and temptation upon them, and because of the good
that is in them; of these the Apostle James speaks, when he bids them count it
all joy, when they fall into diverse temptations; of these Paul speaks, when he
says he will rejoice in his infirmities; so that the persecutions and miseries
which come upon them are an Argument of the good in them, more then of the
evils; as the tree that is full of fruit, has its boughs more broken, then that
which is barren, and the Pirates watch for the ship that is fraughted with
gold. And thus a martyr comforted himself; That though he had many sins, for
which he deserved death, yet he thanked God, that his enemies did not attend to
them, but to the good that was in him, and for that he suffered: so then, all
the grievances upon the godly are not of the same nature.

Sixthly, 6 Afflictions for sins of the godly and wicked diff^r.
The afflictions for sins upon the godly do differ much from those that are
upon the wicked. This we also grant, that when God does punish the godly and
the wicked for their sins, though the punishment for the matter of it may be
alike, yet they differ in other respects very much; as in the cause from which,
one comes from a God hating their persons, the other from anger indeed, but
the anger of a father. Hence secondly, they differ in the fittedness of these
afflictions to do good, God does moderate these afflictions to his people, that
thereby grace may be increased; but to the reprobate, they are no more to their
good, then the flames of hellfire are to the damned; The Butcher he cuts the
August. Again, in the end they differ; All afflictions to the godly, are like
the beating of clothes in the Sun with a rod, to get out the dust, and moths,
but it is not so with the wicked; many other differences practical Divines
prove out of the Scripture.

Seventhly, 7 God sometimes chastises h^s people in reference to their sins
though forgiven. This proved 1. from Scripture.
Yet God does in reference to the sins of his people, though forgiven,
sometimes chastise them. This is proved,

1. From the Scripture, that makes their sin the cause of their trouble: Thus
of David, Because thou (says Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.14.) have given great occasion
to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is born of thee,
shall die: Thus God speaks to all the godly in Solomon, 2 Samuel 7.14, 15. I will
be his father, and he shall be my son: if he commit iniquity, I will chasten
him with the rod of men* but my mercy will I not take away: In these places,
sin is expressly made the cause of those afflictions; and it is a poor evasion
to say, this was in the Old Testament, for was not the chastisement of the
godly men's peace in the Old Testament, laid upon Christ, as well as in the New?
but their folly herein, and their contradiction to themselves, will be
abundantly showed, in answering their objections.

2 In the places that do assert Gods judging of the people.
2. In the places that do assert Gods judging of his people, and rebuking of
them: and they are diverse, 1 Cor. 11. For this cause many are sick, and weak:
where again, you have not only the affliction, but the cause why, viz.
irreverent profaning of that Sacrament. Thus James 5.14. Is any man sick? Let
him call for the Elders, and let them pray for him, and if he have committed
sins (says the Text) they shall be forgiven him: There is none but has
committed sins; yet the Apostle makes such an if, because he speaks of such
sins, that may provoke God to lay that sickness upon him. Thus in the Old
Testament, Psalm. 99.8. Thou forgavest them, 3 From the i^couragement to duties
by temporal arguments, and th^e^s of temporal ^ffl^ctions.
though thou took^st vengeance on their inventions: Here the Psalmist calls the
chastisements upon those, whose sins were forgiven, vengeance: as in other
places, his anger is said to smoke against the sheep of his pasture; but we
must not understand it of vengeance strictly so called, as if God would
satisfy his justice out of their sufferings.

3. From the encouragement to duties by temporal Arguments, and threats of
temporal afflictions. If the godly have these goads, then certainly, as they
may conclude their temporal mercies to be the fruit of their godliness, which
has the promise of this life, and the life to come; so they may conclude that
their afflictions are the effects of their evil ways, which have the
threatening of this life, and the life to come; only here is this difference,
that the outward good mercies, are not from their godliness by way of merit,
or causality, but their afflictions are so, because of their sins: Hence the
Apostle urges the godly, Heb. 12.19. with this, that even our God is a
consuming fire: Thus 1 Pet. 3.10, 11. He that will love life and see good
days, let him eschew evil, and do good. So that the Scripture pressing to
holiness, because of outward good mercies, and to keep from sin because of
external evils, and pressing these to the godly, does evidently declare this
truth; and certainly the Apostle, speaking of the godly, Romans 8.10. says, the
body is dead because of sin; for by body, Beza does well understand our mortal
body, and not the mass of sin, as some interpret it.

4. From the comparison God uses concerning his afflictions upon his people;
and that is, to be a father in that act, 4 From the comparison God uses
concerning his affliction upon his people.
correcting of them. Thus Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. compare this with
Rev. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke; now rebuke is always for some fault,
and this is further cleared, because he makes this conclusion, be zealous
therefore and repent, therefore sin was precedent. Now in these places, God
compares himself to a Father, and believers to children, Honey Com. 133.
and we all know that fathers never correct but for sin; it would be ridiculous
to say, the father whips the child from sin, not for sin. It is true, he does
it from sin, by way of prevention to the future, yet for sin also. The
Antinomian says this is spoken of many believers together, where some were not
converted, but this is weak, because the persons whom he reproves, God is said
to love them, and they are children not bastards. Again he says, There is no
sin mentioned, therefore it was not for sin; But I answer, 5 From the Command
not to despise our afflictions but to humble our selves.
the very comparison of God with a Father correcting his child, does evidently
argue, it was for sin; though it be not expressed.

5. From the command not to despise, or to make little account of Gods
afflictions, but to humble our selves, and search out our ways. Why should
this be spoken, but because they are for our sins? Heb. 12.5. Despise not the
chastening of God, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him. Where two things
may seem to be forbidden, though some make them all one, one not to faint,
(...), a metaphore from those who faint in the race, through languor, and
dissolution of mind. The other is in the other extreme, not (...) to despise,
or to make little or nothing of it: as it were a great fault in a child, to
slight or make nothing of his fathers corrections. Now let all the world judge,
whether the Antinomian Doctrine does not open a wide gate to despise Gods
afflictions: this makes them cry down Fast-daies, repentance, humiliation, and
confession of sin: yea they make it Popery, and hypocrisy what is done this
way. (...) we may say with Homer.

6 From the command given to Magistrates.
6. If God has commanded Magistrates to execute outward evils upon some godly
men, that have hainously offended, then its Gods will to afflict them for sin;
but he has done so. If a godly man, being through the Dalilah of some
corruption, persuaded to have his hair cut off, his spiritual strength gone,
and so he fall into the sin of murder: is it not Gods will that the Magistrate
should put him to death for this sin? and what God would have the Magistrate
do, is it not as much as if God himself had done? and must not all say this is
a chastisement upon him because of his sin? Thus have I brought reasons to
prove that, which I think was never denied before, till this age, which every
day like Africa brings forth some Monster. And certainly the Doctrine of
afflictions upon the godly is so sweet and wholesome a truth, that none but a
Spider could suck out such poison from it, as the Antinomian has done.

LECTURE V.
ROMANS 3.24, 25. Being justified freely by his grace, etc.


WE come now to consider how the Antinomian can make good that Paradox of his [
God chastises not believers because of their sins] and indeed the Author
forementioned does much sweat and tug, in bringing in several absurdities,
Whether God chastises believe^s because of their sins. The A^tinomian Paradox
discussed.
which he conceives will follow upon the truth asserted by us. But before we
examine them, let us take notice of the Authors great contradiction to himself
in this point, and that within very few Pages; Falsehood is not only dissonant
from truth, but also from it felf; for whereas in the forequoted place he makes
his assertion universal, that Ged sees not sin in persons converted, and
therefore there are no afflictions befall them because of sin: Now see how flat
contrary that same Author speaks in the same book, page 117. for there making
an opposition between the condition of believers in the Old Testament, and
those in the new, he expressly gives this difference: God (says he) saw sin in
them, as they were children that had need of a rod, by reason of their nonage,
but he sees none in us, as being full-grown heirs; and again, God saw in them,
and punished them for it, as they were under the Schoolmaster of the Law, but
he sees none in us: Hence page 99. he makes it peculiar to the time of the
Law, that Moses for an unadvised word was stricken with death, and Vzzah, and
Jonah, and Ely, with others temporally corrected: Therefore it was (says he)
came those terrible Famines, whereby mothers were driven to eat their own
children, all was because they were under the severity of the Law, that if they
did but a little step awry, they were sharply scourged for the same.

Now how great a contradiction is this to his other assertion? for were not the
godly under the Old Testament actually converted? had they not Christ's
righteousness made theirs? were they not elected? how comes it about then, that
they were afflicted for sin, and not believers under the New Testament? when a
man can bring the East and West together, then may he reconcile these
assertions: but self contradiction is no strange thing in that book.

Antinomian Arguments answered.
But I come to his Arguments; The first place he urges is To. 5.1, 2, 3. Being
justified by faith we have peace with God, that is, all beating, 1. Argum.
blows, and anger are ceased, says he, and hence it is that we glory in our
afflictions: but now if they were for our sins, we had no more cause to glory
in them, then the child has in his whippings for his faults. For the opening
of this place consider these things, some ancient Commentators read the word
imperatively ((...) for (...)) let us have, instead of we have, and thus they
have interpreted it,

[Being justified by Faith, let us take heed how we sin again, but preserve our
peace with God] The words taken this way would much confirm, 1. Answer.
rather then debilitate our assertion: but I do not judge this so suitable to
the scope of the Apostle in this verse; we will take them as they are
indicatively or assertively: and first, we may mean by peace, either that
reconciliation which is made with God, or the sense and feeling of this, which
is nothing but tranquillity, and security of conscience, through the persuasion
of Gods favor to us. Now these may be separable one from the other, a believer
may be reconciled with God, and in the state of friendship with him, yet he not
feel this, or know this, as many passages in David's Psalms do witness; even as
the child in the womb knows not the great inheritance, and rich Revenues, it
shall be possessed of, or as Agar did not see the well of water by her, but
thought she must perish, till God opened her eyes. There is a seal of the
pardon of sin, when yet the proclamation of it is not made in the conscience.
If we take peace in the first respect, it is an absolute universal proposition,
and true of every justified person; but in the latter sense it is true only of
some persons, and at some times, for the sense of Gods favor is a separable
privilege from those that are in it.

If by peace we should understand the sense of Gods favor, and the declaration
of it in our consciences (as by their arguments they must do) then it proves
against their opinion as well as any others: for they hold that a believer
needs to pray for pardon in the declaration or sense and feeling of sin,
though not for the pardon it self of sin; now there cannot be at the same time
a want of the feeling of pardon of sin, and the tranquillity of conscience
together: so that this place must needs be a thorn in their side.

But 2ly, the true and direct answer to this place is, that there is a twofold
peace, one which is opposite to the hatred of God, 2. Answer.
as he is a terrible enemy to sinners, unreconciled with them, in which sense
he is often described in Scripture. The other, as it is opposite to that
fatherly anger and displeasure, whereby though for the main reconciled, yet he
may for some particular faults be displeased; now the Apostle speaks of the
former kind of peace. Being justified that is God being once reconciled with
us in Christ, he has no more hostile enmity against us, and if we do sin
afterward, he will not become an enemy to us, or satisfy his justice by
punishing of us, but as a father he may in his displeasure chastise us. The
sense of Gods displeasure as a father, may well stand together with an
assurance, that for all this he is no enemy. A child that bitterly cries out
because of his fathers chastisements, yet even then has that hope and comfort
which he would not have if fallen into the hands or rage of an enemy that would
kill him. Hence it is that we press all believers, though sorely punished for
their sins, as their own hearts can tell them, yet they must never pass such a
sentence, Now God is become my enemy, he deals with me as with a Judas, as with
a Cain; these (we say) are sinful inferences, but they may conclude thus, God,
though a loving father, is now very angry, and much displeased with me.

Distinguish then between a peace that does oppose the hatred of God to a
sinner as an enemy, and a peace which does oppose only the frowns of a father;
and this objection is answered. I will acknowledge the people of God are apt
under his sore displeasure not to discern between a father and an enemy. They
have much ado to keep up this in their hearts; God he smites, he frowns, he
chides* yet he is a father still: but this is their temptation and weakness,
and we are apt to endeavor some kind of compensation to God in our troubles
for sin: therefore it was a most blessed thing when God at the Reformation out
of Popery, caused this truth to break out, That punishments for sin were not
satisfactory to God, but fatherly chastisements. Thus you have this answered,
and as for that which follows, we glory in tribulations, the Apostle must be
limited to those which fall upon us for professing of Christ and his truth. In
these we may glory, as the soldier does of his marks and wounds he has
received in the wars for a good cause, and to this purpose we told you in one
Proposition, That there was a great difference between those troubles that fell
upon us, because of the good in us; and those which come upon us, because of
the evil in us. What glory is it, says Peter, 1 Pet. 2.20. if ye be buffeted
for your faults? Now who can deny but that even a godly man may fall into some
heinous crime, for which he may receive a sentence of death? This man though he
may rejoice in God, who does pardon the sin to him, yet he can no more glory of
this tribulation, then a child does of whipping for his faults.

Another place of Scripture, is Isa. 53.5. The chastisement of our peace was
upon him, 2. Argum.
and with his stripes we are healed. This Text of Scripture is again and again
pressed by them, and certainly it is more sweet then the Honey or Honeycomb:
but truly they do with it, as the thieves with the man of Jericho, leave it
half dead, 1. Answer.
and much wounded. First, Let us open the place, and then see how far they are
from the meaning. The Prophet Isaiah in this Chapter, may be called, as we said
before, the fifth Evangelist, for he seems rather to write an History of
Christ, then make a prophecy of him. Among other passages these two are to our
purpose.

1. That the chastisement of our peace was upon him: by Peace here, Calvin does
well understand, not that of quietness in the conscience, but a reconciliation
made with God through his sufferings. And it is observed by some, how
emphatical the Scripture is in that Pronoun [ He] He has born, and He has
been wounded.

The second follows, With his stripes we are healed: Some think that this is
spoken to debase that condition Christ so voluntarily put himself in, that so
his love might appear the more to us; it being an allusion to the State of
servants, who used to be chastised by their lords. The phrase is the same with
that, He has born our griefs, or diseases, which Matthew. 8.17. is applied to
Christ's healing of diseases, and 1 Pet. 2. to that suffering upon the Cross.
And well may this be, because the outward healing of diseases, was a Symbol or
Testimony of his inward healing. Although Grotius observes, That Christ is
therefore said to bear our diseases when he cured them, because of the great
pains and travel he took therein, for it was after Sunset, and the multitude
did much throng him; so then, by the words you see the whole price of our peace
laid upon Christ, and by him all evils, both temporal and spiritual removed:
but what is this to the purpose? Yes (say they) here our chastisements are laid
upon Christ, therefore we have none for sin; but 1. if this proved any thing,
it will be more then the Antinomians will yield, for it would infer, that there
are no chastisements at all, either for sin, or no sin; now the Antinomians
cannot deny (and experience confuteth them) but that the godly have
afflictions, though as (they say) not for sin; and this will inevitably follow
by their argument; for as they would prove from hence they have no sin at all,
not only sin that will not condem (as the Orthodox say) but even no sin; so it
will by the same reason follow, that believers have no chastisements at all, I
do not say ( not for sin) but none at all.

But Secondly, 2. Answer.
The Antinomian in that place page 129. does fully answer himself, All
chastisement (says he) for sin, needful for the making perfect peace between
God and his justified children, was laid upon him: very true, Therefore say we,
though these chastisements be for sin, yet they are not upon the godly as upon
Christ, they are not to satisfy Gods justice, to work a reconciliation, but
only to humble them in themselves, and make them the better feel how much they
are beholding to Christ who bore so much wrath for them. To say therefore as
the Papists, Christ by his death did only remove the spiritual evil, and we by
our sufferings must take away the temporal punishment, this would indeed be
derogatory to Christ, and take off in a great measure from his glory.

A Third place brought in to maintain their error, 3. Argum.
is James 1.2, 3, 4, 5. Count it matter of all joy when you shall fall into
diverse temptations, therefore (says he) they are not for sin, because they are
matters of joy; and mark how he baptizeth (goes on the Author) crosses and
afflictions, as it were with a new name, taken from the nature of the change of
them through the Gospel, calling them temptations and trials. But mark the
ignorance of the adversary rather then the name of afflictions: for, Is it
peculiar to believers under the Gospel, that their afflictions are trials? what
then will he return to that place, Deuteronomy. 8.2. God says, the afflictions upon
the people of Israel for forty years in the wilderness (and they were not all
believers, much less believers under the Gospel) were to humble them, and
prove or try them? And Jer. 9.7. God speaking of the Israelites says, He will
melt them and try them. See also Dan. 9.25. Zech. 13.9. Whereby you will
presently judge of the man's bold ignorance. But as for the place it self,
certainly the words are very emphaticall. Count it (implying a man in his
choicest deliberation ought to do so) all joy, an Hebraism, full, perfect joy,
when ye fall, the word is so fall that ye are compassed round about. And
lastly, diverse temptations, By temptations Austin seems to have understood
inticements or provocations to sin, and whether such temptations may be
desired, or to give ground of a just joy, is disputed by the Schoolmen, but
that is impertinent: we see the Apostle speaks of afflictions, as appears
by the word following, and not all kind of afflictions, but such as are for
Christ's name: certainly the Apostle writing to the Corinthians, and speaking of
the chastisements of God upon them for their sins, he does not bid them count
that all joy, but rather exhorts them to judge themselves that they be not
condemned with the world. He does not then speak of all kind of afflictions,
but some only, and his meaning is not, that under even those afflictions they
should have no grief (for he says, no affliction is for the present joyous but
grievous) but he gives one respect why they should rejoice, because of the
good work of their faith manifested thereby, though in other considerations
they may be humbled. And I see not but even in those persecutions which befall
the godly for the Gospels sake, they may not, some of them at least, and
sometimes, be humiliations for the Godlies former sins, as well as
explorations of their Graces, and more eminent glorifying of them here and
hereafter. I deny not but even in afflictions for their sins, the people of God
may take comfort to their souls from several considerations, but I think not
that the Apostle does refer to them in this place: Let us now consider what
dangerous Absurdities would flow from this doctrine of ours; Absurdities
o^jected by Antinomians. 1 Absurdity objected.
and first (says he) this is to confound Law and Gospel together. The Law
should be preached only to secure sinners, the Gospel to broken sinners only;
whereas if you tell the godly when they are afflicted, that it is from their
sins, you preach Law to them.

But first, Then the Apostle mingled Law and Gospel, 1. Answer.
when he commands the Corinthians to judge themselves under Gods hand upon
them: and how legal was Peter, when he said, judgment must begin at the House
of God?

2. The Gospel and the Law are to be mingled in all spiritual administrations,
but for different ends. 2. Answer.
As they must not in preaching be confounded, so neither divided.

3. The people of God have still sin, pride, 3. Answer.
and hardness of heart remaining in them, and shall a Minister preach the
Gospel to his pride? shall we comfort them, because their hearts are sometimes
dull and froward?

Lastly, Though we say they are afflicted for their sins, 4. Answer.
yet this is not to make the crosses Legal but Evangelical; for we do not say
they are so for their sins, as that thereby they must satisfy the justice of
God in their own persons, but for other considerations.

A second Absurdity will be, say they, 2 Absurdity objected.
hereby to make the Gospel unsufficient to abolish the old man, unless it
borrow help from the Law.

But first, Observe his contradiction, 1. Answer.
The Gospel does abolish sin in the believer; how can that be, when he holds
there is no sin to be abolished? certainly that which is not, needs not to be
abolished, for it is not already.

Secondly, If the Gospel be so powerful to abolish sin, 2. Answer
why will he have the Law preached to obstinate sinners? certainly by his rule
the Gospel would sooner melt the tuffest and most Ironny sinner that is.

Thirdly, 3. Answer
That which he would have such an absurdity is an eminent truth: the Law and
the Gospel are mutually subservient to each other, and are to be preached as
conjoined, though not confounded one with another.

Another Absurdity (for I cannot take them in order, 3 Absurdity objected.
seeing he does absurdly make one thing several arguments, and so does but
tautologize) This would be to deny Christ's perfect righteousness, and that we
are not made without all spots or blemishes.

1. Answer.
But first, It does not derogate from Christ, that we are not freed from sin,
while here in this life, for he himself holds the believers in the Old
Testament, had sin in them, and God scourged them for it, yet Christ bore their
sins, and took away their iniquities.

2. Answer.
Secondly, If this place prove any thing, it would the Popish Tenet, That we are
inherently without sin: and the Antinomian denies that, for he says, we are
made perfectly holy; not actively, but passively, whereas those places speak of
an active holiness.

3. Answer.
Thirdly, If so be the sin remaining in us did not only bring temporal evils but
eternal; did not bring only a disease but hell also; then this would evacuate
the fullness of Christ's death, but now it does not.

4 Absurdity objected.
A fourth Absurdity he would fetch from an Argument of Bish. Babingtons, Ejus
quod non est, non est poena, but sin when it is forgiven, is not; therefore to
forgiven sin there is no temporal punishment.

Answer.
I answer first, If by that which is not, should be meant that which has a
physical and natural existence, then the Argument would prove that no sin
whether forgiven or not forgiven, could damn a man, because no sin (according
to the received opinion) has any positive natural being: therefore it must be
understood of a moral being, that is, a desert of punishment. Now when sin is
said to be forgiven, the reason is not, at if remission of sin made sin no sin,
drunkenness no drunkenness; or as if that sin did not deserve punishment, for
that is inseparable from the nature of it: but forgiveness of sins takes away
the actual ordination of them to condemnation. So then a sin, though forgiven,
has some kind of being, though not that of actual ordination to everlasting
death; when therefore sins are said to be thrown into the bottom of the sea and
they shall be no more, that is to be understood quoad hoc* in respect of actual
condemnation. So David's sin was forgiven, viz. as to damn David, yet though
forgiven, it was still, viz. to afflict David, and to make God angry with him.

5 Absurdity objected.
A fifth Absurdity, If you say the people of God are afflicted for sin, this
would trouble the consciences of Gods children exceedingly, and make them
fearfully to expect horrible temporal plagues every hour, because the least sin
is so infinitely distasteful to God.

But first, 1. Answer.
It seems then a godly man though fallen into murder, adulteries, etc. his
conscience must not be troubled: Peter if he denies Christ, must not weep
bitterly.

Secondly, we give many cordials and antidotes against despair, 2. Answer.
while we say they are afflictions even for sin, for we add further, That they
are all bounded within a due measure; God considers our strength, and will lay
no more then he will enable to bear.

Thirdly, There is a twofold trouble, 3. Answer.
one that is holy and effectual for good, such a trouble as that was which the
Angel made in the pool of Bethesda; and there is a trouble by way of torment,
driving from, and raging at God; now we all forbid this later, neither will
this Doctrine give any ground to such a distemper.

Lastly, 4. Answer.
If a doctrine shall be branded for such an event as shall come through the
corruptions of men, then we may say their opinion will encourage believers, or
men that do presume they are so, to act all manner of flagitious crimes, and
yet to have no fear that God will plague them for those things.

LECTURE VI.
JER. 50.20. In those days, and at that time, the iniquity of Judah shall be
sought for, and it shall not be found, etc.


ALthough the Apostle say true, 1 Timothy 6.4. that there is a doting about
questions, whereby the soul of a man is made sick and spiritually diseased, as
the Greek word (...) implies, weakening and debilitating grace, as much as
fretting does waste away the flesh; and this is done when men encounter in
controversies as beasts in their combats, seeking only victory; yet there may
be such a doctrinal clearing of truth by answering of Objections, that may tend
much to edification, both in knowledge and affections; and by the striking of
flint stones together, there may fly out sparks enough to kindle godliness and
zeal in our breast. This I shall endeavor by Gods assistance in that necessary
and famous question, of Gods forgiving sin. For to preach in crabbed
controversies, is like Gideon, Judge. 8.16. to teach men with briars and thorns,
as the phrase there is. The Antinomian places this Text in the forefront, for
that absurd opinion, God sees no sin in persons justified: The Text opened.
if therefore their Goliath be slain, the rest will speedily quit the field. The
words contain a gracious promise to Judah and Israel.

First, To deliver them from their temporal evil: They shall be brought out of
their captivity into their own country again: we need not dispute how many
came back again, its enough this mercy was offered them, howsoever they might
neglect it.

Secondly, Here is a promise to remove their spiritual evil, which was the
cause of the former; God will pardon their sins; and by this a profitable
Doctrine is taught, That a people ought to be more desirous of Gods pardon,
then of removal of their calamities, whereas commonly like unwise diseased men,
we complain more of the Symptoms then of the disease it self. The evil of sin
depriveth us of an infinite good; but the evil of afflictions, only of a
finite. Now this promise is not to be stretched out only to the times of the
Gospel, but is particularly true of the Jews, when removed out of their
banishment, yet not to be limited to that time only; and howsoever the promise
for pardon be general to all, yet it is to be understood in this manner, that
to the wicked, their sin was no farther forgiven, then in this sense, That
their captivity was removed: but to the true believers, there was a real taking
away of Gods wrath and displeasure from them. The promise of pardon is
described very emphatically and comfortably to the truly humbled Jews, There
shall be none of their sins, and none shall be found when sought for: This
expression does suppose a judicial inquiry, (as when God is said to make
inquisition for blood) and to be found does imply, God judicially taking notice
of a man to punish him, so Rev. 20.15. In her was found the blood of the
Saints: So Beza amplifieth that word, Phil. 3.9. be found in him, as if the
justice of God were pursuing Paul as a malefactor, and Christ was a City of
refuge unto him.

Observation. Remission of sin is such a taking of it away, Observation.
as if it had never been: he that denies sins forgiven to be quite removed,
denies Pharaoh and his host to be drowned in the red Sea, said Gregory.

This point practically improved is the treasure of a believers comfort: But
there is the Antinomian error on the right hand, and the Popish on the left,
whereby a godly heart, if not well instructed, may when it calls for bread, meet
with a stone, Errors concerning remission of sin.
and when for fish, with a serpent. Therefore for the more orderly proceeding,
let us consider what the Antinomian says, then what the Papist; and lastly,
what the truth is. Antinomian errors.
The Antinomians opinion may be discovered in these particulars.

1. That a justified person having on Christ's wedding garment, has thereby all
his sins quite taken away from before God, and so utterly abolished, that we
have not any spot of sin in the sight of God (Honeycomb of Justification, page
24. cap. 3. per tot.)

2. This is extended by them ( page 27.) not only to actual sins but original
sins, for we easily grant that in actual sins, if once forgiven, there
remains no more defilement, but that he is made in that respect of remission,
as white as snow, though there may remain a further disposition to evil, by
that sin once committed, if renewing grace help not.

3. This abolition of sin, they understand both of the fault and the guilt; so
that God does not only take away the punishment, but both the form of the sin
also is wholly removed, so that there is neither punishment nor cause of
punishment, in one thus justified. Hence they say, there is no sin in the
Church now, and they express it thus, As a Physician, though he heals a man,
yet he cannot take away the scars; but God heals sin so, as no scar
remains, yea, he gives a fresh color again. They say likewise, our sin is
consumed, as if one drop of water should be abolished by the heat of the Sun,
yea, page 39. the Author affirms, that whosoever have not confidence in this
one point, that our sins are so taken away by Christ, that God does not see our
sins in us, without doubt are damned as long as they continue to rob the blood
of Christ of this honor; Therefore (says he) true Divinity teaches that
there is no sin in the Church any more.

p. 51.) of a twofold abolishing, the one mystical and secret, wrought only by
Christ, and his righteousness; The other gross and palpable, wrought by us, by
the help of Gods Spirit, to our sense and feeling; so that they grant sin in
us, and sin to be mortified, but this is not in Gods sight, although it be in
our own.

God has an all-seeing eye, and therefore he cannot but see sin if it be in
us, They answer, God indeed sees all things, saving that which he will not
see, but undertakes to abolish out of his sight, and they distinguish of Gods
knowing and his seeing (p.68.) God knows believers sins, but he does not see
them. To know, is to understand the nature of a thing: but to see (according to
them) is to behold the real existence of a thing: now that cannot be of sin,
because its taken away. Thus (say they) God did know the sins of Abraham, and
men did reprove him, but God did never once rebuke him in all his life after
his calling, for any one sin.

So that by these Positions you may see their meaning to be, That a justified
man is by Christ so cleansed, that God sees nothing but what is perfectly holy
in him: sin not only in the punishment, but in the existence of it is removed
quite away as to Gods sight. Hence God takes no notice, never chastises them,
never reproves them, because he sees nothing but what is exceeding good; and
therefore because the justified feel the contrary, that they have sin, they
commend and press faith, to live above sense, reason, and all our experience;
for (say they) as a man that looks through red glass, sees every thing red, so
God looking through Christ, sees not only our persons, but all our actions,
perfectly righteous with Christ righteousness. What else may be said of their
opinion, is to be spoken of, when we treat of imputed righteousness.

Popish errors concerning remission of sin.
In the next place, let us consider what is Popery in this point, The Papists,
as Bellarmine, lib. de Justif. c. 7. say with the Antinomian, That forgiveness
of sin is the quite abolishing of it, and that whether it be original or
actual, so that no sin abides any more in a man so justified, till he falls
from it; and says Bellarmine, If the Scripture would have invented words on
purpose, to show that sin is quite extinguished, it could not use other then it
does, and they think it impossible to conceive, that there should be sin in a
man, and yet justified; for this is (say they) to make him at the same time a
child of God and the devil, The devil to dwell in him by sin, and Christ by
Justification. Thus they distinguish not between sin reigning and sin being.
Though sin be in a godly man, yet it neither has vim damnatricem or
dominatricem, condemning power, or reigning power. Now its wonder the Papists
should conceive this so impossible, when they hold that the godly have venial
sins, which yet are truly sins, and so by their own argument God must hate and
punish them, yet God does not break off his friendship for all that: now
compare these two errors together in their agreement and difference.

1. Both Papist and Antinomian agree in this, Papists and Antinomians agreement,
That remission of sin, is quite abolishing and extinguishing of sin, both in
the existence of it and punishment (although some Papists hold for the later,
viz. of punishment, at least temporal, that that may abide, though the sin be
forgiven.)

2. They both agree in the places of Scripture, as Christ cleansing us from all
sin, Thou art all fair my love, To purchase to himself a Church without spot or
wrinkle; These and the like, they both insist much upon.

3. They both agree in reason to prove it, viz. That sin is so odious to God
that he hates it wheresoever it is, and therefore a godly man must at the same
time be the object of Gods hatred and love, which (say they) is absurd to
affirm; but here they differ; the Antinomian makes a believer without sin,
because of Christ's righteousness which he is clothed with; as also difference.
The Papist he makes him to be without sin inherently, because of the grace of
sanctification perfectly renewing him. And indeed though the Antinomian seem to
show more zeal to Christ and grace, yet the Papist speaks more to reason; and
if those places of Scripture did prove an utter extinguishing of sin, it would
carry it fairer, for an inherent perfect holiness, The Orthodox truth
concerning remission of sin.
then such a mystical perfection as they imagine. In the third place, I shall
lay down the truth, and wherein Scripture-doctrine does indeed sail between
these two rocks.

And, 1. The Orthodox do distinguish of the nature of sin, especially original,
and the guilt of it, now (say they) the Scripture makes forgivenes to be the
removing of the guilt, but the nature does still abide in some degrees.

This sin even in the godly, is seen by God, taken notice of, he hates it, and
does punish it, only he does not punish it in their own persons, but in Christ;
so that the sin of a godly man does offend God, and he abhors, and will
punish it: but Christ intervening, it falls upon him; so that our being in
Christ does not hinder Gods taking notice of our sins, and hating of them, but
only freeth us from final destruction by them.

If by seeing of sin should be meant judicial and final punishing of a man,
then we would say, God does not see sin in the godly in that sense, and this
some Orthodox have spoken, which the Antinomian mistaking, have lost the truth.
Thus Pareus, lib. 2. de Justific. cap. 9. p. 491. maintaining, That the godly
man's sins are covered, which (says he) supposes not that sins are not, but
that they are not seen, makes this objection, but nothing is covered, or hid
to God; and then answers, True, but what he would have covered, but he will
not fasten his eyes upon believers sins, because through Christ he turns away
the eyes of his justice, that he may place the eyes of his mercy upon them; and
to this purpose he quoteth Austin, Tecta peccata, quare dixit, ut non
viderentur, quid enim erat Dei videre peccata, nisi punire? Brockman likewise
de Justific. cap. 2. qu. 10. p. 526. In vain is it objected, That nothing is
covered to God, for that is true with this restriction, unless it be that
which he would have covered; so that if by seeing were meant Gods judicial
punishing and condemning, in that sense God does not see the sins of believers,
for he throws them behind his back: but if by seeing be meant (as the
Antinomian does) Gods not taking notice of, nor being offended with the sins of
the godly, so that he does not chastise them for them; this is a very dangerous
error, and is far more then a difference about words; for the truth is, That
the sins of a Godly man do offend God, and he is angry, not as a Father, but as
a Judge: hence (as you heard) the afflictions upon the Godly are for their
sins, and called Judgments, only he is a Fatherly Judge. There is an
excellent temperament of both these in God relatively to his people. For the
further discussion of this main point, Exp^essions in Scrip^u^e about pardoning
of sin*
let us consider practically, the sweet and full expression of the Scriptures
about pardoning of sin. One word frequently used is Nasa, which signifies to
lift up; and take away a thing so, 1. Verbal*
as that it was an heavy burden, and so some translate that, Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is he who is eased of his sin, for you may see in that Psalm, David
feeling an insupportable weight upon him by his iniquities, such as he could
not stand under: now to pardon, is to take this weight off, so Genesis 4.13. My
sin is greater then can be born, or taken away, i.e. forgiven: again, If thou
do well, is not Levatio, that is, pardon and ease? It is then no marvel, if
forgivenes of sin be accounted such a blessed thing, by those who truly feel
the burden of their iniquities. Hence you have it excellently, Zech. 3.9, 10.
made the cause of all quietness and content, when their sins were pardoned,
then they called to their neighbors to sit under their fig trees. And well
does Calvin call this, The chief hinge of Religion, and the truth of this
Doctrine is to be sought out with all care, for what quietness can a man have
till he know what judgment or esteem the Lord has of him, and in what manner
it is wrought?

Another expression of it is called covering of sin, there are two words for
this, the one is Chasah, and is used properly of such a thing that is put
between the object and the eye, Numb. 9.15. It is used of the Cloud that
covered the tabernacle, its applied to a Garment, or any other thing that does
cover, Genesis 3.21. Its applied to God covering Adams nakedness: Hence a learned
man thinks, those skins were of beasts sacrificed, which did prefigure Christ,
and God by this covering, would as by an outward Symbol teach them, by whom
their sins should be covered, and to this an allusion seems to be, Rev. 3.18.
I counsel thee to buy of me white garments, that thy nakedness may not appear.
A like word is Caphar, which signifies covering with pitch, or the like, which
does so cleave to the thing it covers, that it can hardly be removed. Its
applied Exodus 15.27. to the propitiatory, or covering made of pure gold,
wherein God showed himself gracious. It is used Levit. 16.30. The word also is
used of the pitching of the Ark, and as that pitch kept the waters from coming
in, so does the blood of Christ our sins from overflowing us, and this does
excellently describe the nature of pardoning of sin, God does as it were hide
it from us, he will not punish it: but you must not stretch this word too far
with the Antinomian, as if indeed God did not take notice of them, for David's
when it was covered, yet was visited afterward by God, but its covered so far,
as that it shall not condemn. We do not therefore as the Antinomian says, make
God peep under the covering again, but we say the word is a Metaphor, and must
not be understood grossly and palpably, as if there were any real thing put
before the eyes of God, that he could not behold our sins, but only that God
will not finally condemn us for sin. Furthermore, when a sin is pardoned, it is
said to be hid from Gods eyes, as if God did not know it, Jer. 16.17 The Hebrew
word Zaphan, is applied to the Northern part of the world, because it is hidden
from the heat of the Sun. Hence Joseph is called, Genesis 41.45. Zapthnath
paaneah, because he was a revealer of hidden things. Those iniquities therefore
which are so often before thee, 2. Real ^xpressio^s.
they are as it were hidden from God.

Another is Mechah (and I will name no more) which is to blot out, or wipe out,
a Metaphor from those who cancel or blot out their debts* when once discharged.
Now besides these verbal expressions, you have many real phrases that do
declare this great mercy, as Micah 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities, and
thou will cast them into the bottom of the sea, where the Prophet does admire
the goodness and freeness of God herein, Who is a God like thee? passing by
iniquity, subduing sins. The word implies, that our sins were as our enemies,
the guilt of them did inslave us, and keep us like vassals in fear, but now
they are mastered. And further, He throws them in the bottom of the sea,
there is no more memory or footsteps of them, as when the Egyptians were
drowned in the bottom of the sea, they could never hurt the Israelites more.
Thus God does to thy sins when they are pardoned. Another expression you have,
Isa. 44.22. some expound it thus, As the Sun rising does make the thick clouds
to vanish away, and there is nothing but serenity to be seen; so it is with God
pardoning: but Junius understands it thus, As the thick cloud dissolved into
rain, washes away the soil and filth of the earth, so will the Lord in
pardoning, take away that noisomnesse and offense their sins made. Consider
Hezekiahs expression, Isa. 38.17. Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back;
It is an expression from men, who when they will not regard a thing, cast it
behind their backs, and thus God does, not as if he did not take notice to
chastise for them, but they shall not have their proper effect, which is to
condemn. And these expressions are very necessary to a contrite heart, which is
apt to imagine God as always beholding his sins, and sending forth his
judgments because of them, whereas it must be as a foundation laid, That God
is gracious and merciful, not only in the general, but even to us in
particular. The last I will pitch upon, is Psalm. 13.12. As far as the East is
from the West, so far has he removed our sins from us, where the Psalmist
makes Gods mercies as much above our sins, as heaven is above earth; and lest
the guilt of sin should hinder the descent of it, he makes God to throw away
our sins from him, as far as it can be. Thus you see how abundant the Scripture
is, in describing this mercy of mercies: This mercy, which if not enjoyed,
Comfortable consideration arising from the fore*going phrases.
every thing, our beds, our fields and houses, will be an hell to us* The sum
of these words and phrases amounts to these comfortable considerations.

First, That God pardons sin, and removes the guilt of it totally and
perfectly, so that a sin cannot be more forgiven then it is: not that all the
pollution of sin is likewise totally taken away, for that would contradict
other places of Scripture, which say, sin is still in us, but only the
condemning power is subdued; and therefore this doctrine does afford as much
comfort, as any Antinomian would desire, and yet does not fall foul with other
places of Scripture. Those sins committed by thee and repented of, are as
absolutely forgiven as can be desired: they can be no better pardoned if thou
wast in heaven, or had perfect righteousness bestowed upon thee. It has
pleased God that the guilt of thy sin should be perfectly remitted, though the
power be not fully mortified.

Secondly, These phrases imply, That its Gods mere act without us, which does
expel the guilt of sin, not any thing done in us, or by us, and therefore thou
art not to build thy hope of pardon upon any work of Regeneration or
Mortification within thee, but Gods goodness without thee; even as a Creditor
does forgive many thousands to a Debtor, by his mere voluntary Act. Now we are
apt to think according to the principles of Popery, that our Justification is
no better then our inherent holiness is, whereas any godly man may sit down
and consider, that he is not able to go out with his five thousrnd, against,
the Justice of God that comes against him with ten thousand. Grace justifying
takes away all guilt of sin; grace sanctifying does not, because as
Bonaventure well observes, the remedy given by grace against original sin, is
not ordained against it, prout corrumpit naturam, sed prout personam, as it
does infect our nature, for so it sticks till death, but as it does defile
the person; measure not therefore the perfection of grace justifying, by the
perfection of grace sanctifying.

That sin forgiven, is as if it had never been; now the troubled soul cries
out, Oh that I had never been thus, done thus* Why? God when he does pardon,
makes it as if it had never been: do not fear the drowned Egyptians will rise
up and pursue thee again. We may tell a David, a Paul, it is so with them, as
if no adultery, murder, or persecutions had been committed by them.

As God does indeed really thus remit, so the Scripture commands the repentant
sinner to believe this, and with confidence to rest satisfied. Oh what holy
boldness may this truth believed work in the tender heart! You may see a poor
man, though he has much ado to live, yet if his debts be discharged, how glad
he is he can go abroad, and fear no Sergeant to Arrest him, no writ issued out
to attach him; and thus it is with a sinner repenting and believing; and if
there be any whose heart is not ravished with this glorious mercy, it is to be
feared, he never felt the burden of sin, or else never strongly believed this
gracious way of God. Let not then any Antinomian say, we put water into the
believers wine, or wormwood into their bread; for who can rationally desire
more then this does amount to? but to expect such a pardon, such a
justification, as that God shall take no notice of sin, to chastise or afflict
for it, is to say, There is forgiveness with God* that he may not be feared,
contrary to David's expression.

LECTURE VII.
JEREMIAH 50.20. In those days, and at that time, the iniquity of Judah shall
be sought for, etc.


FIfthly, From this Scripture-expression is gathered, That gross sins are
blotted out, as well as sins of an inferior nature; Though there be sins that
waste the conscience, yet they do not waste the grace of remission; how is the
true repentant affected with slavish fears sometimes, as if his sins did blot
out Gods mercy like a thick cloud? as if our transgressions had subdued his
goodness, and thrown it into the bottom of the Sea? What a comfortable
expression is that, Isaiah 1.18. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be
as white as snow, etc. It was wonderful mercy that ever so horrid and bloody
sinners (therefore their sins are said to be like scarlet) should become so
clear, yet the grace of Justification does as totally remit great sins, as
less sins, as Christ did with the same easiness cure several diseases. Thus
David also, Psalm. 51. after he had wallowed in that mire, he prays to be
purged, in an allusive expression, with hysope, which was the last thing used
in their legal purifications, and therefore does imply the total and complete
cleansing by Christ, and upon this, David says, He shall be whiter then snow,
which phrase is neither with the Papist to be extended to sanctification, as if
such perfect clean righteousness were vouchsafed to him, as that there were no
sin in him, nor with the Antinomian, as if God did quite abolish sin from David
out of his sight, so as to take no notice of it, or chastise him for it (for
after the pardon was past, yet his child was to die, and much more evil to
come to David's house) but in respect of final condemnation, God having thus
pardoned David through Christ, would no more adjudge him to everlasting
punishment, then he would one that was innocent, or without any spot of sin.
And this is to encourage great sinners; ten thousand talents was a great sum
of money, yet how easily forgiven by that kind Master? Thus Exodus 34.7. God is
described forgiving sins of all sorts, and this he proclaimed, when his glory
passed by; and how necessary is this for the contrite heart, which judges his
sins, because of the aggravations of them, to be unpardonable? If they had not
been of such a breadth and depth, and length, they would not fear overwhelming
as now they do. There are sins of all sorts described, and which is to be
observed, God puts no term or bounds to his mercy, whereas he does set some
to his anger. Let not therefore the greatness of sin be thought more then the
greatness of mercy pardoning, and Christ's obedience suffering; as it is
hypocrisy to extenuate and make our sins less then they are, so it is
unbelief to diminish his grace; and Gods greatness above us is as much
celebrated in this his kindness, as in any other attribute. The sins of all the
world, if they were thy sins, were but like a drop of water to his mercy, no
more then our essence or power is to his Majesty: Take heed then of saying Such
and such sins may be forgiven, but can he forgive such as mine are also?

That all their sins, though never so many, shall likewise be blotted out. The
Sea could as easily drown an whole Host of Pharaohs men, as twenty Soldiers.
The Apostle is excellent, Romans 5. in this, making an opposition between the
first Adam and second, aggravating the superlative power of the gift by grace,
above the evil through sin: Hence it is called the riches of his grace, rather
then power or wisdom, because of the plenty, and abundance of it. Who would
not think that while Gods goodness in the Scripture is thus unfolded, there
should not be a dejected, unbeleeving Christian in the world? shall our sin
abound to condemnation, more then his grace to justification? because sin is
too strong for us, is it therefore too much for the grace of God also? you see
by ths, that we may drink wine enough, in the Scripture Wine-cellars, to make
our hearts glad, and yet swallow not down any dregs of Popish or Antinomian
errors. These things thus explained, Arguments proving that God does see sin so
in the Justified, as to be offended with it.
I come to confirm you with several Arguments, that God does see sin so as to
be offended and displeased with it, in those that are already justified.

And the first rank of Arguments shall be taken from those places of Scripture
where the godly do aggravate their sin, under this notion, that it was in Gods
sight, that he especially beheld it, 1 Rank of arguments from Scripture.
and was offended with it: and this aggravation the Prophet Nathan does set
home upon David, 2 Samuel 12.9. why have thou despised the commandment of the
Lord, to do this evil in his sight? I. Argument.
Now this would be a falsehood, by the adversaries Doctrine, and not fit to be
confessed by the justified; but rather to be looked upon as robbing God of his
glory. Let us observe the places, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; Observe that, in thy sight; Therefore
God did see and take notice, so as to be displeased with David, and of all
considerations this did most wound and break his heart; so that indeed the
Antinomian Doctrine does properly overthrow that which is the choicest
ingredient in godly sorrow, viz. because God is angry. For what is David's
meaning but this, Although men do not know how wicked I was in the matter of
Vriah and Bathsheba, yet thou do, and although the world would flatter me,
yet as long as thou art angry, I can have no peace. Haec regula tenenda est, si
vero paenitentiae sensu imbui velimus, says Calvin upon the place, that is,
this rule is to be observed, when at any time we would be truly affected in a
way of repentance. This Argument seems to be Cogent, but see what an answer
the Antinomian gives, whereby you may see that true of Tertullian, that
besides the poetica, and pictoria, tertia jam est, eaque haeretica licentia,
besides the boldness of Poets and Painters to invent any thing, there is a
third, and that is of Heretics.

The Answer is this, David does here judge according to his sense and feeling,
what he was to find at Gods hand by the Law, The Antinomian answer refelled.
so that he does not speak this (according to their divinity) in a way of
faith, but sense and failing; and therefore the Author does compare this with
that place, Ps. 31.22. I said in my have, I am cut off. Honey Com. page 81.
Oh boldness! Shall David be thought in have and rashness, to say, Against
thee have I sinned and done this evil in thy sight? Then all the other verses.
Have mercy on me, Thou delightest in truth, may be said by David to be spoken
in have. How unpardonable is this error, to make that which was a special
tenderness of godly sorrow upon David, to be a part of his humane weakness?
But (says the Author) he speaks in the Gospel-way afterward, when he says,
purge me, and I shall be whiter then Snow: But in what sense that is true, you
have already heard; when a gross actual sin is committed, is repented of, the
sinful act is quite passed away and gone, the guilt by forgiveness is quite
extinct, and so, as to that respect, remission of sin does make us as white as
Snow. But it is not thus with original sin, whose guilt though removed, yet the
proper stain of it does still abide; (but of this more, when we declare what
that is, which does denominate a sinner) Therefore David does not here speak
contradictions, but his soul may be made white by Justification, and yet in the
committing of new sins, God be angry and much offended with him.

2 Argument.
A second Text to this purpose, is, Psalm. 90.8. Thou have set our iniquities
before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance. Where Moses the
penman of the Psalm, speaks in the behalf of the Church then afflicted, that
God had put their sins before him; so that God did not only take notice of them
to chastise them, but he put them before his eyes. How the sin of a justified
man, may at the same time be covered, and yet put before God, is to be showed
in answering their Objections. And the Text to put the matter out of all doubt,
adds in close, they are before the light of his countenance, which is very
emphaticall. God (as is to be showed) has in the Scripture a threefold eye,
to our purpose, the eye of omnisciency (which the Antinomian will grant) and
all agree in; the eye of his anger, which they deny; and an eye of condemnation
which the Papist pleads for: now we go further then the Antinomian, we say God
has an eye of omnisciency, and of anger, upon the sins of justified persons,
but not so far as the Papist, to say he has the eye of condemnation upon them.
Antinomian Evasions answered.
You would think this Text stood unmovable, but let us hear how they would
shake it.

First, It may be said, that these are places in the Old Testament, whereas
they speak of Believers under the New.

I answer, first, 1 Evasion answered.
The chiefest places which they bring for seeing no sin, are in the Old
Testament. Thus God sees no iniquity in Jacob: Though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be white as snow: Thou art all fair, my love: Their sins shall be
blotted out. These places and the like were true in the Old Testament, and
applied particularly to the godly Jews then living, by way of comfort to them,
as the context plainly evidenceth.

Secondly (As I showed in the Treatise of the Law) there can be no sound reason
given, why God should see sin in the justified person then and not now: For did
not God elect them from all eternity? Were not they in Christ, and their sins
laid upon Christ? Now these are the great Arguments why God sees no sin in
believers (as they hold) and were not* all these as verificable upon the godly
in the Old Testament?

2. It may be answered, 2 Evasion answered.
that Moses speaks here in the behalf of the whole Church then, and there were
many among them that were not justified. But this is easily taken away.

1. The Scripture speaks universally, and Moses reckons himself in the number
with them.

2. The calamity was general, and who can say, none of the Justified suffered
under it? and this chaftising of them, is that which is called setting of sins
before Gods face.

Lastly, Some places of Scripture which they bring, and the chiefest ones, for
seeing no sin in believers, are universal, as this is, and spoken of the whole
Church: thus my Text, The iniquity of Judah and Israel shall be sought for, and
not found: so God sees no iniquity in Jacob, that is spoken of the body of
them, when yet they must acknowledge, all were not justified among them.

I will name one place more in this rank, and that is Luke 15.21: Where you
have a confession of a penitent son, I have sinned against heaven, and before
thee. This penitent was a son and therefore calls God Father; and indeed he
could not cease to be a son, therefore he does not say, I am not thy son, but I
am not worthy to be called thy son. As for Grotius his observation upon the
place, Haec fabula declarat, quod omnes homines sunt ortu filii Dei, sed^e^
jure excidunt semet a Deo alienando, that is, this fable declares that all men
are by birth the sons of God, but they fall from that right, by alienating
themselves from God, it deserves a double Animadversion, one for calling this
Parable fabula, which although in a critical notion, it may have a right sense,
yet use does not now endure it; It would be very offensive to call Christ's
Parables, Christ's Fables: Secondly, he shows unsound Divinity, worse then
Pelagians or Arminians, as his very expression declares; (but to pass that)
The Parable does represent a godly man foully lapsed in sin, and now returning
to God, and he accuses himself, aggravating sin, that his Father took notice
of it; and whatsoever other Doctors teach, yet this is the best way, for godly
persons repenting, to aggravate their sinfulness, in reference to Gods
beholding of them, and being angry with them, Quicunque sibi se excusat,
accusat Deo, whosoever excuses himself to himself, accuses himself to God,
said Salvian and Tertul. In quantum non peperceris tibi, in tantum tibi Deus
(creed) parcet, so much as thou shall not spare thy self, God (believe it) will
spare thee.

Lastly, This is to be observed, that after his father had kissed him, which
was a sign of reconciliation and pardon; yet the son confesses he had sinned
against heaven, and before him.

2 Rank of arguments from Scripture.
A second rank of Arguments shall be from those places where the Spirit of God
is said to mortify our sins, or we by his help to crucify our sins: if the
Spirit of God do enable us to crucify and mortify sin, as that which is an
enemy and loathsome to him, then notwithstanding Christ's righteousness imputed,
God does take notice of that which is filthy, and to be removed in the godly:
But we are assisted by Gods Spirit, to this, Ergo.

Romans 8.11, 13. If ye by the Spirit mortify the deeds of the body. Gal. 3.18
If ye be led by the Spirit, ye shall not fulfill the deeds of the flesh. In
these words are two plain Conclusions,

First, That the godly have still sins in them, for these are called the deeds
of the flesh. By deeds of the flesh, are not meant gross sins, but all the
inward motions and thoughts of the soul corrupted.

Secondly, That the Spirit of God sees them, takes notice of them, they are
loathsome to him, and therefore he mortifieth them. Now the Spirit of God being
the same with God, that which he mortifieth, must needs be taken notice of by
him as offensive.

To this what do they answer?

They say, We do not mortify sin, no not by Gods Spirit, The Antinomians
answer confuted.
out of Gods sight, but only out of our own sight, so that when the Spirit of
God overcomes a corruption in us, this is not by removing it out of Gods
sight, but our own only, Honeycomb, page 164. for (say they) Christ's
righteousness being made ours, we are all clean before God, and that which the
Spirit of God does afterward in sanctification, is cleansing away sin only
declaratively before men; Hence (as you heard) they distinguish of a two*fold
cleansing, one secret and mystical by Christ's righteousness, and the other
palpable and gross to our sense and feeling, which is by Gods spirit in us;
but here are many mistakes and errors.

1. That they oppose Christ's cleansing and the Spirits cleansing together; for
what Christ's blood does meritoriously cleanse away, the same Christ's Spirit
does by efficacious application. Hence Christ by his death does quite remove
sin, in respect of the guilt of it here on earth, and does give his Spirit to
crucify the power of it; so that both Christ's cleansing, and the Spirits
cleansing, do relate to Gods sight: for it is Gods will that we should not only
be clean by imputed righteousness, but also by inherent holiness.

2. It is false, that we only mortify sin declaratively to men, for it is
really and indeed done, even to Godward. Hence this is the great difference
between a Pharisaicall or external mortification, and a spiritual; The former
is from humane principles to humane motives; the other is from God, and to God,
and through God: so that as that is not a divine faith, but humane, which is
not from a divine principle, and because of divine Authority; so neither can
that be divine and spiritual mortification, which is not from divine
efficiency, and because of divine grounds. Hereby it is that the whole work of
grace is called a new creature, and it is a new creature not only man-ward, but
Godward, and who can think when Ephesians. 4. we are exhorted to put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness, that any other sense can be drawn
out of it, then that, the putting off the old man, and putting on the new, have
relation to God as well as man? It is therefore well observed by Musculus on
the former Text, that both these are put together, If ye through the Spirit do
mortify; we and the Spirit. The Spirit, and that shows all the Popish means
of mortification to be unprofitable, the Spirit of God neither appointing them,
or working by them. Then he adds ye, denoting that we also are to work and
act (being first quickened with a spiritual life put into us) and not as some do
now dangerously maintain, give up all, expecting the operation of the Spirit
only.

3. The falsehood of this Assertion will further appear; If the Spirit of God by
mortification does not remove sin out of us, as to Gods sight, then by further
sanctification, it brings no good thing into us as to Gods sight likewise; and
thus as God shall see no sin in his people, so neither no good thing inherently
in his people; for this must necessarily follow by their principles, as God
takes no notice of sin inherent in believers to be angry with them; so likewise
no notice of inherent grace to be well pleased with them; for if the Spirit of
God do not cleanse our corruption from Gods sight, then still the more
corruption is washed away, God still does no ways approve that holiness, but
it is only the imputed holiness of Christ, which he regards. Therefore he that
maintains God sees no sin in believers to chastise, must maintain, he sees
no graces in them to reward them; and take their own similitude, as he (say
they) that looks through a red glass sees every thing in it red, if there be
dirt in it, it looks red, if there be pearls in it, it looks red, all is one
to the sight; so when God looks upon us in Christ, if there be sin, if there
be our own inherent holiness, it is all one, God sees only Christ's holiness.
Thus while the Antinomian labors to have our sins covered from Gods eyes; he
likewise spreads a covering over all the fruits of Gods Spirit in us, that they
shall not be taken notice of: whereas none ever denied but that the graces of
Gods people are acceptable to him, though not to justification; and many
promises he makes to them, the imperfection being done away by Christ. But in
their way, as God takes no notice of Paul's sinful motions to be offended at
them, so neither of all his labourings and sufferings in the Gospel way.

Lastly, If the Spirit of God do only mortify, as to our feeling, and not to
Gods sight, then when the soul departs into glory, all that inherent purity,
must only be declaratively also; but in heaven we are made holy perfectly in
Gods sight, and that without any imputed righteousness of Christ, though
Christ did purchase and obtain that for us. Now what the Spirit of God does
finish and consummate upon the souls dissolution, he had begun even in this
life.

A third sort of Arguments is from those places which commend repentance,
humiliation, and godly sorrow for sin; Third sort of Arguments: Revel 2.18.
for if God takes no notice of our sin, be not offended at it, we may indeed be
sorrowful for sin because of men, but not because of God* Jam. 4.9, 10. 2 Cor.
7.9, 10.
Shall I be sorrowful because God is offended when he is not offended? shall I
weep because God is angry when he is not angry? If you ask Peter why he weeps
bitterly, will he not say, Because he offended God? If you ask the Corinthians,
why they are so deeply humbled, will not they say, because by their sins they
provoked God to bring temporal calamities upon them? so that the poisonous
nature of this Doctrine, appears in nothing more then in this, it takes away
all grounds of humiliation and repentance of sin in those that do believe.
Therefore mark it, He that says there is no sin in the Church of God now
(which is their express opinion) he must likewise say, There is no godly sorrow
in the Church of God now. For what is the reason there can be no godly sorrow
in heaven, there was none in the state of innocence, but because there was no
sin there? and it must be thus now in the Church of God. This error eats into
the vitals of godliness, therefore beware of it. Say, I will have no such free
grace, as shall take away godly sorrow; Remember the gracious Promise, Zech.
12. where God promises, a spirit of prayer and mourning for sin, as well as to
blot out sin, he shall not obtain the promise for the later, that feels not
the promise for the former. And certainly, if this Doctrine were true, why did
Paul say, Though I made you sorry, I did not repent? We Ministers ought to
repent, that ever we made you sorry; and you are to repent that ever you have
been sorrowful.

A fourth kind is from all those places, Fourth kind of Arguments.
where God is said so to take notice of the sins of justified persons, as that
he does grievously afflict them for their transgressions. This Argument does
properly and directly overthrow the whole Antinomian assertion, but because I
have largely proved this already, I will not insist on it. To make good their
assertion, that God sees no sin, they are forced also to hold, that all the
afflictions upon the godly, are only trials of their faith, preservatives from
sin, but not correctives for sin. But did not God see sin in Moses, when for
his unbelief he kept him out of Canaan? Did not he see sin in David, though
pardoned, grievously chastising him afterward? Did he not see sin in Jonah,
who would fain have run from Gods face, that he might not have seen him? Did he
not see sin in the Corinthians, when many of them were sick and weak, for
abusing the Ordinances, yet many of them were such, that therefore were
chastened, that they might not be condemned of the Lord.

There are more arguments, but at this time I conclude with an use of
exhortation, to brokenhearted, and contrite sinners, again and again to
meditate upon the great and glorious expressions which the Scripture uses
about forgiveness of sin. Your fears and doubs are so great, that only such
great remedies can cure you. Tell me ye afflicted and wounded for sin, is not
this the best oil that can be poured into your sores? Tell me ye spiritual
Lazarusses, that lie at the gate of God daily, who is rich in mercy, desiring
the very crumbs that fall from this table of grace, are you thankful because
God provideth food and raiment, and not much rather because of a pardon? how
great is Gods goodness, he might have removed us out of his sight, and he has
done so to our sins; he might have thrown us into the bottom of hell, and he
has cast our iniquities into the bottom of the sea; he might have blotted our
names out of the book of life, and he has blotted out our sins from his
remembrance.

LECTURE VIII.
JEREMIAH 50.20. In those days, and at that time the iniquity of Judah shall
be sought for, and it shall not be found, etc,


A Fifth rank of arguments is from those places of Scripture, Fifth rank of
Arguments.
wherein the people of God in their petitions and supplications, do
necessarily imply this truth, that God sees, takes notice, and is angry with
their sins. Now all petitions use to be in a twofold faith, one applicative
and fiduciall, the other doctrinall and assertive, which is the foundation of
the former. If a Papist pray for the deliverance of any out of purgatory, it is
a vain prayer, because there is not a theological verity to ground his prayer
upon: thus a Socinian cannot truly pray to God in Christ, because he has not a
dogmaticall or assenting faith to the truth of Christ's divine nature, and so
cannot have a fiduciall faith in the same.

Thus it would be with the people of God, how can they in their prayers entreat
God to turn away his anger from them, to hide his face from their sins, if he
were not indeed angry? Now that the petitions of Gods people are for this end,
will appear by several places. I shall not here mention that petition, we are
directed to in the Lords prayer, viz. forgive us our sins, for that is a noble
instance, and deserves a single consideration of its self; but we have many
other instances, as Psa* 51.9. Hide thy face from my sins. It is plain by this
prayer, Gods face, and so his eyes were upon David's sins though justified, and
that a godly man falling into grievous sins, has them not presently covered
from Gods eyes; for his meaning by this phrase, is, that God would not regard
them to visit them on him, the contrary whereof is Psa. 119.15. Let their sin
be continually before thee; and this is observable, that David does again and
again petition for pardon, whereby is showed how difficult a thing it is to
obtain the favor of God after we have offended him by our sins. Neither let
that be replied, that this is done by Believers in the Old Testament; for Paul
brings a proof from Psa. 32.1. to show what is the nature of Justification,
even under the Gospel. And that I may once for all this dissolve this objection
of theirs, I shall handle distinctly this question, Whether the Justification
of believers under the Old Testament and New, be not uniform and altogether the
same? which is to be affirmatively maintained, and therefore remit you to that
question. For the present, we see how David here does twice and thrice with
much vehemence desire that Gods face would not be upon his sins. Question
considerable propounded.
Here may be one considerable question made, seeing Nathan the Prophet had told
David his sin was forgiven him; Was not this great unbelief and diffidence, to
pray for pardon after that consolation? To this it may be answered,

1. That Nathans comfort might be given after this penitential Psalm: for
although 2 Samuel 12.13. the History makes mention of Nathans oil poured into
David, as soon as ever he was wounded, yet it is a frequent thing in Scripture
to have those things immediately connected in story, when yet there was a great
distance in the practice. But grant it was immediately upon David's repentance;
yet faith in God for pardon, may well stand with prayer for pardon; The deep
sense and feeling of Gods offense, cannot but provoke to earnest petition,
though faith at the same time persuades the heart God will hear: Hence David
does not here pray in unbelief, thinking God would not pardon him; therefore
some translate v. 7. in the future tense, Thou will purge me with hysop,
because of his assurance. Again, though God removed David's sin in respect of
condemnation, yet not in respect of all other effects of his anger, for so his
sin did still lie as a burden on him, and in this respect he still seeks Gods
face. In the next place consider, Psa. 32.1, 3, 4. Of all parts of the
Scripture, the Psalms have this excellency, that they do in a lively
experimental way set forth the gracious works of God upon the soul, and David
does in many Psalms, still as it were play upon the Harp, to drive out the evil
spirit of unbelief and diffidence out of a man's heart. Now this Psalm is a most
excellent directory for the obtaining of pardon after sin committed; wherein
David being for a while grievously crushed by Gods anger for his sins, at last
feeling the Sunshine of his favor breaking through the clouds, he does in the
beginning of the same joyfully break out, admiring the happiness of those who
have their sins pardoned, and he does in several words repeat the same benefit,
because of the excellency of it: and certainly were your hearts touched with
the sense of Gods displeasure for sin, neither riches, nor good trading, or any
advantage in the world, would so glad your heart, as to have a pardon of sin.
For how comes David to be thus affected with forgiveness of his sins? even
because he confessed it not, was not humbled under it, till Gods wrath was
heavy upon him, and then he resolved to acknowledge it, whereupon God
immediately forgiveth him. Now lest any should think What is this to us in the
times of the Gospel? observe v. 6. For this every one that is godly shall pray
unto thee, that is, for this remission, for this pardon every one that is godly
shall pray; so that its ungodliness by David's judgment not to confess sin,
or to pray for the pardon, which how can any Antinomian do by his principles,
that holds, God sees not, or takes notice, so as to be offended with the
sins of justified persons: and so they are not only Antinomists, but
Anti*Confessionists, Anti-Petitionists, and Anti-penitents.

Take one more instance, Psa. 6.1. where David prays God would not rebuke him
in his hot displeasure, Compare this with Jer. 10.24. where you see the
servants of God do suppose an anger from God will fall on them for their sins,
and they do not refuse his rebukes, only they desire God would moderate and set
bounds to his wrath, that it may not overwhelm them. Many other places there
are, where its plain, the people of God praying, do suppose him to be angry
with them for their sins; and it is a truth so engraven in the heart of a godly
man, that no error can ever quite obliturate it.

A sixth sort of Arguments shall be from those places, Six sort of Arguments.
where God is said to take notice of our sin, more then we can or do, 1 John
3.18, 19, 20. where the Apostle presses believers to a sincere love of one
another with this Argument, that hereby we shall assure our hearts before him;
the Greek word signifies to persuade, and does excellently set forth the
difficulty of being assured in Gods presence. Now this great benefit he
illustrates by the contrary, if our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our
hearts; and this holds universally in every holy duty, as well as that of
love: if our hearts condemn us for hypocrisy, and insincerity in them, God
does much more, for he knows more evil by our selves then we do. Now how can
this Apostolical assertion be true, if so be God took no notice, or were not
offended at the sins of his people? Its an argument of sweet meditation to
humble us, that if where there is but a drop of grace, our sins are so loathsome
and offensive; how much more must they be to the ocean of all purity?
Antinomian objections answered.
To this the Antinomian replieth ( Honeycomb p 89.) that John speaks this of
hypocrites, and not the justified children of God; But 1. he gives the express
title of little children to them, ver. 18. and my little children, so that he
takes upon him the bowels of a father to them. Again, let it be granted that
he describes hypocrites, yet there is no godly man but this text will in some
sense belong to, there is no man so godly, but he has some hypocrisy and
insincerity in his best love; there is that worm in his best fruit, that dross
in his best gold. It follows then by proportion, that so far as the godly do
discern imperfections, and insincerity in their duties, so far they are to be
humbled before God, who knows much more by them then they discern; as you see
little moats are discerned by the Sunbeams in the Air, which were not
discerned before: therefore when John adds, If our hearts condemn us not,
then have we confidence with God, his meaning is not, as if we could have no
confidence where our hearts do condemn us in some degrees, for then none in
the world could have confidence; but he speaks of condemning our selves upon a
discovery of a total and wilful hypocrisy; and so we will indeed grant that he
speaks of hypocrites, but yet it proves as much as we desire, namely, that
where there is any condemnation of our selves for any degree of insincerity in
any duty, we are to tremble, and to remember that God is greater then our
hearts, knows more by us, and so his wrath might break out hotter then we can
imagine. Neither is the former answer weakened, though we grant it to be
understood of total hypocrites, for it is usual with the Apostle to threaten
even those that are godly, and dear to him, with the condition and punishment
of Hypocrites and Apostates, as Heb. 6. See another instance, 1 Cor. 4.4. I
know nothing by my self; yet am I not thereby justified, for it is God that
judges me; where the Apostle does not speak of an Anabaptistical perfection,
as if Paul knew no sin by himself; but his meaning is to be restrained to the
faithful dispensation of the office committed to him, in which though he had
not perfection, yet his conscience did not accuse him of gross negligence or
unfaithfulnes; but for all this, he does not think himself justified, by any
godliness in him; and why so? because God judges him, who takes notice of, and
is offended with more sins then he understands by himself; so that Paul does
acknowledge God to see sin in him, and therefore he cannot be justified by any
thing inherent; and this made Bernard say excellently, Tutior est justitia
donata, quam inhaerens, Imputed righteousness is safer to rely upon then
inherent. Think it therefore a small thing to be acquitted by Antinomian
principles, when it is God that judges; and whatsoever the Adversary speaks
about a righteousness of Christ communicated unto us, so that thereby God
sees no sin; yet because they say, he sees no sin in us inherently* they must
conclude for some perfect inherent righteousness. Lastly, Ps. 19. David crying
out, Who can understand his errors? prays thereupon, Cleanse thou me from
secret sins; and this does imply, that there were many sins that David had,
which were loathsome and foul in Gods eyes, though undiscovered by himself, and
therefore he would have God wash him, and make him clean*

A seventh rank of Arguments, shall be from those places, Seventh rank of
arguments.
wherein God has commanded Ministers to bind and retain the sins of
scandalous offenders, and has promised, to ratify that in heaven, which they
according to his will, do on earth. Experience witnesses, that a justified
person may fall into some scandalous sin, whereby the whole Congregation may be
much offended, and God highly provoked. Now in this case God has commanded the
Ministers of the Gospel to bind and to retain such a man's sins till he does
repent. This binding is not by way of authority, but ministerial declaration,
and effectual application of Gods threatenings in his Word to such a person
sinning, and when this is done, God has promised, that all this shall be
ratified and made good in Heaven against that man. Now how can God make good
the Ministers threatenings applied to that godly man, if he take not notice, and
be not offended with the person so hainously sinning? The places that prove
such a binding of sin, and Gods ratifying of their sentence, are Joh. 20.23.
Mat. 16.19. Mat. 18.18. Can any man say, that when a godly man is cast out of
Gods family, the seals of Gods grace denied him, and he delivered up to Satan,
that God is not angry with him? yea, is not he bound then to apprehend God
estranged from him? when a godly man is excommunicated, he is not only cast out
from the external Church-society, but likewise there is a deprivation from
internal communion with Christ; not as if he were cut off from the purpose or
decree of Gods election, or as if the habitual seed of grace were quite extinct
in him, but only as the outward seals of Gods favor are denied him; so also
does God being angry with him, deny him any inward testimonies of his favor;
and it would not be faith against sense (as the Adversary calls it) but
presumption against Scripture to say* God was at that time well pleased with
him; yea Divines say ( Synopsis puri. Theol. dis. 48.) that there is a
conditional exclusion of the person so offending from future glory, for the
Church threatens him, that as they judge him now, and bid him depart from their
society, so if he do not repent, Christ at the last day will command him to
depart from his presence and the holy Angels, according to that of Tertul. in
Apologetico, Summum futuri judicii praejudicium est, si quis it a deliquerit,
ut a communicatione orationis and conventus, and omnis sancti commeroii
relegetur.

Eighth kind of Argument*
The eighth kind of Arguments is from those places, where Christ is said still
to be an Advocate, and to make Intercession for believers after they are
justified, which would be altogether needless, if God did not take notice of
their sins, and were ready to charge them upon believers'; consider the places,
1 John 2.1. Heb. 7.25. In the former place, John having said, That Christ's
blood cleanses us from all sin (a place the Antinomian much urges, not
considering that at the same time the Apostle ver. 9. requires confession and
shame in our selves, if we would have pardon) in the first verse of the second
Chapter, he says, He writes these things that they should not sin; all true
doctrine about Christ and free grace tends to the demolishing, and, not
encouraging of sin: but the Apostle supposes such fragility that we will sin,
and therefore speaks of a remedy, If we sin we have an Advocate; now this
makes several ways against the Antinomian.

First, That sins committed after our Justification need an Advocate; it is not
enough that we were once justified, our new sins would condemn us for all that,
were it not for Christ.

Secondly, In that Christ is an Advocate, it supposes, That though God be a
Father to his people, yet he is also a Judge, and that he so takes notice of,
and is displeased with their sins, that did not Christ intercede and deprecate
the wrath of God, it would utterly consume them. Thou therefore who say, God
the Father is not offended, why then does Christ perform the Office of an
Advocate? If thy sins be not brought into the Court, what need any pleading for
thee? In the other place, Heb 7.25. The Apostle acknowledges a twofold
function of Christ's Priestly Office, The one is, The offering up of himself for
our sins; The second is, The continual Intercession for us, which the Apostle,
Chap. 9.24. calls, Appearing before Gods face in our behalf; now we must not
so advance Christ's sufferings in the taking away of sin, so as to exclude the
other part of his Priestly Office, which is, continually to plead our cause for
us: for the Apostle makes Christ to stand before the face of God, as some great
Favorite before an earthly Prince, to plead in the behalf of those who are
accused; so that the Doctrine which denies God seeing of sin in his people,
does wholly overthrow Christ's Intercession, and the efficacy of it. Concerning
the manner of Christ's Intercession, it is not to be conceived in that way as he
prayed here upon the earth; but it is his holy will, and express desire of his
soul, that God the Father should be reconciled with those for whom he has shed
his blood: and truly that point of Divinity, viz. Christ's affections and
sympathizing with his people now in heaven, is an Ocean of infinite comfort.

LECTURE IX.
JER. 50.20. In those days, and at that time, the iniquity of Judah shall be
sought for, and there shall be none, etc.


Ninth sort of Arguments.
I Shall now conclude with the last sort of Arguments, which are from those
Scriptures that speak how God is affected with his people when they have
sinned, which affections do necessarily imply Gods seeing of sin, so as to be
angry with them, yea in some respects Gods anger is more to them then others,
and we say, in some sense God does more see and take notice of the sins of
believers then others.

The places of Scripture which speak in what manner God takes the sins of
believers, are these, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, etc.
where the godly in their sins are said to grieve Gods Spirit. Now can the
Spirit of God, which is also God, be grieved (to speak after the manner of men)
at our sins, and not take notice of them? certainly if they grieve God, they
ought to grieve us, let us not neglect that which the Spirit of God is so
offended with. This place seems to be taken out of Isa. 63.10. They vexed his
holy Spirit. So that it is such a grieving, as does vex and imbitter the holy
Spirit of God. O what a dreadful consideration should this be against all
falsehoods in this point* Does not God, does not the Spirit of God take notice
of thy corruptions, yet it is grieved and vexed at them? furthermore the
aggravation of this sin is seen in that it is against the Spirit that does seal
us to the day of redemption. A Metaphor, says Zanchy (in loc.) from Merchants,
who having bought such goods, seal them as their own, that so leaving others,
they may transport them. Now for the godly to sin, it is to deface this seal,
and if it be so great an offense to violate humane seals, how much more divine?
Observe likewise that passage of God to Moses, Ex. 4.14. where Moses out of the
sense of his infirmity, refusing the office God called him to twice or thrice,
it is said, The Lords wrath was kindled against him. In the Hebrew it is very
emphatical, The fury of the Lord was angry against Moses, and the LXX, (...),
by which expression was signified, God was not lightly, but grievously angry
with him; So Ps. 74.1. the Church cries out, Why does thine anger smoke
against the sheep of thy pasture? and in many other places. Now, can God be
angry, and that in so high a degree, with that which he does not see, or take
notice of? It is true Isidor. Pelus. l. 1. ep. 144. will not suffer, that
notice and affliction which God lays upon us, to be called (...) or (...),
but then anger is to be taken in a strict sense, for punishment by way of
satisfaction, but otherwise the Scripture does frequently use this word, and
that of God to his own people, yea vengeance, which is more, Ps. 96.8. But that
it may the better appear, how great the guilt of sin in believers, even in the
sight of God is, and what his account is of it, take notice of these
particulars. Particulars expressing how great the guilt of sin is in believers
even in Gods sight.


First, What the Scripture styles them, 1 Samuel 2.29. There God reproves Eli in
his indulgence about his sons, with this remarkable expression, Thou honor
thy sons above me. Is not this an aggravation which God takes notice of? and
yet Eli did reprove his sons, but because he failed in the measure of zeal,
therefore is God thus angry with him; so that God does not only see the gross
sins committed by his people, but a less measure of their graces, and is angry
for that. So Rev. 2. because the Church abated in her first love, and her works
were not perfect, therefore does God threaten her. As the godly are said to
honor the creature above him when they sin, so they are likewise said to
despise God; and can God but be offended with them that despise him? 1 Samuel
2.13. They that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed, says God again to Eli.
Thus likewise to David, 2 Samuel 12.9. Wherefore have thou despised the
commandment of the Lord? God cannot but take notice of that which is a
despising, and contemning of him. As their sins are a despising of God, so are
they said to displease God, which cannot be if God see no sin; for if God see
no sin, it is all one in reference to God, whether a believer wallow in the
mire of sin, or whether he live holily; so that this Doctrine must needs eat
and consume like a Gangrene. Is God as well pleased with Peter denying Christ,
as Peter repenting? as much pleased with David in his adultery and murder, as
when making his penitential Psalm? The Papists indeed would fasten such
prodigious consequences upon the Protestants Doctrine, but they abhor it,
whereas it follows naturally from the Antinomian assertion. Indeed the
Orthodox say, David and Peter in their lapses, did not fall from the state or
grace of Justification; but wherein the Antinomian and they differ, is
hereafter to be shown. That God is thus displeased with justified persons,
when they thus sin, is plain, 2 Samuel 11.29. where what we translate (
displeased) according to the original, is, was evil in the eyes of the Lord;
where you see express Scripture, That God did see sin in David, because that
which he had done, was evil in Gods eyes: so again, 1 Chronicles. 21.7. David's
numbering of the people, is said to be evil in the eyes of the Lord. Thus the
very letter of the Scripture is against them. Lastly, Their sins are offenses
against God, and can God be offended with that which he does not behold? Elihu
speaks true and excellent Doctrine, Job 34.32. though he erred in the
application, Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I
will offend no more; where he acknowledges, That chastisements are for sins,
and that sins are offenses. If then the sins of Gods people are a dishonor to
him, a despising of him, a displeasing of him, they are evil in his eyes, and
an offense to him, it cannot be but that he must see sin in his people.

Gods threatening and upbraiding of them with all his kindnesses he did to them,
so that God does not only take notice of them, but in the several aggravations
of their ingratitude and unkindnesse unto him, in all that they offend. Thus
observe Gods dealing with Eli, 1 Samuel 2.28. Did not I choose thy father out of
all the Tribes of Israel to be my Priest, to offer upon my Altar? Did I not
give unto thy father all the offerings by fire of the children of Israel?
wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice? What a cutting sword must this needs be in
Eli's heart? and because the children of God have a Spirit of love in them,
these upbraidings must needs wound their heart the more. Again, see the like
dealing with David, 2 Sa. 11.12.8, 9. I anointed thee King over Israel, and I
delivered thee out of the hand of Saul: and if that had been too little, I
would have given thee such and such things, wherefore have thou despised the
commandment of God? etc. Must not this pierce into the very bowels of David?
Shall God upbraid his people falling into sin, spread before their eyes the
manifold mercies he has bestowed upon them, and all this while see no sin in
them? Therefore when it is said, Iam. 1.5. That God upbraideth not, that is to
be understood, in respect of his frequent and liberal giving, as men use to
say, I have given thus often, and I will give no more; which kind of giving
Seneca calls panem lapidosum; but if men walk unworthy of the benefits received,
he does then upbraid, as Mar. 16.14. He is said to upbraid the Disciples,
because of their unbelief.

Thirdly, The Scripture applies the threatenings of God to believe^s, as well
as to others* making no difference between them, unless they repent. Indeed we
say against the Papists, that all the sins of justified persons are venial, and
not mortal, that is, such as in the event will have pardon, but that is,
because the seed of grace will be operative in them, so that they shall either
habitually or actually repent of their sins. Neither when the Orthodox say,
That Election is absolute* do they exclude the media instituta, means appointed
by God, in which the fruit of Election is accomplished, but conditions
antecedan^ous, as if that decree did remain suspense and uncertain, till the
will of man had determined, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. The Apostle lays down an
universal rule, such and such gross offenders shall not inherit the kingdom of
heaven, that is, those who live so and do not repent, and this is to be
extended not only to those who are habitually so, but actually likewise*
unless they are reformed. Therefore no godly man falling into any of those
gross sins, may deceive himself, and think he shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven without a change. Godly or ungodly, yet if found in the committing of
such a gross sin, unless they do repent, God will not accept one or the other.
As repentance is appointed for the wicked man as a duty, without which he
cannot be saved; so confession and forsaking of sin, is prescribed a godly man
fallen into sin, without which he cannot have remission, 1 Jo. 1.9. There is no
such free grace or Gospel* as faith to a believer, if fallen into a foul sin,
whether you repent or no, your sins shall be pardoned to you. Hence 1 Cor. 11.
the Apostle makes every man that receives unworthily (and yet some of them
were godly) to receive their damnation, that is, their eternal damnation,
without repentance and reformation; and after repentance, their judgment,
though not of condemnation, yet affliction and castigation. How terrible
likewise is Paul, He. 12.29. where speaking to the godly that are to receive a
kingdom that is eternal, he exhorts them to duty, Let us have grace ((...))
that is, Let us retain and keep grace, (...) is for (...), as To. 15.4. and
observe the manner, with reverence and godly fear, (...) is such a fear as
relates to punishment; compare this place with Ps. 2.12. and thus the words
following suppose, for our God is a consuming fire; this is taken out of Deu.
4.24. and the meaning is, God is no less angry with Christians sinning against
him, then formerly with the Israelites, and it is as easy for him to destroy
whom he is offended with, as for the fire to destroy stubble. How directly does
this place overthrow that Antinomian assertion, God saw sin in believers in the
Old Testament, and therefore afflicted them, but it is not so under the New?

Now when its said, God is a consuming fire, this denotes the great anger of
God, compare it with Deu. 9.3. and Deu. 32.22. Fire is most efficacious, and
least capable of transmutation as other elements are, for which reason the
Persians worshipped fire for a god, but fire might be extinguished, whereas God
is such a fire as consumes all, and remains immutable. Know then (brethren)
that as there are places in the New Testament, which speak of the riches of his
grace, so also of his consuming anger. As therefore the promises of the
Scripture are for consolation and hope to the godly, so are the threatenings for
a godly fear. Between these two milstones a Christian is made dulcis farina, as
Luther once said; and neither of these milstones may be taken for a pledge, as
the Law was in the Old Testament, because one cannot work without the other.
Therefore for a man to take only those places of Scripture, which speak of the
goodness of the promises, and to reject the terrors of the threatenings* is
spiritual theft in an high degree. Does not Paul, 2 Cor. 5 excite himself to
run like a Giant in his ministerial race, because of the terror of the Lord at
the day of Judgment? See ver. 10. We must all appear (so to appear, as to be
seen through and made manifest, before the judgment seat of God (as those that
are to plead a cause in an eminent place before a Judge) to receive a reward
suitable to his life: n^w knowing this (says the Apostle) we persuade; it may
relate to himself, and to those whom he persuades. Yet this apprehension of
the Lords terror did not exclude love, for v. 14. he says, The love of Christ
constrains us, (...), either an expression from those who had a spirit of
prophecy upon them, that was very powerful, whereby they could not but speak,
or else from women in travel, Heb. 12.15. which through pain cannot but cry
out, so efficacious was love in Paul.

4. The sins of godly men cease not to be sins, though they are justified. We
may not say, that in Cain killing of another is murder, but in David it is not:
We may not say, denying of Christ in Judas, is indeed a sin, but in Peter it is
not. No privilege they have by justification, can alter the nature of a sin.
He that receives unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord,
whether he be a wicked man or a Believer. It is not with a Believer and a
wicked man, as with a man and a beast comparatively. If a beast kill a man, it
is not sin, because the subject is not reasonable, but a man if he do so,
whether godly or ungodly, it is a sin, because against Gods Law. It is not safe
to say, that God does with the Believer and wicked, as if a Magistrate should
make a Law, that whosoever commits such a crime, if he be a freeman he
shall only be imprisoned, but if a servant, he shall be put to death: so God,
whosoever murdereth or commits adultery, if he be a Believer, the wages due
to his sin, is only temporal chastisements, but to a wicked man, it is eternal
death. I say this is not safe: for although a Believers sin shall not actually
damn him, yet God has made the same Law to both, and repentance as a means is
prescribed, so that we may by supposition say, If the wicked man repent, his
sin shall not damn him; If the justified person do not, his sin will damn him.
It Is true, it is not proper to say of sin in the abstract, it shall be damned,
no more, then that grace shall be saved; but we are to say, the person shall be
damned or saved. Yet the guilt of the sin will cause the guilt of the person,
if not taken off by Christ as the meritorious, and faith as the isntrumental
cause. The sins then of Believers and ungodly are both alike, only that the
guilt of them does not redound upon the persons alike, is because the one takes
the way appointed by God to obtain pardon, and the other does not. Not that the
godly man makes himself to differ from the wicked, but all is the work of
grace. In some respects the sins of godly men are more offensive to God, then
those of wicked men; because committed against more light, and more experience
of the sweetness of Gods love, and the bitternes^e of sin. What is the cause,
Heb. 10.28, 29, 30. the Apostle makes the condition of a wilful Apostate to
be so dreadful, but because of the excellency of the object in the Gospel,
above that in the Law? If he that despised Moses his Law, died without mercy:
of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy? etc.
Observe that interposition, (...), think ye, do you not easily think that such
sins offend God more? Now although the truly sanctified can never fall into
such a condition, totally and finally, yet their sins committed wilfully
against the Gospel, are gradually, and in some measure of such a nature, and
therefore they fall terribly into the hands of the living God, when they so sin
against him; and consider how that the Apostle speaks these things, even to
them, of whom he hoped better things, and things that accompany salvation, Heb.
6. If therefore we see a godly man, who has tasted much of Gods favor, play
the prodigal, walk loosely, we may and ought (notwithstanding Antinomian
positions) powerfully and severely set home these places of Scripture upon his
conscience. And observe how in the New Testament, the Apostle alleges two
places out of the Old, Vengeance belongs to me, Deuteronomy. 32.35. and the Lord
will judge his people, Psalm. 135.14. To judge, is to avenge; so that the people
of God, have those considerations in their sins to provoke God, which wicked
men cannot have; and therefore have the same motives to humble them; as the
Apostle argues, To which of the Angels said he, Sit at my right hand? etc. so
may we, To what wicked man has God poured out his love, revealed himself
kindly, as unto the godly? therefore do they neglect the greater mercies.

LECTURE X.
JEREMIAH 50.20. In those days, and at that time, the iniquity of Judah shall
be sought for, etc.


LEt us in the next place consider the particulars wherein Gods eye of anger
does manifest it self upon his own children, How Gods anger manif^sts it ^elf
upon his own children sinning.
if sinning against him. The effect of his wrath may be considered in that
which is temporal, or spiritual, or eternal; in all these Gods anger does bring
forth in one respect or other. For the temporal objects, take notice of these
particulars; first, In temporals, 1. By involving them in common and ordinary
afflictions
When they sin against God, they are involved in the common and ordinary
afflictions, which do usually accompany sin in the wicked: Thus 1 Cor. 11.30.
for their unworthy receiving of the Sacrament (and some even of those were
godly, as appears v. 32.) many were weak and sickly: weak, were such as did
languish, and sickly is more, such as had diseases on them; now these were
(...), strokes from God, and therefore came from his anger for their sins.
Though the Lords Supper consist of a twofold bread, the one earthly for the
body, the other heavenly the bread of life for the soul, yet both body and soul
did miserably decay, because of unworthy receiving; This Table being as
Chrysostom said, mensa Aquilarum, not Graculorum, food for Eagles, not Jaies.
As therefore those children, who have fainting diseases upon them, and do
secretly eat salt, oatmeal, etc. though they have never such excellent food at
their fathers table, yet thrive not, but look pale, and consuming; so it was
with the Corinthians by reason of their corruptions, they inclined to death,
though they fed on the bread of life. Now that these bodily diseases are the
common issue and fruit of sin, appears Lev. 26.16. Deuteronomy. 28.22. grace
therefore of justification can give no Supesedeas to any disease that shall
arrest a believer offending; but are the wicked in Consumptions, Agues, Fevers
for their sins? so are the godly; yea, the people of God are in these
calamities before the wicked, Amos 3.2. You only have I known of all the
Families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. I
have known you, that is, acknowledged ye for mine, see what that is, Exodus
19.5. A peculiar treasure unto me above all people: The Hebrew word signifies
that which is dear and precious, and to be desired of all. This is aggravated
by what follows, for all the earth is mine, that is, seeing there are so many
nations in the world, over whom I have full power and dominion; how great is
Gods goodness in taking you for his above others? now mark the Prophets
reason, because I have done this, therefore I will visit you for your
iniquities, for to all your other wickednesses you add an ungrateful heart.
So there is another place, 1 Pet. 4.17. where God is said to judge them before
others, and this has been a great offense to the godly; It is time, that is, a
seasonable opportunity by the decree and appointment of God, for judgment,
that is, chastisements for former sins, which are called judgments, because
they are public testimonies and manifestations of Gods anger against sins,
and are to put the godly in mind of their sins (only it is (...) not (...) in
the original) The word is used even of the godly, 1 Cor. 11.31, 32. 1 Pet. 4.6.
By the house of God he means the true Members of the Church, and whereas he
says it begins in them, he thereby intimates, that the godly in this life are
more exposed to afflictions for sin, then the wicked are, and this made David
and Jeremy so expostulate with God in this matter, so that the godly in their
afflictions ought to say, as that widow of Sarepta, 2 Kin. 17.18. This is to
call my sin to remembrance.

It is thought the Apostle, though he does not expressly mention a place, yet he
takes this out of the Doctrine of the old Testament, for so God did begin first
with his people, Isa. 10.12. Jer. 25.17, 18. Ezekiel. 9.6. begin at my Sanctuary,
Ezekiel. 21.4. There God in public calamities makes no difference between the
righteous and the ungodly; now this is so great, that the Apostle says, the
righteous is hardly saved: The word (...) is used of those things that with
much labor are brought about, Act. 14.18. Act. 27.7. These tribulations are so
great, that they almost destroy the godly themselves: see also Jam. 5.13. Is
any sick, where the godly man is supposed to be sick, and the cause ( if he
has committed sin) that is, such sins as were the causes of that disease, they
shall be forgiven him; so that even justified persons afflicted by diseases,
are to inquire what sins the Lord would humble them for, and to labor that the
sickness of the body, be the sanctified occasion of the health of the soul.

2. Gods anger is seen in bringing extraordinary and unusual calamities upon
them because of their sins; 2. In bringing extraordinary and unusual
calamities.
so that they have strange punishments, which even the wicked do many times
escape: Jonah who endeavored to fly from Gods face (and that he might easily
have done by Antinomian Doctrine) with what a prodigious judgment was he
overtaken? Jonah 2. The Prophet calls it the belly of hell; and how deeply his
soul was afflicted under that punishment, appears, in that he says, his soul
fainted within him, and he concluded, he was cast out of Gods sight.

He that voluntarily ran from Gods presence, does now bewail that he is cast
from it. He makes the Whales belly an house of prayer, and this came up to God,
in his holy Temple, that is Heaven. You see by this, that God prepares strange
judgments sometimes for those that offend him, though his children: so in that
1 Cor. 11.30. when he says, that many of the Corinthians were dead for their
unworthy receiving, it is to be understood of an immature and untimely death;
they did not live out to the term of those days, that according to natural
causes they might have done, so that it is the same with being [ cut off] in
the old Testament, Exodus 12.15. Whosoever did eat the Passover with leaven was
to be cut off from Israel: Therefore even godly men may procure to themselves
untimely deaths, and may provoke God to cut them off in the midst of their
years.

3. Yea further, 3. By striking with sudden death.
God may not only afflict them in an extraordinary manner, but even strike them
with sudden death, and that while their sins are upon them. I will not instance
in Ananias and Saphira, nor in Nadab and Abihu, though some have thought
charitably of them; we have a clear instance in Vzzah wherein Gods anger was so
apparent, by striking him suddenly dead, that the thing is said to displease
David, 2 Samuel 6.7. The anger of God was kindled against Vzzah, and he smote him
for his error. His error was not, because he was not a Levite, for its plain he
was, but because they put the Ark upon a new cart, whereas they should have
carried it upon their shoulders; although its thought the carrying of the Ark
was limited only to the Levites that were the sons of Kohath, and that no other
Levite might touch the Ark, which if so, then it was a second offense against
the Law, because he touched it; and indeed this seems to be the proper cause,
because it was a personal fault of Vzzah, whereas the putting of it on a new
cart, was the error of others besides him.

Thus Vzzah in his very sins is stricken dead; you have likewise another sad
example of Ely, Lege historiam, ne fias historia, 1 Samuel 4.18. Because he failed
in the measure of zeal about the reproof of his sons, therefore he fell
backward and broke his neck; Ely manifested his pious affections, in submitting
to the hand of God punishing, and in being more affected with the public
calamity, then his own private, yet this is his sad Tragical end.

4. Gods anger reaches to t^eir children, and what is dear to them.
4. Gods anger does not limit it self to them only, but it reaches even to
their children, and to those that are dear to them. Thus David's child is
stricken dead, for his sin; and thus Flies daughter gives up the ghost with sad
grief. The family both of David and Ely, have remarkable calamities following
them, and all because of their sins. When any of Elies posterity shall be
forced to crouch for a morsel of bread, this is a Memento of Elies sin.

Here a man may see the seed of the righteous begging bread, but for their
Parents sins; Therefore that of David* Psalm. 36. must not be understood
universally. That this calamity may the more wound his heart, God tells him
what he will do to his house after his death; if any were left alive, it should
be like that indulgence to Cain, to carry up and down a token of Gods
displeasure; and if you ask for how long should this anger of God endure, 1 Samuel 3.14. His iniquity must not be purged away from that house for ever. Well
may the Scripture say, that whosoever hears this judgment of God, his ears
shall tingle. By this instance, how watchful should godly parents be, lest for
their sins committed, a curse should cleave to the family for many generations?
I acknowledge these calamities as they fell upon Ely a godly man, so they were
wholesome medicines, and fatherly corrections, but as they came on his wicked
children, or posterity continuing in wickedness, so they were strictly, and
properly, punishments.

Lastly, 5. These temporal evils will r^ach to the public Church and State
wherein they live.
These temporal evils will reach even to the public Church and State wherein
they live, so that the sins of godly men may help to pull down public
judgments. Thus it was with Hezekiah, for his unthankfulnes and pride, there
was wrath upon Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. so David's sin in numbering
the people, it was the death of many thousand in Israel; for Elies sin, the
Israelites are slain in the Army, and the Ark is taken. Hence you have Esaias,
Daniel and Ezra joining themselves in the number with others, who made public
confessions of their sins upon days of humiliation. It is therefore a cursed
and secure opinion, that faith, the godly when they keep Fast-daies, do it not,
because they have any sins that God punishes, b^t because of wicked men. The
Scripture does manife^t the contrary, and the holiest men living do bring some
sparks and firebrarnds to increase the wrath of God, and therefore they ought
to bring their buckets for the quenching of it.

The aggravation of this anger will appear, if you consider, God is angry at
the least sins.
what kind of sins they have been for which God has been so sore displeased,
and in them enumerated, or instanced in, you may perceive they were the
Belzebub-sins, the firstborn of iniquities: Vzzah failed only in the order God
had appointed, what he did was out of care, and a good intention; yet the Lord
smites him; so Moses was denied entering into the land of Canaan* which was an
heavy affliction to him, because he spoke unadvisedly with his lips:
Commentators are at loss to find out what his sin was. So David's sin in
numbering the people, its disputed wherein the transgression lay. Elies heavy
judgments that came so frequently one upon another, were for a want of that
measure of zeal which should have burnt within him. Oh therefore consider that
God does not only see sins, that are mountains* but that are mole-hils
comparatively: He does not only see the beams, but the motes that are in us; he
does not only take notice of our mire and vomit, if we return to that, but of
the least spot and wrinkle; how deeply may thou humble thy self under every
Religious duty performed by thee. How often do we fail in the manner of a
command, as Vzzah in the order? How often out of pride and self-confidence do
we number our earthly props, and refuges, relying upon them? How unadvised are
our thoughts and words? now these hairs of sins (as I may so call them, both
for number and seeming littleness) are all numbered before God.

God angry at errors in judgments and false opinions.
As the Lord is angry with these lesser sins and defects in graces; so also for
Errors in Judgments, and false opinions: How well would it be for the
Antinomian, if God did not see this sin in them, that they hold, he sees no
sin in Believers? I fear me God sees, and takes notice of their erroneous
Sermons, of their corrupt Doctrines and seducing Books. There are indeed those,
who would make heresy, almost innocence, and that it is more to be pitied then
punished, but the Apostle, Gal. 5. reckons heresies among gross sins, such as
exclude from the Kingdom of heaven; and how severe Gods anger is to those who
do err, though in less matters, and although they keep the foundation,
appears in that notable place, 1 Cor. 3.12, 13, 14, 15.

It is a difficult place, and those that would build Purgatory out of it, they
are the Architects of that hay and stubble the text speaks of. Not to join with
that exposition of some, who by hay and stubble, do understand evil works; nor
with Beza, who denies it to be meant of false doctrine, but only of the manner
of preaching: He makes the building of gold and silver, etc. to be the pure and
sincere doctrine of Christ; the hay and stubble to be the vain affecting of
eloquence and words; but I rather go along with those that interpret the place
of false doctrines, but not such as do overthrow the foundation; only they
build superfluous and unsound doctrine, upon the true foundation, which is as
uncomely, as if you should see a royal palace, which has gold for the
foundation, and precious stones for the walls, yet have the covering of straw
and stubble; what deformity would this be? yet so it is with the best preachers
that are, who yet add some errors to the sound Doctrine they deliver. Now for
the opening of the place, it is wholly Allegorical; The preachers of Gods word
are builders, and they are to raise up a stately palace; the materials are
compared to gold and silver, to precious stones. The place is an allusion to
Isa. 54.12. I will make thy windows of Agats, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and
all thy borders of pleasant stones; it is a description of the precious Graces
and Doctrines which the Ministers of God are clothed with; and this shows
with what esteem and high price all the truths of Christ ought to be received
by you. The Ark, Ex. 25.3, 4, 5, 6. was to be made of gold, silver, and other
precious materials; this is the nature of true Doctrine. Now false Doctrine,
though it be not in fundamentals, but in mere accessories, is called hay and
stubble, and he that preaches these shall come to a severe trial. Every man's
work, says the Text, shall be made manifest; where you see the spreading of
false Doctrine, is called the work of a man, as in the second Epist. of John,
its called evil deeds; and this evil work has a twofold effect; First, it
makes the owner to suffer loss, that is, all that labor and pains he has
taken shall bring him no profit, whereas if he had employed himself in the
truth, his reward would have been great. The lucrum cessans is as great a
loss, as the damnum emergens. Oh! what a fearful thing will it be for false
teachers, who have made it their whole business to spread new opinions, to lose
all their labor! The other effect is, that though he be saved, yet it shall be
so as by fire, that is, he shall be in extreme danger, and he shall have sad
tribulations and miseries falling upon him; see the like phrase Jude 23.
pulling them out of the fire. That which thou comfortest thy self with, and
gloriest in, as if it were persecution, it may be is nothing but part of the
fire in the Text, which is to afflict thee, that thy dross may be purged out:
let therefore all false teachers (though belonging to God) expect a fire of
burning, great afflictions and tribulations. And if Antinomians have trouble
for their Doctrine, they are bound to believe God chastises them for this very
opinion, that he does not chastise for sin. I have bin the longer on this
place, because of the multitude of hay and stubble that is built every where.
God will have his day, when a fire shall rise to consume it all, and the true
Doctrine will only continue. The Apostle speaks as terribly afterward, v. 17.
If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy, where the Apostle
calls the Corinthians, The temple of God: now this is not so much true of
every single Christian, as when collected together in a Church or body; and the
Spirit dwelling among them, is much more admirable then his presence in the
Ark; and he defiles this Temple, who by any false Doctrine and error, corrupts
that society; now the greatness of this sin is seen by the words following, The
Lord will destroy him, for so (...) is the same with (...), so that as God
destroyed Athaliah, and Beltashazzar for profaning the Temple, and the
offerings or gifts of the Temple, no less punishment (unless they repent)
shall fall upon those who pervert the Doctrines of Christ.

Manifes^ation of Gods anger to believers sinning in spiritual and internal
things. 1. In matter of consol^tion.
I come to the second demonstration of Gods anger to believers when sinning, and
that is in spiritual and internal things; now they are of two sorts; first, the
consolations of the holy Ghost, with the light of Gods favor; secondly, the
flourishing and sprouting of the graces of sanctification; In both these you
shall find the godly man after sin much withered. What anger in the first
sense, after sin, the godly may feel, David will abundantly tell you, Ps. 11.
he calls it the breaking of his bones; you know how terrible and grievous that
is, and in the godly this must be the more terrible, because they are of a more
tender apprehension: As they say, Christ's bodily pain was more then other men's
could be, because of the excellent temper and tender constitution of his body;
so it is with the godly, every expression of Gods anger, falls like a drop of
scalding lead into a man's eye; the conscience of the believer, when once
awakened, feels every frown of God like an hell. Thus after the committing of
gross sin, God hides his face, and then for the while, they are like so many
Cains and Judas's, crying out, Their sin is greater then they can bear; and
truly this worm would never die, this fire would never be quenched in them, did
not God again take them into favor; there is no difference between a man damned
in hell, and a godly man troubled in conscience, but the adjunct of time, one
is perpetual, and the other is not. Now our Divines say, That eternity is not
essential to the punishment of hell (for Christ suffered the torments of hell
for us, which yet were not in time eternal) but accidental, because those in
hell are not able to satisfy Gods justice, therefore they must continue there
till they have paid the last farthing, which because they cannot do to all
eternity, therefore they are tormented for ever. Look upon David again in Psalm.
32.3, 4. How it fared with him, because of his sins; My bones waxed old,
through my roaring all the day long, my moisture is turned into the drought of
Summer; Did David speak these things hyperbolically and rhetorically only? Did
he not find such anguish, and consumption in his soul, that he thought no
words could express it? and all this he says, was because of sin; O then
believe this and tremble, lest such a whale of sorrow and grief should swallow
thee up, as did David. Thus it was also with the incestuous person, the devil
was ready to swallow him up; he was delivered to him to be tormented by him;
and can all this be done, yet God take no notice of sin? As the godly in this
life time, may have that joy in the Gospel, which passes all understanding,
and more then the heart can perceive; so they may have for sin such trouble,
and spiritual desertions, that shall make every thing, their chamber, the
field, a very hell to them; and David in many Psalms manifests such
desolation upon his soul; especially this is seen in lapses, when persecutions
do abound, and men through fear have denied that truth, which in their
consciences they were assured of. We may read in Ecclesiastical Histories of
the grievous wounds and gashes, Gods people through frailty have made upon
their own souls. And as it is thus in matter of consolation, so in the
particular of sanctification, ^. In sanctification.
how may you observe some, who have been planted by Gods grace like a Paradise,
through their negligence and corruptions become like a parched wilderness? was
not David in his fall, till recovered, like a tree in winter? though the
moisture of grace was within, yet nothing did outwardly appear; Was he not like
Samson when his hair was cut off, not able to break the cords of sin he was
tied in? some have thought a godly man can no more fall from the degrees of
grace, then the essence and state of grace; but if sin increase and grow,
certainly grace must decrease, for whether sin expel grace meritoriously only,
or formally, still the introduction of the one must be the expulsion of the
other. Thus Rev. 2. the Church is reproved for abating in her first love; and
the people of God complain, Why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear?
Isa. 63.17. not that God does infuse hardness, but only he denies mollifying
grace. And certainly a gracious tender heart, must fear a deliverance up to
hardness more then up to Satan, Illud est cor durum, quod non trepidat ad
nomen cordis duri, said Bernard, That is an hard heart, which does not tremble
at the name of an hard heart. A godly man therefore may so provoke God, that he
be left in a senseless, stupid way, acting sin without tender remorse, and
securely lying down therein.

The manifestation of Gods anger Eternal.
Lastly, The anger of God eternal cannot indeed be in the event upon him, but
yet it does conditionally oblige him till he does repent, so that you may
suppose a Believer to be damned, if you suppose him not to repent. A
conditional Proposition, Nihil ponit in esse, but it does in posse, and
therefore the Scripture makes such hypothetical Propositions, wherein a
possibility of Apostasy is supposed in the godly, if left to themselves; as in
that famous place, Ezekiel. 18.14. When the righteous man turns away from his
righteousness, and commits iniquity, all his righteousness shall not be
mentioned, in his sins he shall die. This place is not (as some do) to be
understood of a righteous man in appearance only, for its opposed to a wicked
man in reality; and it is such a righteousness, that if continued in, he
should have lived eternally. Neither may we stretch it to an apostasy from the
state of Justification, as others do; but it is to be understood as
comminatory, by way of threatening and supposition: for it is true, that if a
godly man should forsake his righteousness, it would not be remembered to him;
and therefore if you suppose a justified person not to repent of his grievous
sins committed, you may also suppose him to die in the displeasure and eternal
wrath of God: but this is more exactly to be considered of, when we handle that
Question, Whether Remission of sin obtained, may be frustrated and made void by
new subsequent actual sins?

LECTURE XI.
HEB. 4.13. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight;
but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to
do.


ALthough this Text in the general sense of it, will not fully prove Gods eye
of anger against sin in justified persons; yet because a more special scrutiny
and search into the words, will make much against the Antinomian Error, and
also because the Answers which are given to this Text, and the like, do contain
gross falsehoods, so that in the refuting of them, all things in this
controversy will be clearly discovered, as also because that principal and
noble Question, How far Gods taking notice of sin, to chastise and punish it,
is subject to the mere liberty of his will, will in some measure be discussed,
I shall therefore insist upon this Text. Not that the Orthodox make it their
shield of Achilles, as the Antinomian slandereth, Honeycomb, p. 73. But
because the vanity of that distinction, which they make between Gods seeing and
his knowing, may be brought out from behind the stuff, where like Saul it had
hid it self.

And first, for the Text absolutely in it self, The coherence.
The words are part of that excellent commendation, which is given to Gods
word. The purity and power of Religion is kept up by acknowledging the fullness
and perfection of the Scripture. Both Papists and Illuminatists agree in this
dangerous Error, that they look for, and expect a Doctrinal teaching
immediately by Gods Spirit, above, and besides that of the Word: Hence as the
Papists make the Scripture but a sheath to receive any sword, either of gold or
iron (words that will bear any sense you put upon them) so do the
Illuminatists, that a godly man is above all books, teachers, writings, and
feels nothing but God working and acting in him. We have therefore the greater
cause to set up the Scriptures in their Divine authority and fulness, by how
much the more others endeavor to diminish it. This noble encomium of Gods word
begineth, v. 12. where you have the subject of the commendation, and the
commendation it self. The subject is called (...), the word of God. Bellarmine
and other Papists, that they might depress the Authority of the Scriptures,
understand this of Christ, who is often called the Word. Their reasons are
partly because Christ is in other places called so, as Joh. 1.1. and alibi, and
partly because this Word is spoken of as a person, and therefore all things are
said to be open and naked to his sight. But these are not Cogent; for although
in other places Christ is called the word, yet the context does there clearly
evince it, whereas here the contrary will appear: for having before exhorted
them to receive the Gospel, and to hearken to the voice, while it calls to day,
among other Arguments he brings this from the nature of Gods word, which is to
be understood both of the Law and the Gospel; and its further observed as a
peculiar thing to John only in his Gospel, and the Epistles, to call Christ the
word of God; and although the Text speaks of the word of God as preached, and
not as written, yet because the word written and preached, differ not
essentially but accidentally in respect of the manner, therefore this Argument
holds true of the Scriptures. As for the second reason it is ordinary by a
metonymy to attribute that to the Scripture which belongs to God speaking by
the Scripture, as Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, etc.
so the Scripture is said to speak Ja. 4.5. So that it is no wonder if here the
word of God be spoken of, as knowing all things, because God by this does
discover and manifest every thing. In the next place consider the commendation,
and that is, 1. from the adjunct qualities, 2. from the powerful effects. The
adjunct qualities are ( quick and powerful) that is, it is not dead or
frustrated, but puts forth its power and efficacy, which our words cannot do.
It is thought to be an allusive expression to the fire which was on the altar of
sacrifices, that was not to go out.

Secondly, Its commended from the effect, its sharper then a two-edged sword;
its an Hebraism to give a mouth to the sword, because it does so devour; but
because a two-edged or two-mouthed sword does divide more forcibly, therefore
is Gods word compared to that. Such a sword they say, the Levites in the Old
Testament did use in dividing and opening the sacrifices, in which Metaphor the
Apostle continues afterward. Now by this comparison two things are insinuated,

1. That God knows all sin, even the most hidden.

2. This knowledge is not a mere bare knowledge, but such as is of a Judge
examining and punishing. For as the sword does pierce and hurt, so Gods word
does see and punish, therefore it is said to be (...), that is, most exactly
discerning and separating gold from dross, and judging accordingly: so that
the Text speaking not barely of an omniscient eye of God, but an eye
discerning* judging and punishing, does in this consideration pertinently
belong to the controversy. We need not be curious in distinguishing between
the spirit and the soul (only the Scripture does not confound these together)
nor between the things understood by the marrow and joints, The Text opened.
which are translated from the body to the soul. This is intended in the
general, by the joints, he means the minima, the least things; and by the
marrow, the intima, the most secret and inward things. Having thus described
the efficacy of Gods word, he lays down two Propositions in my Text; one
negative, the other affirmative. Negative, There is no creature, (...)
inapparent, but he sees through it. Affirmative, All things are naked and
opened, opened is more then naked: Naked, is that which is not clothed or
covered; Opened, is that, whose inwards are discovered and made conspicuous.
Much is said by Critics concerning the word (...)* Cameron thinks it
translated from wrastlers, who are said (...) their adversary, when they so
take him by the neck, and turn him upside down, so as to object him in every
part to the eyes of the beholders: some say, the Metaphor may be taken from
those, who being before the Judge, hold down their neck and face to the ground,
as not daring to behold his face: but that which is most received, and which is
most consonant to the context, is of those who take the word from those who
begin at the neck, and divide the sacrifice in the middle, so that all the
inwards do appear. Thus you see how emphatical and full the Scripture is in
describing of Gods omniscient eye of any sin wheresover it is, and that not by
a mere bare cognition, Observe.
but of judging; so that the Observation is,

That seeing there is sin in justified persons, Gods eye must needs see it, and
judge it.

Antinomians an^wer by distinguishing,
To this it is answered very confidently by a distinction never heard of before,
That God indeed knows the sins of believers, but he does not see them, Hon.
Comb p. 67, 68, 69, 70. and this distinction they plead so boldly for, that
(they say) although all men, Devils and Angels, would gainsay it, yet it must
stand; for the opening of this silly distinction, they express themselves
thus; That although to see and know be all one in the pure uncompounded nature
of God, yet they are not so to us; even as justice and mercy are all one in
God, And reasons thereof.
but not to us, yea contrary; and the Author gives two strong reasons (as he
calls them) to The Scripture (says he) distinguishes them, now he argues,
that as it is a sin to distinguish where the Scripture does not (and thereupon
he instanceth in the distinction of the guilt of sin, and the nature of sin,
making it a new distinction, and suspecting it for a corrupter of the Gospel,
as if Christ had taken away the guilt of our sins, and not the sins themselves)
so where the Scripture does distinguish, there it is a sin for us not to
distinguish. Now concerning the former, that there is in the Scripture a
distinction betweeen the guilt of sin, and sin it self, is in its due time to
be proved.

Let us consider how he proves this distinction of Gods seeing and knowing.
The place he brings is Psalm. 94*9, 10. He that formed the eye, shall not he
see? he that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? Here (says he) they
are distinctly set down, and the Scripture uses this continual practice,
saying no where, That God does not know the sins of justified persons, but in
many places, That he sees no sin in them. His second reason is, because among
men and Angels, yea in God himself there is a reason (to our capacities) of
this difference; for to know a thing, is, to understand the nature of it,
though the thing it self be abol^sh^d and has no existence; but to see a
thing, is to have a real existence of it before our eye. As for instance, God
(says he) knows the flood that drowned the whole world, but he does not see
it having an existence now; so God knows the leprosy of Naaman, more
perfectly then Naaman did himself, yet he does not see it upon Naaman; and thus
God knows the sins of the wicked, and of his justified children more
perfectly then they themselves do, and herein is no difference between them;
but here is the difference, that God sees sin in the one, and not in the
other, because abolished by Christ.

Thus you have a heap of falsehoods and nonsense together, as if the Author had
no knowing or seeing, while he speaks of these things.

To let you understand the truth in these particulars; howsoever it would be
very profitable in this place, to give you the Scripture Doctrine, about the
eye or seeing of God; as also the different use of it in Scripture; namely,
that sometimes its taken for a mere naked apprehension of a thing; sometimes
for the actions or effects that do flow from Gods seeing, and then it is used
either in a good sense for the eye of his care, protection and approbation, or
in a bad sense, and that two ways, either for an eye of condemnation, in which
sense God does not see the sins of Believers, or of displeasure and anger, in
which sense its expressly said, the sinful actions of godly men are evil in
Gods eyes: The truth of the Antinomian distinction* examined by several
Propositions.
Howsoever (I say) it would be very profitable to speak of this here, yet I
shall put it off. I shall therefore examine what truth is in this distinction,
which they so applaud, and that shall be by several Propositions.

First, That seeing is attributed to God only metaphorically, 1. Seeing
attributed to God only metaphorically.
God has no bodily eyes. It is well observed by a Father, that the meaner and
more debased the things are to which God is compared, there is the least
danger, because every common apprehension will judge it not to be truly and
formally so in God. And thus it is of eyes, and when to see is attributed to
God, it is the same thing with to know, so that to make a difference between
these two is gross ignorance.

Secondly, Knowledge is attributed likewise to God, 2. Gods knowledge and ours
differs.
but in a far different sense from what it is in us, and therefore differs from
our knowledge many ways: 1. His knowledge is his substance: Hence Synesius
said, God to be (...), by his understanding. 2. Its not caused from objects;
Gregory expressed it well, Ipse mundus nobis non notus esse posset nisi esset,
deo autem nisi notus esset, esse non posset. 3. It Is simple and one. There is
properly no memory of things past, no prescience of things to come, but all
things are present to him: As if there were a body that were all eyes, that
needed not to turn it self backward and forward, to see things; or as a man
standing upon an high Tower does with one cast of his eye behold Passengers at
the bottom of the Tower, which go successively one after another; Thus Deus est
totus lux, and totus oculus, God is altogether light, and wholly an eye. 4.
Knowledge in us, is properly taken for to know a thing by its causes, but it is
not so in God. This rightly understood will overthrow that distinction of
knowing and seeing.

3. The alleged text, Psalm 94 no ground for their distinction.
Thirdly, That text, Psalm. 94. does no ways suppose such a distinction; for the
Psalmist does there intend, whatsoever perfection is either in bodily seeing,
or mental knowing, it is eminently and more transcendently in God; neither
does he limit seeing to the sins of wicked men, and knowing only to the sins of
the godly; yea, the text makes thus against the Antinomian, if a believer
himself and others see sin in him, shall not God much more? Indeed in the
creatures, there is a distinction between seeing and knowing in some respects,
for knowing may be of a thing in the abstract, but seeing does denote the
intuitive present apprehension, so that knowing has a perfection which seeing
has not, and seeing which knowing has not; but in God all his knowledge is
intuitive, and all things are present to him, because of his eternity and
omnipresence, so the Schools determine, and rightly, upon that Text, 2 Pet. 3.
afterward to be explained, and the reason is, because intuitive knowledge, or
the apprehension of a thing present, is the most noble knowledge, not that the
things themselves do coexist, or are present to one another, but unto God in
Eternity; for as Gods immensity is in respect of his essence, so his eternity
is in regard of time: so that although the things themselves vary, yet Gods
knowledge does not; As an Artificer, who has the Idea, or form of an house in
his mind, before he makes it, when it is made, and after it is destroyed: he
has still the same form in his mind, though the house be altered.

4. The Scripture uses no such diff^rence.
Fourthly, Neither does the Scripture customarily use such a difference; yea, to
know, when attributed to God, is used many times for a knowledge of
approbation, and then we cannot say, God knows the sins of Believers; but we
may as well say, God knows no sin in them (that is) to condemn them for it,
as well as he sees none in them, so Hab. 1. God is said to be of purer eye^
then to behold iniquity* that is, with approbation, and so in this sense, we
may say, God sees no sin, no not in wicked men: Besides it is very false, that
the Scripture does no where say, that he sees sin in Believers; for it is
expressly said of David's numbering the people, and of his murder, that it was
evil in Gods eyes, and he confesses that he had done that evil in Gods sight.
But of this more hereafter.

So then wheresoever the Scripture says, God sees no sin, there we may also
as truly say, God knows none; and where it is said, he does see, there we may
say he does know also.

Fifthly, 5. There is no distinction to our capacities between Gods knowing and
s^eing.
There is in reason no distinction to be made to our capacities between Gods
knowing and seeing, for in those instances the Author gives, we may say God
knows in that respect as he sees, and he does not see in that respect he
does not know; As for example, God does not see the flood now to be, no more
can we say, he knows it now to be, for that is false; God does not see the
Leprosy upon Naaman, no more does he know it to be on him: So God knows his
people in Christ, as well as sees them in Christ, and therefore if by Christ
he sees no sin in them, he must likewise know none in them. Now this error is
grounded upon a dangerous conceit, as if Gods seeing were limited to things
existent, and his knowledge to things past or future, so that it is inexcusable
ignorance, to say with this Author, that God knew the Sun and Moon before he
made them, but he did not see them. He did not indeed see them to be before
they were, no more did he know them to be before they were, but when they were
made, his seeing and knowing of them were all one.

Sixthly, 6 Gods seeing and k^^wing, not opposite.
If Gods seeing were to be explained oppositely to his knowing, then nothing
that had a present being were known by God. But does not the Scripture give to
God the knowledge of all things? and though the things be diversified by time
past, present, and to come, yet to God they are not so; Consider that eminent
place, 2 Pet. 3.8. A thousand years with God, are but as one day. The Apostle
alleges this place out of Psalm. 90. ver. 4. with a little variation. The
Psalmist says, as yesterday when it is past: The Apostle as one day. The
Psalmist says, in thy eyes O Lord: The Apostle with the Lord. The Psalmists
expression in the eyes of the Lord, are very pregnant to our purpose. Here is a
description of eternity, proving that God sees all things with one intuitive
cast of his eye, and that although to us things are present, past and to come,
yet to God all things are present, and although we are not able to reach this
with our understanding, no more then a pigmie the Pyramides, yet we must rest
more upon this Scripture assertion, then our own understanding, Quicquid de Deo
dici (we may add cogitari) potest, eo ipso est indignum quia dici (cogitari)
potest: and again digne Deum aestimamus, dum inaestimabil^m dicimus. The
Schoolmen dispute, whether those things which God did once know, he still
knows, as for example, God once knew that Christ was to die, but now it is
not true, that he is to die; and their resolution is, that we cannot properly
say, God begins to know what he did, or cease to know what he did, but rather
that the thing it self begins to be known, or cease to be known, so that
the change is not in respect of Gods knowing, but the thing known, as when I
see the Sun, and afterward it is hid in the cloud, the change is not in my
eye, but in the Sun; Hence they also resolve, that God knows all things simul
together, that his knowledge is invariable, that it admits not of increase
or decrease, that all things are present to him, and that as the Sun is always
in actu lucendi, so God in actu intelligendi: So that this very Text does
briefly overthrow all that which the Antinomian in so many pages sweateth to
prove; and that the consideration of Gods eternal knowledge in this manner is
of profitable use, appears by that, when the Apostle says, Be not ignorant
of this one thing.

7. Gods seeing not limited to things present.
Seventhly, If Gods seeing of things were limited in our capacity, only to
things present, then all the bypast sins of ungodly men, though unrepented of,
yet God does not see them, because they have no present being, and so God shall
not only, not see sins in the godly, but likewise not in the ungodly: All the
past sins of Judas and Cain, God did not see at the day of their death, for
they were p^st away. Here will be much comfort to unbelievers, as well as
Believers.

Eighthly, If therefore God does not see a thing because it is past, 8 Gods not
^^^ing sins past exclud^s Christ's merits.
what need the Antinomian run to Christ's merits taking away sin out of Gods
sight, for this would follow by natural consequence, because the object is
taken away? Take their own instances, God does not now see the Flood that
drowned the world; The Leprosy upon Naaman; The Israelites wound that is
healed; why so? does there need the blood of Christ to remove these? No, it
follows naturally, because the objects are removed and taken away; and so it
would be here.

Ninthly, All these instances for Gods not seeing, yet knowing, 9 Antinomian
(...) cont^a^y to their doctrine.
are contrary to the doctrine they hold* God does not see the Flood that
drowned the world, he sees not Naamans Leprosy, why so? because these things
have no being; but here is their grand absurdity, that they hold sin has still
an objective existency in us to Gods understanding, and yet he does not see it.
They should have instanced in some thing that has a being, and yet for all
that, God not see it. If Naamans Leprosy had continued on him still, and yet
God not see it, then it had been to the purpose; for they grant that we have
truly sin in us, and we are to judge so; yet though it has such a being in us,
God does not see it.

Tenthly, What an empty Cobweb is this distinction, 10. The vainness of this
distinction.
even for that very purpose they bring it? Oh say they, if God see sin, he is
of so pure a nature, that he cannot be but horribly and infinitely displeased
with us: Those (say they) that hold God sees sin in Believers, consider not
how loathsome, even the least sin is in his eyes. But will this comfort my
conscience, if they say at the same time, though God does not see it, yet he
knows it? Alas, God is of that pure nature, that if he knows but the least
sin by me, he cannot but be infinitely displeased at it. So that you see this
distinction will no ways ease a Believer in point of the trouble of his
conscience. And thus have I labored to break the heart of this false and
ignorant distinction.

LECTURE XII.
HEBREWS 4.13. All things are naked and opened to him, etc.


2. Antinomians second answer.
THe second answer made by the Antinomians to this Argument from Gods
omnisciency, is this, For when we say, how weak and absurd is it, to hold, God
does not see that, which we see? They answer ( Honeycomb page 61.) Here we
oppose the power of God against his will, for he sees all things, saving that
which he undertakes to abolish out of his own sight, that he may not see it, so
that by his mystical clothing of us with his sons righteousness, he has
abolished it out of his own sight, though not out of ours. Now we told you that
this answer is not universally to be slighted, for our Divines, Pareus and
others (as I mentioned before) (maintaining that remission of sin, though it be
the utter deletion of the guilt, yet not the full eradication and abolition of
the filth, but that it still continues in us) make this objection to
themselves, Nothing is hid or covered from Gods eyes, if therefore sin be
there, God cannot but see it. To this they answer, God sees all, but what he
will not see, and that is a known saying of Austins, Noluit advertere, noluit
animadvertere, noluit agnoscere, maluit ignoscere, God will not take notice of
the sins of justified persons, he will not punish them, he had rather forgive
them. It seems then by this, that God will not see sin in Believers to
condemnation but yet he will to castigation; but if Christ has fully satisfied
Gods wrath, and it be a mere arbitrary thing in God, whether he will chastise
or no, why then should not Gods anger and his chastisements be removed from the
godly by Christ's death as well as his justice and punishments? It Is therefore
worthy the inquiry, how far Gods taking notice of sin so as to chastise or
punish it, is subject to the mere liberty of his will: And in answering of
this, I will not range as far as this question will carry me, for the total
discussion of it in its large extent will be when we speak of the meritorious
cause of justification against Socinians. Propositions showing how far Gods
taki^g notice of sin, so as to pu^ish it, is subjec^ to the mere liberty of his
will*
To speak therefore in a more restricted way of this matter: Consider these
Propositions, some whereof are ground-works and foundations, the other more
immediately reaching to our scope in hand.

First, There is in God a liberty and free will, whereby he does whatsoever he
pleases, so that as the Psalmist says, He that made the eye to see, shall not
he see? He that makes man to know, shall not he know? and thus he that gave
man and Angels this perfection of freedom, shall not he much more be free? 1.
There is in God a lib^rty whereby he does whatsoever he pleases.
Therefore those titles of (...) and (...), which the Greek Fathers sometimes
give to the will of man, are too proud and lofty, and do more properly belong
to God. Indeed so far as freedom is conceived in creatures to have some
potential (...) indifferency, or (...), a suspendedness to be determined by
some other, so far we are not to conceive it in God; for this mutability or
Potentiall indetermination, is an imperfection; and so that same potest as
peccandi, power to sin, which some make necessary to liberty, and which they
call a perfection* though they grant the action of sin it self to be an
imperfection (though this should be granted, which must not) yet neither could
this be found in Gods liberty, and no marvel, seeing that it is not in the
liberty of Christ's humane will, for though Christ's obedience was truly and
properly so, being under a command of God, yet not only as he was God, but as
he was man, he was (...), and (...) impeccablo, or free from the temptation of
sin. Therefore its detestable blasphemy of Durand and other Schoolmen, saying,
Christ might have sinned, lib. 3. Sentent. did. 12. quae. 2. as also of the
Remonstrants who say, Christ after he had taken this Office of a mediatorship,
might have forsaken it, and given it over, but of this more in its proper
place; God therefore is a free agent, Psalm. 135.6. He has done whatsoever he
pleased in heaven and earth, so that he made not the world as the fire burns,
or the Bees make their Honey-Combs, by a natural necessity, but according to
the counsel of his will; hence it is that all his spiritual mercies become
commended unto us, under the title of grace. There was no natural or moral
necessity, obliging God to elect us, to give his Son for us, or to save us, and
indeed it could not be liberality, if it were not a libero, from one that is
free.

2. How freedom may be extended to God.
Propos. 2. According to the different descriptions of liberty and freedom; so
it may be extended larger or narrower unto the actions of God. Those who make
liberty consistent with a necessity of immutability, and do not think
indifferency necessary, but only knowledge, and judgment going before, they
extend it even to the goodness and holiness of God; so they say, God is
libere bonus, freely good, and does freely love himself, so they make the
confirmed Angels and Saints, freely to love God, though necessarily, thus we
sin freely, though necessarily: But others, who make a power to do, or not do,
necessary to liberty, think it a kind of blasphemy to say, God does freely
will that which is good: hence they make liberty not an attribute of his
nature, as holiness, omnipotency, etc. are, but an affection of his will only,
and they think that necessarium and contingens, under which liberty is
comprehended, are differences of ens in its full latitude, as finitum and
infinitum; therefore as the same thing cannot be finite and infinite, so
neither necessary and free, but this is to put the definition of liberty into
too strait fetters, as in time may be shown. I join with those, that think
immutability and liberty may be in the same act, and that God does freely,
though unchangeably love himself; but that freedom of his actions to the
creatures, is with a power to do otherwise if he pleases.

There is also another kind of liberty mentioned by the learned, which is
opposed to servitude, and is the same with sui juris; now God in all things is
this way free: He has no law imposed upon himself by any other, but only what
he prescribes himself, that does he work by; therefore when we say, its just
with God to damn an impenitent sinner, this justice arises not from any
obligation put upon him by another, but what he has eternally prescribed
himself.

3. We cannot prope^ly say God sees all things because he will see them.
Propos. 3. Gods omnisciency, or his bare seeing and taking notice of sin, when
it is, is not subject to his liberty, He cannot but see, whatsoever is, and
also possible to be, so that we cannot say properly God sees all things
because he will see them; for this is an attribute founded in the nature of
God; but if we take knowledge or seeing for the effects accompanying them, as
the Scripture for the most part does, because God is not an idle spectator of
things, but upon his seeing, there is either care and protection, or anger and
punishment, then in this sense, all these effects are subject in some sense to
the liberty and free will of God. God cannot but see the adultery of David, but
whether he will so see it, as to punish David for it in his own person, or in
Christ; or whether he will chastise him at this time, or in this manner; that
is merely at the good pleasure of God. Whether indeed he is free to punish at
all, or chastise at all, you will hear in the other Propositions; thus much we
may conclude, That God cannot abolish sin so out of his sight, so that with his
eyes of omnisciency he should not behold it, when it is there.

Propos. 4. In respect of Gods liberty and freedom, 4. Great difference in
respect of Gods freedom betwee^ the attributes of God, and the actions of them.
there is great difference between the attributes of God, as also the exercises
and actions of them. There are some properties that require no object for their
exercise, but they make it; thus the omnipotency of God, does not find, but
make its object. Again there are others, which though they require an object,
yet not any condition, or circumstance in it; so the wisdom of God, can and
does order every object, let it be what it will be, to a glorious end. It
ordered an harmonious world out of a Chaos, he made all things, qua omnipotens,
as omnipotent, and ordered them all qua sapiens, as a wise God. But then there
are other attributes, which though essential to him, yet cannot be exercised,
but where the objects are so and so conditionated; as that mercy of God,
whereby he does forgive sins, requires an object penitent and believing: so
that Justice of God, whereby it is punitive and vindicative of sin, requires
an object, that is a sinner and impenitent. Now in the actions about the
objects of the former sort, God is every way free, he might have created the
world, or not have created it; but in the actions of the latter sort, though he
be also free, yet not so as to use Justice, or not Justice, when there is an
object with its due condition. As now it was free to God, whether he would make
man or no, it was free for him, whether he would permit man to fall or no, but
when fallen, not free whether he would be just or no: Thus God is free, whether
he will procure, or prepare an object of justice; but then when he has so
prepared an object, then he is not loosned from the obligation of Justice. To
procure an object of Justice arises from the Sovereignty and mere freedom of
God: Hence Gods permission of sin, or reprobation negative. which is the
passing by of some, are not acts of Justice properly so called; but
condemnation for sin is truly and properly Justice. The former arise from Gods
supreme dominion and freedom. When an Object of Justice is, there is an
obligation to execute the same upon it, but not when an object of mercy is,
because its necessary to mercy, that it should be indebita, but to justice,
debita.

I do not here intend to meddle with that Question, Whether God absolutely
might not have let sin go unpunished, and yet forgive it, as we see men can:
(This is disputed even among the Orthodox; some are for the Negative, as
Pis^ator, Lubertus, etc. Others for the Affirmative, as Davenant, Twist, etc.
but the proper place for this will be, when we speak of Christ's satisfaction)
nor yet with that other of the Schoolmen, Whether God may absolutely accept of
a sinner to pardon, and eternal life, though he do not regenerate, or sanctify
him; these are to be handled in their proper place. You see by this delivered,
how far the actions of Gods Justice may be said to be free, or not free.

5. God cannot in justice but punish sinners.
Propos. 5. Whatsoever may be said in an absolute sense about Gods Justice, yet
since that threatening promulged (In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die
the death) God cannot in Justice, but punish sinners. Though it be in his
freedom whether he will give thee a being, or no, yet if thou art an obstinate
sinner, it is not in his freedom, whether he will damn thee or no; so that as
God cannot but love that Image of his holiness where he sees it, so he cannot
but hate the contrary, wheresoever it is, though that hatred shall not always
fall upon the person in whom it is, because removed by Christ.

It is Camerons opinion, That the word Iustitia, (...), when attributed to God,
does always signify Goodness, Salvation, Redemption, but never in the
Scripture (says he) does it denote an affection in God, whereby he avengeth
himself upon sinners; but that the words Ira and Iudicium, Anger and Judgment
express this; But though the word signify so sometimes, yet in some places it
must needs mean this disposition in God, Psalm. 9.5. 1 Timothy 4.8. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.
so that in some sense, we may with several Orthodox men, say, Justice is
essential to God. Sin is not indeed Physically contrary to God, as water is to
fire, for if it were so, God would not suffer it to be, because he is an
infinite good; as if there were infinite fire, or light, there could not be any
water or darkness; but it is morally contrary to him, Hab. 1. Thou art of
purer eyes then to behold iniquity; even sins against any positive command of
God, that are sins only because prohibited, they are thus far against his
nature, and not his will only; because it is against his nature, to have his
will and commands disobeyed in any thing, he being the supreme and most holy
Lawgiver. If God did only punish sin because he will, and not because he is
essentially just, there could no true cause be given, why Heathens should have
terror in their consciences after sins committed, seeing the Word is not
revealed unto them, declaring Gods will: and when the Scripture speaks of God
punishing sins, it does not attribute it to Gods mere will, because he will do
so, but to his Justice, Rev. 16.5, 7. Thus Exodus 24. God is described by this
property, Not acquitting the guilty. Now when we say, God cannot but punish sin
with death since the promulgation of the threatening, that is not so to be
understood, as if then only the tie and obligation of Justice came upon God,
but it was from eternity: for as God did in time reveal this threatening; so he
did from all eternity will this threatening; and so therefore from all eternity
it was just with God to punish a sinner, neither could he forgive him without a
satisfaction. This is diligently to be observed, because men speak sometimes,
as if vindicative Justice were then only due when the actual threatening was;
whereas the executions of God in time, are, as his decrees were from eternity;
and truly we should not give way to such Disputes, Whether God could have
pardoned absolutely, or provided any other way and remedy, when we see God
pitching upon this, and the Scripture only revealing this. Hence the Scripture
commands us to eschew sins, not merely because of his will only, but because
he is holy in his nature, Lev. 11.44. Josh. 24.19. It is true Gods hatred and
displicency of sin cannot but be, yet the destination of it actually to
punishment comes in some sense under his liberty.

6. It is in Gods freedom to punish sin in the party offending, or in a sa^ety.
Prop. 6. Though God cannot but take notice of sin, so as to punish it, yet it
is under his freedom, whether he will punish it in their own persons or in a
surety; and by this means the wisdom of God found out an excellent temperament
of Justice and Mercy, so that the one does not oppose the other;
notwithstanding Gods justice, yet his love and wisdom put him upon that remedy,
which neither men or Angels could have excogitated; so that God does not let
sin go unpunished, only he provideth a Ram to be sacrificed for Isaac, a
Mediator to come between his wrath and us. It is true, reason (as we see) does
much gainsay this mystery; but we may say, mulier ista taceat, let this woman
hold her peace in the Church of God: Though therefore God cannot but execute
justice upon sinners, yet his justice did admit of a temperament, whereby God
does proceed to see the sins of his people, to hate them, but yet to punish
them upon Christ.

7. Great difference between Gods justice essentially a^ intra, and the effec^s
of it ad extra*
7. Prop. There is a great deal of difference between Justice, as it is an
essential property in God, ad intra, and between the effects of it, ad extra.
These latter come much under the liberty and freedom of God; which appears in
the variety of his judgments upon wicked men, some being consumed one way, and
some another, so that it is merely at his pleasure, whether he will stir up
more or less wrath, Ps. 2. there is a little anger of his spoken of: but you
may read a remarkable expression, Ps. 78.38. He turned away his wrath from them
and stirred not up all his wrath. Here you see the anger of God subject to his
free will. If the effects of Gods justice should flow from him as burning from
fire, or drowning from water, the whole world were not able to endure before
him who is a consuming fire. How could it come about, that the wicked do so
overflow with prosperity in this world, if so be that God did necessarily
punish and destroy, which are effects of his Justice? So that there is a great
difference between Justice taken for an attribute, and Justice for the effects;
God cannot but be always just the former, whereas there is a liberty in the
latter. As in man, the power of laughing is an essential property in him, yet
the act of laughter arises in some measure by the freenes of his will. Hence
it is that Gods essential Justice does not receive more or less, but the
effects of his Justice may be more or less: If many men be in the same sin,
and God does punish some of them with a remarkable temporal judgment, we may
not say, God deals more justly with these then the other; yet we may say, the
effects of his Justice are greater upon some then others.

8. Propos. Christ satisfied God as a just Judge, not as a Father provoked, and
by this means, though punishments are taken away, 8. Christ satisfied God as a
just Judge, not as a Father.
yet afflictions for sin are not; and this does directly answer the whole
Question, whereas it is demanded, seeing Christ fully reconciled God to us, and
thereby all punishments are taken away, why not as well all afflictions? If he
has removed greater, will he think much at the less? The answer lies fully
in this, Christ by his blood and satisfaction undertook that the justice of God
should never fall upon us to punish us, not that he should never be angry with
us a Father, to chastise us. By this redemption, its Christ's will that God
should not as a just Judge, require compensation of us; not, that as a provoked
Father, he should not scourge us for our sins when committed. The reason is
clear, because fatherly anger is an ^ffect of love; but punishment the fruit of
hatred. And thus now you see, why God will not see sin to condemnation, because
Christ has made up that; yet he will see it in believers to angry castigation,
because Christ did not interpose there: it is therefore no derogation to
Christ's death, no injury to his sufferings, if notwithstanding them, God does
afflict for sin, even his own children.

9. Propos. By reason of this anger of God against sin, 9. Affl^ctions on
believers agreeable to Gods Justice.
even still abiding, those afflictions which come upon believers, are from a
convenience with the justice of God. Although we cannot say rigidly, That if
God did not chastise believers for their sins, he were unjust; yet we may say,
his afflicting of them, is beseeming his Justice, partly, because he has
prescribed this law to himself, 1 Samuel 7.14. Even as to wicked men upon their
obstinate sinning, to punish them, so upon his own, if they offend, to chasten
them; and partly by afflicting of his people for their sin, he demonstrates the
hatred of it unto the world. Although therefore God do not always chastise
every godly man, but sometimes by their repentance these very chastis^ments are
either prevented or removed, yet when God does thus break out in his anger
against them, this is becoming his just nature, and the world thereby sees how
he is displeased with it. One of the Articles which Arminius relates, as laid
against him, was, that he should hold, The temporal afflictions of believers,
were not chastisements but punishments, properly so called. To this he
answers, pa. 103. Resp. ad Artic. 31. That the calamities inflicted upon
David for his sin, in the matter of Vriah, may be called punishments properly;
and that the Text seems to be better explained so, and yet withal, that
there will be no favor to the Popish opinion: for he grants, That Christ
satisfied both for eternal and temporal punishments, but yet God when he takes
off the spiritual punishment, may for a while reserve the temporal, as though
Christ has taken away the jus, the power and right death has over us, yet he
has not quite destroyed actual death: but all this is a mere itching, to
innovate needlessly in Religion; for if Christ have satisfied for temporal
death, then though it be not removed presently, yet it cannot abide as a
punishment strictly.

LECTURE XIII.
MATTHEW. 6.12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.


THis Text shall be the last (because the noblest) to prove that God sees sin
in those that are believers; for if they be bound to pray that God would
forgive them their debts, therefore they are involved in debts, and in deep
humility they are to acknowledge this, withal desiring the cancelling or
blotting them out; so that as the Church anciently used this place against
those Pelagian Doctrines, which dreamed of a perfection in this life, and
immunity from all sin, no less does it overthrow those novel Assertions, of
being without sin (though not inherently) yet as to Gods eye and account. What
Ter^ullian said of the Lords-Prayer in general, is most true of this Petition,
Quantum substringitur verbis, tantum diffunditur sensibus, it is as
comprehensive in sense, as straightned in words, The Text divided.
so in this Petition, you have few leaves of words, but much fruit of matter;
Its like Christ's Mustard Seed, which by a good Interpreters managing, will grow
into a tall tree. The material things that belong to remission of sins, I shall
enclose as pertinent to my purpose. In the words you have the Petition it self,
Forgive. Secondly, The Subject, Us, Disciples and Believers. He that thinks
himself without sin, that very thought is a sin in him. Thirdly, The Object or
Matter of Petition, Our debts (that is) as Luke 11* expounds it, sins.
Fourthly, The Condition or Qualification of those who are to expect pardon ( As
we forgive our Debtors) which words are not to be understood causally and
meritoriously of Justification, nor as if we did hereby teach God to imitate
us: Therefore those expressions of the Ancients, intimating that in other
things we imitate God, but here God does us, are not rigidly justifiable.
Cassianus Collat. 9. cap. 23. reproves some that would not forgive others, but
yet lest they should lie in their prayer, they would leave this part out of the
Petition: But our Savior makes this a necessary qualification for remission
of sin, whether we express it or not. Lastly, There is the Particle of order,
Observables from the connection.
And; so that the very connection of it to the Petition for daily bread, does
teach us; first, that our hearts are not to stay long in prayer for temporal
things, but presently to return to spiritual: As some Fowls of the air,
suddenly catch their prey off from the ground, but dare not abide, lest they
should be ensnared; so ought we to do in our affections about heavenly things:
many times the Be is drowned in its own honey. Hence we have but one Petition
for earthly things, and two for spritual things, belonging to our selves; this,
and the Petition following; In this we pray for remission of sin; in the
fol^owing for sanctification; which are the sum of the new Covenant. Besides
this order does well teach us, That although we have all bodily necessaries,
yet if our sins are not forgiven we cannot take any delight in any worldly
advantage whatsoever. I shall begin with the Object of the Petition, which is
in the Text Debts. Sins are so called to aggravate the nature of them, Why sins
are called Debts*
and make us more fearful and cautelous how we run into them. As Solomon
speaks of Suretiship for another, Deliver thy self like the swift Roe; the same
is much more to be applied to our sins, which are debts of a more terrible
nature. Now when sins are called Debts, or said to be forgiven, its a Metaphor
from pecuniary Debts, as the Debtor was said luere when he did pay his money;
and it is generally used of any that are obnoxious to punishment; so the
Grecians say, (...), and the Latins, Poenas debere. So the Hebrew word (...)
is used both for Debts and Guilt, Dan. 1.10. Ezech. 18.7. as also for Sin,
Exodus 32. and (...) which is applied to a Sinner, Jam. 2.20. is also frequently
used of Punishments, as Mat. 5.21, 22.

Observe. Sins are debts.
The Observation, Sins are Debts. This is excellently described, Mat. 18.24.
where our sins against God are not only compared to a Debt* but a debt of a
vast sum, ten thousand talents, which there is no hope for us ever to
discharge, so that the aggravation of a sin lies in this, that it is against
God; therefore observe, that offense which man does against man, is compared to
an hundred pence only, but that which we do against God to ten thousand
talents. O that men therefore who account it such a misery and slavery to be in
money-debts, would bemoan their condition of sin-debts. As sins are debts, so
God is said to have a debt-book* wherein he writes all our transgressions:
hence is that phrase of blotting them out, and of cancelling the handwriting
that is against us. This handwriting in the Scripture should as much appale
and astonish us, as that on the wall did Belshazzar. So that phrase (...), not
to reckon or impute, is taken from accounts in debts. But to open the Point,

What in sin is a d^bt.
1. Let us consider, What in sin is a Debt. And

2. Why sins are called Debts.

In sin there is the obliquity and dissonancy from the Law of God; and this is
not called a Debt, for we do not owe this to God, but the contrary, obedience
and holiness. In sin there is a guilt and obligation unto eternal punishment,
and this is properly a Debt; but yet in this Petition we must not limit it to
the latter respect only, but include both the deformity and demerit of sin,
that God would forgive both. What it is in sin that does denominate a sinner,
will in time be discussed.

Secondly, Consider Why they are called debts, Why sins are called debts. ^ By
sinning we rob God of his honor, glory, etc.
and that may be in these respects.

First, Because upon our sin, we owe God his honor, his glory, yea, his very
deity again, which as much as lies in us, we by transgressions have taken
away. Omne peccatum, est quasi deicidium, say the Schools. Every sin does as
it were deprive God (as much as lies in a sinner) of his Godhead and
blessedness; so that if God were capable of misery and grief, thy sins would
bring it upon him. Hence are those expressions of being pressed by our sins as
a cart is under sheavs, Amos 2.13. And the Prophet Ezekiel his lying so many
days on one side, and then on the other, to his great pain and trouble, was as
some think, to represent, how much God was affected with the Israelites sins,
and how great his patience was to endure them so long. If then they said to
David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us: how much rather may we say to God,
Thy honor, thy glory, it is worth ten thousand thousand of us? it is fitter
for us to be damned or annihilated, then the least glimpse of his glory
obscured. For this is such a debt in sin, as we are never able to make up
again. If a mean Peasant should defame a great King, and reproach him, he were
never able to make satisfaction in way of Honor to him; how much rather is
this true of us, seeing there is no proportion between that which is finite and
infinite?

Secondly, He is a debtor to Gods Justice to satisfy that: ^ A sinner is a
debtor to Gods justice.
and hereby it is, that Christ gave himself a price for our sins, and
reconciled God to us: for we were not in that condition, as to say with the
servant in the Parable, Mat. 18. Have patience and I will pay thee all I owe.
They have low and narrow thoughts of sin, which think any external or
internal humiliation for sin, can be satisfactory to Gods Justice. Hence the
godly do not (as the Antinomians charge them) put any such meritorious
efficacy, and causality in them. They attribute not that to their tears, which
belongs to Christ's blood; they do not judge their crucifying sin to be
equivalent with Christ crucified; they do not in practice that which some have
done in opinion, say, they are the Messiah or Christ: and certainly if the
Psalmist say, we cannot ransom our selves from the grave, much less can we
from hell. Now this debt of Gods Justice is in every sin, the least idle
thought or word: we may say of every sin pardoned, here is the price of blood,
even of Christ's blood.

3 Sinners not able to satisfy Gods justice, become debtors to everlasting
punishment.
Thirdly, Being not able to satisfy Gods justice, in the next place, we by sin
become debtors to everlasting punishment in hell; so that as the murderer or
flagitious person by his crimes becomes a debtor to the capital punishments to
be inflicted by a Law, so does a sinner to the Scripture punishments threatened
in the word, so that hell and damnation are the proper wages that are due to
him. Oh how dear does every pleasant or profitable sin cost thee? thou owe
eternal damning for it. Chrysostom in his time complained of some, who would
say, Give me that which is sweet, (...), and let it choke me: so do all
sinners, Give me that sinful profit and pleasure, though I am obliged to
eternal wrath thereby. Ambrose thought wicked men were called debtors, because
the devil lends them their lusts and sins as so much money, for which he will
exact eternal torment as the usury of them. Whatsoever it be, certainly this
notion of sins being debts ought much to affect and trouble thee. Thy sins are
worse debts then any thou owe.

4 All the good we have, we are betrusted with as so many talents.
Fourthly, In sin we become debtors by this means, All the good we have, whether
natural or supernatural, we are betrusted with as so many talents, and for
abusing of these, or not improving of them, we become debtors unto God. You
have a full parable to this purpose, Mat. 25. Where you have every opportunity,
even the least, that God puts into our hands, compared to a talent, and that
for the greatness and preciousnesse of it, and a man may be accountable unto
God, either propter damnum emergens, for the loss that comes to our master
therein, or for lucrum cessans, the very ceasing of gain. As that servant who
hid his talent in a napkin, and returned it safe again, though he was not
guilty of any prodigal decoction of it, yet he is called a wicked and
unprofitable servant, Now, because all our talents are many, hence our debts do
arise to an infinite sum: none so indebted as those who have great wealth,
great parts, Sicut crescunt dona, sic cr^scunt rations donorum, The more
mercies the greater account to be given. This consideration may deeply humble
us.

As our sins are thus debts, so we have all naturally the evil properties,
and wicked customs of ill debtors.

and we have the evil properties of debtors
1. We are very unwilling to be called to any accounts; we do not love to hear
of the day of judgment; we love not that the Ministers of God should tell us
of our bills and hand-writings that are against us. Hence some observe that
expression, 1 We are unwilling to be called to an account.
Mat. 18.24. When the Master begun to reckon, it is said, One was brought that
owed ten thousand talents, as if it were by force; and he was haled to his
master. What an amazement and astonishment will that voice from heaven put us
into, Give an account of thy Stewardship, unless Christ be our surety, and he
undertake to discharge all? so that the very word debts, may breed in us much
love to Christ, who was willing to stand engaged for us. Phocian the Athenian,
coming to one in public office, that was very solicitious about giving up his
accounts, and (says he) I am solicitious how I may give no account at all.
Thus if it were possible, would every man be studious how he may decline that
day of accounts: how gladly would he have the grave to detain him there always?

2. To be full of shame and fear: Thus are men in debt, ^ We are full of shame
and fear.
desirous to lie latitant, and not to be seen, Grave vocabulum debitorum, said
Ambrose, The name of debts is very dreadful and terrible. Hence Ambrose
speaks of some, who for the shame and distress thereof, have made away
themselves, fearing more opprobrium vitae, then mortis periculum, the reproach
of life, then the punishment of death. Suidas speaks of a Proverb in lit. A. A
(...), Once red with blushing at the time of borrowing, and afterward ten
times pale for fear of paying, Canis latrat, and cor tuum palpitat, Ambros. de
Tob. cap. 7. The dog does but bark, and thy heart fears an Arrest: and if men
have been thus perplexed about worldly debts, when yet death would at last
release them, how much more may men be afraid of these spiritual debts? There
was a certain Roman died in a vast sum of debts, which in his life time he
concealed, and after his death, when his goods were to be sold, Augustus the
Emperor sent to buy his pillow he lay upon, because says he, I hope that would
make me sleep, on which a man so much indebted could take his ease. It is much
that we who have so many debts spiritual, can sleep, or eat, or drink, till we
see them discharged by Christ. Oh that every natural man should not like Cain
fear every thing would damn him!

3 Of shifts and delays.
3. To shift and put off, to be in continual delays, and if so, to be no
further troubled. This a custom in worldly debts, if men can shift one way or
other they care not: hence Horace calls the wicked debtor, Sceleratus Proteus,
fiet aper, modo avis, modo saxum, and cum volet arbor, become in all shapes, to
evade the Creditor, and thus it is in spiritual debts. How unwilling to
acknowledge our debts, to confess them to God? I look upon all Pelagian
Doctrines on one side, and Antinomian opinions on the other side, which would
either make no sin in us, or at least not to be taken notice of by God, but as
so many cousening cheats of a guilty heart, that is unwilling to be found a
debtor before God. Cum delationem impetraveris, gaudes, said Ambrose of a
debtor, If men can but delay they do rejoice. And are we not all thus naturally
affected, if we can from day to day get one worldly comfort after another, and
so be able to support our selves, we think all is well: (...), nothing is more
troublesome, then to hear, Pay what thou owe: do not therefore please thy
self with delays and excuses, lest thou die in thy misery.

4 We hate those to whom we are indebted.
4. To hate those to whom we are indebted: Leve aes alienum debitorem facit,
grave inimicum; A little money borrowed makes a man a debtor, but a great deal
an enemy; and so the more they owe, the more they hate: (...), said Aristotle,
Debtors wish their Creditors to have no being, such is the hatred that arises
thereby: and this is most eminently true in wicked men, They hate God because
they fear him as a just Judge, who will severely demand to the last farthing:
Comfortable therefore is this direction, to pray in this Petition, for hereby
is supposed, that God is propitious, and ready to release us; we may have a
Jubilee ever day; No devil has any warrant to say, Forgive us our sins, God
has cast them into utter darkness, and bound them up in perpetual chains for
their debts, but he is ready to forgive us. As therefore we read of David,
That men in debt and distress followed him, hoping thereby to be freed from
their Creditors hands, so let us follow Christ, who only is able to take off
this heavy burden from us, and know the longer we lie in our debts, the more
they will increase upon us.

Now in two respects spiritual debts do exceed wordly debts. In two respects
spiritual debts exceed wordly debts.


1. In the danger of non-payment: Suppose the highest punishments that we read
of in Histories against perfidious debtors, yet that does not amount to the
punishment of our spiritual debts. In some Laws they were bound to sell their
children, 1 In the danger of non-paiment.
yea, themselves to become slaves, Exodus 21.7. Exodus 22.2. 2 Kings 4.1. Thus
God commanded in the Jewish Laws. This was very miserable, to have children
sold for parents debts. Valentinian the Emperor would have such put to death
that were not able to pay their debts; but above all, that Law in the 12.
Tables, that who was in debt, the Creditors might take him, and cause him to be
cut alive in as many pieces as the Creditors pleased. This cruelty says
Tertullian, was afterward erased out by public consent, Suffudere maluit
homini sanguinem, quam effundere: but, what is this to that Mat. 18.30. His
master was wroth, and delivered him to the t^rmentors, till he had paid all
that was due? so then chains and imprisonments are the worst of worldly debts,
but the eternal wrath of God falls upon spiritual debtors.

2. In the impossibility of escaping this punishment. 2 In the Impossibility of
escaping the punishment.
In these debts death will free a man: but then is the beginning of our misery
by spiritual debts. So Mat. 5.26. Thou shall by no means come out, till thou
have paid the utmost farthing; and because we are never able to do that,
therefore must our condemnation be eternal. We pity the indebted prisoners
that out of their grates cry, Bread, bread; But how more doleful is that cry of
Dives out of hell for a drop of water, and none gives unto him? This is some
mitigating consideration to the worst troubles here, that they are not eternal;
and it is the aggravation of the least in hell, that they are eternal.
Therefore in that the Scripture calls our sins by these names, and we have an
innumerable heap of them, let us mourn under the weight of them, and bewail
their burden, and this is to be done with all speed, not knowing how soon
justice may take us by the throat, saying, Pay that thou owe.

The use may be of instruction to the godly, Use of Instruction to the godly.
that notwithstanding their Justification and forgiveness of sins past, yet
they run into debt daily, and such debts, as for the pardon of them, they must
renew daily sorrow and confession, as also sue out continual pardon: for
certainly our Savior did not direct us to say this Petition, humiliter only,
for humility sake, as some of old thought; but also veraciter truly, and if it
be true, then we are not in a cold customary way of luke-warmnesse to beg this
pardon, but with the same deep sense, conflict and agony of spirit, as we see
malefactors importune the Judge for a pardon. Now if there were a malefactor,
that thought the Judge saw no crimes, nor matter of death in him; but on the
contrary, that he was altogether righteous and free, how could this man with
any deep remorse and acknowledgement bewail himself? so that this Petition
contains excellent Doctrine as well as practice. Tertullian called the Lords
Prayer, Breviarum Evangelij, a breviary or sum of the Gospel, for legem
credendi, add and operandi, lex statuit supplicandi, said another, The Law or
Rule of Prayer, teaches the rule of faith and practice; and this is very true
in this Petition, which teaches both Doctrine and Practice against the
Antinomians: It is true, they make glosses upon this Text, but such cursed ones
as do wholly corrup^ it; do not therefore think that Justification gives thee
such a quietus est that new sins daily committed by thee should be no matter of
humiliation or confession; certainly our Saviors command is, That we should
desire this forgiveness, as often as we do our daily bread.

LECTURE XIV.
MAT. 6.12. And forgive us our debts.


WE have already considered the object in this Petition, viz. sins, which
according to the Syriak Idiotism are called debts, as alms are called
righteousness, ver. 1. in an Hebraism. The next thing to be treated of, is the
Petition it self, forgive us, (...): this word is most commonly used by the
Apostles to signify pardon of sins; they have it about seven and twenty times;
but more of this when we show what remission of sins is. The work I have for
the present to do, is, to show how comprehensive this Petition is, and what it
is we pray for herein. Bellarmine opposing the Doctrine of the Protestants,
holding a special and peculiar faith, appropriating pardon of sin, mistaking
the question, as if we maintained justifying faith to be that whereby we
believe our sins are certainly forgiven us in Christ, charge this absurdity
upon us, lib. 1. de Just. c. 10. That we take away this Petition in the Lords
Prayer: For says he, If I be bound certainly to believe my sins are forgiven
already, it would be as absurd to pray that God would forgive us our sins, as
to pray Christ might be incarnated, seeing we believe he was incarnated
already. And l. 4. de noti^ ecclesiae, c. 11. He makes this opinion of the
Protestants, holding we are righteous before God for Christ's sake, and the
believing of this with a special faith, to be comparable with any Paradox in
the world, as not being above or besides, but plainly contrary to all reason,
and as that which makes it impossible for us to say, Forgive us our sins,
unless we lie. It is true according to the Antinomian Divinity, which says,
there is no sin now in the Church, this Prayer does no more belong to us then
to the Angels in heaven: therefore the Antinomian makes not the meaning of this
Prayer to be as if we prayed for the forgiveness which we had not before, but
only for more full and rich assurance of it. Honeycomb p.156. But the Sequel
will show the falsehood of both these assertions.

Obser. Observe.
It is the duty of justified persons to pray for the forgivenes of their sins.
To understand this, we will show, first, It is the duty of justified persons to
pray for forgiveness of their sins.
what is the express meaning of this Petition, and then what is the implied
sense of it.

In the first place, our meaning in this Petition is, That God would not
require of us the payment and satisfaction of his justice for our sins. We
have a Parable, The meaning of the Petition Forgive us, etc.
Luke 16.8. Of an unjust Steward, who called his Lords debtors, who bid him
that owed an hundred measures of oil, set down fifty: but if God should
condescend thus far to us, instead of millions of sins we owe, 1 that God would
not require of us the satisfaction of his justice for our sins.
to set down but an hundred, yea, should we come down as low in the number of
sins, as Abraham of his righteous men, yet that would not avail us. Yea, as
long as there is but a farthing, the least sin unpaid, so long are we unable to
give an account to God. We therefore desire of God, that he would not call upon
us to pay for the least vain thought, or idle word, much less for those more
grievous sins which we have committed. As it is, Not unto us Lord, not unto us,
let the glory be given: so Not of us Lord, not of us, let thy justice be
satisfied.

2 That God would lay our sins on Christ A twofold diff^rence between Gods
forgiving our sins, and our forgiving others.
2. We pray, That God would lay our sins upon Christ, and accept of satisfaction
in and through him; for seeing God has declared his will, that man shall die
for sin; if we should pray, that God would absolutely forgive our sins, it
would be to pray, that he might be unjust. There is a twofold difference
between Gods forgiveness of our sins, and our forgiving of others. First, We
may and ought in some cases to forgive others freely, without any satisfaction
at all, but God has bound himself to another way. We may and ought to forgive
others though they do not repent, and ask pardon of us; but God has declared
his will otherwise: we do not therefore pray, that God would out of an absolute
sovereignty and dominion remit our sins; but that he would account them upon
Christ, and take him for our surety. As the Prophets wife who died in debt, was
wonderfully relieved by the Prophets oil, so that she was enabled to satisfy
all her creditors; no less advantageous is the blood of Christ to us, whereby
the justice of God is appeased toward us. Therefore in this prayer, thus we
may argue, O Lord, we call not upon thee to repeal any threatening, to nullify
thy word, to become unjust; but thy wisdom has found out a way that we may be
pardoned, and thou satisfied. Neither will this be any injury to Christ, to lay
them upon him though innocent, for this he voluntarily undertook, and he is not
made a Surety or Mediator against his will, neither in the midst of all his
agonies and troubles he grapled with, did he repent of his suretiship, or
desire to give it over; so that there goes more to make this Petition good,
and possible, then did to make the world at first, for there it cost Christ but
a word, Let there be light, and there was light, but it is not so here, Let
there be pardon, and there shall be pardon: besides Christ's speaking, there
must be his doing and suffering.

3. As we pray thus for Justification, so also for continuance and preservation
in it. As we pray for daily bread, 3. As we pray for justification, so for the
continuance in it.
though our store be full; so, Though our Justification be sure, and
persevering, yet by prayer we are to be preserved in it. A certain knowledge
and faith of a thing, takes not away prayers; we know certainly God will gather
a Church, and preserve it to the end of the world; yet we pray, Thy Kingdom
come. Paul knew Act. 27.24. that none in the Ship with him should perish,
because God had given him their lives, yet none can doubt, but he prayed for
their preservation, as well as used other means. Howsoever now, grievous sins
committed by a David or Peter, may fasten upon them, as the Viper upon Paul's
hand, yet by the grace of God, they shall not be able to unstate them out of
Gods favor, but at last their repentance will revive, and so they will sue out
a pardon; and certainly Gods power and grace is no less seen in preserving of
us in the state of Justification, then at first justifying us.

4. We do not only pray for preservation in this estate, 4. We pray for daily
renewed acts of pardon and imputation of Christ's righteousness.
but for daily renewed acts of pardon, and imputation of Christ's
righteousness. Howsoever, as in the controversal part is to be showed,
Justification is not reiterated, but is a state in which we were at first
believing put into, without Apostasy from it, either total or final: yet those
particular acts of pardon, and imputing of Christ's righteousness, are
continually by God communicated unto us: neither may we think, That our sins
past, present and to come, are all taken away by one sentence, so that there is
no new or iterated pardon. Then indeed Bellarmines Argument would have strength
in it, That it were as absurd to pray for forgiveness of sin, Bell^rmines
objection answered.
as to have Christ new incarnated; or that we might be predestined, according
as some have falsely said, Si non sis praedestinatus, ora, ut praedestineris, If
thou art not predestined, pray that thou may be. We might indeed pray for
the believing of these things in a more settled manner, but not for the things
themselves. But this is the proper answer to Bellarmines Objection, We pray for
pardon of sin, and not for the Incarnation of Christ, or the making of the
world, because these were so once done, that they are never to be done more.
The Incarnation of Christ was once done, and is not to be done again; but
remission of sin is so done, as that it is continually to be done for us, and
the ultimate complete effect of it will then only be, when sin shall be quite
taken away, so that a total and full remission will be only at the day of
Judgment, as appears Act. 3.19. That your sins may be blotted out, when the
times of refreshing shall come: Not but that every sin here forgiven is fully
and perfectly forgiven, but because we renew sin daily, therefore there is need
of a daily pardon: Away therefore with all such opinions, as shall either plead
such an inherent righteousness in the Pelagian way, or such an imputed
righteousness in the Antinomian way, that will overthrow this Petition for
forgiveness of sins. If all thy former sins be forgiven, and no pardon for
future, thy case would be desperate, for sin like Samsons hair, though it be
cut, yet it will grow again, and come to great strength.

5. We pray for the sense of this pardon in our consciences more and more.
5. We pray for the sense and feeling of this pardon in our consciences more and
more. For although God has pardoned our sin, yet if we know not of this, it
takes off much from our comfort and Gods glory; we are in this case like some
Heir or Prince, that has many temporal dignities, but by reason of his infancy
does not understand it. Hence David, though Nathan told him, His sin was
pardoned, yet Ps. 51. he prays for mercy and pardon, and that in a plentiful
manner; so that although a sin is perfectly remitted, so that it cannot be more
of less forgiven then it is, yet the assurance or knowledge of this, may be
more or less; and indeed though to have sins pardoned be an objective
happiness, yet to know that they are pardoned, is formal happiness; so that he
is completely happy, who both has his sins pardoned, and also knows they are
so; and this made David Ps. 103. so exult and rejoice, Bless the Lord, O my
soul, who forgiveth all thine iniquities. This particular assurance enlarged
his heart to praises. But although this be part of the sense in this Petition,
yet this is not all we pray for, as the Antinomian contends; for we pray
principally for the real exhibition of pardon; and secondarily for the
Declaration and manifestation of it in our consciences. Their conceit is, That
God from all eternity has pardoned our sins past, present and to come, and
that when we believe or repent, our sins are pardoned declaratively only to our
conscience, they being forgiven before. This I shall handle in a Question by it
self: Only I shall lay down some few Arguments to prove that we do not only
pray for assurance and manifestation of pardon, but also for pardon it self.
The reasons are these, We pray for pardon it self, and not for the sense
thereof only.


First, We might by the same rule, interpret all the other Petitions in regard
of Declaration only, and not exhibition; when we pray for sanctification and
glorification in that Petition, Thy Kingdom come, it might be as well said,
Reasons proving this. Reas. 1.
that we were sanctified and glorified from all eternity; and therefore when we
are converted or saved in heaven, this is but to our sense and feeling. This
Argument seems to be so strong against them, that they have confessed, A man is
already glorified while he is upon earth, most absurdly confounding the Decrees
of God from eternity to do things, with the executions of them in time. How
ridiculous would it be to expound that Petition, Give us our daily bread, thus,
Not that God should give us daily bread, but only make us to see and feel that
he has given it us?

A second reason is, from the nature of forgiveness of sin. Reas. ^.
When sin is pardoned, it is said to be blotted out: now that blotting out is
not only from a man's conscience and feeling, but more immediately out of Gods
Book. So that when God does forgive, he does cancel those debts which are in
his Book, and not only the guilt that lies upon our hearts: therefore these
are very separable the one from the other: A man may feel no weight or burden
of sin upon him, and yet it stand in fiery Characters against him in Gods Book;
and on the contrary, a sin may be blotted out there, yet be very heavy and
terrible in a man's feeling and apprehension: so sin pardoned is said to be
covered or hid, not in respect of us, as if it were taken from our sight, but
from Gods sight, and he is said to cast our sins behind his back, not ours.

The third reason, This Explication, Reas. 3.
as the whole sense of the Petition, would overthrow all other places of
Scripture, which make no pardon of sin to be, but where the subject has such
qualifications, as this in the Text of forgiving others, it is not indeed put
as a cause or merit, but yet it is as a qualification of the subject; therefore
our Savior repeateth this again, Except ye forgive others, neither will my
heavenly Father forgive you. So Act. 10.43. Whosoever believes on him shall
have remission of sins, Romans 3.15. He is a propitiation through faith in his
blood; here faith is made an instrument to apply and bring that pardon to the
soul, which it had not before. So 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins. By these and the like Scriptures, it
is plain, That remission of sin is given us only in the use of these graces:
not that hereby we merit at Gods hand, or that God is tied to these ways; but
it is here, as in the Sacraments, he has tied himself to convey his graces in
no other channels or conduits then he has appointed.

Reas. 4.
Lastly, This would make no difference between sins repented of, and not
repented of; for if they be all pardoned from eternity, then sins that are
humbled for, and that are unhumbled for, have the like consideration on Gods
part, and I may feel the pardon of the latter, though not repented of, as well
as the former, yea I may have the sense of the pardon of all the sins I shall
commit for the future, and so whereas I pray for daily bread, not tomorrow
bread, I shall here beg for the sense of the pardon, not only of my sins to
day, but tomorrow, and the next year: But I never read that God made such a
Jubilee, as one Pope did, who promised a plenary Indulgence, not only for sins
past, but aforehand also, for all sins to come; God does not antidate his
pardon before the sin be committed or repented of; but of this more largely in
time.

6 We pray that as God forgives the sin, so he would release the punishm^nt.
6. We pray, That as God does forgive the sin, so also he would release the
punishments, and take away all the wrath that does belong to it. It is a
mockery which Papists make about pardon, as if indeed God did pardon the sin,
but the punishment that abides still, and we must work out a release from that
by our own selves. It is true as we have proved, God though he does pardon sin,
yet he may grievously afflict; but these are fatherly chastisements, not
judicial punishments: but in this Prayer, we desire also that as the sins are
removed, so also whatsoever troubles, afflictions and chastisements do remain,
that they also may be taken away; that as the gulf of hell is removed, so every
cloud also may be dispelled.

7 We pray to be delivered from the effects of sin.
7. In this Petition, we pray, That God would deliver us from those effects of
sin, which God has immutably set upon it, such as are sicknesses, death and
corruption; For although God by virtue of the Covenant of Grace has promised a
perfect pardon of sin, yet we cannot come to a full enjoyment of all those
privileges which remission of sin does bring, till we be freed from death and
corruption. So that as long as there is the death and grave, still sin has
some power. We therefore pray, that whatsoever mortality and corruption sin
has brought in, it may be taken away, and we made fit for eternal life, which
is the consequent of pardon of sin; for you must know that pardon is not a mere
privative mercy, freeing us from Gods wrath, but there is also a positive
investing of us with a title to everlasting life and glory, only our
corruptibility hinders us from the actual possession of that which we have a
right unto: we therefore pray, That as God removed our sins, so he would also
remove all the sad effects and mischievous fruit which came in by it.

8. We pray not only for pardon of sin, 8 We pray for pardon, and the
concomitants thereof.
but also for the good concomitants and effects of it, which are Peace with
God, and Joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 5.1. Hence Luther speaks of a twofold
pardon, one secret and hidden, when he forgiveth sins, but the people of God do
not feel or regard it; The other is open and experimental: now both these
condonations are necessary. The first (says he) is more bitter and
troublesome, but more noble and acceptable. The first cleanses, the latter
pacifieth: the first is of mere faith, and obtains much of God; the latter is
of experience more, and takes off from the excellency of faith: for as that is
the best manifestation of love when it is carried out to an enemy, so is that
of faith, when relying upon God, though feeling terrors, and an hell within
us. God uses the first kind of pardon to more heroical Christians. The latter
to those that are more infirm. An instance of this twofold remission we have
in Mary Magdalen; the former, when Christ turned his back on her, and told
Peter, Much was forgiven her; the other, when he turned toward her, saying,
Thy sins are forgiven thee, go in peace. Now in our prayer we must not be
limited; but as in the Law every Commandment is spiritual, and has a great
latitude in it; so in prayer every Petition is spiritual, and has much in it:
let us therefore enlarge our hearts, and open them wide when we seek to God for
pardon of sin. The privilege is exceeding great, and many are the dignities
that do depend on it. If thy sins be pardoned, thou becomest a favorite of
Heaven, there is no contrariety between God and thee. The devil showed the
glory of the world, and falsely said, All this is mine, but thou may show all
the glory of the Gospel and promises, yea all the glory of Heaven, and say, All
this is mine. Yea there is a full reconciliation made between God and that
person, notwithstanding all former enmity, as appears in the example of the
Prodigal son, he has all love, favor and honor. Again, insomuch that such
come not into judgment, Joh. 5.24. There is no condemnation to them, Romans 8.1.
yea there is not so much as any charge or indictment against them. What devil,
what conscience, what law may accuse thee when God justifies thee? Now in this
Petition we desire that not only pardon of sin, but all these blessed fruits of
it, may be vouchsafed to us. Oh therefore the congealed and icie temper of men,
who are no more inflamed in prayer about this! There are many that can heartily
and feelingly pray the former Petition, for the necessaries of this life, but
how few for the grace of God in pardoning in a spiritual manner? Hearken then,
O man, to what Christ has said is good for thee to importune and seek after.
Philo. lib. de Somniis says, and it was also the opinion of Philosophers, That
the Heavens make such an harmonious melody, that if the sound and noise of it
could reach to our ears, it would make men leave off all their inferior and
sublunary labor and profit, attending to that only: Certainly this Doctrine of
remission of sin, which is revealed from Heaven only, has such excellent
harmony in it of Gods Justice and his mercy, of Gods satisfaction and our
happiness, that it may justly make us forget to eat our bread, or delight in
other comforts, meditating of, and being ravished with his excellency. Let this
then instruct thee concerning that necessary duty of seeking out the pardon of
thy sins; this belongs to every one, though a Paul, though a Moses, though in
the highest form of Christianity. It is a great comfort that all voluntary sins
after grace received, are not unpardonable, as well as that against the holy
Ghost. How often do we sin voluntarily and willingly after we are enlightened?
And then the sins of infirmity and ignorance are more then the sands of the
seashore: Is it not therefore necessary that thou should be continually
begging for pardon? Know then that these indulgences are not like the Papal, to
be bought by money, but they are purchased by the blood of Christ: Peter
thought it a great matter to forgive a brother seven times a day, but if God
should not forgive us seventy times seven a day, our condition would be
damnable. Those that look to have pardon by their meritorious works, and penal
satisfactions, cannot look up to God. Whereas all Nations used to look up to
Heaven for rain, In Aegypto (says Seneca) nemo aratorum aspicit Coelum, etc.
No Husbandman regards the Heavens, but Nilus only, from which they have rain;
so in Popery Christ is neglected, and Angels or Saints set up, as those that
can give pardon; Men therefore look upon their Pilgrimages, their Penance, as
if they were to forgive their sins to their own selves.

LECTURE XV.
MAT. 6.12. And forgive us our Debts.


WE come to show, what is implied in this Petition, Three things implied in
this Petition.
and this may be reduced to three heads:

First, What is implied in the subject who does pray.

Secondly, What in the object or matter that is prayed for.

Thirdly, What in respect of the person to whom we do pray.

For the first, 1. On the part of the subject, or he who prays, is implied 1
That all men are sinful*
There are many things supposed in those who are to pray thus: As

1. That all men, though never so eminently sanctified, yet have sins in them:
And this has been generally urged by Antiquity against Pelagians, who have
dreamed of perfect righteousness in this life, as if we might be sons of
light, without any spot in us; and that evasion is ridiculous, that we speak
this humiliter for humility sake, not veraciter truly: for if we had no sin,
this hypocrisy were enough to make it in us, and 1 John 1.9. puts it out of
all doubt, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us. He does not say, we extol or lift up our selves, and there is no
humility in us, but we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us: Now
this the Apostle says immediately upon those words, The blood of Christ
cleanses us from all sin: So that whether this cleansing of Christ be
understood in regard of the filth or guilt of sin, its not completely
fulfilled, till we come into heaven. So true is that of Ambrose, Qui semper
pecco, debeo semper habere medicinam, I who sin always, need forgiveness
always. And whereas the Apostle says, We all have sin, that is to be
understood, partly in regard of the vicious affections and inordinate
concupiscence, which is in every one; and partly in regard of the guilt, which
does accompany them; neither may we limit this to some, for the Apostle puts
himself in the number of those who ought to say so. Neither may this be
restrained as some would have it, to sins past in our former conversation only,
although the Apostle speak, verse. 10. in the preterperfect tense, for he says,
we so sin, as that if we confess our sins, God is faithful to forgive:
therefore he speaks of sins, which are yet to be pardoned, and not of those
that are past only.

I acknowledge it is one thing to say, Every man has sin, and another thing,
that he sins in every good action he does, and if this place did not
demonstratively prove it, yet other places do. It is good to observe the danger
the Apostle makes to come from this opinion, That we have no sin in us, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; and then which is worst, We
make God a liar, who in his Word does testify of us, as having sin in us. So
that this opinion argues those that maintain it, neither to understand or
firmly believe the Scriptures; and this is to be extended to those who hold no
sin in us, as to Gods eye, by reason of Christ's righteousness: For the
Scriptures do equally overthrow both. The most material Answer that I have
observed by any given to this Argument from our duty of praying for pardon of
sin, is given by Castalio de Iustif.p. 63. It is this, This prayer is not so
prescribed us (says he) that we should always pray so, and we never read
that any in the Scripture used these prescribed words: Nay (says he) we never
read that the Apostles prayed for remission of sins, no nor Christ never
prayed for pardon of them. Therefore the meaning of this Petition must be to
pray for pardon as often as they need it, not that they need it always.
Therefore he compares this Petition to such places, Love your enemies, Agree
quickly with your adversary, Honor your father and mother; that is, when you
have enemies or adversaries, when you have a father and mother: so here, Pray
for pardon, that is, when you have sinned. But this very answer needs a
pardon, because its fraughted with much falsehood; for first, although we read
not that they prayed those express words, yet in their very address to Christ
to be instructed how to pray, and our Savior teaching them to pray thus, as
one Evangelist; or after this manner, as another has it: it had been
hypocrisy and mockery, never to have conformed to it. Besides, our Savior
supposes they have need of pardon, when he tells them, Except ye forgive one
another, neither will my heavenly Father forgive you, verse. 15. which implies
their need of pardon. Hence Mat. 7.11. he calls them evil, If ye then being
evil, which is not to be understood comparatively in respect of God only, for
so the Angels are, Joh. 4.18. but inherently, because of the remainder of that
corruption in them. Hence (as you heard) the Apostle John puts himself in the
number here, If we say we have no sin, etc. certainly the Apostle Paul was
far from these thoughts, 1 Timothy 1.18. where he calls himself the chiefest of
all sinners: that is, one in the rank of those, whose sins had a scarlet hue;
and he says this in the present tense, not of whom I was chief, but I am
chief; for although Cajetans Exposition be very probable, that makes this
relate not merely to sinners, but to sinners saved, thus, Christ came to save
sinners, of which saved sinners I am chief; yet the former is not to be
rejected; and certainly in some sense every man is bound to think of himself,
as a greater sinner then others; As the Pharisee said, I am not as other men,
adulterers, covetous, etc. The godly man on the contrary, thinks he is not
holy, zealous, sincere, as other godly men are. When Paul Romans 7. complains
of that evil in him, and law of sin, can we think he never desired the pardon
of it? And when our Savior, Joh. 17.17. prays God to sanctify his
Disciples; what is that but to set them apart for their office, by forgiving
their sin, even as Isaiah was purified by a live coal from the altar. As for
his parallel places and duties, it is a most absurd comparison; for he may as
well say, That the Kingdom of God, and hallowing his Name, are not constantly
to be prayed for, but upon occasion only. Certainly those places of Scripture
which make original sin to cleave to us, even as Ivy to the Oak, and which
is as leven in us, sowring every thing we do in some measure: And those places
which speak of such a perfection in the Law, that we are never able to perform
it, argue a constant abiding principle of sin in us, we may conclude then, that
this Petition does suppose a worm in our best fruit, dross in our purest gold,
and many spots in our choicest beauty. Neither may we dream of such an imputed
righteousness, as shall take away the necessity of this praying; not that the
godly are therefore to be denominated sinners, because we call them godly,
though sin be in them, because godliness is the most noble quality in them,
as we call that a field of corn, which yet has many weeds in it.

2. A sense of sin within us.
A second thing implied, is, feeling of sin a burden and weight upon us: For
none can heartily and with feeling experience importune God for this pardon,
but such who are sensible of a pressing load by sin. Hence the Hebrew word
Nasa, does signify (as you heard) the taking of a weight and burden. So the
Greek word (...) is used of deliverance from bonds, Luke 4.18. where what was
literally true of the Jews that were in captivity and prisons, is applied to us
spiritually, and the Gospel of Christ is said, to preach deliverance to the
captives: so that hereby is declared, that as a captive Jew in Babylon was
wearied with his estate, and did vehemently expect deliverance: no less does a
man burdened with sin, desire a freedom and relaxation. Therefore the time of
the Gospel is expressed allusively to the year of Jubilee, verse. 19. as that
was proclaimed with the sound of a Trumpet, so this by the mouth of the
Apostles. How many are there then who pray this prayer, but want much feeling
and zeal within. Now sin has a double weight, one of punishment, the other
of offense and displeasure to God, and in this later, we ought especially to
groan under it. Came felt a burden of his sins, and David also felt a pressure
by them, but the tears of these two differed much. The one was merely because
of punishment; the other, because it was against God, Against thee only have I
sinned. This inward disposition is that which puts an excellent relish and
high prize upon Christ and his benefits. Hence the word to trust signifies
also to roll and cast our burden upon the Lord: As a man who bears an heavy
weight upon his back, being ready to break under it, rouls it upon the next
stall he meets with, to ease himself, Psalm. 55.22. Consider therefore what thou
feel within; what pressures upon thee, while thou desire this
forgiveness: Art thou as the poor prisoner, bound in his chains and irons,
longing for a releasment? Art thou as one ashamed in the presence of so
glorious a God? Quidni totis artubus contremiscat ranuncula e palude accedens
ad thronum Regis? Why should not the Frog coming out of the lake to the Kings
Throne, altogether tremble?

3. It implies godly sorrow, and spiritual mourning of heart: 3 Godly sorrow
for sin.
For we may not think this is appointed as a mere complement to use to God, but
our hearts ought to be wounded and melted within us at that time. And indeed
why is there a promise, Zech. 12. for the spirit of prayer and mourning
together, if it were so easy and customary a work? Why Romans 8. are these
groans unutterable wrought by the Spirit of God in us at that time? insomuch
that a soul in prayer, is in spiritual travel and heavenly Agonies: All which
cannot be, unless the heart of a man be deeply humbled within for sin: so that
this Petition does not only imply sin is in us, and that God sees it, but also
that all within us ought to be moved and troubled at it. Beg therefore for
pardon with the same zeal and movings of bowels, as David did, Psalm. 51. who
had his broken bones. A tear in our eye for sin, does more adorn it, then a
jewel does the ear. Now the Antinomian Doctrine is like an Eastern, or Northern
wind, that dries up, or blows away this spiritual rain. If God sees no sin
in us, then he would see no humiliation nor debasement in us for sin: and so
whereas as heretofore repentance in believers has been necessary, now it shall
be prejudicial to salvation, and all sorrow shall be ungodly. What direct
Antipodes are these to Scripture-directions? Hence they repent that ever they
did so much repent, and look upon their sorrow for sin, as Christ upon his
enemies. Lord forgive me, for I did not know what I did. But we have not so
learned the Gospel. The people of God, when sinning, are called upon to afflict
themselves, and to mourn: and because the Corinthians did not so at first,
though afterward they did, therefore the Apostle threatens to come with a rod
unto them. Take heed then of all Doctrines or practices, that may obstruct the
running streams of thy soul: Keep thy self always in this spiritual sweat.
Take not the Limbeck from the fire, that so spiritual distillations may flow
continually.

4 Earnest perseverance till we obtain.
4. It supposes earnestness and importunity, with perseverance till we do
obtain. That which is requisite in every prayer, must not be excluded here.
Prayer without fervency is like a messenger without legs, an arrow without
feathers, an advocate without a tongue. Hence are those phrases, Be instant in
prayer: and Watch unto prayer: and Pray without ceasing. Till the heart be
deaded to every creature, and mind this thing only, it will not pray aright.
Seeing therefore our blessedness and happiness is made to consist in this,
That our sins are pardoned; how ought we to lay every thing aside, till this be
vouchsafed unto us! Hierom complained of his distractions and dullness in
prayer, Siccine putas orasse Jonam? Sic Danielem inter leones? Sic latronem in
cruce? Where is thy faith? Did Jonah pray thus in the Whales belly? Did Daniel
thus among the Lions? Did the thief thus upon the cross? If spiritual things
were as truly and really apprehended by us, as temporal are, how should we bid
all comforts stand afar off, even refusing to be comforted, till Gods favor
shine upon us! If the frowning of a King be like the roaring of a Lion, how
terrible then are the frowns of God for sin?

5 Constant renewed acts of faith.
Lastly, It supposes in the subject, constant renewed acts of faith; For as
there is constant pardon begged, and offered, so there must be a continual
lifting up, and stretching out the hand to receive. As the branch in the Olive
does constantly suck juice and nourishment, so ought we perpetually to be
receiving from the fullness of Christ. This then is the only grace that has
the promise of pardon made to it: although where this is, there will also be
the presence of all other graces. Neither may we with Spalato judge the
distinction that is made between faith and other graces in this matter of
Justification and Remission of sins, a mere metaphysicall subtilty and
formality, as is to be showed. If therefore thy faith be asleep within, no
marvel if such tempests and storms arise, that thou fear drowning. As a
tradesman will part with any thing rather then his tools, for they are
instrumental to his whole livelihood; so above all, we ought to look to our
faith.

3. In the object matter we suppose these things, 3 In the object or matter
pra^ed for, are impl^ed.


1. That forgiveness of sin may be had after Baptism. That although we sin
after that solemn stipulation, yet God will not divorce us, or cast us (as it
were) out of the Ark into the deluge. There have been some of old, as the
Novatians, 1 That f^rg^ven^ss of sin may he had after B^ptism,
and Anabaptists of late, who have maintained, There is no hope of pardon to
those that after their Baptism do foully sin; for there they suppose is given
the plenary Remission; but this is false and uncomfortable: for we have the
incestuous person after his repentance received into favor again. How
desperate had Peter's condition been, if this had been true? And when our
Savior bids us Forgive our brother seventy times seven, we may not think there
is more love in the creature, then in the Creator, and Gods kindness beyond
that of a man's, is most emphatically described, Jer. 3.1. Where God promises a
reconciliation to his people, though they played the adulteress with him.

2. That we may with hope and faith pray for the pardon of great sins as well
as less. In Justification by Christ, 2 That a remission of great sins may be
hoped for.
greater sins are as easily forgiven as less. Though, as is to be showed, the
party offending does not come by pardon so easily, and more is required of him;
now this is a good cordial to the afflicted spirit, who is apt to limit God in
his pardon. He may forgive such and such sins, but can these great mountains
ever be removed out of his sight, sins of such a magnitude and aggravation? But
our Savior does not determine us in our Petition, but whatsoever your sins
are, pray for the pardon of them. Had it not been a great dishonor to Christ,
if any diseased man had said, his malady was greater then Christ could cure, he
might heal others, but not him? No less injurious is thy doubting, when the
greatness of thy sin makes thee stagger. The obedience of Christ is as much
above thy greatest sin, as Christ's person is above thy person.

3 That there is an iteration of pardon.
3. It supposes iteration of pardon, that God is not wearied out, neither does
upbraid us. Who would not think that the soul should be ashamed, and blush to
go for the pardon of the same sins committed over and over again. How easily
might we think, What hope is there to have me speed? Have I not a thousand and
thousand times entreated God to forgive me such pride, such vain thoughts, such
negligence in his service, and must I still go to ask pardon? How shall I look
up into Heaven any more? and this temptation is more terrible, as is to be
showed, if it be a sin, or sins of a more grievous nature, that the petitioner*
has been overtaken frequently with; but as we are commanded to forgive to a
brother offending in a day many times against us, so may we expect greater
things of God. Know then, as we sin daily, so there are outgoings of pardon
continually; and the goodness of God, does like the Sun, rejoice to run his
race without any weariness.

3 In the person to whom we* pray, are implied,
Lastly, In the Person to whom we pray, there is supposed,

1 That God only can forgive sins.
First, That God only can forgive sins. This is an incommunicable property of
God, Isa. 43.1. and Exodus 34.7. It is there reckoned as one of his
prerogatives: Hence Matthew. 9. this is made an argument of Christ's Deity, that
by his mere command he forgave sin, for this power to forgive sin, is greater
then to create Heaven or Earth, or to work the greatest miracles; Therefore a
power to work miracles has been vouchsafed to the Apostles, but not of
forgiving of sin, unless declaratively only. When therefore our Savior,
Matthew. 9. asks which is easier, To forgive sin, or to say, Take up thy bed
and walk; intending by this miracle to prove that he did also forgive sin, it
is not spoken as if this later were greater then the former, but only the
curing of the paralytical man, was a more visible sign to confirm the other,
for when they saw that which he commanded accomplished upon the man's body, they
might well conclude the other fulfilled in his soul. Now when we say, God only
can forgive sin, this is to be extended both to the forgiveness in Heaven, and
to that in a man's own conscience; for the former it is plain, because the
injury is done only against him, when we sin; and for the later, it is clear,
because he is the Father of Spirits, and so can command whatsoever peace and
security he pleases in the conscience. We see when Friends and Ministers do
pour oil into a wounded soul, they feel no benefit or refreshment, till God
speak to the heart. This is notably asserted by Elihu, Job 34.29. When he
gives quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he hides his face, who
then can behold him? O therefore with all humble thankfulness acknowledge this
great mercy of pardon, if thou art made partaker of it; If the Lord should work
miracles for thee, he would not display so much power and mercy, as he does in
this forgiveness of thy sins.

Secondly, It supposes God does see, 2 That he takes notice of sin.
and take notice of sin in us, after we have believed: For how can God be
said to forgive that which he takes no notice of? If forgiving be covering of
sin, and a blotting it out, then it is seen and open to God, and uncancelled
till this be done. Suppose our Savior had used these words in this Petition,
Cover our iniquities, as we cover the sins of others; would not that expression
have necessarily implied, That God did see them, and look on them, till he
covered them? Certainly Joseph did upon a good ground, abstain from sin, when
he said, How can I do this, and sin against God? That is, who sees me, and
beholds me in secret, and will be angry with me: But if God take no notice of
my sin; how can I truly awe my self from sin, saying, How can I do this
evil in Gods eyes? How can I provoke him to anger?

Let the Application then be, to importune for this mercy, Use.
of forgiveness, which makes all other things mercy. Health, riches, learning,
peace, are mercies, if with these there be a pardon of all our sins: especially
be pressed to seek for it, from this motive which I shall only mention at this
time, viz. That pardon of sin is the only support and help in all miseries and
calamities whatsoever. This only can sweeten thy pain, thy poverty, thy fears
of death. When the Apostle, Romans 5.1. had spoken of Justification by faith, and
the peace we have thereby with God, infers from thence, We glory in
tribulation. Alas, there would be little glory, if at the same time man be
against us, and God also. So Romans 8.33, 34, 37. when the Apostle had gloriously
triumphed in this privilege of Justification, and that none could lay any
thing to our charge, then he concludes, We are more then conquerors. Again 1
Pet. 3.16, 17, 18. exhorting the people of God to be ready to suffer for
well-doing, gives this reason, For Christ once suffered for sins, the just for
the unjust, etc. So that no misery or calamity can be joyfully undergone,
unless the Lord forgive our sins to us. In these times of war, while we have
been under continual fears of an enemy, what could rightly support us, but
remission of our sins? To have men accusing and condemning of us; but to have
God clearing and absolving, this can make an Heaven in the midst of an hell.

LECTURE XVI.
MAT. 6.12. And forgive us our debts.


HAving explained this Petition positively and practically, we come to handle
those Questions, which may make to the clearing of that truth, which is
contained in the Text. And I shall pitch upon those that are useful and
necessary, not on thorny and perplexed. God indeed once spoke out of the thorny
bush, but seldom does truth discover her self in those thickets, which the
Schoolmen have made.

The first in order that should be discussed is, What remission of sin is; Or,
What is meant, when we say, God does forgive sin? But before we can come to
that, another Doubt must be rouled out of the way, and that is, What sin is,
and what are the proper effects of sin? For a man can never understand, what
it is to have sin blotted out, or taken away, Sin considered ^our vvayes,
unless he be first informed, What the nature of sin is, and what effects it
has wrought upon the sinner. Of this therefore in the first place,

And first, 1 Abstractedly in its own nature.
I shall speak of sin abstractedly in its own nature.

Secondly, Relatively to the person who sins.

Thirdly, The proper effects of it.

Fourthly, The weight or aggravation of every sin.

Let us begin with the former. Sin in the Scripture has several names, which
do in some measure describe the nature of it. The Hebrew (...) is used commonly
for sin, The nature of sin expressed in the several names of it.
and it does in a proper signification, wherein it is once used, denote an
aberration from the mark we shoot at, Judge. 20.16. Every one could sling stones
at an hairs breadth, and not miss; and from hence metaphorically is signified
the nature of sin, for every man's action is to have an end, which end is
manifested by the Scripture; and when a man reaches not to this, he is said to
sin; answerable unto this word in the Greek is (...), which comes from (...),
that is, to err from the scope: And another word (...), which is going beyond
the bounds and limits which are set us. Though a learned Critic, Dieu, does
make (...), not to signify beyond, but by, as if it did denote a negligent and
careless passing by the commands of God. Another word is (...) which comes of
a word that properly signifies crookedness and obliquity in the body, and so
is applied to the soul, and does denote perverseness in him that sins, and
to this may answer (...) where the particle (...) is not to be understood
privatively only, but adversatively: for a mere want of the Law, may not be a
sin always, but a repugnancy must necessarily be. And thus the word is used, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. 1 Timothy 4.9. The Hebrews also express sin by (...) which is as
much as a desection, or falling off from God; and answerable to this in the
Greek is (...), which is a falling away from that integrity and purity we
either once had, or ought still to have. As for the Latin word peccatum, some
have derived it from pellicare, which is to commit adultery, as if a sin were
so called in the general, from one kind of it; and others from pecus, because
a man in sin wanders like a beast, or becomes like a beast; yet many conceive
the word peccare to be a theme it self, and not derived from any other word.

2 In the definition of it.
As for the definition of sin, What it is; though there have been many disputes
about it, and Chemnitius wished for one public definition of it, to which all
Churches should agree; yet certainly that of John is full and comprehensive
enough, 1 John 3.4 Sin is the transgression of the Law: Answerable whereunto is
that, 2 Samuel 15.24. I have sinned, for I have transgressed the commandment of
the Lord: Only you must remember not to limit (...), to a mere want of the Law,
but as comprehending that which is against it. Now this definition agrees both
to habitual and actual sins.

To habitual, whether it be that innate and imbred of original sin; or whether
it be that habitual voluntarily contracted, you have both the actual and
habitual (...), excellently put together, Romans 6.19 As you have yielded your
members servants to iniquity unto iniquity: where by the former iniquity is
meant original and habitual sin; by the later, actual sin as the fruit of the
former. It has been doubted, how habitual, especially original sin can be
called truly sin, because it is not voluntary: for that voluntarinesse should
be of the nature of sin, is so universally acknowledged, that neither Doctorum
paucitas, nor Indoctorum turba do dissenti^e: neither the few learned men, or
the many unlearned did ever gainsay, said Austin: And besides, All sin must be
forbidden by a Law, now how are we forbidden to be born without sin? Would
not such a prohibition be ridiculous?

Again, The commands of God seem to be for good actions, not for the habits of
good actions.

Now although it might fairly be maintained, that (...) not (...), the
transgression of a Law, and not voluntariness, How all sin is voluntary.
is of the nature of a sin; for the Apostle, Romans 7.15. says, He does that
which he would not do; and there are many sins of ignorance, which must
necessarily be without any express act of the will, yet we may with Austin call
this sin voluntary, taking voluntary, as it comprehends the will of Adam, that
universal person, and principle in whom we all willed. And by this means,
though Infants are not in themselves capable of any precept, much less before
they were born, which they were to accomplish in their own person, yet they
were bound up in a command, even before they had an actual being in Adam, in
whose will they were to fulfill that command, for that command was not given to
Adam as a single person, but as an universal.

Hence it is, that habitual sin, whether remote, or proxime, is forbidden by
the Law of God, which requires not only good things to be done, but also that
they flow from a clear and pure fountain within, even an entire perfection of
the nature; so that although infused habits of grace come not under a precept,
in respect of the infusing and ingenerating of them, for that is Gods act, and
we are not bound to do that, yet they are commanded both before they are
infused and after; Before, by the Law, which requires of us, that inward
rectitude, which is now lost; and after they are infused, to be diligent in
those pious actions, whereby those habits may be preserved and retained. So
that by this we may see a sin to be, whatsoever does transgress the Law of
God, whether habitually or actually, whether internally or externally, whether
by commission, or by omission, and from hence arises the curse which the Law
pronounces against sinners, because its broken by them.

In the next place, 2 Of sin relating to the person sinning. A man possibly may
not, or rather form^lly cannot intend sin.
if we speak of sin as it relates to the person sinning; so there is not
required; first, That a man should not intend sin, and will it as sin, for that
is impossible: even as the understanding cannot assent to any thing false as
false, but as the object is either true really, or apparently: So neither can
the will, desire any thing that is evil, as evil, but as it is apparently good.
As the devil appeared in Samuels clothes, so does sin and evil always under
the notion of some good or other. Hence the Apostle says, Lusts saves, i. do
(...), entice a man, as a Fisherman does the silly fish by the bait upon the
hook, which the Apostle elsewhere calls (...), a deceiving or putting a false
Syllogism upon our selves. So that they do not sufficiently vindicate the pure
providence of God from sin, who say, God does will the act, but not the
deformity, or the evil of it; for so neither does man will expressly the evil of
the act, although in willing that act to which sin is necessarily annexed, it
be interpretatively to will the sin.

Neither secondly is to sin, to produce sin, as the proper and immediate
terminus of our action, for sin being a privation, or at most a relation, it
cannot be the immediate effect of any action. Sin is not indeed a mere pure
privation, such as blindness is, but mixed and compounded, such as sickness
is, which has both the inordinacy, and want of a good temperament, and also
the ill humors in it. So that a man sins by producing or doing that action,
to which sin is annexed. And herein neither do they sufficiently clear Gods
concourse about sin, in saying it goes to the material act of sin, but not to
the immediate obliquity of it. For so neither does man, and indeed sin being a
privation, or as some, a relation, it is impossible it should be produced any
other way, but by that act unto which it is joined to, as theft is committed by
doing that material action, to which that deformity is inseparably adjoined.
Therefore to sin, is to do a thing deficiently from the Law of God, so that God
in all those several acts of his about sin, whether they be permissive or
ordinative, is gloriously vindicated, because he does nothing deficienter, as
falling from that eternal and immutable Law of righteousness; whereas the
Angels and man did, missing or coming short of the rule, by which they were to
be guided: but because this Discourse is more remote to our present matter of
Pardon of sin, we come to that which does more nearly concern it.

3 The proper effect of sin, which is to make guilty.
Therefore in the third place, there is the proper effect, and consequent of
sin, which is to make guilty, and oblige to eternal wrath. To omit the many
things that are in sin, Divines do acknowledge two things in every sin,
the Macula, or filth, and the Reatus, the guilt; which guilt some do again
distinguish into the guilt of sin, which they call the inward dignity and
desert of damnation, which they make inseparable from sin, even as heat is
from the fire; and the guilt of punishment which they make separable: For the
present, let us examine, What is that effect of sin, whereby a man when a
sin is committed is truly denominated a sinner, for seeing Remission is a
taking away of sin in that respect, whereby we are adjudged and accounted of as
sinners, it is necessary to know what that is, which does so constitute a
sinner: As for example, David after his adultery, Peter after his denial, have
contracted such a guilt upon them, whereby they are accounted as sinners,
though the acts of their sins be gone and passed; and in this condition they
stand, till remission or forgiveness come, which takes away their sins. For
the understanding of this, consider this foundation, That every sin committed
by a man, though the sin be transient, and quickly passes away, yet it does
still continue, and is as it were still in acting, till by remission it be
removed. And this consideration is of great practical use. A man is apt to look
upon his sins committed a long while ago, as those which are passed, and are no
more to be thought upon; but you must know, that there is something which does
remain after a sin is committed, which is somewaies the same with the action of
sin: so that not figuratively, but properly the sin it self is said to
continue. Thus the Scripture calls something by the name of sin, that does
continue, when yet the commission of the sin is past. As David many months
after he had sinned, prays God, To blot out his sin: why, where was his
sin? It was committed long before, and it was a transient act, but yet David by
this does acknowledge that there is something which does continue that act of
sin, whereby David is as much bound up in his conscience, as if he had been in
the very commission of it. Consider therefore that till there be a pardon of
sin, though thy sins have been committed forty or fifty years ago, yet they
are continued still, and thou art truly a sinner, though so many years after,
as thou wast at the first committing of them. Sin is not taken away by length
of time, but by some gracious act of God vouchsafed unto us: How justly may it
be feared, that many a man's sins do still lie at his doors! Thou art still in
thy sins, and looked upon as so by God; though it may be thou have left such
sins many years ago. Thy youthful sins it may be, thou have left them along
while ago, yet thou art still in them, and they are continued upon thee, till
by remission they are taken away. It is not thy other course of life and
abstinence from sin, that makes a sin not to be, but there must be some
gracious act on Gods part, removing of this. Consider therefore of it, that thy
soul remains as polluted and guilty twenty years after a sin, yea a thousand
of years, if thou could live so long, as when it was in the very first act of
sin. Remember the action of sin does pass away, but not the sin; you may
therefore ask, Wherein does the sin continue still? What is that which makes me
still to be reputed of as if I were a sinner in the very act? It is commonly
out of the Schoolmen determined, Whence comes 1 A st^in upon the so^l, taken
out by sanctification.
That after a sin is committed, there does remain a Macula, a blot in the
soul, and that continuing, the sinner does thereby remain obliged unto eternal
wrath. That there is such a filth and blot remaining because of sin, Live. de
Rec.
I see generally acknowledged by our Divines: only that learned Wootton does
much oppose it, and says, the Schoolmen have been five hundred years laboring
to declare, what it is, and are not able to do it. Indeed he grants, That in
Adams sin we may well conceive a blot remaining after the sin was committed,
because he was endowed with grace; but now in a man grown up that has grace,
no sin that he commits takes away his grace, and therefore he is not deprived
of that beauty by the blot of sin. And as for wicked men, they have no beauty
at all in them; and therefore how can sin make such a blot in them? There
must be beauty in them by grace, which is nitor animae, the luster of the soul,
before there can be Macula, which is the deformity of it. For the right
conceiving of this, know, 1. That it is one thing to acknowledge such a
defilement and impurity by sin absolutely; and another to acknowledge it so,
That justifying grace, or remission of sin must take that blot away. Herein the
Papists err, That they hold sin leaves such a stain, which remission of sin
takes away; whereas indeed there is such a filth by sin, but that is taken
away by sanctifying grace, not justifying; so that it is a dangerous error to
speak of such a defilement by sin, and then to say, God by pardoning takes it
away; This were to confound Justification and Sanctification.

But in the second place, we may according to Scripture, say, not only in Adams
sin, but in every sin we commit there is a blot and stain made upon the soul,
Matthew. 15.20. These things that come from the heart defile a man, Ephesians. 5.27.
Sin is compared to a spot and wrinkle. So Romans 3.12. All by nature are said to
become unprofitable. The Hebrew word in the Psalm, out of which this is taken,
signifies corruption or putrefaction, for such sin is to the soul, not that
you may conceive that the essence of the soul is naturally corrupted by sin, as
rust does the iron, and moths the garment; but in a moral sense, by sin the
soul in its faculties is disenabled from doing its duty. Thus the Apostle calls
sins dead works, Heb* 9.14. not in that sense, as if they did bring death to a
man, for that the Apostle expresses otherwise, killing us, when he speaks of
the Law; but he calls them dead works, because they defile man, as dead carcases
in the old Testament: For the Apostle, verse. 1. spoke of cleansing by the blood
of an heifer, which was to be used when a man had touched any dead thing, which
made him legally unclean. Thus (says he) Christ's blood will cleanse from sin
that contaminateth a man. Neither is it necessary that grace must really have
been in the soul before, and then sin by depriving the soul of it, so to stain
it: for its enough that the soul ought to have grace in it, though it were not
present before: as when a man does not believe Gods Word, though this unbelief
do not deprive him of the beauty and grace of faith, which he had, yet it does
of that beauty of faith, which he ought to have. ^ An o^^igation to ^t^r^^l
^^^shment (...) by re^ission.
And thus as particular actual sins are multiplied: so are particular stains
and defilements also increased; we therefore must grant a stain by sin, though
this be not that which is removed by remission. Therefore that which continues
a man a sinner in Gods account, and is to be removed by remission, is that
obligation to eternal wrath appointed by God; for as soon as a man has
sinned, there does accrue to God a moral right (as we may speak with reverence)
and power, being a Judge, as thereby he may inflict vengeance upon a sinner;
and in this respect sin is called an offense, because it does provoke him, who
is a just Judge, unto anger and vengeance. This then is that, which makes a sin
to continue still as if it were in act, because upon the sin committed there
is an obligation by Gods appointment to everlasting punishment, and when this
is taken off, then is God said to forgive, and till it be, sin is alive,
crying for vengeance, as fiercely, as if it were newly committed. So that the
act once committed that causes the obligation to punishment, and this
obligation continuing, God does not forgive. When a sin is committed it may
remain in Gods mind, and in our mind. In our mind, by way of guilt and
trouble; as David said, His sin was always before him; or else in Gods mind,
so that he does will the punishment of such. Now when God does forgive, he
blots sins out of his mind, and remembers them no more. He does not will the
obligation of them to punishment, being satisfied through Christ, and the party
believing in him. By all this you may see, That after a sin is committed there
remains obligation in the will and mind of God to eternal punishment, and
God when he does forgive, cancelleth this debt or obligation. This being
cleared, we may the easilier judge with what act God does forgive sin, but of
that hereafter.

Sin considered as an ^ffence to God.
Let us consider the aggravation of sin, as it is an offense to God, which may
the more instigate us to pardon. In sin we may consider two things; First, The
deprivation of that rectitude which ought to be in every thing we do: in which
sense, sin is a moral monster, as there are natural monsters, for the soul in
sin does not bring forth fruit answerable unto reason and the Law of God; this
consideration may much humble us; but there is another thing in sin which does
more aggravate it, and that is as it is a dishonor, and an offense to God, and
by this means it becomes above our power ever to satisfy God for it.
Therefore in every sin besides the particular considerations, look upon that
general one, which is in all, viz. That peculiar deformity it has, Whether sin
b^ an infinite evil.
as it is an offense against God. Its disputed, Whether sin have an infinite
evil and deformity in it? To answer this, If a sin be considered in its kind,
so its not infinite, because one sin is so determined to its kind, that it is
not another sin, as theft is not murder.

Neither secondly can sin be said to be infinite evil, in respect of the being
of it, for it comes from finite creatures, who are not able to do any thing
infinite; and therefore sin is not infinite, as Christ's merits are infinite,
which are so, because of the dignity and worth of the person, though the
actions themselves had a finite being. Besides, if sins were infinite in such a
sense, then no sin could be greater then another, because that which is truly
infinite cannot be made more or less.

Therefore thirdly, Sins are said to have infinite evil in them, in respect of
the object or person against whom they are committed, viz. God, who is an
infinite object. For seeing the aggravation of a sin arises from the worth
of the person against whom it is committed; if the person offended be of
infinite honor and dignity, then the offense done against such an one, has an
infinite evil and wickedness in it. So that the infiniteness of sin arises
wholly from the external consideration of God against whom it is. But of this
more when we speak of the necessity of Christ's satisfaction to Gods justice by
his death.

Let the Use be to inform thee, That every sin committed, Use.
continues as fresh to cry vengeance many years after, as if it were but
lately done, till remitted by God. Think not therefore that time will wear it
out, though they may wear out of thy conscience, yet they cannot out of Gods
mind. Consider that of Job 14.17. Thou sealest up my transgression as in a
bag, and thou sowest up mine iniquity. So that what the Apostle speaks of some,
2 Pet. 2. is true of all impenitent sinners, Their damnation slumbereth not,
nor does it linger. Therefore till the mercy of God has taken off this guilt,
thou art to be in as much fear and trembling, as if the very sins were still
committed by thee.

LECTURE XVII.
MAT. 6.12. And forgive us our Debts.


What remission of sin is.
THe next Question to be handled, is, What remission of sin is, and how God does
forgive them. And although the discussing of the former Question, viz. What
makes a man a sinner does make an easy and quick way of dispatching this,
because Justification does take off that consideration and respect of a sinner
from a man, yet that the whole nature of it may be better understood, I shall
lay down several Propositions, all which will tend to give us much light in
this great and glorious benefit of the Gospel.

From the names of it.
And in the first place, as we formerly considered some choice Hebrew words that
set forth the pardon of sin, so now let us take notice of some Greek words in
the new Testament, that express this gracious act of God: for the holy Ghost
knows best in what words to represent this glorious mercy to us.

The word that is most frequently used by the Evangelists and Apostles is
(...), which in the general, is as much as to dismiss or send away, to let
alone, to leave, to permit or suffer; in which senses the Scripture often uses
it: and certainly God in this sense does pardon sin, because he lets it alone,
he leaves it, he meddles no more with it, but handles the person forgiven, as
if he never had been a sinner. But commonly this word is used of absolving
those who are accused as guilty, which appears in that famous sentence of
Agesilaus, who writing to have one Nicias sent to him that was accused, used
this expression, (...) Nicias, if he have done no wrong, absolve him, if he
have, absolve him for my sake, but howsoever absolve him, or set him free. And
in this sense forgiveness of sins may well be called (...), but in the
Scripture it seems rather to be an expression from those that are loosned out
of their bonds for their debts; and therefore frequently is applied to the
forgiving of debts, Mat. 18.25, 27, 32. and this is more notably set down, Luke
4.18. to preach to captives or prisoners, (...), freedom or forgiveness of
sin, and so (...), shall be as much as (...), to loosen bonds, as the word is
used, Luke 16.26. Acts 27.40. Therefore howsoever Grotius thinks the word to
remit, to be a metaphor from those who part with, or leave a thing that they
might retain, yet it seems rather to be taken from releasing of debts, and
loosning of bonds, in which the conscience of a sinner was tied, being bound to
answer at the Tribunal of God. Hence the Scripture uses several names to
express pardon of sin, according to the several titles that sin has in the
Scripture. As sins are Debita, Debts, so God does forgive, as they are Sordes,
a filth and loathsomeness, so God does cover them, as they are vincula, bonds,
so he does remit them. As they are debts, written down in a book, so he blots
them out: As they make us miserable and wretched, so he is merciful and
propitious in removing of them.

A second word is (...), Col. 2.13. Having forgiven you all trespasses, Col.
3.13. Even as Christ forgave us. Now this word does excellently signify the
fountain, and the effect of pardon. The fountain, that it comes from the mere
grace and favor of God. There is nothing in us to merit or satisfy God with.
Therefore howsoever there be a necessity of faith and repentance, yea and God
will not forgive sin in persons grown up, but where these are, yet these are no
meritorious causes, nor can they satisfy God for all that offense and
dishonor which our sins have cast upon him. And this may encourage the broken
heart, who feels a load of sin upon it self, and has nothing to bring unto
God: remember the root and fountain of all forgiveness is grace, which is so
far from supposing any worth of condignity in thee for pardon, that it rather
implies the contrary. And as it does imply grace thus in the fountain, so also
acceptablenesse and joy too in the party, to whom sin is forgiven. So that
there can be nothing in the world more welcome, or a greater matter of joy,
then to bring this glad tidings; and indeed therefore is the Gospel called
(...), because it preaches the glad tidings of Gods love and reconciliation
through Christ with a sinner.

A third word is (...), thus the Publican prayed, Luke 18.3. Some derive (...)
from (...), because we desire to look on those to whom we are propitious. But
this word does more immediately relate to the blood of Christ, as the way by
which God becomes thus pacified. So that as the other words set up the grace of
God in pardoning, so this the merits and satisfaction of Christ, 1 John 2.2. 1 John 4.10. Romans 3.25. Heb. 2.17. In which places the appeasment of God toward
us, is attributed to the blood of Christ. Therefore if we put the former words
and these together, we may see an admirable temperament and mixture of grace
and justice in forgiving of sins. The former places exclude Popish Doctrines,
The later, Socinian blasphemies.

A fourth word may be (...), to obtain mercy. For although the Scripture apply
this to all the benefits and mercies of God, yet Paul applies it more
particularly to pardon of sin, 1 Timothy 1.13. and when Dives prayed, Luke 16.24.
Father Abraham (...), have mercy on me, and so by consequent to be removed from
that place of torment. Hence in that form of prayer which Paul uses by way of
salutation, there are these three words (...) and (...). But this word is more
expressly used for this end in the grand Covenant and Promise for pardon of sin,
Heb. 8.12. For I will be merciful to their iniquities, etc. This is so
comprehensive a Petition, that it seems to be a generally received form of
prayer in the Church, (...), yea the wiser among the Heathens used this prayer,
as appears by Arrianus epist. diss. lib. 2. cap. 7. (...): Now this word
supposes, 1. The party praying for pardon to look upon himself, as in a most
miserable and undone estate, that no outward calamity or evil lies so heavily
upon him, as his sins do* And then secondly, on Gods part, it supposes that he
does not only pardon, but that even his bowels yearn within him, when he does
forgive. Hence Luke 1.78. they are called (...), the bowels of mercy. This
goodness of God is excellently represented in the father of the Prodigal, Luke
15.20. Therefore how great a sin is unbelief, and refusing to have good
thoughts of God, when God has manifested himself thus gracious!

The last word I shall mention (though there be others that are used) is by way
of negation, (...), Romans 4.8. 2 Cor. 5.9. And this is a metaphor from those
that cast up their accounts, and account so much upon such an one for debt. Now
by this word is shown the terrible nature of sin, as also that howsoever for a
while, we may live jollily, care for nothing, and be in security, yet God will
one day cast up his accounts, and charge such and such debts upon us; but if so
be the Lord will not impute them to us, and account them upon our score, this
will be our blessedness. And thus you have heard the most choice and principal
words the holy Ghost expresses our forgiveness by. We proceed,

1. Proposition. Lay this down as a foundation, Propos. 1.
That when God does pardon sin, he takes it away so, as that the party
acquitted is no more looked upon as a snner.

All the expressions about pardon amount to thus much; even as when one accused
of theft and murder in the Commonwealth, and is legally acquitted by the Judge,
he is no more reputed a thief or murderer. Therefore it is a calumny of the
Papists, as if we held, That a man is a sinner after God has pardoned him. It
is true, we say, That sin does remain in a man, though he be justified, and
that sin has a desert of condemnation with it, but where God has pardoned,
there he does not look upon that man as a sinner, but as a just man. Therefore
in different respects we may say, That pardon of sin is an utter abolition of
it, and it is not an utter abolition of it. It is an utter abolition of it, as
it does reflect upon the person, making him guilty, and obliging him actually
to condemnation; in this respect a man is as free as if he had never sinned;
but if you speak of the inherency of sin, and the effects of original
corruption, that do abide in all, which are also truly and properly sins; so
pardon of sin is not an utter abolition, and although Christ wrought no
semiplenam curationem, as is observed, no half-cures upon any diseased persons,
but whom he healed, he healed perfectly, yet he works by degrees in the grace
of Sanctification, as he did perfect the world by several degrees
successively, and not (as Austin thought) all at once. So that this particular,
viz. That forgiveness is a perfect abolition of sin in the former
consideration, is of transcendent comfort to the believers: and indeed it is
impossible that sin should be forgiven divisibly, and by parts: so a man should
be at the same time under the favor of God, and under his hatred, which is
impossible.

Thou therefore who art a believer have cause to rejoice, for this perfect work
of remission of thy sins past, wherein nothing more is, or can be done for thy
good and consolation. Do not think it is with God, as with men, who say indeed,
They forgive with all their heart, yet retain their secret, inward hatred, as
much as before. Indeed the pain of sin may roll and tumble in thy conscience a
long while after, though it be forgiven (we see so in David) as the sea, which
has been enraged by tempests and winds, though they be quiet, yet the sea
will roar and make a noise a long time after. The heart of a man awakened and
pierced with the guilt of sin; does not quickly and easily compose it self
again.

Propos. 2.
Prop. 2. It is one thing for God to forgive, and another thing not to exact
and demand punishments.

As we see among men, a Judge many times through fear or otherwise, when
Justice is obstructed, does not call such a malefactor to an account, but
deferreth it, yet for all that, the man is not acquitted; so it is often to be
seen in Gods providence, There are multitudes of sinners, who after their
transgressions committed, are not only without punishment, but enjoy great
prosperity, and much outward success, yet these men are not pardoned, they
have no acquittance from God. This has been such a temptation to David,
Jeremiah, and others of Gods people, that they have many times staggered
through unbelief. But men may have their punishments deferred, their damnation
may sleep or linger, but it is not taken off.

Let not men therefore delude themselves with vain hopes, as if their sins were
forgiven, because not yet punished: No, there must be some positive gracious
act of God to acquit thee, else thy sins are alive to condemn thee. Examine thy
self therefore whether thy peace, comfort, plenty, be a fruit of Gods
forbearance merely, or of his acquittance. This later is always an act of his
gracious mercy: but the other may be a terrible fruit of his hatred against
thee, insomuch that thou had better wander up and down like Cain, fearing
every thing will kill thee, or damn thee, then be in such security.

Prop. 3. Propos. 3.
A godly man may account not only himself bound to thank God for the pardon of
those sins he has committed, but he is to acknowledge so many pardons, as by
the grace of God he has been preserved from sin.

And if a believer enter into this consideration, how will it overwhelm him! So
often as God has preserved thee from such and such sins, which thy own heart,
or temptations would have inclined thee to, God has virtually given thee so
many pardons. That God preserved David from killing Nabal and his Family, here
was interpretatively as great mercy, as in the express forgiving of the murder
of Vriah. It is a rule of Divines, Plures sunt gratiae privativae, quam
positivae. There are more preventing graces then positive. The keeping of evils
from us, is more then the good he bestows on us. Therefore Austin observed
well, that as Paul said, By the grace of God I am what I am: So he might also
have said, By the grace of God I am not what I am not. Though therefore we are
not so sensible of preventing mercies, as of positive, yet a due and right
consideration of Gods love in this matter might much inflame our hearts: Say
therefore, O Lord, I bless thee, not only for the pardon of those sins I have
committed, but also for thy goodness in preserving me from those many
thousands, I was prone to fall into, which is in effect, the pardon of so many.

Prop. 4. Propos. 4.
Remission of sin is not to be considered merely as removing of evil, but also
as bestowing of good.

It is not only ablativa mali, but collativa boni: it is not a mere negation of
punishment due to us, but a plentiful vouchsafing of many gracious favors to
us, such as a Sonship, and a right to eternal life, as also Peace with God, and
Communion with him. God also never pardons any sin, but where he sanctifies
the nature of such an one. Indeed it will be worth the enquiry, Whether this
connection of pardon of sin with inherent holiness, arise from a natural
ne^essity, so that one cannot be without the other; or whether it be by the
mere positive will, and appointment of God; for the present this is enough, God
has revealed he will never dis*join these.

Propos. 5.
Prop. 5. I^ every sin there are (as to the purpose of Justification, these two
things considerable) the offense that is done to God, whereby he is displeased,
and the obligation of the man so offending him to eternal condemnation.

Now remission of sin does wholly lie in removing of these two: so that when
God does will neither to punish or to be offended with the person, then he is
said to forgive. We must not therefore speak of two kinds of remissions, one
remission of the punishment, another of the offense and fault; for this is one
remission, and God never does the one without the other. It is true there
remain paternal and medicinal chastisements after sin is forgiven, but no
offense, or punishment strictly so taken. What kind of act this remission is,
whether immanent or transient, is to be showed in the next Question.

Propos. 6.
Prop. 6. From the former Proposition this follows,

That sin in the guilt of it is not remitted by any act that we do, but it is a
mere act of God.

So that neither the grace of repentance, or love of God is that, which
removes guilt out of the soul, but it is something in God only. It is the
opinion of many Papists, That God in pardoning does only enable to repent for
sin, and then the guilt of sin does naturally and necessarily go away, so
that there needs no acceptance from God, or act of remission, but only an
infusion of grace to repent. But this in the next Sermon shall mainly be
insisted upon, and it is of great practical use, to take us off from having
confidence, and trust in our sorrow for sin. For as when a creditor does
forgive his debtor, it is the sole act of the creditor, not any thing of the
debtor: So in pardoning, it is not any thing that we do, though with never so
much love, and brokennesse of heart, that does release and untie the bond of
sin, but it is an act of God only.

If you say, Object.
Why then is repentance and faith pressed so necessarily, that God does not
forgive without it? For if it be only an act of Gods* then it may be done
without any work of the sinner intervening. But of this in the next place;
only for the present take notice, Answ.
That it is not any sorrow or retraction of ours, that makes a sin either
remissible, or actually remitted, but a mere act of Gods, and if all the men of
the world were asked this Question, What they mean, when they pray God to
forgive their sins? The sense of all would be, not that they should do
something which would remit them, but that God by his gracious favor would
release them. So then, if all these particulars be cast up together, you may
clearly conceive, how God does forgive sin, not by infusing or putting grace
into us, which may expel sin, as light does darkness, but by his outward grace
and favor accepting of us: and therefore we are not to rely upon any thing we
do, not to presume, no not of our godly sorrow for sin, but to look up to
Heaven, desiring God would speak the word, that he would pronounce the sentence
of absolution.

Let the Use be, To look upon our selves as bound in chains and fetters by our
sins, Use.
as made very miserable by them, that so we may the more earnestly desire
pardon, and put an high prize upon it. Though Gods forgiving be not the putting
of godly sorrow, and the working of a broken heart within us, yet we can never
obtain the one without the other. The grace and mercy of a pardon is no more
esteemed by us, because we look not upon our selves, as so many guilty persons
adjudged to eternal death. Thus the Publican cried out, Have mercy upon me a
sinner. What Plutarch said of the Husbandman, That it was a pleasant sight to
him, to see the ears of corn bending to the earth, because that was an argument
of fruit within. No* less joyful is it to spiritual husbandmen to see their
people walk with humble, debased, broken hearts, through sense of sin, and not
to walk confidently and delicately, like Agag, saying, The worst is past. God
said of Ahab, though humbled for external motives only, See thou how Ahab
humbles himself? How much more will God take notice of those, who humble
themselves upon spiritual grounds, desiring ease from Christ. As therefore
Bernard writing to one, epist 180. who he thought was not sollicitous enough
about the Judgments of God, in stead of wishing him according to the ordinary
custom of salutation, Salutem plurimam, much health, said, Timorem plurimum,
much fear: So may the Ministers of God, we wish you not much joy, but much holy
fear. Alas thou fear pain, poverty, death: but the guilt of sin is chiefly
to be feared: but we like children are afraid of a vizard, and do not fear the
fire, which is a real danger.

LECTURE XVIII.
MAT. 6.12. And forgive us our debts.


How our duty of repentance consists with Gods free grace in remitting.
YOu have heard, Pardon of sin is Gods work only, as also his manner of doing
it, is not by infusing grace into us, which takes away the guilt of sin, but
besides grace sanctifying, there is also an act on Gods part repealing the
sentence of condemnation against us. Now because this may seem to overthrow the
duty of repentance: and because this is the rock many have been split upon, not
being able to reconcile our duty of repentance, with Gods gracious favor of
pardoning. I shall speak, though not all, yet as much as relates to my purpose
in hand, concerning the duty and necessity of repentance, although there be no
causality or merit in it, to take away sin, and this may rightly inform us
about the true efficacy of our sorrow for sin.

To open this Truth, consider these Propositions:

Propos. 1.
First, That God does never remit or forgive sin, but where also he gives a
mollified and softened heart to repent.

The Scripture does abudantly confirm this by precepts and examples. It is
indeed disputed by the Schoolmen (as you have heard) whether God by his
absolute power might not forgive sin without Sanctification of our natures, and
the grace of Repentance; for seeing they are two distinct mercies, why may not
God separate the one from the other? But it is a vain thing to dispute what God
might do, when he has revealed what he will do. And although we cannot say,
That there is a natural necessity between Justification and Sanctification,
such as is between the light and heat in the fire; yet this conjoyning of them
together by Gods will and appointment, arises from a condecency and fitness
both to God himself, who is an holy God, and to the nature of the mercy, which
is the taking and removing of sin away.

2. Propos. 2.
Although the Scripture attribute pardon of sin to many qualifications in a
man, yet Repentance is the most express and proper duty.

The Scripture sometimes makes forgiving of others a necessary disposition,
sometimes confessing and forsaking of them, sometimes believing (though that
has a peculiar nature in receiving of pardon, which other graces have not; and
therefore faith obtains pardon by way of an instrument applying, which other
graces do not) But if we speak of the express formal qualification, it is
repentance of our sins, not repentance as it is a mere bare terror upon thy
heart, but as it is sweetened with Evangelical considerations. Luther said,
There was no word so terrible unto him, and which his soul did more hate, then
that (Repent.) But it was because he understood not Gospel-grounds. We read
then of some places of Scripture, which make God to be the only Author of
blotting out and pardoning sin. And again we read of other places, where God
does this for none, but the broken and contrite heart. Now both these places
must not be opposed to each other: neither may we so dwell upon the one, as to
neglect the other; so to look upon it as Gods act, as if there were nothing
required in us: and again, so to look upon that which we do, as if God were not
to be acknowledged.

3. Propos. 3.
None may believe or conclude that their sins are pardoned before they have
repented.

To this I shall speak more particularly, when I handle the Doctrine of
Justification before Faith. As for the Assertion it self, it is plain by all
those places of Scripture, which make repentance requisite to pardon, Ezekiel.
14.6. Ezekiel. 18.30. Mat. 3.2. Luke 13.3. The learned Dr Twisse, Vind. great. p.
18. confesses, that there are Arguments on both sides in the Scripture:
Sometimes he says, Pardon of sin is subjoyned to confession and repentance, of
which sort he confesses there are more frequent and express places; but yet
sometimes remission of sin already obtained, is made an argument to move to
repentance, and he instanceth in David and Mary Magdalen, who did abundantly
and plentifully break out into tears, upon the sense of pardon. But these
instances are not to the purpose, for David repented of his wicked*ness before
Nathan told him, That his sin was taken away; and his penitential Psalm was not
made so much for the first pardon of his sin, as the confirming and assuring of
him in his pardon. Thus it was also with Mary Magdalen. But more of this in
time.

Propos. 4.
4. There is a necessity of Repentance if we would have pardon, both by a
necessity of precept or command; as also by a necessity of means and a way.

Whatsoever is necessary, Necessitate medii, by a necessity of means or a way;
is also necessary by a necessity of command, though not e contra. That
repentance is necessary by way of a command, is plain by the places
fore-quoted, and in innumerable other places. I do not handle the case, Whether
an actual or explicit repentance be necessary to salvation of every sinner;
but I speak in the general. It is disputed, Whether it be a natural precept, or
a mere positive command; and if it be a natural or moral command, to which
command it is reduced? Those that would have it under the command of, Thou
shall not kill, as if there were commanded a care of our souls, that they
should not be damned, are ignorant of the true limits and bounds of the several
Commandments. Its disputed also, When this time of repentance does bind? It is
a wonder that some should limit it only to times of danger and fear of death.
Certainly this command binds as soon as ever a man has sinned, Venenata
inducias non patiuntur, A man that has swallowed down poison, is not to
linger, but presently to expel it. And one that is wounded, who lies
bleeding, does presently dispatch with all readiness for Physicians, to have
his blood stopped: and thus ought men to take the first opportunity. Hence in
that famous miracle wrought at the pool of Bethesda, not the second or third,
but he that stepped first into it was the only man that was healed. As repentance
is thus necessary by way of command, so also by way of means: for the Spirit of
God works this in a man, to qualify him for this pardon; So that although
there be no causality, condignity or merit in our repentance, yet it is of that
nature, that God does ordain and appoint it a way for pardon: So that the
command for repentance is not like those positive commands of the Sacraments,
wherein the will of the Lawgiver is merely the ground of the duty; but there
is also a fitness in the thing it should be so: even as among men, nature
teaches, That the injurious person should be sorry, and ask forgiveness
before he be pardoned.

5. Concerning this duty of repentance, 5 Two great practical mistakes
concerning repentance observed.
there are two extreme practical mistakes; the one is of the profane, secure
man, who makes every empty and heartlesse invocation of mercy, to be the
repentance spoken of in the Scripture, whereas repentance is a duty compounded
of many ingredients, The first of the profane man.
and so many things go to the very essence, yea the lowest degree of godly
sorrow, that by Scripture-rules we may say, Repentance is rarely to be seen any
where; for if you do regard the nature of it, it is a broken and a contrite
heart. Now how little of the heart is in most men's humiliations? Men being
Humiliati magis quam humiles, as Bernard said, humbled and brought low by the
hand of God, rather then humble and lowly in their own souls. Again, if you
consider the efficient cause, it is from the Spirit of God, the spring of
sorrow must arise from this hill, Zech. 12. Romans 8. Further, if you consider
the motive, it must be because God is displeased and offended, because sin is
against an holy law, and so of a staining and polluting nature.

Lastly, If you consider the effect and fruit of repentance, it is an advised
forsaking and utter abandoning of all those lusts and iniquities, in whose
fetters they were before chained: so that a man repenting and turned unto God,
differs as much from himself once a sinner, as a Lazarus raised up and walking,
differs from himself dead and putrefying in the grave. Do not thou then whose
heart is not contrite, who do continually lick up the vomit of thy sin,
promise to thy self repentance: No, thou art far from this duty as yet.

The second of the godly.
On the other side, There is a contrary mistake, and that is sometimes by the
godly soul, and such as truly fear God, They think not repentance enough,
unless it be enlarged to such a measure and quantity of sorrow: as also
extended to such a space of time; and by this means, because they cannot tell,
when they have sorrowed enough, or when their hearts are broken as they should
be, they are kept in perpetual labyrinths, and often through impatience do with
Luther in such a temptation, Wish they never had been made men, but any
creatures rather, because of the doubts, yea the hell they feel within
themselves. Now although it be most profitable bitterly to bewail our sins, and
to limit no time, yet a Christian is not to think, Pardon does not belong to
him, because his sorrow is not so great and sensible for sin as he desires it.
David indeed does not only in his soul, but even bodily express many tears,
yea rivers, because of his sin, and other men's sins; yet it is a good rule,
That the people of God, if they have sorrow in the chiefest manner
appretiative, though not intensive, by way of judgment and esteem, so that they
had rather any affliction should befall them, then to sin against God, if this
be in them, though they have not such sensible intense affections, they may be
comforted. When the Apostle John makes this argument, He that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, how shall he love God, whom he has not seen?
implies, That things of sense do more move us, then matter of faith. David
made a bitter outcry upon the death of Absalom, with sad expressions, Would to
God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son, etc. But when Nathan told
him of his Adultery and Murder, though he confessed his sin, yet we read not
that he made such sensible lamentation. Thus Hierom writes of a godly woman
Paula, that at the death of her children, would be so dejected, that she did
hardly escape death; yet it is not reported that she found such grief for her
sins. So that as in corporal things, a man would choose the toothache, rather
then a pestilent fever, yet a man is more afflicted and pained at the
toothache, or burning of his finger, then at a fever: So it may be here, a
godly man would rather choose the loss of his children, or dearest relations,
then lose the favor of God by his sin; yet it may be have more painful
grief in the one then the other. Again, it is to be observed, That the
Scripture requiring sorrow or repentance for sin, does not limit such a degree,
or such a length of time, which if necessary, would certainly have been
prescribed.

6. It cannot be denied, Propos. 6.
but that the ancient Fathers have spoken hyperbolically of tears and
repentance; which phrases were the occasion of that corrupt doctrine in Popery.
Chrysostom compares repentance to the fire, which takes away all rust of sin
in us. Basil calls it, The medicine of the soul, yea those things which God
properly does, are attributed to tears and sorrow; as if the water of the eyes,
were as satisfactory as the blood of Christ; his blood is clean enough to purge
us, but our very tears need washing. It is true indeed, we read of a promise
made to those who turn from their evil ways, Ezekiel. 18.27. he shall save his
soul alive; but this is not the fruit of his repentance, but the gift of God,
by promise: It qualifieth the subject, it has no influence upon the
privilege: Even as a man does by the power of nature dispose and prepare the
body to receive the soul, but it is the work of God immediately to infuse it.

7. Though therefore repentance be necessary to qualify the subject, yet we
run into falsehood, Propos. 7.
when we make it a cause of pardon of sin. And thus ignorant and erroneous
people do: Ask why they hope to be saved or justified, why they hope to have
their sins pardoned; they return this answer, Because they have repented, and
because they lead a godly life: Thus they put their trust and confidence in
what they have done. But the Scripture, though it does indispensably command
repentance in every one, yet the efficient cause of pardon is Gods grace, and
the meritorious is Christ's blood: And if repentance come under the name of a
cause, it can be only of the material, which does qualify the subject, but
has no influence into the mercy it self. We read Luke 7. that Mary Magdalen
had many sins pardoned her, because she loved much: But the Parable of a
Creditor which forgave debts, that is brought by our Savior to aggravate her
kindness, does plainly show, That he speaks not of a love, that was the cause
of pardon of her sin, but which was the effect of it, Gods love melting her
heart, even as the Sun does snow. The highest expressions that we meet with in
Scripture, where pardon of sin seems to be ascribed to godliness, as a
cause, is Dan. 4.27. Break off thy iniquities by showing mercy to the poor.
Here we would think, that if a man would on purpose hold, that doing of a good
work, would be a proper cause to remove sin, he would use no other expression.
But first it appears by the context, that Daniel gives not this counsel in
reference to Justification, and the pardon of his sin, so as to be accepted
with God, but to prolong and keep off that temporal judgment, which was
revealed in the vision, as appears by those words [ If there may be a
lengthening of thy tranquillity.] And we have the like instance in Ahab, who
prorogued his calamity by an external humiliation. Again, although the Vulgar
translate it, Redeem thy sins, yet the Hebrew word does properly signify, To
break a thing, as we translate it, and although by a metaphor it be applied to
redeem and deliver, yet that is always of men and persons, not things,
especially it would be ridiculous to say, Redeem thy sins: so that the meaning
is, That whereas before Nebuchadnezzar had by injustice and oppression done
much rapine and violence; now Daniel counsels him to break off such wicked
ways, by the contrary expressions of love and chastity: So that this place
gives not any spiritual mercy to repentance, as the proper cause thereof.

8. As repentance is thus necessary, but not as a cause of pardon: so neither
is it required, as that whereby we appease and satisfy God; and this all
Popery goes upon, yea and all Pharisaical spirits, in their humiliation, that
by those afflictions and debasements of their souls, they shall satisfy God,
and make him amends. But this is so gross, that the more learned of the
Papists are fain to mitigate the matter, and say, That satisfaction cannot be
properly made to God by any thing we do, because all we have and do is from
God, and therefore there must be an acceptance or covenant by way of gift
interposed, whereby we may be able to satisfy. And then further they say,
There cannot be satisfaction made to gain the friendship of God, which sin has
violated, but to take away some thing of temporal punishment that belongs to
sin. The scope of the whole.


So that by all this which has been delivered, we may give repentance those
just and true bounds, which Gods Word does assign to it, and yet not give more
then Gods Word does. Neither may we think it a nicety or subtilty to make a
difference between a qualification, and a cause; for if we do not, we take off
the due glory that belongs to Christ and his merits, and give it to the works
we do, and we do make Christ and his sufferings imperfect and insufficient; and
by this we may see, in what sense grace inherent or sanctification does expel
sin; for if we speak of the filth and pollution of sin, so sanctifying grace
expels it, as light does darkness, heat does cold, by a real mutation and
change: So that God in sanctifying does no more to expel the sin, in the filth
of it, afterward; even as the Physician needs to do no more to the removing of
the leprosy, then by producing a sound health in the body. But when we speak
of the guilt of sin, it is not grace sanctifying within us that does remove the
guilt, but grace justifying without us. Insomuch that although a man after sin
committed were perfectly sanctified, yet that would not take off the guilt his
sin had brought upon him: So that although that man, needed in such a case no
further grace of sanctification to make him holy, yet he needed the grace of
remission to take away this guilt. So that the guilt of sin does not cease by a
natural necessity, upon the removing of the nature of the sin, but upon a
distinct and new act of Gods favor in forgiving; for if this were so, then
Gods mercy in giving a repenting heart, and his mercy in pardoning should not
be two distinct mercies (which yet are evidently distinguished by the
Scripture) but the same entire mercy. Now although this be true, yet how few do
reform their judgments in this point? and thereupon they come to put that upon
their grace within them, which belongs to grace without them.

Use of Instruction, Use 1.
That there may be an happy reconciliation and accord between Gods grace in
forgiving, and man's duty in repenting, one need not be preached to justle out
the other. All error is an extremity of some truth, and therefore it is hard to
discover truth, because its difficult to find out where the bounds are, that
truth parts from error. Let not therefore a Christian so rely upon his
repentance, as if there were no Covenant of grace, no blood of Christ to
procure an atonement: so neither let him extol these causes to the
extinguishing of his duties.

Use 2.
To stir up to this duty of repentance, as that without which pardon of sin
cannot be obtained. There is no such free grace nor Gospel-mercy that does
supersede a broken and contrite heart. Christ was broken for thy sins, yet that
will not excuse thee from a broken heart for them also. Christ was wounded, and
a man of sorrow for thy sins, yet that will not take of^ thy wounds and sorrow
also. Indeed if these were able to satisfy Gods wrath, or to make an
atonement, then Christ was wounded, and became a man of sorrows in vain, for
God does not require a twofold satisfaction: but we are wounded for sin upon
other grounds then Christ was: we mourn for other causes then he did: and
consider, thou that art afraid to grieve here for sin, how little is this to
that which thou shall be forced to grieve for hereafter! Thou art unwilling to
be burdened here; but oh how easy is that to the load thou must stand under
hereafter! This Bernard urged, When, says he, we urge men to repent, they say,
this is durus sermo, an hard speech, who can bear it? But you are deceived,
when God shall say, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire. This is indeed an
hard speech. And account that repentance is as much as the bringing of a man to
his wits and mind again. All the while thy sins are not a burden to thee, thou
art in blindness: even as the child as long as it is in the dark womb, weeps
not, but as soon as ever it comes into the light, then it cries. As long as
thou lie in the womb of darkness and ignorance, thou mournest not, but when
God shall open thy eyes to see thy estate, and the aggravation of thy sins,
then thou will burst out into sorrow.

LECTURE XIX.
MAT. 6.12. And forgive us our debts.


IT has been showed, That there is an happy accord between Gods grace in
pardoning, and our duty in repenting. In bounding of which you have heard the
Scripture excludes all merit and causality from our repentance, and gives the
glory of all to Gods grace, and Christ's blood.

Before I leave this point, Practical Objections concerning repentance.
it will be necessary to answer some practical Objections, for there is a great
miscarriage in many about this very duty of repentance. If they be asked, How
they hope to be saved? they will reply, by their repentance. Thus they make
that their Ark and city of refuge; they look upon that as the brazen serpent,
and not Jesus Christ. And it is no wonder, if this be so among ignorant people,
when the most learned amongst the Papists, do give such power and merit unto
repentance. Insomuch that Vasques says, He wonders at those Catholics, who
have such low and despicable thoughts of the righteousness in us, as that it
should not exclude sin, without any new favor or pardon of God: as if the
enabling us to repent, did expel the guilt of sin, as fire does water, by a
natural necessity.

The first Objection therefore may be, To what purpose does God require
Repentance, seeing it is no cause of pardon? Object. 1. Of what use repentance
may be.
Why may not God forgive sin, as well without this sorrow of ours; for if it
have no efficacy of it self, to deliver from the guilt of sin, then sin might
be pardoned, as well without it as with it; for if the Spirit of God prepares
us for pardon, by exciting and stirring up Repentance, this Repentance must
have some respect of causality to pardon, or else to what purpose it is
wrought? It is hard therefore to see the necessity of Repentance, unless it
have such effects. Insiste fortiter poenitentiae, inhaere tanquam naufragus
tabulae, said Ambrose; And this efficacy all are pron^ to give to Repentance.

Answ. 1.
Now to answer this, lay first this foundation, That God does indispensably
require repentance of all, Act. 17.30. where not only the command of repentance
is made known, but the goodness of God in pressing this duty: for whereas God
has neglected and passed over the former times of ignorance, by not revealing
any such command unto them, now by the general spreading of the Gospel he does.
For howsoever we translate it (winked at) as also Beza does, yet Dieu upon the
place shows more probably, that it signifies Gods anger, and indignation to
them, and therefore hid the means of salvation from them. This grace is also
required of the godly sinning, 2 Cor. 7.9, 1O. Revel. 2.16. Tertullian
subtly, but not solidly says, God first dedicated repentance in his* own
self; for before God said, It repents me that I have made man, the name of
repentance was not heard. But we know that God cannot in a proper sense be said
to repent, because there is no ignorance in his understanding, or mutability in
his will. But to answer, Why God does require it; this in the first place might
be enough, Because it is his will and command, Bonum est poenitere, an non,
quid revolvis? Deus praecipit, said Tertul^ian: Is it good to repent, or not?
Why doubtest thou? Has not God commanded it? It is Gods will, to join pardon
and repentance together. Though there were no more connection between these two,
then by that mere appointment of God, we were bound up to do it. As we see in
the Sacraments, God has promised such spiritual grace in the holy use and
application of such outward signs, where there is no natural connection at all
between the grace and the sign; but the union comes by the mere institution and
command of God. Although the conjoyning of pardon with repentance, be more then
from a mere positive command, there is an aptness and fitness in the thing it
self. Now God in commanding of this, does not because he needed it, or as if he
could not do otherwise; for if a man may forgive another, that has injured
him, although he do not grieve or be troubled for such an offense, why may not
God, if we speak of absolute power? Thy tears therefore and thy repentance,
they make not God more happy; neither are they required for Gods good, but for
thy own good. Neither does God require them, as if they should make up any
defect or insufficiency in Christ's blood; for alas, if Christ's blood be not
able to cleanse away thy sin, how shall thy tears do it? Hence its no less
then blasphemy, which Rivet reports of Panigirolla the Papist, who calls it
foolishness, and a grievous sin to put confidence wholly in Christ's blood.
Although therefore God puts up thy tears in his bottle, yet if he do not also
take notice of the blood of Christ, thy soul must still remain filthy. Do not
therefore magnify thy tears, and undervalue Christ's blood. The blood of the
Sacrifice, which represented Christ's blood, was to be sprinkled upon the posts
of the door, but not on the threshold, it was not to be trampled upon or
despised, no more is Christ's blood.

In the second place, Answ. 2.
There are many reasons of congruity and fitness, why a man should repent, Six
Reasons of congruity betwixt repentance and remission.
though it procure not pardon as a cause. Though God cause the Sun to shine,
and the rain to fall upon the wicked as well as the righteous, yet pardon and
reconciliation is not vouchsafed to the impenitent, as well as the penitent.

The first reason of Congruity is, Reas. 1.
Because hereby a man shall experimentally know the bitterness of sin, as well
as the sweetness of it; For as God, though Christ has fully satisfied his
justice to take away all punishment, does yet heavily afflict his own people
for sin, that so they may in their own sense apprehend what wormwood and gall
is in sin; so the Lord, though pardon come wholly by Christ, yet will give it
to none, but to those that repent, that so according to their delight in sin,
may also be their bitterness for it, Jer. 2.19. Aristotle said, Homo est magis
sensus quam intellectus, much more is he sensus then fides, more sense then
faith, and what he experimentally does most feel, in that he is most affected.

2. Another Congruity is this, Hereby we shall come to prize pardon the more,
and to esteem the grace of God in forgiving. Reas. 2.
The sick esteem the Physician. The broken bones make a man cry out for ease.
The famished Prodigal would be glad of crumbs. It is therefore fit, that a man's
sins should be a burden, and an heavy trouble to him, that so pardon may be the
sweeter, and Gods love the more welcome. When Joseph's brethren were put in
fear, and dealt with roughly as spies: after this to know that Joseph was their
reconciled brother, did work the greater joy. Again, we shall hereby judge the
better of Christ's love to us, his sufferings in his soul were more exquisite
then those in his body, when he cried: My God, why have thou forsaken me? in
this was the height of his Agony. Now thou that in thy repentance feel Gods
displeasure, art ready to cry out, Why do thou forsake me? By these throbs
and agonies in thy own soul, thou may have some scantling of what Christ had
in his soul: and certainly to think that Christ was thus tempted, thus under
Gods displeasure for thee, will more indear Christ to thee, then that he was
made poor, a worm and no man, yea crucified for thee.

Reas. 3.
3. Hereby we shall give God the glory of his Justice, that he might damn us, if
he did enter into strict judgment with us. In repentance we judge our selves,
1 Cor. 11. that is, we condemn our selves, acknowledge such sins to be
committed by us, for which God might show no mercy, for which he might say,
Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire; and by this means, God is highly
honored, and we debased. See this notably in David, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee
have I sinned, that thou might be justified, when thou speak, and clear
when thou judge. By this expression, David does acknowledge, that all the
afflictions laid upon him for sin, were just, and therefore God was to be
cleared howsoever. Thus in repentance a man comes to know himself, how low and
vile he is, and that if he be saved from wrath and hell, it is merely from Gods
good pleasure; and therefore repentance is a kind of a revenge upon a man's
self, 2 Cor. 7.10. The Lord is set up in his greatness and sovereignty, we are
made wholly prostrate.

Reas. 4.
4. As there is a Congruity; So repentance flows by natural consequence from
a regenerated and sanctified heart: For seeing regeneration is taking away the
heart of stone, and giving an heart of flesh, thereby also is given a
flexiblenesse and tenderness, and aptness to relent, because God is
dishonored. As there is in children a natural impression to mourn and relent,
when a father is displeased, so that this godly sorrow flows from a gracious
heart; as a stream from the fountain, as fruit from the tree. From this inward
principle David does so heartily mourn and pray; from this Peter goes out, and
weeps bitterly. It is therefore a vain Question to ask, Why a godly man is
humbled for sin, it is as if you should ask, Why a child mourns for the
death of his father? That love of God within him, which does abundantly
prevail, and reign there, is like fire that does melt and soften. So that as
natural forms are the principles of actions, which flow from them: Thus is a
supernatural principle of grace within, the ground of all spiritual actions
that issue thencefrom, but although it flow as a fruit, yet many times this
stream is obstructed or dried up.

5. There is in godly sorrow an aptness or fitness, Reas. 5.
to be made the means or way wherein pardon may be obtained. And this is the
highest our godly sorrow can attain unto, in reference to pardon of sin, viz.
an ordinability of it to be such a way, wherein we may find mercy. And thus we
cannot say of impenitency, or any other sin: That God may forgive a man living
in his impieties and wicked ways, for they have no aptitude or condecency in
their natures, to be referred to such an end. We grant therefore that when the
Spirit of God does humble and soften a man's heart for sin, that it works that
in a man, which has a fitness to be used, as the means whereby mercy is
obtained; yet that has no merit or condignity in it to purchase salvation.
Hence it is that we may not say, It is all one whether a man does repent or
not; or that repentance is in a man, as a sign only that God has pardoned; but
we must go further, and say, it is the means and way which God has a^pointed
antecedently to pardon, so that where this goes before, the other comes after.

6. There is a Congruency in repentance for sin, The sixth Reason two ^old.
Though it be not expiatory or satisfactory; If we do regard the justice of
God, or the mercy and grace of God. The justice of God: 1. In regard of Gods
justice.
For if he should pardon sinful, impenitent men, though they wallow in all
mire and filth, that despise his grace and mercy, how could his justice bear
it? Though therefore repentance does not satisfy his justice, yet sins
unrepented of cannot be pardoned without injustice; and therefore Christ did
not undertake to satisfy the wrath of God in an absolute illimited manner, but
in an ordered way, viz. in the way of faith and repentance.

2* In regard of his grace and mercy.
Again, It is not beseeming the grace of God, to give pardon without repentance,
for hereby a floud-gate would be opened to all profaneness and impiety; and
then what sense or taste could men have of the grace of God, if it were thus
exposed to all impenitent, as well as repenting? who would magnify grace? who
would desire it? So that you see, its neither agreeing with the mercy or the
justice of God, to forgive sin before, or without repentance.

Object. 2. Whether repentance of it self may not take away the guilt of sin.
A second Objection may be, Why repentance wrought by the Spirit of God is not
enough to remove sin in the guilt of it? What necessity is there, that besides
this there should be a special and gracious act of God to pardon?

Answ. 1.
1. The Answer is from many grounds: First, The Scripture makes these two
distinct mercies, and therefore ought not to be confounded. God promises to
turn the heart unto him, and he will turn to it, in the way of pardon. So that
a man absolved at the throne of grace, has two distinct benefits, for which he
is to give God thanks; the one is, that he makes him to see his sins, and be
humbled for them: The other, that being thus humbled, God gives him pardon;
for although God has ordered it so, that where the one goes before, the other
shall infallibly follow, yet all this is of Gods goodness. He might have
commanded repentance in a deep and broken manner, and when we had done all, yet
might have had no pardon, and therefore it is no thanks to thy repentance, but
to Gods grace that thou do meet with forgiveness.

Answ. 2.
2. Our repentance is infirm and weak needing another repentance. Lava, Domine,
lachrymas meas, says he, O Lord, wash my tears. That is only true of Christ's
blood, which Ambrose spoke in commendations of water, Quae lavas ownia, nec
lavaris, which washest all things, and art not washed thy self. So that
repentance cannot be the remedy to lean upon, for alas that needs another
remedy, which is the blood of Christ. If therefore when asked, How do thou
hope to have thy sins pardoned? thou answer, because thou repentest and
humblest thy self for thy sins. It will be further demanded, But how do thou
hope to have thy sins of thy repentance taken away? Here all must necessarily
be resolved into the blood of Christ: Take heed then after sin, of trusting in
thy own sorrow. It is a most subtle sin, unless a man be much acquainted
with the Gospel-way, and his own self-emptinesse, its impossible but that he
should look upon his repentance, as that which makes God amends.

3. If it were possible that our repentance were perfect and without spot,
Answ. 3.
yet that could not take away the guilt of sin committed, because sin is an
infinite offense and dishonor to God, and therefore can never be made up by
any man, though he should be made as holy as Angels; for if man had committed
one sin only, if the same man should presently be made perfectly holy; or if
he had the holiness of Angels and Saints communicated to him, all this could
not take off the guilt of sin, neither would all that holiness have as much
satisfied God, as sin displeased and dishonored him. Hence God sent Christ
into the world to make a reparation, and to bring a greater good, then sin
could evil. Oh therefore how low must this lay thee in the dust, after sin
committed! O Lord, Could I repent to the highest degree, Could I bring the
holiness of men and Angels, it could not make up the breach sin has made
upon me; what then shall I think of my self, whose graces may be much perfected
and bettered then they are?

But you may say, Why repentance bears not the proportion in* satisfaction that
sin does in the offense.
Why should not repentance be as great a good, and as much honor God, as sin
is an evil? For when you say, sin has an infinite evil in it; it is meant
only objective, because God against whom it is committed, is an infinite God;
Now then if sin be called infinite, because it turns from an infinite God,
why should not repentance be said to be infinite, because it turns to an
infinite God? This has much puzzled some, and has made them hold that
repentance has as much infinite worth in it, because of God, to whom a man is
turned by it, as sin has infinite evil in it. But there is a vast
difference, because it is enough for sin to have an infinite evil in it,
because the offense is done against an infinite God, and so the nature of an
offense is according to the object against whom it is. As an offense against a
King or Emperor is more then against a private man; so that still offenses are
more or less as the persons against whom they are, be of greater or less
dignity: but now it is otherwise in good things that are done by way of
satisfaction, that arises from the subject, not the object: as now repentance,
though it be a turning to God, who is infinite, yet that cannot have infinite
satisfaction, because the subject which does repent is finite: Therefore this
clears the difficulty: offenses arise according to the object, but
satisfaction increases according to the subject. Hence it is, That Christ only
could satisfy, because he only was an infinite person. Otherwise if grace or
holiness could have done it, Angels might have wrought our redemption.
Besides, our repentance And turning to God, cannot be as meritorious of good,
as sin is of punishment, because of that true rule, Malum meum and pure malum
est, and meum est: bonum meum, neque pure est, neque meum est. Our sins are
altogether, and only sins, and they are truly ours: but our good things are
neither purely good things, nor yet ours, but the gifts of God.

Object. 3. What harm to God in sin.
The last Objection is, Why should there be such pressing of mourning and
repenting for sin, and that because it is such an offense to God. For seeing
God is all-sufficient and happy enough in himself, our sins do not hurt him, or
make him miserable, no more then our graces add to his happiness, but as he
is above our graces, so he is also above our sins: seeing therefore God is
incapable of any injury from man, why should sin be such an offense?

Answ. By distinguishing Gods Attributes.
The Answer is easy, If you consider the internal Attributes of God, as
Justice, Wisdom, Glory and Happiness: So God can have no loss or injury, for
he is always the same happy and immutable glorious God: but if you do consider
the ^^^^nall good things that are due to him from men, as Honor, Praise,
Reverence, etc. These may be taken away from God by the perverse wills and lives
of men, and so God have less of this eternal Honor and Glory then he has.
And although this external Honor and Reverence do not make to the internal
Happiness of God, yet he is pleased with this, and commands it of men, and
threatens to punish where it is denied him: and certainly we may not think the
Scripture does aggravate sin^e under this title, as an injury to him, as that
which offends him, and is disobedience unto him, if so be there were not some
Reality. Besides the Necessity of Christ's death by way of satisfaction, does
necessarily argue, That sin is a real offense and dishonor to him. And
lastly, a sinner as much as lies in him, depriveth God of all his inward
happiness and glory; insomuch that if it were possible God would be made less
happy by our sins. It is no thanks to a sinner that he is not, but it arises
from his infinite Perfection that he cannot.

Let the first Use be, Use 1.
To commend Repentance in the necessity of it, if ever we would have pardon.
God has appointed no other way for thy healing. Never persuade thy self of the
pardon of sin, where sin it self has not been bitter to thee. Besides,
where godly sorrow is, there will be earnest prayer and heavenly ascensions of
the soul unto God, for his pardon. Hence, Zech. 12. The spirit of Prayer and
Mourning is put together, and Romans 8. Prayer and groans unutterable. As the
fowls of the Heaven were at first created out of the water; so do thy heavenly
breathings after God, arise from thy humbled, and broken soul. It is
presumption to expect pardon for that sin, which has not either actually or
habitually been humbled for by thee. If a man should expect health and life,
yet never eat or drink, would you not say, he tempted God, and was a murderer
of himself? So if a man hope for pardon, and yet never debase or loath himself
repenting of his sins, will you not ^^y, he is a murderer of his soul? And be
encouraged to it, because God has annexed such a gracious Promise to it. He
might have filled thee with sorrow here and hereafter. It might be with thee,
as the damned Angels, who have neither the grace of repentance, nor the mercy
of pardon.

Use 2.
2. Not to trust in repentance, but after all thy humiliations still to depend
only upon Christ. Though Christ died, and was crucified, yet he did not lose
his strength and efficacy. This was represented in that passage of Gods
providence, That a bone of his was a broken; Rely therefore upon Christ
wounded for sin, not upon thy own heart that is wounded, use this, but trust
only in Christ. Dependence upon Evangelical graces does evacuate Christ, as
well as confidence in the Law. A man may not only preach the Law, and the
duties thereof to the prejudice of Christ's glory; but also the duties and
graces of the Gospel. If a man relieth upon his repentance and believing, he
makes Justification and Salvation to be of works, though it be of faith; for
he makes his faith a work, and gives that glory which belongs to Christ, to his
own repentance.

LECTURE XX.
MAT. 6.12. And forgive us our Debts.


IT has already been demonstrated at large, How God does remit or forgive
sins. We come now to show, What kind of act forgiveness of sin is, What kind
of act in God forgiveness of sin is.
and whether it be antecedent to our faith and repentance. Both these Questions
have a dependency one upon another; and therefore must be handled together.

The first Doubt is, What kind of act in God forgiveness of sin is? Whether
it be an immanent act in-dwelling and abiding in God, or transient, working
some real effect and change upon the creature.

Now in handling of this, I shall not trouble you with that perplex Question so
much vexed by the Schoolmen, Whether a transient action be in the Agent, or in
the Patient, but lay down some differences between an immanent action, and a
transient action; Two cautions concerning the workings of God.
only you must take notice that we are in mere darkness, and not able to
comprehend how God is said to act or work. For on the one side, we must not
hold that there are any accidents in God; or that he can be a subject recipient
of such, because of his most pure and simple Essence; 1. There are no accidents
in him.
so that whatsoever is in God is God. And yet on the other side, the Scripture
does represent God doing and working such mercies and judgments as seems
good to him. Only this some conclude of, wherein others with some probability
dissent, that Gods knowledge and will is the cause of all things that are done;
so that there is not an executive power besides them, whereby he does this or
that; As we see there is in man, though an Artificer wills such a thing to be
done, yet that is not existent till he has wrought it, but now God works all
things by a mere command of his will, as appears Genesis 1. God said, Let there
be light, and there was light; Here was Gods will to have it so, no executing
power distinct from that will. Therefore it is a sure truth, De Deo etiam vera
dicere periculosum est. It is dangerous to assert things though true of God;
and Tunc digne Deum aestimamus cum inaestimabilem dicimus, then do we rightly
esteem of him, when we judge him above our thoughts or esteem. We must not
therefore apprehend of God, 2. No new will in him.
as having a new will to do a thing in time, which he had not from eternity (as
Vorstius and others blaspheme) but his will was from all eternity, that such a
thing be in time accomplished by his wisdom. As for example, in Creation, God
did not then begin to have a will to create: but he had a will from all
eternity, that the world should exist in time; and thus it is in Justification
and Sanctification; not that these effects are from eternity, but Gods will is:
And if you ask, Why, seeing Gods will to create or justify is from eternity,
Creation and Justification are not also from eternity? The answer is, because
God is a free Agent, and so his will is not a necessary cause of the thing, for
then it would be immediately, as the Sun beams are necessarily as soon as the
Sun is, but it is a voluntary principle, and so makes the effect to be at the
time he prescribes. As if there were an Artificer or Carpenter, that could by
his mere wi^ cause an house to be reared up; he might will this to be done in
such and such a year long after his will of it to be: So God when the world is
made, when a sinner is justified, willed these things from all eternity, and
when they come to have a being, these effects cause an extrinsecal denomination
to be attributed to God, which was not before, as now he is a Creator, and was
not before, now he justifies, and did not before. There is no change made in
God, but the alteration is in the creature. But of this more in its time.
Differences between an immanent and tra^sient action.
Let us come to give the differences between an immanent action, and a
transient, and then we may easily see, which of these two Justification or
Remission of sin is.

1. An immanent action produces no outward effec^.
The first and proper difference is this, An immanent action is that which
abides in God, so that it works no real effect without: As when God does
merely know or understand a thing; but a transient action, is when a positive
change is made thereby in a creature, as in Creation, etc. So that we may
conclude of all Gods actions, which do relate to believers, only predestination
is an immanent act of God, and all the rest, Justification, Regeneration,
Glorification, are transient acts: for Predestination though it be an act of
God choosing such an one to happiness, yet it does not work any real change
or positive effect in a man, unless we understand it virtually, for it is the
cause of all those transient actions that are wrought in time. Howsoever
therefore Justification be called by some an immanent action, and so made to go
before Faith and Repentance Ex^ra controversiam est, remissionem peccatorum*
prout act^^ est in D^o immanens antecedere nostram fidem and resipiscentiam.

Twiss. Vin. gr. page 18.


as if Faith were only a declaration and sign of pardon of sin from all
eternity, yet that cannot be made good, as is to be showed.

2. An immanent action in God is from eternity.
A second difference flows from the other, An immanent action is from
eternity, and the same with Gods essence, but a transient action is the same
with the effect produced. Hence the Orthodox maintain, That Gods decrees are
the same with his nature. Hence when we speak of Gods willing such a thing, it
is no more then his divine Essence, with an habitude and respect to such
objects; Gods Decrees are no more then God decreeing, Gods will no more then
God willing: otherwise the simpliciy of Gods nature will be overthrown, and
those volitions of God will be created entities, and so must be created by
other new volitions, and so in infinitum, as Spanheimius well argues, only the
later part seems not to be strong or sufficient, because when man wills, he
does not will that by a new volition, and so in infinitum, and why then would
such a thing follow in God? Besides its no such absurdity in the actings of the
soul, to hold a progress in infinitum, thus far, that it does not
determinately pitch or end at such an act. It is one thing to have things
distinguished in God, and another thing for us to conceive distinctly of them.
The former is false: The later is true and necessary. But with transient
actions it is otherwise, they being the same with the effects produced, are in
time; And this is a perpetual mistake in the Antinomian, to confound Gods
Decree and Purpose to justify, with Justification, Gods immanent action from
all eternity, with that transient, which is done in time. Whereas if they
should do thus in matters of Sanctification and Glorification, it would be
absurd to every man's experience, whereas indeed a man may as truly say, That
his body is glorified from all eternity, as that his sins are forgiven from all
eternity. And certainly Scripture speaks for one as well as the other, when it
says, Whom he has justified, them he has glorified.

By these two differences, you may see, That pardon of sin is a transient
action, and so Justification also, partly, because it leaves a positive, real
effect upon a man justified; he that was in the state of hatred, is hereby in a
state of love and friendship, he has peace with God now, that once was at
variance with him. Now when we say, There is a change made in a man by
Justification, it is not meant of an inward, absolute and physical one, such as
is in Sanctification, when of unholy we are made holy, but moral and relative;
as when one is made a Magistrate, or husband and wife: partly, because this is
done to us in time, whereas immanent actions were from all eternity, and
therefore it would be absurd to pray for them, as it is ridiculous for a man to
pray he may be predestined or elected. Some indeed have spoken of
Predestination, as actus continuus, a continued act, and so with them it is
good Divinity, Si non sis praedestinatus, ora ut praedestineris, If thou be
not predestined, pray that thou may be; but this is corrupt doctrine, and
much opposes the Scripture, which does frequently commend election from the
eternity of it, that it was before the foundations of the world were laid;
whereas now for pardon of sin, it is our duty to pray that God would do it
for us. This being thus cleared, we come to answer the next Question depending
upon this, viz. Whether God does justify or forgive our sins before we believe
or repent? and our answer is negative, That God does not. Although there are
many who are pertinacious, that he does; and so they make Faith not an
instrumental cause to apply pardon, but only a persuasion that sin is pardoned;
and thus repentance shall not be a condition to qualify the subject, to obtain
forgiveness, but a sign to manifest that sin is forgiven. This Question is of
great practical concernment; and therefore to establish you in the truth,
consider these Arguments. Arguments proving our bel^ef and repentance
antecedents of justification.


1. The Scripture speaks of a state of wrath and condemnation, that all are in
before they be justified or pardoned. Therefore the believers sins were not
from all eternity forgiven; for if there were a time, viz. before his
Regeneration and Conversion, that he was a child of wrath, under the guilt and
punishment of sin, then he could not be at the same time, in the favor of God,
and peace with him. Argum. 1.
Now the Scripture does plentifully show, That even believers before their
Regeneration are detained in such bonds and chains of guilt and Gods
displeasure, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. There the Apostle speaking to the converted
Ephesians, tells them of the wretched and cursed condition they were once in,
and he reckons himself amongst them, saying, They were children of wrath, and
that even as others were: So that there is no difference between a godly man
unconverted, and a wicked man, for that present state, for both are under the
power of Satan, both walk in disobedience, both are workers of iniquity, and so
both are children of wrath. It is true, the godly man is predestined, and so
shall be brought out of this state, and the other left in it. But
predestination (as is more largely to be showed) being an immanent act in God,
does denote no positive effect for the present of love upon the person; and
therefore he being not justified, has his sins imputed to him, lying upon him,
and therefore by the Psalmists argument, not a blessed man. This also, 1 Cor.
6.9, 10, 11. The Apostle says of some Corinthians, That they were such as
abiding in that state could not inherit the kingdom of God, and such were some
of you, but ye are washed, but ye are justified. Therefore there was a time
when these Corinthians were not justified, but had their sins abiding on them.
Likewise all the places of Scripture, which speak of Gods wrath upon wicked
men, and that they have no peace with God, must needs be true of all godly men
while unconverted. He that believes not, has not life, and the wrath of God
abides on him, and without faith it is impossible to please God. Now who can
deny but that this is true of Paul, while no believer, but an opposer of
godliness? The Psalmist also says, God is angry with the wicked every day;
Was not this true of Manasses before his conversion? It must therefore be a
very poisonous Doctrine, to say, That God is as well pleased with a man before
his conversion, as after.

2. If the Scriptures limit this privilege of Justification and pardon only to
those subjects that are so and so qualified, Argum. 2.
then till they be thus furnished, they cannot enjoy those privileges. The
places are many which testify this, Act. 3.19. Repent, that your sins may be
blotted out. Therefore their sins stood uncancelled, as so many Debts in Gods
register Book, till they did repent, Act. 26.18. To turn them from darkness to
light, from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of
sins. Therefore they had it not, while under the power of darkness, 1 John
1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
which supposes, That God does forgive our sins only, when we confess and
forsake them, Matthew. 6.15. If ye forgive not, neither will my heavenly Father
forgive you. It is in vain to number up more places, for these do necessarily
prove sin is not forgiven, till Faith and Repentance. They do not indeed
argue a causality or merit, yet they infer a necessary presence in those that
obtain pardon, and do hold by the same proportion, as those places which
require Sanctification before Glorification.

3. Where the Scripture requires many things to the obtaining Argum. 3.
of any special benefit, there that benefit cannot be said to be enjoyed, till
all those things be brought about. Now the Word of God speaks of several things
required to pardon of sin. There is the Grace and mercy of God, as the
efficient cause, Psalm. 51.1. Isa. 43.25. Romans 3.25. 2. There is requisite the
blood of Christ, as the meritorious cause; for there can be no remission of
sins without effusion of blood, Romans 3.25. 1 Cor. 15.3. Heb. 1.3. 1 John 4.10.
3. There is Faith required as an instrumental cause, Act. 26.18. Romans 3.25. Now
although an isntrumental cause have not that worth or excellency as the
efficient and meritorious have, yet it is as necessary in the way of an
instrument, as the others are in their respective causalities: so that as a man
may not from those places, which speak of Gods grace, infer, therefore
remission of sins is before Christ's death: So neither may a man argue, because
Christ died to take away our sins, therefore these are taken away before we
believe. So that this Argument may fully establish us. We see the Scripture
speaking of three causes cooperant to pardon of sin, therefore I may not
conclude the effect is wrought till all those causes be. And as the Scripture
speaks of these causes, so, as you heard, of many qualifications in the
subject. Insomuch that it is so far from being a duty to believe our sins were
pardoned from all eternity antecedently to faith and repentance, that we are
undoubtedly to believe they were not. If the King proclaim a pardon to every
one that shall humble himself, and seek it out. If the Physician prepare a
potion, for the patient to receive it, shall any man say because of those
causal preparations, that either the one is pardoned, or the other healed
before their particular application of those things?

Arg. 4.
4. If our sins be pardoned antecedently to our Faith and Repentance, then all
those effects which are inseparable in the least moment of time from
Justification, are also antecedent to our Faith and Repentance: But it is
evident by experience, that is not so. It is a clear truth, That Sanctification
of our natures is individually conjoined one with the other. So that although
there be a priority of nature, yet they are together in time. God pardons no
man's sins whom he does not heal, Romans 8.1. 1 John 1.9. Psalm. 32.2 A man may be
justified, and not glorified, but not justified and unregenerated. Then if so,
a man shall be at the same time, unconverted, and converted, at the same time a
member of Christ, and a member of the devil; and so as they say, we are
justified only declaratively in our own consciences, so we shall be
regenerated, and converted only declaratively. Again, where sins are pardoned,
there is blessedness, as the Psalmist speaks, then I may call Paul a blessed
Persecutor: Manasses a blessed murderer, for they had no sin imputed to them at
that time. Besides those whose sins are pardoned, may boldly go to the throne
of grace, and call God Father; all which are contrary to the whole tenor of
Scripture, which expostulateth with men, for taking his name or words into
their mouth, and hate to be reformed: yet a Doctor of this Antinomian sour
leaven, affirms Den reconcil. with God, p. 25
boldly, That God does love us as well before conversion, as after, That God
did love Paul with as great a love when he persecuted the Church, as when he
preached the Gospel; How must this devour up all godliness, when I may have
the same faith and confidence in God for pardon in the acting of flagitious
crimes, as well as out of them, in prayer and humiliation? and if he may have
the same faith, why not then the same consolations, and joy in conscience?

5. If Justification do antecede our Faith, Arg. 5.
so that Faith does only declare our pardon of sin, then any other grace may be
said to justify as well as Faith. For take any other grace, repentance,
humility, joy, these are all the fruits of Gods Spirit, and so demonstrate his
election of us, his justification of us. But how unanswerably do the Orthodox
prove, a peculiar instrumental virtue in faith for pardon, which others have
not? The Apostle expresses it, (...), through faith in his blood, not love of
his blood; and indeed the Apostle maintains that Gospel-position against
false teachers, viz. That we are justified by Faith, not by works. The Question
was not, Whether the works of the Law did justify us declaratively only, but
causally. So then by this Doctrine, Faith must no more be called the hand, or
the eating and drinking of Christ's body and blood, but only made a sign of such
mercies.

6. If pardon of sin be from all eternity, Arg. 6.
going before our Faith and Repentance, because of Gods election, then it must
also be antecedent to the death and obedience of Christ. So that not only our
tears, but Christ's blood shall be excluded from this great favor. The reason is
plain, Because Gods predestination and election is antecedent to Christ, yea
Christ is a fruit of our election: so that the Orthodox maintain against
Arminians, though we be chosen in Christ, yet not for Christ. Christ is the
meritorious cause of Justification and Glorification, but not of
predestination, that is merely from his own self; so that if Gods act of
predestinating us be enough to instate us into all this favor and love, Den.
Arg. 3. to prove we are justified before we believe.
what need is there of an atonement by Christ's blood? and thus we may urge a
Doctors Argument upon himself: All the elect of God are justified, but all the
elect of God are elected antecedently to Christ's merits, therefore they are
justified before Christ's merits.

Arg. 7.
7. If (because its said, Ephesians. 2. That while we were dead, Christ gave himself
for us: And Romans 5. That he died for the ungodly) it follows, Our sins are
pardoned before we believe, then it will also follow, that all men's sins are
pardoned. For the Texts that speak thus of his dying for the ungodly, and for
enemies, make no distinction of one from another: And thus a Judas as well as a
Peter is bound to believe his sins are pardoned. Those that argue against all
qualifications, and say, God requires nothing of thee, though lying in thy
blood, must needs hold an universal promiscuous pardon of all, and that such a
sin as presumption is not possible; for if I believe that Christ died to take
away my sins, though I walk in all disobedience, yet that is not presumption,
but a duty. It is true the Orthodox call upon those who lie grovelling in their
swinish lusts to come unto Christ, and to believe in him; but what is that
faith? Not a faith that sins are already pardoned, but a faith relying on him
for pardon, which faith also at the same time cleanses and purifieth the
heart. Therefore let us take those general Texts, which speak of Christ's dying
to take away the sins of enemies; and let any Antinomian give a true reason,
why one man's sin is pardoned rather then another; and although to evade this,
they fall into another error, holding Christ died for all; yet that will not
serve the turn, unless they hold, That all men shall actually be saved, and
none damned; for those Texts speak of a benefit that is actually obtained for
those, in whose behalf he died. And thus I have produced seven Arguments for
the antecedency of our Faith and Repentance to our Justification, as many in
number, as the fore-quoted Author brings against it. Other grounds may be
pleaded to this purpose, when we shall demonstrate, that all sins are not
pardoned together.

Use, Of Exhortation, To avoid all presumption, whether it be wrought in thee
by thy own carnal heart, or corrupt Teachers, Use.
and that is, when thou believe pardon any other way then in
Scripture-bounds; there is a Pharisaical presumption or Popish; and there is an
Antinomian or Publican presumption. The former is, when we hope for pardon,
partly by Christ, and partly by our own works and merits. The other is, when we
expect it, though living and walking in sin. Now it is hard to say, whether of
these is more derogatory to Christ. The one sins in the excess, the other in
the defect. Be not therefore a Pharisee, excluding Christ either in whole or in
part from the cause of pardon, Tutius vivimus, quando totum Deo damus; we live
more safely, when we give all unto God, and take nothing unto our selves. In
the next place be not a Publican. Think not to have Christ and Belial together;
expect not pardon for sin without repentance of it. The world is filled with
these two kind of presumers: some limit Gods grace, and associate their
performances with it. Others extend it too far, and conjoyn their lusts with
it. But as the Apostle says, If of works, and of the Law, then there is no
grace: So we may, if of lusts, and profane impieties, then there is also no
grace. We are therefore both to avoid sins, and carnal confidence in our own
righteousness, if we would have Christ all in all. In vain did Peter and Mary
Magdalen pour out their souls with so much bitterness, if pardon of sin may be
had without this. It is Hieroms observation, That in all Paul's Salutation,
Grace goes before Peace, for till Gods grace has pardoned our sins, we can
have no peace, and God does not pardon, but where he gives repentance. Labor
therefore for that which is indeed the good of thy soul, viz. Pardon of sin.
When the rich man in the Parable, speaking of the corn in his barns, said,
Soul, take thine ease, thou have much good laid up for thee. He spoke as if he
had porcinam animam, the soul or life of an hog; for, what good is corn and
wine to a man's soul? Forgiveness of sin and reconciliation with God; that is
the connatural and suitable good and happiness for the soul.

LECTURE XXI.
MAT. 6.12. And forgive us our debts.


Whether Justification precede faith and repentance* Arguments for the
affirmative
IT has been proved, That God does not justify or pardon a man till he does
believe; and that the wrath of God abides upon such an one. It is necessary in
the next place to answer those Objections which are propounded by the
Adversaries, because some of them carry a specious pretense with them. And
indeed the Antinomian with those Arguments he fetches from some places of
Scripture, is like David in Saul's Armor, not able to improve them, the weapons
being too big for him. But before I enter into the Conflict, its worth the
enquiry, what the judgment of the Orthodox is in this point. From authority of
orthodox men.


The Remonstrants, Acta Synod. p. 293. bring several places out of our
Authors, Lubertus, Smoutius, Piscator, and Others, wherein they expressly say,
That God does blot out our sins, before we either believe or amend our lives,
and that this pardon does antecede our knowledge of God, Faith, Conversion, or
Regeneration of the heart. Thus also D. Twisse, in the place before quoted.
Pemble also to this purpose ( page 24.) The Elect (says he) while unconverted,
they are then actually justified, and freed from all sin by the death of
Christ; and so God esteems of them as free, and having accepted of that
satisfaction, is actually reconciled to them: But the falsehood of this will
appear in Answer to the sixth Argument. When Grotius had distinguished of a
twofold remission, a full remission, and a less full remission, holding this
later kind of remission to be given to impenitent sinners, abusing two places
of Scripture for this purpose, Romans 5. 10. 2 Cor. 5.19. Rivet confuteth him,
making it a sure truth, That sins are not actually remitted, but to those that
repent, and says, Quinam sunt ii, qui volunt actu remissa peccata cuiquam ante
conversionem? certe nobis sunt ignoti. Who are they that say, sins are actually
pardoned before conversion? Certainly they are unknown to us. Although we
acknowledge the price of reconciliation and redemption to have been prepared
for the elect from all eternity, or in Gods purpose and intention remission of
sins to have been ordained for them, even as conversion, which in his time by
Gods grace are to be effected. Thus Rivet, vind. Apol. p. 127. If therefore any
of our Orthodox Authors have acknowledged a remission of sins before faith, it
has been in a particular sense to oppose the Arminians, who maintain a
reconciliability, and not a reconciliation by Christ's death, and not in an
Antinomian sense, as is more largely to be showed in answering of their
Objection, brought from Christ's death for enemies and sinners. Indeed some
learned and worthy men speak of a Justification before faith in Christ our
head, as we are accounted sinners in the first Adam or common person. Thus
Alstedius in his supplement to Chamier, page 204. when Bellarmine arguing
against the holiness of the Protestants Doctrine, and bringing this for a
paradox above all paradoxes, That I must be justified by faith, and yet
justifying faith be a believing that I am just and righteous; which is (says
Bellarmine) besides and against all reason; He answers among other things,
That Christ and the elect are as one person, and therefore an elect man is
justified before faith in Christ, as the principle of righteousness before
God; and then he is justified by faith as an instrument, perceiving his
justification in that righteousness of Christ. So that faith as it goes to
the act of justification, is considered in respect of that passive application,
whereby a man applies the righteousness of Christ to himself, not of that
active application whereby God applies to man the righteousness of Christ:
For this application is only in the mind of God.

To this purpose the learned Zanchy in his Explication of the second Chapter of
the Epistle to the Ephesians, upon those words, verse. 5. [ And you being dead
in sin, he has quickened together with Christ] does in the first place
distinguish of a twofold quickening, One whereby we are freed from the guilt of
sin, and invested with a title or right to eternal life; The other from the
power of sin, whereby we are made spiritually alive to God. The former is
Justification, the later Sanctification. Now (says he) this twofold blessing
is to be considered in Christ, and in our own persons. In the first respect,
God did quicken us in Christ, when by his death (sin being expiated) he freed
from guilt all the elect that have been and shall be, considering them as
members in Christ their head. In the later respect, God does it, when having
given us faith, he gives us also remission of sins, and imputes Christ's
righteousness to us. And afterward the fore-quoted Author, making this
Objection to himself, How Christ could be said to be freed from the guilt of
sin, who had no sin? He answers, The person of Christ is considered two
ways; First, in it self, as God-man, and so Christ was not bound by any guilt.
Secondly, as appointed head, and so representing our persons. In this respect,
as God laid our iniquities upon him, Isa. 55. So when they were expiated by his
blood, then was he released from the guilt of those sins. We might instance in
other Authors, but these may suffice to certify, that some orthodox and
learned Divines do hold a Justification of the elect in Christ their head,
before they do believe, yet so, as they acknowledge also a necessity of a
personal Justification by faith, applying this righteousness to the person
justified. Therefore although this Doctrine pass for true, What the opinion
abovesaid may mean.
yet it will not strengthen the Antinomists. Although even the truth of this
opinion may modestly be questioned, unless by being justified in Christ our
head, we mean no more, then that Christ purchased by way of satisfaction our
Justification for us, and so virtually we were justified in Christ's death and
resurrection. But the learned men of that opinion, speak as if God then passed
a formal Justification upon all (though afterward to be applied) that are
elected; even as in Adam sinning all his posterity were formally to be
accounted sinners.

Now this may justly admit a debate, That so expounded it seems but weak, for
th^se Reasons.
and there seem to be many Arguments against it.

First, If there were such a formal Justification, then all the elect were made
blessed and happy, their sins were not imputed to them: for so in Adam when
accounted sinners, they are wretched and miserable, because sin is laid to
their charge. Reas. 1.
And if the elect before they believe or repent were thus happy, how then at
the same time could they be children of wrath? and so God imputing their sins
to them, Can God impute their sins to them, and not impute them to them at the
same time? It is true, if we say, That Christ by his sufferings obtained at
Gods hand, that in time the elect should believe and be justified, this is
easily to be conceived; but it is very difficult to understand, how that all
our sins should be at the same time done away in Christ (who is considered as
one person with us) and yet imputed to us.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
I do not see how this Doctrine does make our justification by faith to be any
more then declarative, or a justification in our conscience only, and not
before God, and so by believing our sins should be blotted out in our sense
only, when they were blotted out before God by Christ's death already. And so
our Justification by faith, shall be but a copy fetched out of the Court roll,
where the sentence of Justification was passed already, whereas the Scripture
speaks to this purpose, That even before God, and in his account, till we do
believe and repent, our sins are charged upon us, and they are not cancelled or
blotted out, till God work those graces in us. Therefore this opinion may
symbolize too much with the Adversary; and indeed none of the meanest
Antinomians Den recon, of man with God p. 3, 4.
speaks of an original reconciliation which was wrought by Christ on the cross,
without any previous conditions in us, and urges that parallel of the first
Adam, in whom we all sinned before we had any actual being; as also that Text,
Col. 3.1. where we are said to be risen with Christ.

Thirdly, It is difficult to conceive, Reas. 3.
how Christ should represent any to his Father, thereby to partake of the
heavenly blessings which come by him, till they do actually believe, and are
incorporated in him, for they are not his Members till they do believe: and
till they are his Members, he cannot as an head represent them. It is true, God
knows whom he has elected, and to whom in time he will give faith, whereby
they may be united to Christ, and so it is in Gods purpose and intention to give
Justification and Sanctification to all his elect: but these being mercies
vouchsafed in time, and limited to such qualifications in the subject, I see
not how they can be said to be justified in Christ (before they do believe)
otherwise then virtually and meritoriously. It is true, we are all condemned in
Adam, because that was a Covenant made with him and his posterity, so that the
issues thereof fell upon them by a natural and necessary way: but it is not so
in the second Adam. Neither do those places, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Colos. 2.13, 14.
prove any more, then that in and through him, we do obtain such mercies there
spoken off: and although we are said to sit in heavenly places already, yet
that is because of the certain right we have thereunto; in which sense also, he
that believes is said to have eternal life; and Christ being the first fruits
does sanctify the whole lump.

As for that place, 1 Timothy 3. where Christ is said to be justified in the
spirit, that makes nothing at all to this Justification we speak of. For the
meaning is, That Christ was declared just, and absolved from all the reproaches
cast upon him, by the spirit of God, which was done several ways, as by the
witness exhibited from heaven unto him, by the innumerable miracles he wrought.
In which sense, Mat. 11. Wisdom is said to be justified of her children. So
that Act. 2.22. seems to be a full Commentary on this place, Jesus of
Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by signs and wonders, which God did
by him in the midst of you: And this is that Justification of himself, which
Christ speaks of, Isa. 50.8. It is true the Apostle does apply that spoken of
Christ to every believer, Romans 8. by way of allusion; and the rather, because
Christ being the head of the elect, it will be made good of them in time, when
they do believe: otherwise election is not enough to free from present
accusation or condemnation, unless by faith they be actually in Christ, as is
to be showed more at large.

But this is a digression. It is the constant opinion of the Orthodox, That a
man is not justified, or has his sins pardoned, till he does believe. I have
brought Arguments to prove the point, and now address my self to remove their
Objections.

The first is brought from Infants, who are justified, 1. Argument from Infants.
and yet do not believe, therefore before faith some are justified.

First, The case of Infants is of a peculiar consideration, and therefore not
to be attended unto in most Questions: yea the Scripture pressing the things
requisite to salvation, as repentance, obedience, etc. cannot be understood of
Infants. And Suarez argues against Justification by faith in the general, upon
this ground, Because Infants are justified without it, so that the Argument (if
it proves any thing) would prove a Justification without faith, rather then
before faith. Suppose a man should argue about glorification, as the adversary
does about Justification. Infants are glorified without fruits meet for
repentance, Therefore men grown up also may be, How absurd would that be?
Therefore if the conclusion of the Argument were granted, viz. Some that do not
believe are justified, restraining it to Infants, the main Question would have
no detriment. The opponent lays down this conclusion (Reconc. of man with
God, p. 5.) That man's actual reconciliation to God, requires previous
conditions to be wrought in him by Gods Spirit, before he can be reconciled
actually to God; among which he reckons believing as the chief. Now I may
retort on him thus, Infants are actually reconciled to God, but Infants do not
believe, Therefore some are actually reconciled to God that do not believe.

Secondly, The opponent cannot but know, that there are Learned men, who hold
Infants have actual faith, and do believe, Therefore to them his Argument is of
no force. It may very well be thought, that they have actual sins, not such as
are in men grown up, accompanied with reason and will; but those immediate
motions of original corruption in them. For although original sin be not
peccatum actuale, yet it is, peccatum actuosum, if it be not an actual sin, yet
it is an active sin, and therefore may not be thought idle in an Infant. Austin
lib. 1. Confess. c. 2. Vidi ego Zelantem parvulum, etc. I have observed envy in
an Infant, when another little child has sucked his breast, and so they have
sinful anger, which made the same Father say, Imbecillit as m^mbrorum
infantilium innocens est, non animus infantum. There is more innocence in their
bodies, then in their souls. Now if there be actual motions of sin before the
use of reason, why not actual motions of Gods Spirit. That it is possible,
John Baptist makes it without question: all the doubt is, Whether God does
ordinarily so to Infants. Aretius is alleged by some to hold, That Neither may
this seem such a wonder, seei^g that the orthodox hold even in men grow^ up,
the first grace is wrought in us as mere patients, our understandings and wills
no ways antecedently concurring to it; so that the grace of God is then
wrought in us, without us.
even repentance may be attributed to Infants out of Joel 2.16. but the command
there is, That parents should bring their children into the public
humiliation, that by the sight of them they may be the more fervently stirred
up to pour out their prayers before God.

Thirdly, That which the most solid Divines pitch upon, is, That Infants have,
(I speak not generally, but indefinitely) a seed of faith, because they have
the Spirit of God and regeneration, otherways they could not be saved; and by
this seed of faith, they become members of Christ, and that relation which is
in their faith to Christ's merits, is the instrument by which they obtain
remission of sin. As for that place, Faith comes by hearing, it is to be
applied to the ordinary means of faith, and that in persons grown up. Neither
can I say, that an Infant is bound to have actual faith; for happily in the
state of integrity, Infants then, though they had the image of God, yet could
not have put forth the actual exercise of graces, and if they could not do it
in that state, it is not to be expected they do so now.

Fourthly, It is not enough for him to prove they are justified before they
believe, but also before they be any way united to Christ, Let that union be
conceived how it can by us. For if a man be justified, because he is elected,
as his third Argument would prove; then he is to show, that Infants not only
before they believe, but before they have any union with Christ are justified,
for the election of Infants must needs go before their union with Christ. And
howsoever the opponent quoteth Austin saying, That which was wrought in John
Baptist, to be a singular miracle, yet Sermon. 14. d^ Verbis Apostoli, on those
words, He that believes not shall be damned, makes this question, Vbi ponis
parvulos baptizatos? Where put you little children baptized? profecto in numero
credentium, truly in the number of believers.

His second Argument is to this effect. Argum* 2.
He that is in Christ is justified. Now a man is in Christ, before he does
believe, because the tree must be good before the fruit can be. Therefore a man
must be justified before he do believe.

In answering this Argument many things are considerable.

First, It must be acknowledged a very hard task to set down the true order of
the benefits bestowed upon us by God. The assigning of the priority and
posteriority of them is very various according to the several judgments of
men interessed in that controversy.

The opponent (it may be knows) that there are some, who say Christ, or the
Spirit of Christ is first in us by way of a moving or preparing principle, and
afterward as a principle inhabiting and dwelling in us; That as some say,
Anima fabricat sibi domicilium, the soul makes its body to lodge in; it works
first efficiently, that afterward it may formally, so they say Christ does in
us. As the silkworm prepares those silken lodgings for her self to rest in.
So that according to the judgment of these men, Christ, or his Spirit, does
efficiently work in us the act of believing, by which act Christ is received to
dwell in us. And in this way, Christ has no union with us, till we do believe.
He works indeed in us before, but not as united to us. Now according to this
opinion, the answer were easy, That we are not in Christ, till we do believe;
Though Christ be in us, as working in us, and upon us. Yea faith would first be
wrought, and then Christ with his benefits of justification, etc. would be
vouchsafed to us; but there are Reasons why it is not safe to go this way. And
indeed that Charta magna or grand promise for regeneration, does evidently
argue, the habits or internal principles of grace, are before the actions of
grace, Ezekiel 36.26. God takes away the heart of stone, and gives a new heart,
an heart of flesh, which is the principle of grace, and afterward causes them
to walk in his Commandments, which is the effect of grace.

But secondly (which does fully answer the Objection) It is true, our being
ingraffed into Christ, is the root and fountain of faith, and of Justification
too; but yet so, that these being correlates (faith and Justification) they
both flow from the root together, though with this order, that faith is to be
conceived in order of nature before Justification, that being the instrument to
receive it, though both be together in time. Therefore the major Proposition
should be thus regulated, He that is in Christ does believe, and is justified,
or believing is justified; for Justification as our Glorification, though it
flow from Christ, yet it is in that order and time which God has appointed.
Neither is it any new thing in Philosophy, to say, Those causes which produce
an effect, though they be in time together, yet are mutually before one another
in order of nature in diverse respects to their several causalities.

Christ is in us, and we in Christ, Christ is in us, (...), by way of gift and
actual working, and we are in Christ (...), by way of receiving; and both these
are necessary, as appears, Joh. 15.5. and both are together in time, yet so
that in order of nature Christ's being in us is before our being in him, and the
ground of all our comfort and fruit, is not, because we are in him, but he in
us (even as the branch bears fruit, not because it is in the Vine, but
because the Vine is in it, communicating efficacy to it.) Thus also faith and
Justification are together, yet so as one is produced by the other, we are not
justified, and therefore believe, but we believe and are therefore justified.

Lastly, This may be retorted upon the opponent, who (as was alleged before)
denies any actual reconciliation, till we do believe. But may not we strike
the adversary with his own reason in this manner? He that is in Christ is
actually reconciled. But we must be in Christ before we do believe. Therefore
we must be actually reconciled, before we do believe.

I pass over the third, and reserve the fourth and sixth Argument (being all
one) for the next Lecture, because in them is matter worthy of a large
consideration.

I come therefore to the fifth Argument, Arg. 5.
which is taken from the collation between the first Adam and second out of
Romans 5.18, 19. From whence is argued, As in the first Adam we are accounted
sinners before any thing done on our part; so in the second Adam, we are to be
justified before any thing wrought in us. This the opponent does much triumph
in, but without cause, as the answer will manifest.

And in the first place we cannot but reject those Expositors of that text
fore-quoted, Answ.
who understand us to be sinners in Adam, only by imitation, or by propagation
merely, as from a corrupted fountain; but we suppose it to be by imputation:
Adam (by Gods Covenant) being an universal person, and so as Austin said, Omnes
ille unus homo fuerunt, All were that one man. And therefore these do not rise
up to the full scope of the text, who parallel Christ and Adam only as two
roots, Origens or fountains; for there must be a further consideration of them
as two common persons, for our immediate fathers are a corrupted root, and we
are corrupted by them, yet their sins are not made ours, as Adams was. Hence
the Apostle lays the whole transgression upon one, as by one man's
disobedience, etc. Those that deny imputation of Adams sin (as the Pelagians of
old, and Erasmus with others of late) do not relish that translation of those
words (...), in whom all have sinned, but prefer the other, Forasmuch as all
have sinned in him; but both come to the same sense: and howsoever Erasmus say,
that (...) with a dative case must be understood causally, yet that is not
universally true; for Mar. 2.4. there is mention made of the bed, (...) in
which the paralytique lay, it would be ridiculous to translate that inasmuch.
So Act. 2. Be baptized, (...), in the name, Heb. 9. Those ordinances consisted
(...), in meats. We therefore grant, That Adams sin was ours by imputation,
before we had any actual consent to it. In which sense Bernard called it,
Alienum and nostrum, another sin and ours: yea, it is so far from being ours
by consent, that if a man on purpose should now will that Adams sin should be
his, this would not make Adams sin imputed to him, it would be a new actual sin
in the man, it would not be Adams sin imputed to him. Now although all this be
concluded upon, yet it follows not, that therefore we are justified in Christ
before we believe. I acknowledge some eminent Divines have pressed this
comparison; but there is a vast difference in this very act of imputation, and
the ground of it: for supposing the Covenant at first made with Adam, all his
posterity by a natural way are involved in his guilt, and so whether they will
or no, antecedently to their own acts they are obnoxious to this guilt. Hence
all men (none excepted) that are propagated in a natural way are thus
corrupted, but in Christ we are by a supernatural way, and none are made his,
but such as believe in him; and he does not represent any to God as his
members, till they be incorporated into him by faith, which faith although it
be a gift of God, yet by it we are enabled voluntarily to choose and embrace
Christ. Many other differences there are, but I pitch on this only, as being
fully to my purpose in hand. If therefore we were in Christ by a natural way,
as we are in Adam, then antecedently to any thing wrought in us, we might be
partakers of privileges by one, as we are of curses by another.

LECTURE XXII.
MAT. 6.12. And forgive us our Debts.


WE proceed to the remaining arguments, which would maintain a justification
before faith.

Arg. 7.
The next is from Gods election, thus, All the elect of God are justified before
God. But some of the elect do not believe. And the major is proved from, Romans
8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies.

Ans. 1.
In the first place this Argument might easily be laid aside, for the Apostle
does not speak here of election, antecedenter, antecedently to his other
graces, which flow from that in time, but executive, as it is executed and
completed in those that are elected. Therefore by the elect he means those
elect that believe, that are holy, that are conformable to the image of God,
that do love him, as the context shows; for otherwise we know Paul himself
laid much to the charge of the Ephesians, though elect, when before their
conversion, he said they were children of wrath as well as others; and
therefore by that adamantine chain, Whom he has predestined he has called,
whom he has called he has justified, whom he has justified he has
gl^rified, it is plain, he takes election terminative (as they say) in the
effects of it, even till it has obtained the utmost terminus, which is
everlasting glory.

2. From this chain also is an infallible Argument against the Opponent, thus,
Answ. 2.


Those only are justified that are called, But none are called or converted
from all Eternity, Therefore none are justified from all Eternity.

The major is grounded upon the method and order which the Apostle observes,
beginning with the highest round in that chain, which is Predestination, and
ending in the lowest, which is Glorification: so that it cannot rationally be
thought that the Apostle did not intend an exact order, and method in those
expressions.

3. If so be a man (because he is elected) be justified from all Eternity, then
it will also follow he is glorified from all Eternity. Answ. 3.
And so Hymenaeus and Philetus may be excused in this sense, if they say, The
resurrection is past already. It is true, the Apostle uses words signifying
time past, Whom he has predestined, he has called, etc. But that is either
to show the certainty and infallible connection of these benefits together; or
else, because Predestination being necessarily for the time past, he would not
alter the current of his expression for the following mercies.

4. The Apostle might well say, Answ. 4.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? and not of Believers,
because election is the maternal mercy, it is the fountain and head from which
all other flow. Hence the Apostle does in the same Chapter limit mercies to
those that are called according to Gods purpose, implying hereby, that this is
the ground and root of all.

Answ. 5.
But fifthly, To discover the fundamental weakness of this Argument. We are to
take notice, That Predestination is an immanent act of God, and works no
positive real effect upon the party elected, till in time, for howsoever it be
an act of love, yet of love only by way of purpose and decreeing, and so does
not denote a change in the creature, but when that purpose or council of God,
(which is altogether free) has determined it. Hence we are to co^ceive a love
of God electing us from all Eternity, which does produce another love of God
(not immanent in him, for so nothing is new in God, but transient in us) and
that is Justification; from this love flows another effect of love, which is
Glorification. Some have doubted, Whether Election be an act of love; and
therefore have distinguished between Dilection and Election, as if Dilection
did go before, and Election follow. But certainly the same act of God, as it
does will good to the creature, is Dilection, as it wills it to this rather
^hen another, is Election. We grant therefore that Election is an act of great
love, but its a love of purpose or intention, not execution, it is Amor
ordinativus, not collativus; it is a love ordaining and preparing of mercies,
but not bestowing them presently. Thus Austin defined Predestination, to be
Praeparatio beneficiorum quibus liberantur, a preparing or ordaining of those
mercies and privileges, which the Elect shall have in time. And among men we
see the purpose of giving such a gift is accounted love, as well as the gift it
self. Now while a man is only under the love of Election, and no more, there is
no actual Remission of sin, no acceptance or complacency in his person or
duties. There is a purpose in God to do all these in time, but the mercies are
not from eternity exhibited. An elect person unconv^r^ed, and a reprobate in
many things differ not. As
So that in some respects there is a great difference between an elect Person
unconverted, and a Reprobate: And again in some respects there is none at all.
As for example, there is this grand difference, to love Jacob, and hate Esau)
but the Reprobate shall perish eternally in his sin. The Apostle says, Romans
11. Election has obrained, because that will most certainly bring about both
the means and the end. So that for all the Elect, The foundation of God
stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19.

2. There is no difference in this, in that for the present both viz. Gods
will, for the future to give pardon and glory, and yet to will neither of them
to be for the present. All this is done with the same act of Gods will. If
therefore hatred be taken as opposite to that love of Election, which God had
from all Eternity, so an elect man, though unregenerate, is never hated; but if
it be taken largely for that displicency or wrath of God, which is contrary to
the grace of Justification exhibited in time, so he may be said to be hated
before his conversion: neither is it any wonder, if this be called hatred,
seeing in the Scripture, less loving, is called hating sometimes, as the
Learned observe. Neither does this make any change in God, it only denotes a
change in the creature, as hereafter is to be showed. So that the gross
mistake, as if Ele^tion were all love, actually and expressly, and the
confounding of the love of God, as an immanent act in him, with the effects of
this love, has made several persons split upon rocks of errors. But how love
and anger are in God, is more exactly to be examined, when we speak of the
meritorious cause of Justification, which is Christ's merits: for indeed this
Argument from Election, will as well put in for a Justification before any
consideration of Christ, as well as of Faith, if every thing be duly weighed,
as in that part (God willing) is to he showed, where also the distinctions
about Gods love are to be considered of. Some making a general love, and a
special love; others a first love and a second, or one flowing from the first;
others a love of benevolence or beneficence, and of complacency: But of these
in their proper place.

We proceed, and in the next place, we will put his fourth and sixth Argument
together, Argu. 4. and Argum. 6.
being both grounded upon this, That Christ by his death gave a full
satisfaction to God, and God accepted of it, whereby Christ is said so often to
take away our sins, and we to be cleansed by his blood. This Argument made the
learned Pemble, page 25. to hold out Justification in Gods sight long before we
were born, as being then purchased by Christ's death, otherwise he thinks we
must with the Arminians say, Christ by his death made God placabilem,
reconcilable, not placatum, reconciled. No (says he) it is otherwise, the
ransom demanded (...) paid and accepted, full satisfaction to the divine
Justice is given and taken, all the sins of the Elect, all actually pardoned.
This is a great oversight.

Answ. 1.
For first, Though Christ did lay down a price, and the Father accept of it, yet
both agreed in a way and order when this benefit should become theirs, who are
partakers of it, and that is, when they believe and repent. Now Bonum est ex
integris causis, if God the Fathers Covenant be to give pardon for Christ's sake
to those that do believe (which faith also is the fruit of Christ's death) then
may we not separate Christ from faith, no more then faith from Christ, or God
the Fathers love from both. If Christ had died for such a man to have his sins
pardoned, whether he had faith in him or no, then this Argment would have stood
firm: God then, did accept of Christ's death, and becomes reconciled, but in
that order and way which he has appointed.

Answ. 2.
2. This Argument does interf^re with that of Election; for there pardon of sin
does take its rise from Election, but here from the time God laid our sins upon
Christ. And indeed the Antinomians are at a variance amongst themselves, some
fetching the original of pardon from one way, and some from another.

Answ. 3.
3. We do not say, That faith is the condition of Christ's acquiring pardon, but
of the application of pardon. Faith does not make Christ's merits to be merits,
or his satisfaction to be satisfaction. This arises from the dignity and worth
of Christ. It would be an absurd thing to say, That faith is the cause why God
does accept of Christ's merits, and receives a satisfaction by him. This were
to make the instrumental cause, a meritorious cause. The Arminians they make
Christ to have purchased pardon upon condition of believing, which believing
they do not make a benefit by Christ's death; yea they say, Nihil ineptius,
nibil vanius, nothing is more foolish and vain then to do so. Now this indeed
is an execrable error, to hold Christ died only to make a way for
reconciliation, which reconciliation is wholly suspended upon a man's faith, and
that faith comes partly from a man's will, and partly from grace, not being the
fruit of Christ's death, as well as remission of sins it self. But we say a far
different thing, Christ satisfied Gods wrath, so that God becomes reconciled,
and gives pardon, but in the method and way he has appointed, which is faith,
and this faith God will certainly work in his due time, that so there may be an
instrument to receive this pardon.

For the opening of this, when it is said, Christ satisfied Gods wrath, this
may have a different meaning, either that Christ absolutely purchased
reconciliation with the Father, whether they believe or no, without any
condition at all, as Joab obtained Absoloms reconciliation with David, or
Esther the Jews deliverance of Ahashu^rosh, Or with a condition. In the former
sense it cannot be said, because the fruits of Christ's death are limited only
to believers. If with a condition, then either Antecedent, which is to be
wrought by us, that so we may be partakers of his death, and that cannot be,
because it is said, He died for us while sinners and enemies. And this is
Arminianism, for by this means only a gate is set open for salvation, but it
may happen that no man may enter in: or else this condition is Concomitant or
consequent, viz. A qualification wrought by the Spirit of Christ, whereby we
are enabled to receive of those benefits, which come by his death; And in this
sense it is a truth; and by this, the foundation of the Opponent is totally
razed. For Christ took away the sins of those, for whom he died, and reconciled
them to God, and this absolutely, if by it we understand any condition
anteceding to be done by us: but not absolutely, if it exclude a condition that
is consequently wrought by the Spirit of God, to apply the fruits of Christ's
death: so that the actual taking away of sins is not accomplished, till the
person for whom he died be united to him by Faith. Hence the Scripture speaks
differently about Christ's death; sometimes it says, He died for us sinners and
enemies; and in other places, John 15.13. He lays down his life for his
friends, and his sheep. Joh. 17.19, He says, he prays and sanctifies
himself for those that shall believe in him, viz. in a consequent sense; for
those who by faith shall lay hold on his death. A two fold condition of faith,
So that faith has a twofold condition, the first of the time, when sins are
taken away by Christ's death, and that is, when they believe. 2. Of whom these
privileges are true, and that is, of such who do believe. Now all this may be
the further cleared, if we consider, what kind of cause Christ's death is, to
take away our sins. It is a meritorious cause, which is in the rank of moral
causes; of which the rule is not true, Posita causa, sequitur effectus, The
cause being, the effect presently follows. This holds in natural causes,
which necessarily produce their effects, but moral causes, work according to
the agreement and liberty of the Persons that are moved thereby. As for
Example, God the Father, is moved through the death of Christ to pardon the
sins of such persons, for whom he dies. This agreement is to be made good, in
that time they shall pitch upon in their transaction. Now it pleased the
Father, that the benefits and fruits of Christ's death should be applied unto
the believer, and not till he did believe, though this faith be at the same
time also a gift of God through Christ. It is good therefore, when we either
call Election absolute, or say, Christ died absolutely, to consider that
Absolute may be taken as opposite to a Pre-requisite Condition, which is to be
fulfilled by us, so that upon this, Election, and the fruits of Christ's death
shall depend; or else Absolute, may be taken, as it opposes any Means or Order
which God has appointed, as the way to obtain the end; and in this later
sense, it would be a grand absurdity to say, Election is absolute, or Christ
died absolutely, for if this were so, the profane Argument about Election,
would have truth in it. If I be elected, let me live never so wickedly, I shall
be saved. And the Arminian Argument, That every one were bound to believe that
Christ died for him, though wicked and abiding so, would not well be avoided.

His last Argument is from the unchangeableness of Gods love, If we are not
justified in his sight before we believe, Arg. ult.
then God did once hate us, and afterward love us. And if this be so, why
should Arminians be blamed, for saying, We may be the children of God to day,
and the children of the devil to morrow? Hence he concludes it, as undoubted,
That God loved us first, before we believe, even when we were in our blood.

In answering of this Argument, several things are considerable,

First, It must be readily granted, That God is unchangeable, Answ.
Jam. 1.17. God is there compared to the Sun, and is therefore called, the
Father of Lights, but yet is preferred before it, because that has Clouds
sometimes cast over it, and sometimes is in eclipse, but there is change, or
shadow of change with him. The Heathens have confessed this, and so argued, If
God should change, it would be either for better or worse; for worse, how could
it be imagined? for better, then God were not absolutely perfect. Most accursed
therefore must Vorstius his blasphemy be, who purposely pleads for mutability
in God.

But secondly, As this is easily to be confessed, so the difficulty of those
Arguments, brought from the things which God does in time, and not from all
Eternity, have been very weighty upon some men's shoulders; insomuch that they
thought this the only way to salve all, by saying, That all things were from
Eternity. And certainly by the Antinomian Arguments we may as well plead for
the Creation of all things from all Eternity, as that we are justified from all
Eternity, for all are equally built upon this sandy foundation, That because
the things are done in time, therefore there must be some new act of will, or
love in God, which would imply God is mutable, not loving to day, and loving to
morrow; Therefore to avoid this, they say, All is from Eternity. Origin who was
called by an ancient Writer Centaur, because of his monstrous opinions, argued
thus, lib. 1. (...), cap. 2. As there cannot be a father without a son, or a
Master and Lord without a possession, so neither an omnipotent, unless there be
those things about which this power may be exercised. Now although it be true,
That De Deo etiam vera dicere periculosum est, because of the weakness of our
Understandings to perceive his infinite luster,

Yet thirdly, It is well cleared by the Schoolmen, That those relations which
are attributed to God in time, as a Creator, Father, or Lord, are not because
of any new thing in God, but in respect of the creatures; so that when the
world is created, when a man is justified, we say, God who was not a Creator
before, is a Creator, who was not a Father by grace, is now by grace; not
because any new accident is in him, but because there is a new effect in the
creatures. Thus, if a man once the child of wrath, be now a son of Gods love,
the change is not in God, but in the creature.

For the better clearing of this, we are to take notice in the fourth place,
That it is one thing, as Aquinas observes, Mutare voluntatem, to change the
Will; and another thing, Velle mutationem, to Will a change. By the same
unchangeable Will, we may Will several changes in an Object. As the Physician
without any change of his Will, may will his Patient to take one kind of
Physic one day, and another the third: here he wills a change, but does not
change his Will. Thus God with the same Will, decreed to permit in time such an
elect man to be in a state of sin, under the power of Satan, and afterward to
call him out of this condition, to justify his person; here indeed is a great
change made in the man, but none at all in God. There is no new act in God,
which was not from all Eternity, though every effect of this love of God was
not from Eternity, but in time. Hence when our Divines argue against Arminians,
That if the Saints should apostatize, Gods love would be changeable, it is
meant of Gods love of Election, which is an absolute purpose and efficacious
will to bring such a man to glory: now although such a decree was free, and so
might not have been; yet ex hypothesi, supposing God has made this decree, it
does very truly follow, That if that Saint should not be brought to glory, God
would be changeable. And besides this immutability, which may be called an
immutability of his nature, there is another of his Word and Promise, whereby
he has graciously covenanted to put his fear in their heart, that they shall
never depart from him: Now if any of the Saints should totally or finally
apostatize, Gods mutability would be seen in both those respects of his nature
or will, and of his truth and fidelity. But the case is not the like, when a
man at his first conversion, is made of a child of wrath, a child of grace;
partly because there was no such absolute decree of God from Eternity, that he
should be for no space a child of wrath, but the clean contrary; and partly
because there is no such word or promise unto any unconverted person, that he
shall be in the favor of God; but the Scripture declares the clean contrary.
This duly considered, will give a clear reason, why it is no good Argument to
say, Such a man in his sins to day, is a child of wrath; and converted to
morrow, is a son of grace: Therefore God is changeable. But on the other side,
if a man should argue, An Elect man received into the state of grace, may fall
totally and finally, Therefore God is changed, would be a strong and undeniable
inference. And indeed for this particular may the Arminians be challenged, as
holding Gods mutability, because they hold, That notwithstanding Gods decree
and purpose to save such a man, yet a man by his own corruption and default,
shall frustrate God of this his intention. Otherwise all know, Adam was created
in a state of Gods favor, and quickly apostatized into the contrary: so that
we may truly say, Adam was one day, (yea hour, as some) a child of Gods
favor; and in another of his wrath, yet the change was in Adam, not in God,
both because God had not made an absolute Decree from all Eternity for his
standing, as also because he had made no Promise to preserve him in that happy
condition. In this sense 1 Pet. 2.10. it is said, Which in time past were not a
people, but now are the people of God, which had not obtained mercy, but now
have obtained mercy. And whereas the Opponent says, God loved us before we did
believe; it is true, with a love of purpose; but many effects of his love are
not exhibited till we do believe. He loves us* and so works one effect of
love in us, that that effect may be a qualification for a new and further
effect of love. He loves us, to make us his friends, and when he has done
that, he loves us with a love of friendship. God loved us before he gave
Christ, for out of that love he gave us Christ, that so when Christ is given
us, he may bestow another love upon us. Now because it is ordinary with us to
call the effect of love, love, as the fruit of grace is grace; Therefore we
say, In such a time God loved not one, and afterward we say, He does love the
same, not that herein is any change of God, but several effects of his love are
exhibited. As we call the effects of Gods anger, his anger, Poena patientis,
ira esse creditur decernentis, The punishment on the offender, is judged the
anger of the inflicter: and by this means we say sometimes God is angry, and
afterward he cease to be angry, when he removes these effects of his anger:
so a man is said to be loved, or not to be loved according to the effects of
Gods love exhibited in time, and God has so appointed it, that one effect of
his love should be a qualification in the subject for another, as
sanctification for glorification.

LECTURE XXIII.
MAT. 6.12. And forgive us our Debts.


Whether we pray here for Pardon or for Assurance of Pardon only.
THe next Question to be considered, is, Whether in this prayer, we pray only
for the Assurance of Pardon, not Pardon it self? For thus the Antinomians
answer to the Objection fetched from this place, that the whole sense of this
Petition is, That we may feel in our selves, and assuredly perceive, what
pardon God had given us before, Honeycomb. p. 155. So Den reconcil. of God to
man, p. 44. making this Argument of the Text against himself, If we pray for
forgiveness of sins, then sins are not forgiven before, answers, The
Protestants (says he) with one consent hold, That they do beg at the hands of
God greater Certainty and Assurance of Pardon, and he instanceth in a condemned
person, that is upon the ladder, who having received the pardon of his Prince,
may when called into the Kings presence fall down and say, Pardon me my Lord
and King; but this is to abuse Protestant Authors, for although many of them
may make this part of the meaning, yet none make it the only meaning. Gomarus
in his Explication of this Petition, does excellently confute Piscator, for
explicating Pardon of sin by a Metonymy of the subject, viz. The sense and
feeling of this in our hearts, and says, That such a signification cannot be
proved out of any place of Scripture, nor out of the language of any good
Authors, and one of his reasons is this, Prayer for pardon of sin would be
imprudently taken out of the Lords Prayer; for he, who prays for the sense
and feeling of a thing, supposes it already done. Now (says he) every wise
Petition has for its object, a thing to come, and not a thing past.

This also Bellarmine objecting against special Faith, as if it were a
confidence that my sins are forgiven already, he makes it as absurd upon this
ground to beg for pardon, as it would be to pray, that Christ may be
incarnated, or made flesh. Crocius in his answer to this, Disput. de fidei
justificantis objecto, pa. 131. says, as you heard before, That those things
indeed use not to be prayed for, which are so done, that they are never done
more; but those things which are so done, as that they may be often done again,
may be prayed for. The incarnation of Christ was once done, and can be no more,
but Remission of sins is so done, that it continues further to be done, and
its last effect is reserved for the future. For as often as we sin, so often
there is need of Repentance. So that by his Judgment Remission of sin is not
like Creation, which once was, and is not reiterated, but conservation. More
might be said out of Authors, but I come to answer the Question. The Answer to
the Question propounded,


First, We grant it a duty for that believer, who knows his sins are
pardoned, to pray for further Faith and Assurance of the Pardon. 1. They who
are assured of Pardon ought yet to pray.
For seeing our Faith admits of degrees, and is sometimes staggering, ready to
sink, no marvel if it needs supports. Thus David although he heard his Pardon
proclaimed, yet makes that poenitential Psalm, Psalm. 51. for mercy to do away
his sins, which was by appeasing his conscience, and satisfying his soul with
the goodness of God: for as a godly man, though he have truly repented of his
sins, yet upon any sad occasion does reiterate his Pardon, as Paul many times
has his heart-ake for his former blasphemies and persecutions; so it is
necessary to have the sense and apprehension of his Pardon reiterated to his
own comfort and consolation. There is no man's Assurance about Pardon, so high
and unmovable, but it many times meets with violent assaults, and therefore
needs oil to be frequently poured into his wounds, Comfort, comfort ye my
people, (says the Prophet.) There must be an ingemination of the duty, else
the soul at first will not hearken.

2. This Petition relates to four sorts of men.
In the second place, We may conceive of four sorts of persons praying for this
Pardon of sin.

The first is an unconverted and unregenerated man. For although he cannot call
God Father, and so not pray in Faith, yet he is bound to pray. The Socinians
interpret that compellation, Our Father, not actually, but dispositively; as if
the meaning were, who art ready and willing to be a Father. But that is not the
full meaning of that place. There lies an obligation upon unregenerate men to
perform holy Duties, though they cannot do them acceptably. Their impotency to
do them, does not disoblige from the command to do them. Now its plain, that
such a person praying for forgiveness, does not pray for the Assurance of that
which is already past (for so no sin is forgiven to him) but for initial
Pardon, which he never yet has enjoyed.

The second sort of persons praying this Prayer, are those that at their first
conversion humble themselves, and seek unto God for his face, and
reconciliation with him. Now those that are thus in their beginnings, and new
birth, they can pray in no other sense, but for initial and first Pardon; for
as that is the first time they begin to have sorrow and brokenness of heart; so
that is the first time they begin to partake of Pardon; Pardon of sin and Faith
they are correlates, and so are together.

A third rank is of Believers in their progress of holiness and sanctification,
walking without any scandal or offense in the ways of God: They, in this
Petition have a twofold sense, the one an Assurance of the Pardon of sins,
that are already forgiven them; and the other is a renewed Pardon for the
renewed infirmities they continually are plunged into.

Lastly, There are lapsed Believers, who have fallen into some grievous sins,
and thereby have made desperate wounds upon their own souls, and these have
agonies and pangs of heart, much like their first conversion. Therefore its
called so, When thou art converted strengthen thy brother, says Christ to
Peter. This recovery out of the sin they were plunged into, was like a new
conversion. By such a commotion as this made in the soul, there is nothing but
darkness and confusion, and they pray for pardon, as if this were the first
time. They fear all their former ways to have been hypocrisies. Thus David
Psalm. 51. prays for the restoring of joy to him, that his broken bones may be
heaeled; as also for truth in the inward parts. Now although such a man's former
sins were indeed forgiven him, yet it is to his sense and feeling as if it were
not so, but rather the contrary is feared by him, that Gods wrath does still
abide on him. Hence he prays for Pardon in his own judgment, as one who yet
never has been acquitted by God. So that according to the several conditions
of the persons prayings, we may suppose several senses in the Petition.

But in the third place, to answer the Question, we say, 3 Assurance of pardon
not the only thing prayed for, proved by four Reasons.
That Assurance of pardon is not the only thing prayed for. And that for these
Reasons.

First, We are never to depart from the literal sense of the words, without an
evident necessity, but the plain undoubted sense is, That God would forgive our
sins; Reas. 1.
for our Savior minding brevity in this Prayer, no doubt would speak his sense
in the most perspicuous and clear manner that can be. As therefore if Christ
had said, Make us to be assured of the pardon of sin. The Antinomian would not
have gone from the letter, but pressed us to that: So on the other side, when
Christ says, Forgive us, and not Give us the sense of forgivenes, we have
cause to cleave fully to that: and this may be illustrated by two further
considerations, the former of those places where God is said not to forgive,
the later of those where forgiveness is applied of one man unto another. When
the Prophet Isaiah speaking of the Israelites, how their Land was full of
Idols, and both great and mean men did humble themselves before them, Isa. 2.9.
prays, that therefore God would not forgive them. Can any one make the
meaning to be, that God would not give them the assurance of their forgiveness?

Mat. 12.32. The Evangelist says, All other sins may be forgiven, but that
against the holy Ghost shall never: Now in that sense, other sins are said to
be forgiven, in which sense that is denied to be forgiven: and that is denied
to be forgiven, not in respect of Assurance and Declaration to a man's
conscience only, but really and indeed. Therefore the sins forgiven are in the
like manner forgiven.

Reas. 2.
Again, It is plain, That by Pardon is not meant Assurance of Pardon only,
because when applied to men, it cannot admit of such a sense. Now the Petition
runs thus, That God would forgive us, as we forgive others; and there is no man
will explain the later forgiveness of Assurance; and why then the former?

Reas. 3.
Besides, The equivalent phrase of forgiveness does evince more then an
Assurance of Forgiveness; for when the Scripture calls it blotting out of sin,
it is an expression from Debts, which are, as it were written in Gods book, and
therefore till he cancelleth them, they do remain in their guilt.

Reas. 4.
Furthermore, If a sin be not really pardoned, till a man do repent and believe,
then he beggeth for more then Assurance; but we have fully proved, That there
is no remission of sin till confession and forsaking of it.

The instance for the contrary opinion answered.
As for the above named Authors instance of a malefactor who has received
Pardon, may yet upon his coming into the Kings presence, desire Pardon, it no
ways advantageth him: For suppose a Malefactor might the first time do so,
yet experience does demonstrate it would argue folly and madness in a
Malefactor, to do so frequently: Whereas it is our duty daily to beg the
Pardon of our sins at the Throne of Grace. To conclude this Point (because we
have elsewhere spoken to it) This Exposition does overthrow the continual use of
the Word, the equipollent phrases, the proper object of Prayer, and departs
from the letter of the Text, without any just ground at all. Which is against
the rules of Explication of the Scripture.

The next Question is of great Practical Concernment, Why God does sometimes
pardon sin, not acquainting the sinner with it.
viz. Why God does sometimes Pardon a sin, and yet not manifest it to the
sinners heart. It appears by David, Psalm. 51. That when a sin is forgiven
in Heaven, it is not also remitted, and blotted out in a man's conscience; yet
God can as easily work the one as the other. If he say, Let there be light in
such a dark heart; of an Hell, it presently becomes an Heaven. We would judge
that by this divine Dispensation, as the godly man loses much of his comfort,
so God of his Glory and Honor. But diverse Reasons may be produced for this. As*

First, It may be God will teach us hereby, Reas. 1.
That Pardon of sin is not a necessary Effect of Repentance, but a gracious
Gift bestowed, though not without it, yet not for it. Though therefore thy soul
has been deeply humbled, and is greatly reformed, yet God suspends the light
of his favor upon thy soul, that thou may acknowledge it his Grace, not the
merit of thy sorrow; where Causes do naturally produce an Effect, there it is
a Miracle, if the one follows not the other. If the fire do not burn, if the
Sun stand still; if Peter walking on the water sink not. But it is no wonder,
to see a true contrite heart without Assurance and Consolation. These may be
separated, that so thou may be as humble with thy Graces, as if they were
not at all. Yea God has delighted sometimes in natural Causes to work the
Effects without them, lest the glory should be given to the instruments. Hence
he caused light to be before the Sun, and the earth is commanded to bring
forth Herbs before any rain, that so God may be acknowledged all in all. If God
do this in the order of natural things, how much more of supernatural? Yet this
is not so to be pressed, as if therefore God would forgive sin without
Repentance. No, God has ordered a way inviolably and indispensably, wherein he
will vouchsafe his Pardon, and no otherwise. But although God out of his mere
good will has inseparably conjoined Repentance and Remission together, yet the
Discovery or Promulgation of this unto the broken and contrite heart, is
altogether Arbitrary: And in this, as well as in other things, that speech is
true, The wind blows where it lists. Know therefore by these divine
Dispensations, That though thou do repent, Gods forgiveness is a mere gift of
liberality, and no natural, necessary fruit of thy sorrow. Insomuch that
setting Gods gracious Promise aside, whereby he is a Debtor unto his own
faithfulness, after thy purest, and most perfect Humilation for sin, God might
refuse to take thy guilt away.

Reas. 2.
A second Reason, Why God though he pardon, may yet deny the manifestation of
it, is, Because hereby God would make us feel the bitterness and gall of it in
our own hearts. A Pardon easily obtained takes off the burden of the fault.
Thus God dealt with David, The light of Gods favor does not presently break
through the Cloud, that so David may feel how bitter a thing it is to sin
against God. As God suffered Isaac to be bound, to have wood laid on him, the
knife to be lifted up to strike him, in all which space, Isaac's fear could not
but heighten: Thus God also will kill and wound those, whom he intends to make
alive: he will bruise them and break them, that so they may judge the seeming
good in sin, to be nothing to the real evil that follows it.

Reas. 3.
And from this second, issues a third Reason, viz. To make us more watchful and
diligent against the time to come: Peter's bitterness of soul, was a special
preservative against the like temptations; as bitter Potions kill the worms in
childrens stomachs. It must needs argue much guilt in Gods people, if after the
particular gall and wormwood they have found in sin, they shall be ready to
drink the like bitter potion, when sin presents it self. Certainly the
heart-aches that Paul found afterward, though pardoned, for his former
persecutions, were like a flaming sword to keep him off from such attempts
again; He might more truly say, then that Heathen did, He would not buy
repentance so dear.

Reas. 4.
4. By reason of the Difficulty, and supernatural way of believing, it is, that
Pardon may be in Heaven, when we cannot apply it in our Consciences. Hence
though the Promises be never so much for our ease, and thereupon infinitely to
be desired, yet the way of believing this, is so far above natural conscience,
which expects Justification by works, that the heart of a man has much ado to
close with it. Therefore faith is not like other Graces or Duties ( viz. Love
of God, Humility, etc.) which have some obscure footsteps in the natural
dictates of conscience, but it is wholly supernatural; yea Adam in the state of
integrity knew not this kind of believing in the righteousness of a Mediator.
For as the object of faith, viz. Christ, is only by revelation, no council of
men or Angels could have excogitated such a truth; so faith, as it is the hand
or organ applying Christ's righteousness, is a duty not manifested by humane
light, but wholly from above. And as flesh and blood does not reveal to us,
That Christ is the Son of the living God, so neither that we are to have
remission of sins only by faith in his blood. Hence the Scripture makes faith
the gift of God, which coming from the Spirit into our hearts, meets with
much contrariety and opposition of doubts and unbelief. No wonder therefore if
after the heart of a man has been awakened for sin, there remain some
commotions a long while after: even as the sea after tempests and winds, though
they be allaied, yet for some space after roareth and rages, not leaving its
troubles presently, as you heard before. Though therefore as God pardons in
Heaven, he offers it also unto our Consciences, yet we refuse and put it off,
we will not be comforted, because it is not a comfort flowing in the way we
look for, viz. by working. And for this reason, though David heard Nathan
pronounce his pardon, yet he does vehemently importune for it afterward in
Psalm. 51. as if he had not the least notice of any such mercy to him.

Lastly, God defers the notice of Pardon to thee, Reas. 5.
that so thou may be the more able to sympathize with those that are in the
like tempted condition. For as one end of Christ's suffering in his soul, lying
in agonies under Gods displeasure, was because he might know how to have
compassion upon his children in such temptations: So the Lord does exercise his
people to the same purpose; and certainly Christ accounted this, the tongue of
the learned, to speak a seasonable word to a wounded heart. Besides, hereby
shall we speak the more wonderfully of Gods grace, and his goodness, after our
deliverance out of those storms. Those that have been in these deep waters, see
the wonderful works of the Lord, and so have their hearts and mouths the more
opened to celebrate his praise.

What directions should be given a soul under temptation about pardon of sin.
Another Question may be, What Directions are to be given unto a soul tempted
about the pardon of sin? for many such there are, who like Paul's fellow
passengers in the ship, have been so many days, months, yea it may be years,
and have seen no Sun, enjoyed no comfort at all.

Let the Persons thus affected use these remedies:

Direct. 1.
First, Acknowledge God, and clear him howsoever. Thus David, Psalm. 51. that
thou may be clear, when thou art judged. If the devils and the damned in
hell have no cause to complain of God as unjust, or too severe, then much less
may thou who art kept in darkness for a season only, that afterward thou
may enjoy the more light. Let not God be the worse God, his goodness the
less unto thee, because thou art not yet set free out of the bonds of sin. By
being thus humble thou take the way to be filled, whereas impatiency and
discontent, causes God the more to hide his face.

Direct. 2.
Secondly, Examine thy Repentance, whether that has been so sound, so pure, so
deep, so universal, as it should have been. All sorrow and humiliation for sin,
is not godly Repentance. Ahabs tears and Peter's differ as much as the water of
the Sea, which is brinish and salt, and the water of the clouds, which is
sweet. David, Psalm. 32. acknowledges the pain and gripes he had within,
because of sin: and no wonder he did not confess it, and bewail it before God.
If therefore God keeps thy heart in many doubts and fears, giving thee no rest;
consider whether thou have cast all that leaven out of thy house, whether every
Achan within thee be stoned or no. It is in vain to cure the wound, as long as
any splint of the poisoned arrow lies within it, or if thou find no sin
unrepented of, search whether thy formal lazy duties be not the cause of all
the blackness that is in thy heart. We read in the Canticles, that the
Churches laziness, and her not opening the doors to Christ when he knocked, was
the cause of that spiritual desertion she was plunged into, seeking up and down
for her Beloved, but not finding of him. The standing pool begets the croaking
Frogs, not the running stream: and it is the dull, negligent Christian, whose
heart is filled with sad fears and doubts, whereas the hidden Manna and white
stone is promised to him that overcomes.

3. Though thy soul walk thus in darkness, Direct. 3.
yet exercise acts of dependency and recumbency upon Christ howsoever. As David
many times calls upon his soul to trust in God, and not to be sinfully dejected.
How is that woman of Canaan commended for her faith? who, though our Savior
called her Dog, and did in effect tell her, she was excluded from pardon, did
yet earnestly pursue him, and gave him no rest, till he gave her rest. And
certainly, this is the noblest act of Faith, this is indeed to give glory to
God, when in the midst of all thy fears and guilt, thou can rely upon him
for pardon; as in wicked men who are filled with Satan, as Anania^ was, there
is (...), a desperate boldness, whereby they dare venture upon sin: So in the
godly there should be (...), a confidence of Faith, whereby maugre the devil,
and our consciences, we dare throw our selves into the arms of a Promise. Thus
by frequent putting forth of strong fiducial applicative acts of Faith, we
shall at last enjoy obsignative. Howsoever hereby thou will show thy heavenly
courage in enduring a kind of spiritual Martyrdom. As that Love is the highest
Love, which is carried out to enemies; so those are the strongest acts of
Faith, which make us depend on God, though he seem to kill us, yea to damn us.

LECTURE XXIV.
MAT. 6.12. And forgive us our Debts.


Whether in repentance the difference between great sins and Less is to be
respected
ANother Question, which is also of great use, we are to dispatch at this time,
viz. Whether a Believer repenting and suing for pardon, is to make any
difference between a great sin and a less? For if a man should be persuaded of
the negative, then would gross and notorious sins, which Tertullian calls,
Devoratoria salutis, whirlpools and gulfs, wherein the party offended is
plunged, be no more then those sins, which Austin calls, Quotidiana and levia,
daily infirmities, which continually flow from the most sanctified person.
Again, on the other side, A Christian falling into such a gross sin, may so far
be swallowed up with sorrow, as that he shall think the whole bond of
friendship is dissolved between him and God, that he is cast out of that
spiritual Paradise he was in, and that God is no more his Father, nor he his
child. It is therefore necessary to have a pillar of fire to guide us in this
wilderness. And that the whole truth of this matter may be understood, observe
these Propositions.

Propositions premised concerning this Qu^stion.
First, Every sin, even the least sin, does deserve eternal death. As appears
by those general places, Cursed is every one that abides not in all things the
Law commands, Gal. 3.10. Now every sin is a transgression of the Law. This the
Apostle speaks universally of all sin, without any exception, Romans 6.23. The
wages of sin is death. And indeed this must needs be so, if you consider the
least sin is an offense against an infinite God: and in this respect, because
God is not a little, but a great God, so every sin is not little, but a great
sin. Again, if you consider the necessity of Christ's blood to expiate this, no
sin can be thought little: for if a man had no sin in the world, but one of
these little ones, he could not escape eternal wrath, without Christ's
mediation.

Therefore we cannot say any sin is venial, either from its kind and nature
(as Papists distinguish) such they make to be officious, or jesting lies; or
from the imperfection of the act, such they make those that are committed
indeliberately, or out of ignorance, without full consent or knowledge.

Or from the smalness of the matter, as to steal a farthing, or the like. None
of these sins are so small, but that they deserve hell, because they are the
transgression of the Law of an holy and great God; and our Savior confirms
this, when he says, Of every idle word a man shall give an account, Mat.
12.36. and that phrase of giving an account, is not a diminutive, but
aggravative expression: Our Savior does there argue from the less to the
greater, Thus, If a man must give an account for every idle word, much more for
blasphemy against the holy Ghost.

Take we heed therefore, how we bring down the weight and guilt of the sin;
here also we may see, why Paul found such a mountain upon him, by sinful
motions only arising in his heart.

There are two places that seem to import such a difference between sins, as if
some only deserved hell, and others not. The first is, Mat. 5.22. where our
Savior speaking of three degrees of sin, does proportionably assign three
degrees of punishment, and the last only is guilty of hell fire.

But the clear Answer is, That our Savior speaks allusively to those three
Courts of Judicature among the Jews, the least punishment whereof was death; so
that the first Court punished with death, the second, death with a more
grievous torment; The third with a most grievous. For that our Savior does
only allude to these Courts, and not speak of what faults the Courts punished,
is plain; for none can think that the Court put any to death for calling his
brother fool. It was murder and such ^ins that they punished with capital
punishments. The other place is, 1 John 5.15, 17. where the Apostle makes a
difference between a sin unto death, and a sin not unto death, but that is
clearly to be understood either of the sin against the holy Ghost (which in
those times, when the spirit of discerning was frequent, might easily be known)
or of such sin that did plainly discover obstinacy and impenitency accompanying
of it, otherwise no man might pray for another man that has committed a mortal
sin, if by a sin unto death, the Papist will mean every mortal sin.

Lay therefore this foundation, That every sin is mortal, in respect of its
desert and guilt, howsoever to the godly believing and repenting, no sin is
mortal, but all venial, Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to those that are in
Christ Jesus. Therefore Musculus observes well, That in this case, the persons
offending are to be considered (whether they be believers) more then the sins
themselves.

A second Proposition.

Howsoever every sin, even the least, does thus deserve eternal damnation, yet
there is a great difference between some sins and others. And therefore sin is
not a mere negation, but a privation, as diseases are, and so as one disease
may be more desperate then another, so may one sin be more heinous then
another. The Stoics thought all sins alike. And Cyprian among the Ancients, is
reported by the Learned to have been of that mind. But Scripture does
evidently confute this, He that delivered me unto thee has the greater sin,
John 16.11. So you have the phrase, no be worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.
Thus Ezekiel. 16.47. Israel is said to be more corrupted, and to do more
abomination then Sodom. For although to sin be to miss the mark, yet some may
shoot far wider from it, then others, one sin therefore may be more heinous
then another, diverse ways, as Divines show: As

1. From the Person offending; if he know the will of God, or if he be in
public place or office.

2. From the Object; If it be sin against God immediately, or man only, as Eli
said, 1 Samuel 2.25. If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him,
but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?

3. From the Matter about which; If it be in the life of a man, and not in his
goods, that thou wrongest him. Some also may be aggravated from the disposition
of the man, the means he enjoyes to overcome sin from the frequency of it, or
defending of it, and the like. Hence some sins are compared to Camels, others
to Gnats, some to Beams, other to Moats, some to Talents, other to Farthings.
This then being clear, let us consider, what difference a true believer should
make between these in matter of pardon, and what difference he should not make.

And in the first place, The Question stated in these Propositions following.
he is to make a vast difference about them, when he sueth out for pardon. As

1. He is to believe Gods wrath is more kindled against him, and that his
indignation burns more hotly, when such an iniquity is committed, then in our
daily infirmities. 1. This difference is to be attended in suing for pardon.
Thus when Aaron had made the Idolatrous Calf, how angry was God both with
Aaron and the people? How angry also was God with David after his murder and
adultery? David had continual infirmities, but God did not break his bones for
them, he made not such a breach upon his peace and conscience, as he did in
these sins: Therefore it must argue high profaneness of spirit; if a man after
the committing of gross and loathsome sins be no more troubled, then for the
continual motions and incursions which sin necessarily makes upon us. No, as
sins have a greater guilt in them, so Gods wrath is stirred up in a more
vehement manner against such.

2. There is a great difference to be made in respect of Humiliation, and the
measure of godly sorrow for it. 2.* In respect of humiliation.
For as the sin may exceed another, as much as the Camel does a Gnat; so ought
the sorrow as much as an Ocean does a drop. Thus Peter goes out, and weeps
bitterly; he did not so for every defect, and spiritual imperfection in him, as
for this abominable Apostasy. We read also of the incestuous person, as he
committed a sin, that was not so much as named among the Gentiles, so he
manifested such sorrow as was scarce heard among Christians; insomuch that the
Apostle was afraid of him, lest he should be overwhelmed with too much sorrow.
Now if for every sin of infirmity there should be as much sorrow and
humiliation, as for these crimson and scarlet sins, how would the whole life of
man be but a continual trouble of soul? and in what darkness would he live
always? Although all thy continual failings ought to be matter of humiliation
unto thee, yet when such as these shall break out, thy soul ought to set open
the floud-gates of thy soul. Neither may this be thought a low mercenary way,
as if the party so humbled did intend a compensation unto God. But all places
of Scripture must be regarded, as those which speak of Christ's glorious grace;
so also those which speak of our duties.

3. Gross sins procure wrath, and hinder the consolations of Gods Spirit.
3. The Spirit of God does not only in his Word reveal a greater wrath against
such sins, but he does also withdraw all those consolations and comforts which
were in the heart before. So that a man thus offending, does, as it were, bolt
himself in a dark dungeon, and shut out all the beams of the Sun against him.
Insomuch that although Assurance, and the consolations of the holy Ghost may
consist with the weaknesses, and sinful infirmities of Gods people; yet they do
not with the gross impieties they plunge themselves into, as appears in
David, Psalm. 51. who prays for the restoring of that salvation he had lost by
his sin. The Spirit of God is a Dove, and that delights not in noisome
buildings. The Spirit of God may be grieved and quenched in respect of the
fruits thereof: So that a man thus wounded for sin, feels a very hell in his
heart, admits of no comfort. Neither can it be otherwise, for when we refuse
the Spirit of God sanctifying, we presently repel it comforting. If we have not
the heat of this Sun, neither shall we have the light thereof.

4. Gross sins exclude from the society of the faithful.
4. In these gross offenses the Spirit of God does not only forsake him in
respect of Consolation, but its a Command laid upon the Church Officers, to
cast such an one out of their society, as 1 Cor. 6. neither may the people of
God have any familiar communion or acquaintance with such: now what horror and
trembling may justly arise in such a man's heart, who shall thus be cast out of
all gracious Privileges, and that by Gods appointment? What darkness must this
work in his heart, when he shall argue thus with himself; Its Gods command I
should not be admitted to the Seals of his love; he has given his Officers
charge to pour no oil in my wounds; how can I plead for the grace signified,
when he denies me the Seals thereof? God has shut me out like the unclean
leper, and whither shall I go? Now then, if the Church of God make such a vast
difference between him and others, and that following the directions of Christ.
Ought not the person offending also to judge the same things about himself?

5. In some kind of gross sins, although there may be deep humiliation, yet
there are many other conditions requisite, 3 Some gross sins requste many
conditions before pardon.
without which pardon of sin cannot be obtained, and that is in sins of
injustice, violence, and fraud of others. Thus Zacheus, it is not enough for
him to believe Christ the Messiah, and receive him into his house. but he makes
satisfaction where he has done wrong. Thus our Savior also, Mat. 5. If thou
remember any man have ought against thee, leave thy gift at the Altar, and go
and be reconciled. It is a known saying of Austin, Non remittitur peccatum,
nisi restituatur ablatum: The sin is not remitted, unless what thou have
unjustly taken be restored. And it is a most wretched perverting of the sense,
which an Antinomian makes ( Reconcil. with God, page 90.) that this
reconciliation is to be made of man to man, but not true in respect of God to
man; and whereas the same Author speaks of Zacheus, that he did believe first,
and afterward made restitution: which ( page 91.) he calls an example beyond
all exception; let him the second time consider Zacheus his expression, and he
will see it nothing to his purpose. The words are in the present tense, Luke
19.8. Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor. and if I have
wronged any man, I give him fourfold. Now either Zacheus means this of his
former life past, or else he declares his ready and prepared will for the time
to come; and there are Interpreters of both sides, and which way soever you
expound it, it overthrows the adversaries tenent. For if it be understood of
his course of life, formely past, then it goes clear against him. If of his
readiness of mind for the future, it makes nothing for him. For although by
this it will appear, That Zacheus did joyfully receive Christ before he made
actual restitution, yet not before he had a preparedness, and resolution of
heart to do it. And certainly Zacheus speaking thus to Christ, Behold I give,
cannot but be understood, that this penitent frame of heart was upon him before
he said so. If Zacheus speaks this of his former course of life, then he does
manifest this not in a way of pride or oftentation, but to see whether Christ
would command him to do otherwise, so that he might be thought to say this, for
instruction sake, to be directed for the future.

6 Gross sins require a more intense act of faith to apply pardon.
6. As there must necessarily be more sorrow, and will be greater terrors from
the Lord, so there is also required greater and stronger act^ of faith, whereby
pardon may be applied; For the agony and temptation being greater, the strength
of faith also must proportionably be increased. Hence we see the incestuous
person, was almost overwhelmed; so great a matter was it to exercise faith,
when God was apprehended thus angry: and certainly, if faith be a grace so
difficultly put forth even for the least sin; What conflicts must there needs
be, when nothing but mountains are in the way, and great gulfs apprehended
between pardon and him? The mariner does need more skill and strength in a
tempest, then in a calm; and the soldier must show more courage in the midst
of a furious battle, then when all things are quiet.

Some particulars wherein no difference is to be put between great and lesser
sins.
Thus you see wherein a great difference is to be made. Now there are some
particulars, wherein a believer repenting is to make no difference at all. And
that is in these things.

1. In respect of the efficient cause of pardon.
First. There is no difference in respect of the efficient cause, Gods grace in
pardoning. The godly man is not to think, that God can more easily pardon less
sins, then great sins: No, all these are equally pardoned by him. Even as in
the earth, though there be great and high mountains in respect of other h^ls,
yet both them and these are merely as a pa^ctum in respect of the heavens; So
although some sins exceed others in guilt diverse ways, yet all of them in
respect of Gods grace, are but as a drop before the Sun, which is quickly dried
up. Hence when God proclaims himself in all his goodness, he is described to
be a God pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin; And thus Isaiah 1. he can
make sins as red as scarlet, as white as snow: So that compared to Gods grace,
there is no difference at all.

2. Nor in respect of the meritorious cause.
Nor secondly, may any difference be made in respect of the meritorious cause,
which is Christ's obedience and sufferings: For that cleanses away great sins
as well as small. And certainly, when we consider of what infinite value and
worth the sufferings of him who is God as well as man, do amount to, the
believing soul need not wonder, if Christ do away one as well as the other. In
the Red Sea, the stoutest and most valiant Champion was drowned, as well as the
meanest soldier. He is the Lamb that takes away the sins of the world; and his
blood is said to cleanse us from all our iniquities. Here is no difference
made, from one sin as well as another. So that although thy great sins require
greater humiliation, yet not a greater Mediator then Christ is; Thou must pour
out more tears, but Christ needs not pour out more blood; so that in respect of
Christ's righteousness applied, the least and the greatest sinner are pardoned
both alike; neither is it blasphemy (though the Papists judge it so) to say,
Mary Magdalen, and the Virgin Mary are both justified alike.

3. Neither may we make any difference in the means of pardon thus far, 3
Neither in the means of pardon.
as if our merit and satisfaction were to go to the pardon of one, and not of
the other. We are to show greater sorrow, more means are to be used, yet we are
not to judge these actions of ours, as having any worth or dignity in them for
reconciliation, so that after we have done all, we must confess It Is grace
only that pardons. And this is the more to be observed, because it is hard not
to do any thing extraordinarily in a way of pardon, and not presently to rest
upon this, as if it had some worth in it. But certainly, if so be it be the
goodness of God merely to forgive us our farthings, it is much more his
liberality to pardon our pounds: and if by our own strength we cannot remove a
straw, how shall we a beam? But in the primitive times the Church being severe
against gross offenders, appointed more solemn and extraordinary duties of
humiliation for satisfaction to the Church of God in point of scandal, and in
process of time these were taught to be satisfactory even to God himself.

4. Neither may this difference be made, 4. No difference to be made as to the
state of just^fication.
as if less sins might consist with the grace of Justification, but such
gross sins did wholly exclude out of that state. For there are some who plead
for the distinction of mortal and venial sins, in this sense, venial are all
those which may stand with the favor and grace of God to the person so
failing; but mortal are such, which (though a man has been justified) yet
being committed, will cast him out of this sonship. Such a distinction Musculus
acknowledges, loc. com. de peccato, and others; but this supposes a total
apostasy from grace, which I have already disproved.

Illustration.
As the Ark was made of that wood which would not be corrupt or putrify, so is
the Church of God in respect of the living members. Therefore although Gods
people in such grievous falls lose their assurance, feel woeful commotions of
heart, yet they are not to conclude, That God has utterly cast them off. They
are not to look upon themselves as unsound, though they have been Prodigals.

LECTURE XXV.
PSALM. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered.

Blessed is the man to whom the LORD imputes not iniquity.


DAvid is styled by some Ancients, The Divine Orpheus, by whose music the
wild beasts, evil men, may be made tame: and certainly his material Harp was
not more efficacious to drive out Saul's evil spirit, then his Psalms are
sanctified means to expel all corrupt affections in us. And although all
Scripture be equally excellent in respect of the Author, yea, and of the
matter absolutely considered, yet in respect of us, our direction or
consolation by reason of our present estate, one place of Scripture may be
preferred before another: in which sense Junius interprets those Psalms, that
have their inscription, A Psalm of Degrees, A Psalm of Excellencies, as the
Hebrew word will bear it. Now this Psalm I am upon, may justly be so styled,
because it has a peculiar usefulness to those who are exercised about the
guilt of sin; for here we have David like an anatomy, opened, that we may be
instructed. Hence the title of the Psalm is Maschil, which is as much as giving
instruction, and it is observed by Commentators, this is prefixed commonly to
those Psalms that have some choice, eminent Doctrine, especially about
afflictions, as this has, about David's guilt and trouble under sin, and also
his pardon of it.

The Hebrews call this Psalm (...) Cor, The heart of David, because he is so
affected with Gods displeasure for sin, and the excellency of the pardon.
Therefore you must conceive the Text to be uttered by David, as one groaning
and heavily pressed with the weight of his sin, and crying out, Oh how
blessed and happy are they, that have these sins forgiven them!

In which words you have pardon of sin described. The text contains a
description of the pardon of sin,


First, From several expressions to magnify the mercy, 1 From several
expressions to magnify the mercy of it.
Sins forgiven, covered, not imputed. It is much to consider how ancient
Interpreters have made a difference between the sins enumerated; as if there
were diverse kinds, or at least degrees of sin enumerated; and hereupon also
they make a difference between forgiving, covering and imputing, as if one were
more then the other; but we are rather to take it according to the
Scripture-custome, which does use for amplification sake, to say the same thing
in diverse words, and this is autology, but not tautology. The difference that
is, is from the several metaphors that are in the words. As the first word
does signify the taking away of sin, which is a burrhen, blessed is he that is
eased of such a weight. The second, which is covering, does suppose the
loathsome filthiness of sin in the eyes of God, and therefore by grace is
taken out of his sight. The third, not imputing or reckoning, is a metaphor
supposing sin a debt, and God in his account will not set it upon our score,
so that the several expressions are wonderfully comfortable, if sin trouble
thee as an heavy weight on thee, pardoning is the easing and taking off this
burden; if sin make thee to judge thy self loathsome, thou can not endure
thy self, pardon of sin is covering of it; if sin put thee in such a debt to
God, that thou know not how to satisfy, pardon is not imputing.

2 From the adjunct of rem^ssion, viz. blessedness.
Secondly, This is described from the adjunct, adherent to remission of sin,
viz. blessedness. The Apostle, Romans 4, alleges this place to prove, That a
man has righteousness imputed to him without works, But the pertinency of the
Apostles argument is disputed of: for how does it from this place follow, that
a man has righteousness imputed to him without works? This is as if a man
should argue, He is a rich man, because his debts are forgiven, which is a non
sequitur, because they are two distinct things. This makes Piscator and Wotton,
with others, to make justification to be nothing but remission of sins, and
that imputation of righteousness, and remission of sins are the self same
thing; a man being therefore accounted righteous because his sins are not
imputed unto him. Hence they deny that the Scripture ever says Christ's
righteousness is imputed unto us, although in some sense they grant, it may be
said so, inasmuch as by his death for us, he purchased remission of sin, which
is our righteousness. This is to be considered of, when we speak of the other
part of justification, viz.. imputation of Christ's righteousness. Although
they that are for imputed righteousness, say, The Argument is good, which Paul
uses, because imputing of righteousness is immediately contrary to the
imputing of sin; and therefore Paul might argue righteousness imputed, from
sin remitted, even as we truly argue, The night is not, therefore the day is,
because darkness and light are immediate contraries, and the subject must
necessarily have one of them.

Lastly, This forgiveness of sin is described from the subject, in whom it is,
viz. in him, in whose heart there is no guile; that is, who does not cover his
sins by not confessing, and not repenting of them, as David acknowledges he
did for a while.

Observations raised from the Text.
From the Text I shall raise such Observations as are to my particular scope. As,

First, That forgiveness of sin is a covering of sin.

This truth deserves a diligent unfolding, because the mistake about it has
brought forth dangerous errors in two extremities, The one of the Papist, That
because it is covered, Therefore there is no sin at all in the godly,
otherwise God could not but see it, and hate it, as Pererius and others argue.
The other of the Antinomian, who infer from thence, That therefore God sees
not sin, or takes notice of it in justified persons, as Eaton.

To understand this aright, take notice, 1 That forgiveness of sin is a
covering of sin What is meant by covering of sin.
That to cover is a metaphorical expression, and we must not squeeze it too
much, lest blood come out in stead of milk: Some make the metaphor from filthy,
loathsome objects, which are covered from our eyes, as dead carcases are buried
under the ground; some from garments that are put upon us to cover our
nakedness, some from the Egyptians that were drowned in the Red Sea, and so
covered with water; some from a great gulf in the earth, that is filled up and
covered with earth injected into it. Lastly, some make it an allusive
expression to the Mercy-seat, over which was a covering, which might signify
Gods grace, through and in Christ, abolishing our sins. Hence the Apostle
attributes (...), and (...), to Christ and his blood* which is given to the
Mercy-seat; We may not strive for any of these Metaphors, they all in the
general tend to show this, That God when be pardons, does not look upon us
as sinners, but deals with us, as if we had never sinned at all: as it is here
made blessedness to have sin covered, so it is made a woe and misery, Nehem*
4.5. not to have sin covered, as Nehemiah prays against Sanballat and
Tobiah, This expression is also used, Psalm. 85.2.

In the next place we may consider in what sense God does cover sin when he
pardons, and in what he does not. How God by p^rd^n is said to cover sin.


1. God is said therefore to cover sin from his eyes, because he will not
take notice of it in justified persons to punish it with wrath and
condemnation, although it be not so covered, as that God does not see it to be
angry with it, and chastise believers for it. yet it is so covered, as that he
does not see it to condemn believers for it. We do not therefore make God to
cover sin (as an Antinomian says we do) as if a man should cover a thing
with a net, where the object is still seen, Honey comb, page 57. but as to Gods
hatred and revengefull condemnation, so it is wholly covered; and therefore
those expressions of taking away, blotting out of sin, etc. do fully imply,
that God gives not an half pardon, but that he takes away the offense, and
whatsoever punishment (properly so called) belongs unto it.

2. It does imply, That God when he has thus forgiven, deals with a man as no
more in that particular a sinner. Therefore David after his murder and adultery
are washed away, he is as white as snow in respect of those actual sins; and
every true believer repenting, is bound to believe, that God does this
graciously and gloriously to him, That he is no more in Gods account that
loathsome leper and unclean person he was.

It does imply, That God by degrees and in his due time will cover the
believers sins, as from his own eyes, so from the believers eyes. So that the
guilt of conscience, those arrows of the Almighty, shall not always stick in
his heart. Thus as man's love to another, covers a multitude of sins, he will
not mention, charge or upbraid the party with them; so does Gods love cover the
multitude of believers sins committed by them, dealing with them as reconciled
persons, not upbraiding of them but bestowing all encouraging mercies upon
them; so that if we improve this phrase of covering sin no further, we shall
split on no rock, and yett he soul have as much comfort as it can rationally
desire.

Some particulars not extended to in this phrase of covering sin.
In the next place, hear what it does not reach to, and wherein the phrase is
abused: As

1. When we dream of such covering of sin, as that sin is wholly taken
away; so that no relics of original corruption abide in us. Thus the Papists,
We must not (say they) suppose such a covering as if sin were still there,
only God will not impute it, but it is such a covering as is a blotting sin
out. Now for actual sin, we grant covering to be a blotting it out; but for
original sin, in the lusts thereof, We say, they are still in the godly, and
properly sins, only covered, because not imputed to them: for the grace of
regeneration, though it cut the hair of sin, as Dalilah did Samsons, yet it
grows again, as long as the root is there.

2. We may not conceive sin covered in this sense, as if we by our subsequent
good actions did cover sin, so some have expounded holy works to be the
garment that covers our nakedness, but this would be our covering, and not
Gods covering* whereas the Psalmist attributes it to God, Psa. 85.2. Therefore
that Exposition will not hold, which some bring out of Austin, explaining this
covering of sin, as Emplastrum tegit vulnus, the Plaster covers the sore, by
healing of it: for although healing grace accompany justification, yet it is
not justification.

3. We may not conceive it said to be covered in this sense, As if God when he
had pardoned, did not yet still retain anger against the persons sinning, and
so chastise them. Though this doctrine be much pleaded for, yet Scripture is
evident against it. David had sin covered, yet God would not let the sword
depart from his house. Thus Job aweth himself against sin with this
consideration, That God would see it in him, and take notice of it, Job 10.14.
If I sin, thou markest me (God sees sin in Job) and thou will not acquit me
from mine iniquity; and Cha. 14.16, 17. he says, God does watch over his sin,
and seal it up in a bag. Let not then the people of God delude themselves into
security, by any false doctrine; and what woeful conclusions there are of a
godly man's peace, when he falls into a gross sin, I shall handle in another
Question.

Neither fourthly, may we conceive of sin covered, in a carnal gross manner,
As if there were something interposed between Gods eyes and sin; as if a man's
face were covered with an hat, or a candle put under a bushel. The Antinomians
similitude is gross and carnal, Honeycomb, page 275. as a man looking through
a red glass, sees the water all red within it, so God looking upon us in
Christ, sees nothing but the righteousness of Christ, and no sin at all; for
the reason why our senses judge water red through a red glass, is, because it
depends upon the fitness of a medium, and that being indisposed, the eye is
deceived; but God in looking upon us, does not depend upon any intervening
thing; and indeed Gods seeing of sin in this point, is not so much an act of
his understanding, as of his will, decreeing to punish sin, or not to punish
it* So that this similitude does no ways hold, for God in this matter of
forgiving or punishing sin, is not to be looked upon as a natural agent, but
voluntary. So that all these things rightly understood, we may take that which
is good and comfortable, leaving that which is corrupt and false.

Whether the phrase of Gods covering sin, favor the error, That God sees
not sin in believers. Answer negative.
And if the Question be made, Whether the phrase of covering sin, make for
that error, That God does not see sin in believers offending?

I answer, No, by no means; for these Reasons,

First, Gods covering of sin is to be limited only to condemnation, as I have
proved; David's sin was at the same time open to God, and covered; open to
fatherly chastisements, covered to revengefull condemnation. God did see it as
a Father to be angry with him, not as a Judge to hate him.

2. Because this covering is limited to those sins which are pa^, and repented
of; not to new sins committed; they are not covered without a new gracious act
of Gods favor. David before this sin committed that is spoken of in the
Psalm, he had his former sins covered, but this was not covered, till he did
acknowledge it, and then says he, Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin:
Though therefore God should not see the sins past, yet the new ones
committed, they are taken notice of by him.

3. Because though God has covered them, yet God may, and does sometimes
afflict his people for their sins, so that they cannot be in every sense said
to be covered: But I have spoken largely of this already.

Two Objections answered.
Two material Objections are to be answered, and then I shall proceed.

Object. 1.
The first is, If sin be in the regenerate, yet covered and not imputed, How
will this stand with the omnisciency, truth and holiness of God? His
omnisciency, for he cannot but see sin if it be there: His truth, for God,
must needs judge of things as they are; if therefore sin be there, he must
judge it to be there, otherwise we make him like the wicked who covers sin, he
will not acknowledge it to be there: Now what truth is this, to say of a
regenerate man, he is cleansed and washed from all his evil, and yet his evil
is in him? This the learned among the Papists do much urge, Pererius, Tiriuus,
etc. At most (says Suarez de justificatione) it makes remission of sin to be
nothing but a remission of the punishment, not of the offense or fault. The
very same is urged by Antinomists. Lastly, How does it consist with Gods
holiness; for he must needs hate sin in whomsoever he finds it; and
therefore for the Saints to have sin in them, and yet God not to impute it to
them, seems a contradiction.

But to all this the answer is easy. As for Gods omnisciency, none say, but by
that God beholds sin, where it is; and in that sense, sin is not at all
said to be covered, for he knows all in man. As for his truth, God does judge
as the thing is, for as he sees sin, so he judges sin to be in them* and
according to that eternal rule laid down, Psalm. 89.32, 33* He chastises them
with the rod, though he take not his loving kindness from them; so that God
does not judge things otherwise then they are. And as for his holiness, he is
not only angry with their sins, but also would proceed to their eternal
condemnation, were it not for Christ, their surety, so that their sins are
punished, though not in their own persons. Neither is this a taking away of sin
only in respect of the punishment, but of the offense also, God being wholly
reconciled with his people, though the corruption (which is removed by
sanctification, not justification) is by degrees purged away.

The second Objection is, How can God see sin, seeing they have Christ's
righteousness, and there being no sin in that, Object. 2.
therefore God must look upon them as in Christ, which is without any sin at
all?

The answer is, that when we say, Christ's righteousness is made theirs, it is
not to be understood subjectively, Answ.
as if it were a quality inherent in them (for then indeed God could not see
sin in them) but relatively, he is their Mediator, and by his obedience they
are acquitted, so that the righteousness is in Christ, but by faith it becomes
theirs, not formally, but as the merit for which God does justify them, and
God does account it to them as theirs; now this is no contradiction to be
sinful in our selves, and yet at the same time acquitted by the righteousness
of another. It is true, those expressions of making Christ's righteousness a
formal righteousness, or as others, a material righteousness, and those
disputations, Whether Christ's active or passive obedience, both or either of
them be imputed to us; has much darkened the Question: whereas if we consider
of it, as a relative righteousness performed by our Surety in our stead, the
matter will be made much clearer: yet I speak not this, as if Christ's active
obedience were not made ours, as in time may be showed.

I come to the second Observation out of the Text, which is,

Pardon of sin duly valued by those only who inwardly feel Gods anger against
it.
That those only do esteem pardon of sin as a blessedness, who feel inwardly
the anger of God for sin.

David here in this Psalm, being deeply wounded with the guilt of his sin,
judges not his kingdom, his wealth, his conquest over enemies an happy thing,
but pardon of sin.

Now the ground of this is, because such is our custom (though it be our
weakness) to esteem of mercies more carendo quam habendo, by wanting of them,
then having of them. The blind man earnestly desires sight. The lame man
prizeth sound limbs. A people distressed with war, and finding the
bitterness of it, commend peace. Thus it is here, a man afflicted and
imbittered in his soul because of sin, he does highly admire forgiveness, and
accounts those happy that walk in the sense of Gods favor. Though innocence or
freedom from sin may be majus beneficium, a greater mercy then pardon and
reparation, yet this is dulcius beneficium, a more sweet mercy to the sense and
feeling of him, who enjoys it. Hence that Christ and the Gospel might be
exalted, God permitted sin to be, and the Law is on purpose to discover sin,
and aggravate it, that Christ and his grace may be the more welcome.

Use 1.
The Uses of both points together, are,

Of the first Observation.
1. From the former, Does God in pardoning, cover sin? then with what
boldness may true faith triumph? Why is the godly penitent, as if his sins
were always in bloody characters before God? Why is he, as if there were no
blood of Christ, wherein these Egyptians are drowned? If thou had never been
a sinner, thy heart would not have trembled. Is not forgiveness making of a sin
not to be, as you have heard? So that, as Rachel is mourning for her children,
because they are not; so may thou be rejoicing, because thy sins are not, and
although they be not covered out of thy sight, yet if covered out of Gods
sight, that is thy blessedness; better have them rise up always in thy
conscience, then once before God.

From the second we may be instructed, Use 2.
who are the b^st Preachers of Christ, and the grace of the Gospel, who are
Gospel-Preachers, even such who make deep incisions and wounds first in men's
consciences by the Law. The only way for a Minister to make his auditors
relish and savor of Christ and grace indeed, is to keep them in a godly sense
and apprehension of their infirmities. We are not in our first conversion only
to have throbs and pangs after Gods grace, but also this hunger and thirsting
after Christ, is to be kept up in the progress of sanctification: and
therefore as those Ministers are to be blamed (if any such) that do only press
duty, discover sin, but never set forth the fullness of Christ: So they also
are to be blamed, who only press such Texts as manifest Gods grace, but never
open that issue and fountain of all filth that is within us. Both these
tempered together, are like Aarons excellent compound.

The last Use of Exhortation, is, Use 3.
to be so deeply humbled and tenderly affected within your selves, that all
within you may cry out, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin.
O that every Auditour which hears me this day, could with the same spirit,
affection, and turning of bowels within him, proclaim this truth, as David did.
What is said of Paul's Epistles, is also true of David's Psalms, Nunquam Davidis
mentem intelliges, nisi prius Davidis spiritum imbiberis. You can never fully
understand David's meaning, unless you be possessed with David's spirit. Now
that you may be moved hereunto, consider the motive in the Text, and the means
to get it. The motive is blessedness; a man is never an happy man, till his
sins be pardoned. What makes hell and damnation, but merely not forgiveness?
thy wealth, thy greatness, thy honors, cannot bring that happiness to thee
which remission of sins does. Hence this is the cause of all other
blessedness. And observe, here is a great deal of difference between this
place, Blessed is the man whose sins are pardoned, and those Texts where he
is said to be blessed that fears always, or he is said to be blessed that
walks not in the ways of the wicked, for in the Text is showed the cause or
fountain of blessedness, viz. remission of sin; but in other places there is
only deciphered, who they are that are blessed. A man that fears is blessed,
but his fear is not the cause of his blessedness. A man that lives godly is
blessed, but his godliness is not the cause of his blessedness, but his
pardon of sin makes him blessed in all his graces; Thou art blessed, not
because thou praiest, hear, live holily, but because God does forgive all
thy sins and imperfections in these duties. If therefore your graces, your holy
duties are not the cause of your blessedness, never think your outward mercies
can be. The means to obtain this, is in the Text, by having no guile in the
heart, that is, by not hiding our sins, but repenting of them, and confessing
them to God: For this (says David) every one shall pray unto thee in an
acceptable time; for this, that is, for this remission, and because thou wast
so ready to forgive, when I said, I will confess my sin. Therefore shall every
one seek to thee; where by the way, let none abuse that place, verse. 5. David
said he would confess, and God forgave it: David did but say it, and God
pardoned it; so some have descanted upon it. But to say, there, according to
the use of the Hebrew word in some places, is firmly to purpose and decree so
resolvedly, that he will be diligent in the practice of i^. Do not therefore
think that a mere lip-labor is that brokennesse and contrition of spirit,
which God requires as the means to pardon.

LECTURE XXVI.
PSALM. 51.9. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.


YOu have heard of the peculiar usefulness of the Psalms, in respect of our
conditions or temptatians. What some Authors (I know not upon what ground)
have said of the manna, that it had the taste of all delicate meats in it, and
gave a respective relish to what every palate desired; this may be truly
affirmed of the Psalms, they have a respective direction, or comfort to every
ones affliction or temptation. Hence they have been called by some the little
Bible, or the Bible of the Bible? for although all the stars be of a
quintess^ntiall matter (as the Philosophers say) yet one star differs from
another in glory. And this Psalm among the rest, has no mean excellency or
usefulln^sse, it being a spiritual Apothecaries shop, wherein are choice
antidotes against the guilt and filth of sin, so that every one may say that of
this Psalm, which Luther of another, O Psalm, Tueris meus Psalmus, Thou shall
be my Psalm, The occasion of this Psalm is set down very diligently, and
punctually in the inscription, it was made when Nathan reproved David for his
adultery, after he had gone in to Bathsheba. The Hebrew word is translated in
the time past, and so those that excuse Naaman, 2 King. 5.18. translate those
words, wherein Naaman begs for pardon for his bowing down in the house of
Rimmon, in the time past. Thus (pardon thy servant) when my master went into
the house of Rimmon-and I bowed my self. And they bring this inscription of the
Psalm to confirm such a translation. We are in this Psalm to look upon David
humbled ^or his grievous sins, as a Job sitting upon the dunghill abhorring
himself, because of the ulcers and loathsomenesse upon him, or like a wretched
Lazarus full of sores, lying at Gods throne, who is rich in mercy. For mercy is
the scope of the Psalm, which he prays for in the negative effects of it,
such as blotting out of his favor, etc. and in the positive effects thereof,
such as creating a new heart, filling him with joy and gladness, etc. And this
Petition is enforced with several arguments from Gods multitude of mercies,
from his confession and acknowledgement, with a ready submission to all Gods
chastisements, from the pronenesse of every one to sin, because of that
original corruption seated in him, from the good effect this pardon shall work
upon him, he will teach transgressors Gods ways, so that his sins as well
as his graces shall instruct others. My Text is a prayer about that negative
effect of mercy, The text divided into two Petitions.
which is expressed in two Petitions to the same purpose.

The first is, Hide thy face from my sins.

A face attributed to God in a double sense.
The Scriptures give a face to God in a twofold sense. There is the face of his
favor and his love. This David in the 11th verse, prays God would not take
from him: And there is the face of his anger and his indignation. This David
perceives upon him, and against him, wherefore he desires God would hide it
from him; So that it is an expression from a guilty person, who cannot endure
the just Judge should look upon him; or rather from a child offending, who
cannot bear the frowns of his father, casting his eyes upon him. David has
that filth and guilt now upon him, which he knows God cannot behold but with
much wrath and indignation, therefore he prays God would not look on him. You
see here David acknowledging, That God does see and take notice of the sins of
justified persons in a most provoked manner.

This prayer is expressed to the same sense in the next Petition, Blot out all
mine iniquities, wherein consider the mercy prayed for, Blot out, a metaphor
(as you have heard) from merchants that cancel their debts, or as the Su^doth
dissipate and cause the cloud to vanish.

2. The extent of the object, all my iniquities. Whether this extend to future
sins, so that all sins, past, present, and fut^re are pardoned together, shall
be considered in the second place.

From the first Petition, Observe, Observation from the first Petition.


That God sees and takes notice of in a most angry and provoked manner, the
heinous and gross sins, which a Believer has plunged himself into.

For this reason, David prays God would turn away his eyes, and face from
him, even as the sore eyes desire to have the light removed, as being unable to
bear it. And this aggravation of Gods seeing it, he mentions also, verse. 4.
Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. That God did
see it, and was offended, did more trouble him, then the eyes of all the world
upon him: So 2 Samuel 11.27. where this History is related, there is this
peculiar brand upon David's sin, that what he had done was evil in the eyes of
the Lord; therefore God did see it, and take notice of it, so as to be
displeased with it. This Doctrine is worthy of all diligent examination, both
because it will be a strong Antidote, to keep Gods people from scandalous gross
sins, as also to inform how far in such sins the people of God make a breach
upon their peace with God, and claim to the Covenant of Grace. And although
this Question has been vexed in some respects with the scratching claws of the
Schoolmen, yet I shall endeavor not to be so ill a seedsman as to sow among
thorns, nor as one of the Ancients alludes, Plantare nemus Aristotelicum juxta
altar Dei, Plant Aristotle's dark Grove, near Gods Altar.

And for the clearer proceeding in this great Point, The aggravation of David's
sin in ten particulars.
I shall consider the Doctrine briefly in the hypothesi, as it was David's case,
and then in thesi, as it may be any believers condition: for David take notice
of two things,

First, The aggravation of his sin.

Secondly, Of the evil befalling him, because of it. David's sin is at large
mentioned, 2 Samuel 11. where you have several aggravations of this ungodly act.

First, He was a King, and so his wickedness was the greater, by how much his
person was greater* Men in place being like the Sun, which if in an eclipse,
causes much destructive alteration to inferiors.

Secondly, A man advanced by God to special mercies, both temporal and
spiritual, and for him to sin thus, we may cry out, What ailest thou, O
Jordan, to run backward?

Thirdly, The nature of the sin was a very gross one, against the light of an
Heathens conscience, to deflour his neighbors wife.

Fourthly, It was a trespass against his faithful servant Vriah, who was
venturing his life to preserve David: This was horrible ingratitude.

Fifthly, This aggravation God adds, That he had many other wives; and for
him, as Nathan wisely reproved him, to go and take the poor man's lamb, who had
only that, this was to become very guilty.

Sixthly, Here was great deliberation, and consultation, how to cover the
matter, and to make Vriah the father of it. O where is David's heart that it
does not smite him all this while?

Seventhly, To bring this wretched plot about, h^ sends Vriah with letters to
Joab for his own destruction; Does not David here, that which he condemned and
prayed against so much in others, lie in wait like a Lion to devour the poor
innocent?

Eighthly, His sin becomes more heinous, in that to color this, he will have
Vriah, and many other innocent persons set in the forefront, on purpose to be
killed, and afterward with most transcendent hypocrisy, excuses it with
this, The battle falls alike to all. So that here is a sin with many sins
complicated in it.

Ninthly, When all this is done, David takes Bathsheba to wife, delights in
her, and rejoices with her.

Tenthly, To make his sin out of measure sinful, after these horrid sins
committed thus against natural light, as well as spiritual, we find no remorse
of conscience, no trouble of heart, till Nathan the Prophet come and arouse
him. But presently upon his Reproof, How does this Mountain melt like wax
before the fire? And therefore let no man encourage himself with David's sin,
unless he find in himself also David's Repentance.

And therefore in the second place take notice, what way God takes to break
him, and how much displeasure of God fell upon him.

The degrees of David's repentance.
First, He has great terror and trouble upon him, which he expresses by the
most exquisite torment that is, viz. Broken bones. It was with him, as if all
his bones were brayed and pounced together. Thus fearful is it to fall into the
hands of the living God, who even to his own people is a consuming fire. As the
Sun which uses to dart forth resplendent beams of luster, by gross and
thick clouds is darkened and obscured; so David who heretofore rejoiced in God,
took comfort in his Promises, does now like Dives beg for one drop of comfort,
and finds a great Gulf between that and him, insomuch that it cannot come to
him, nor he to it. Now what are all David's pleasures, all his lustful delights
to these wounds of his soul? Has he not bought Repentance at a dear rate? Let
the godly hear this and tremble, and do no such thing.

Secondly, As he found hell thus within him, So God was also really displeased,
his sins were uncancelled till he repented. So that Gods displeasure was not
only in David's sense and feeling, but in Gods heart also. As the earth of his
own heart was like iron, in respect of the yielding any fruit of comfort, so
the Heavens were like brass. God had spoke to his soul to be like the
mountains of Gilboa, on which no dew of his favor shall fall. Therefore he
does not only pray for pardon, but plenty and iteration of pardon, Multiply to
pardon, as verse. 2. I need pardon again and again, I need a plentiful pardon,
because I have sinned many sins in one sin. Now David might justly be more
solicitous and fearful about the pardon of these sins, because there was no
particular Sacrifice appointed for murder and adultery, but an expectation of
vengeance, either from God or man, but this must not be stretched to the
Socinian errors, as before I have showed.

Thirdly, He found in himself a loathsomeness, and defiling guilt upon his
conscience, whereby like Adam, he could run and hide himself, that God might
not see him. Hereupon he prays, Wash me, Cleanse me, Purge me. O how
loathsome and abominable was he in his own eyes: if David's Righteousness be
accounted a menstruous cloth, or dung by him; what debasing and abhorring
thoughts must he needs have of his sins? He looks upon himself as the Swine
wallowing in mire, and the dog licking up his vomit.

Fourthly, He feels a spiritual consumption and languish upon him, that he
cannot exercise any of those graces that he used to do. Therefore he prays
for a principal or voluntary spirit, that with delight and strength he may do
Gods will. David arises as Samson when his Hair was cut off, thinking to do
such great exploits, as he had before, but he finds his strength gone.

Fifthly, He discovers a world of Hypocrisy in his heart, and cries out of
that, praying for truth in the inward parts. He now (probably) fears himself
for an Hypocrite, questions whether any truth of grace be in him at all; and
certainly it might justly amaze and astonish him, to consider he could do all
that wickedness deliberately in cold blood, without any remorse for a long
while. This might justly plunge David into such a Chaos, that he might fear the
very pillars and foundations of his soul were shaken.

Sixthly, He had lost all that boldness and liberty arising from a good
Conscience, in declaring Gods truth, and reclaiming transgressors from their
evil ways, verse* 13. Some have said that David in this intervall lost the gift
of Prophecy, and making of Psalms. I cannot tell that; but certainly guilt and
shame had so sealed up his mouth, that he could not reprove others for murder,
adulteries, destructive craft, which he himself was so foully guilty of. It was
the Ancients Rule, Quicquid dictur^s aliis, prius tibi ipsi dic, Speak that
first to thy self, which thou art to speak to others. But how could David have
any boldness here, till there was a cole of fire from the Altar to sanctify
him? So that all these things duly pondered, you may say, this Sermon is a
spiritual-Anatomy-Lecture, wherein David's sin and punishment has been so
dissected before you, that every wise hearer may prevent the like desperate
disease in himself.

The te^t considered in the^.
And now I proceed to the Thesis, or this Doctrine in the general. And this
method I shall use: First, Speak of the sins briefly the godly may fall into.
And then more largely of their relation they stand unto God after the
commission of them, till they repent.

And to the former, two things are considerable: What sins Gods children may
fall into.


1. The nature of the sins they commit. And

2. The quality of them, whereby they may be differenced from the sins of
reprobates.

For the former. There is no sin (except that against the holy Ghost) which a
justified person, being left to himself, may not fall into, even such sins,
that moral men, by the help of a natural conscience only would readily abhor.
Thus David with deliberation and consent falls into adultery and murder, sins
condemned by Natures Statute Law: You have Aaron guilty of Idolatry: Joseph's
brethren the Patriarchs, as much as lies in them murdering Joseph, and when
they have cast him away into the pit, they sit down to eat, which implies
their wonderful security: and we read not of their Repentance, till many years
after, being awakened thereunto by Joseph. Samson, he was like one of the Roman
Emperors, a compound of vices and virtues, insomuch that doubt might have been
made of his godliness, had not the Scripture put him in the Catalogue of
Saints. Peter, although it was a passion of fear that caused his sin, yet his
sin was very dreadful, to lie, swear, and curse, in the denying of Christ.
This was such a sin that Peter thought it not possible he should fall into
it. For first at the maids accusation, by comparing of the Evangelists
together, he does not only basely deny himself to be Peter, but adds, He knew
not Christ, yea he knew not what she said: an expression which we use about a
thing that we are in the highest manner ignorant of; and this he does before
all them that stood by. In the next place after a little while (which as
Maldonat computes, must be at least three hours) he denies Christ again: we
might have thought that Peter's heart might have troubled him in that space, but
in stead of repentance he aggravates his crime, with an oath he denied himself
to be Peter; Here was lying against his own conscience, accompanied with
perfidiousness against Christ: Then the third time, a little while after, being
accused again, he still increased his sin, and did not only swear, but curse,
that is, devote my self to the horridest judgments that can be, if he knew
Christ, and this he did often, as that phrase, He began to curse, seems to
imply, and his sin will yet rise higher, if that cursing be referred to Christ,
that he cursed and anathematized him, and all this while though as some
probably think, he heard the Cock crow, yet he repents not till Christ looked
upon him, and without question* would have denied him as often as the
temptation was, had not Christ preserved him.

Thus I have given you Examples of the heinous sins of Gods people, which are
not to encourage in sin, but if duly considered, a bridle against it. As he
said, Plus debeo Thomae, quam Petro, he was more beholding to Thomas doubting,
then Peter believing, because by Thomas his doubt, Christ's Resurrection was
more confirmed: So in some sense, we may more acknowledge Gods Wisdom and
Goodness in his childrens falls, then in their Graces; for hereby we are to
tremble in our selves at our own weakness, be more careful against sin;
Observe the way they took for pardon, and admire Gods goodness, who does not
utterly cast off his prodigal children.

Thus you see there is no kind of crime, which the people of God, through
their own neglect, may not fall into. And as for that other Question, Whether
they may not frequently commit the same sins? We have examples in Scripture for
the Affirmative, only the greater Doubt is, Whether after a through and deep
Humiliation they may relapse in the same sins? But although we scarce have any
instances of such in the Scripture, yet Gods command upon us to receive a
brother seventy seven times offending, if he repent, may keep up the heart of
such a sinner against despair, because goodness and love is in him as in the
Ocean; in us, as in the stream only.

The sins of Gods people in what kind to be ranked.
The second thing considerable is, What kind of sins these are? whether they
may be called sins of infirmity, though so atrocious in their nature, or
reigning sins? Now herein godly Divines have differing expressions, though they
mean the same thing. Zan^hy in his Thesis of the perseverance of the Saints
does industriously assert, That all the sins which elect Believers fall into,
are sins of infirmity. Thus he calls David's and Peter's: His main ground is,
Because every regenerate man has a twofold principle within, the flesh and
the spirit, both which fight one against the other: by which means they are
never carried out to a full consent and purpose in any sin they commit. Hence
he denies they can be called reigning sins, or sins against conscience, that
waste conscience, or that are from resolved purpose within. He gives an
instance from Jonah, and the Mariners; We know the Mariners had not any intent
at first to throw Jonah into the Sea; again they rowed and used all their
utmost endeavor to preserve him: Lastly, they pray to their gods, if possibly,
they may not be necessitated to drown him. Now in all this, the Mariners,
though they did throw him into the Sea, with their will and consent, yet they
did it very unwillingly also. Thus, says he, Jonah, in this respect, is like
Christ, or grace in the hearts of Gods people. And first, the people of God
have no purpose to cast him out. Again, they use their diligent care in
temptations not to do it. Lastly, they beseech and importune God they may never
fall so foully: Therefore if at any time they are overtaken, it is with an
unwilling willingness. Thus he. Neither is it any marvel if he judge so; When
Bucer thought an Elect man, ever before ever he be converted, does not sin with
that full consent as reprobate wicked men do, but have many motions to the
contrary. Now although Peter in his denial of Christ, might be thought with
unwillingness and reluctance to do what he did, yet it is hard to say, David,
who so deliberated and plotted to accomplish his wickedness, did it not with
some full consent at that time. And it may seem hard to call all the sins of
the godly, sins of infirmity; Therefore others will grant them the name of
reigning sins, but with this limitation, that this is not a total reigning: sin
reigns as a tyrant over them, not as a King; and although at some times, as
in David's case, there be no actual resistance made, because all the actual
exercise of Grace is suspended, yet the seed of God does in time revive again,
and so does cast out that usurper: So then the conclusion is, That the gross
sins, which some regenerate persons do commit, may be said to be sins
accomplished with a full consent and delight, and for the time, no actual
resistance made by the regenerate part, and so far may be called reigning sins,
but because God has promised to blow up those sparks of grace in the godly, in
his due time; therefore they reign but as tyrants, and that for a while, not as
Kings, which then properly is, when sins are customarily committed with an
antecedent and consequent consent.

Differences between the sins of the godly and reprobate.
But for the general, That there is a great difference between Saul's sins and
David's, Peter's, and Judas's, will appear evidently.

Differ. 1.
1. From that principle of supernatural life, which although much weakened, yet
is not quite taken away, 1 John 3. He that is born of God, cannot sin, viz. so
as Cain; or as one that is of the devil his father, because the seed of God
abides in him. And Paul, Romans 7. does excellently describe this in the person
of a regenerate man, where some Expositours do not limit the good he would do,
or the evil he would not do, to motions and desires only of the heart, but
extend it to the outward actions done in the flesh.

Differ. 2.
2. There is a difference in respect of God: He does not wholly cast off the one
offending, as he does the other. Compare Saul's sin, for which God rejected him,
and David's together, and you would think Saul's sin far the less; for Saul's was,
because he spared Agag, 1 Samuel 15. and the best of the spoil, pretending it was
for Sacrifice, and he dared not do other for fear of the people, but for this
God rejected him. Now David's was in a more gross sin against the light of
nature, whereas Saul's was against a positive command of God only, and was a sin
only, because forbidden, not from itself, yet God shows mercy to the one, and
not to the other. Certainly, though Gods grace be the great reason of the
difference, yet Saul sinned with more contempt and slighting of God, then David
did. There was a more bitter root in one then the other.

Differ. 3.
3. A difference also may be seen in the consequent. When David was reproved,
how presently did he melt and condemn himself? There could not be such a sudden
thaw of David's heart, if like Nabals it had been like a stone within him. Thus
Peter also, as soon as Christ looked upon him, He went out, and wept bitterly.
It is true, we see Saul and Judas after their wickedness committed, cried out,
They had sinned, but yet it was only for temporal motives, fearing the loss of
their honors or fame, and at most, out of a slavish fear of Gods wrath, not
from any love of him, or faith in him.

The Use is, If David lie thus in his gore, Use.
and what Michal said falsely concerning him, is now true, has made himself
like one of the vile fellows, let him then become a Pillar of salt to season
the godly. Without a gracious solicitude and diligent depending upon God, how
quickly may a star become like a dunghill? You see that the snakes, and other
poisonous creatures, which lie lurking in the holes of ground, when the season
is cold, do yet crawl abroad under the hot Sunbeams. And so those sins which
thou supposest crucified in thee, may revive upon a warm temptation. Peter
could not be persuaded he should ever be plunged into such foul perfidiousness,
he thought all the men in the world would sooner do it then he. Now to prevent
these scandals, hearken always unto the motions of Gods Spirit. While the Cock
croweth, do thou go out and weep bitterly; while the Angel stirs the pool,
do thou presently step in: and if thou art at any time overtaken, continue not
in the sin, return presently. The Candle newly put out, if presently blown
upon, may be kindled again. The longer in the sin, the more senseless and stupid
thy heart will grow; and know that of Bernard to be true, Illud est cor durum,
quod non trepidat ad nomen cordis duri, That is an hard heart, which does not
tremble at the name of an hard heart.

LECTURE XXVII.
PSA 1.51.9. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.


How far gross sins make a breach upon Justification. Answered negatively.
WE come in the next place to declare, How far a regenerate man upon the
commission of such gross sins, does make a breach upon his Justification?

And for the further clearing of this, I shall lay down,

First, What it does not. And secondly, What it does.

No gross sin committed by a justified person, does make void the former
pardon of those sins he has been guilty of. God when he pardons, he pardons
absolutely, not with a condition suspended upon our future conversation, which
if not performed, his pardon shall be revoked. The Lutheran Divines do
generally oppose this Truth; Musculus also in his Commonplace, De remissione
peccatorum, handling this Question, does incline to the affirmative, That new
gross sins committed, make void the pardon of all former sins, so that all his
bypast iniquities do reviviscere, live again in their guilt and accusation of
such a man, Tompson in his Diatriba, pa. 48. Though he plead vehemently for the
intercision of a believers Justification upon the committing of grievous and
loathsome sins, yet he denies, That sins once pardoned are ever imputed again,
because (says he) the irrevocability of that Remission does only depend upon
the immutability of Gods counsel, whose gifts are without Repentance. For
although (says he) there is a necessity of Faith and Repentance, that sins be
at first pardoned, yet that they should continue or abide pardoned, there is no
necessity of Faith; and therefore none are damned for past sins pardoned, upon
a defect of new Faith and Repentance, when new sins are committed. The
Schoolmen handle this Question, and generally deny, That sins pardoned ever are
imputed again, unless in a certain respect, viz. as far as bypast sins are
virtually contained in the following sin, as if by a new sin a man's ingratitude
is so great, that he becomes as guilty, as if he had all his former sins
incumbent on him. But whatsoever men's judgments are, the Scripture-expressions
about pardon of sin, which are, The remembering of them no more, The blotting of
them out, and throwing them into the bottom of the sea, etc. do plainly
evidence, That God when he pardons a sin, pardons it absolutely, and for ever,
so that it shall never live again to condemn him here or hereafter.

There are two places of Scripture, that seem to give a check to this Doctrine.
The first is, Ezekiel. 18.24, 26. where God says, If a righteous man turn away
from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, his righteousness shall not be
mentioned, but he shall die in his sin. Quid clarius? s^ith Bellarmine: What is
more clear then this place? Hence this is strongly insisted upon by Papists,
Arminians, Lutherans, as the Achilles.

Now to this place, these Answers are given,

First, That the Prophet speaks not of a truly righteous man, but a
pharisaical, bragging man, who has a conceit of his righteousness, without any
reality at all; and such a feigned righteousness may quickly melt away; but
this may seem too much forced (though learned men insist on it) partly, because
the opposition is made of a righteous man to one really wicked; partly, because
it is such a righteousness, which if a man had continued in, would have saved
him, he should have lived by it. Others therefore say, The expression is only
conditional, and by supposition, if he do this, which does only imply a posse,
if a man be left to himself, not an esse, or that indeed he will do so; yea God
uses these conditional comminations, as a sanctified means to keep a righteous
man from falling. This is a good Answer: but there are others with whom I join,
that say, The Scripture does here consider a man as of himself, and what he is
in his own power, not what he is by a Covenant of Grace (which is only per
accidens, and ex hypothesi) a mere extrinsecal and accidental thing to a man.
And now, speak of a godly man thus, we may say, that he may fall, and lose the
favor of God; for although in respect of Gods predestination and Covenant of
Grace, he cannot, yet that is merely external, and from without. So that the
Scripture speaks of a godly man, sometimes in respect of his external, relative
condition, as elected and federated: Thus he is made unchangeable in respect of
his state. Again, in other places it speaks of him, in respect of his
internals, and what is dwelling in him; and in this sense, He that stands, must
take heed lest he fall. And that this is the right interpretation, is plain by
the opposition in a wicked man's estate; for there says the Text, If the wicked
leave his wickedness, and do that which is righteous, he shall live. Here is
no mention of Grace at all; Can any from hence infer therefore, a wicked man
without Gods Grace, is able to turn to God? No. Other places demonstrate the
necessity of that. So that it is plain, these Texts do not at all relate to any
thing external and extrinsecal to a man.

The next place urged for the return of sins pardoned, is, Mat. 18.32, 34.
where in the Parable, The Master is said to forgive a servant all his debt, but
because the same servant showed not the like compassion to a fellow servants,
his master was wroth with him, and charged all the debt he had forgiven, upon
him again. By which it may appear, That if we after our sins are forgiven, do
those things that are very distasteful to God, he will remember our former sins
against us. But the scope of the Parable, which is the right key to open it, is
not to show, That God will remember sins pardoned for new ones committed, but
to manifest, That forgiveness of others is a necessary qualification to be
forgiven by God; and that we may not believe God will forgive us, unless we
forgive others: and this is clear from the conclusion of the Parable, ver. 35.
So will not my heavenly Father forgive you, unless you from your hearts
forgive one another. Besides, every passage in a Parable is not argumentative,
but the chief intention only. Many things are flourishes in the Picture, not
lineaments.

Neither does a justified person so sinning, fall from the Grace of
Justification, or his Adoption, he is not cast out of the right of his
Inheritance. Whom he loves, he loves to the end; all this while, Christ's
intercession is effectual for him. Though he be a Prodigal living with Swine,
and upon husks, yet he is a Son still, Quod Christus natura, nos gratia, as
Christ is perpetually the Son of God by nature, so we in him, and by him, are
always the sons of Grace; and the perpetuity or stability of our
Justification, is not founded upon any thing in us, but upon Gods will and
love, and his sure promises.

Neither thirdly, Does he fall from the state of inherent or sanctifying no
more then imputed; for by Gods gracious Covenant, the principles of Grace are
more firmly infixed and rooted in a godly man's soul, then his soul in his body.
Vt custodiat nos per fidem, custodit in nobis ipsam fidem, That he may keep us
by Faith, he keeps Faith in us, says a learned man.

Neither fourthly, Does a godly man fall into these gross sins, without a
merciful ordering of them, even to the godly man's good. Although afflictions
may befall a man to his good, yet some have questioned, Whether God suffers a
godly man to fall into sins for good, because sins have an inward malignity and
poison in their natures, which the evils of afflictions have not. But if
Gregory said truly of Adams sin, Foelix culpa, it was an happy fault, because
God wrought such a good, the good of a Mediator, which is a greater good then
that sin was; no question but God can over rule the sins of Gods people for
their own advantage; as a godly man said, He got more good by his sins, then
his Graces, Audeo dicere, etc. (says Austin de civit. Dei, lib. 13.) I dare be
bold to say it, That it is profitable for proud men, to fall in manifest and
open sins, whereby they may be ashamed and made loathsome in their own eyes,
Salubrius sibi displicuit Petrus, quando flevit; quam sibi placuit, quando
praesumpsit. It was better with Peter disliking himself in his weeping, then
pleasing himself in his presumption. This therefore God does to his people; to
prevent sin he lets them fall into sin: and as Austin says, Sectio dolorem
operatur, ut dolor dolor tollatur. The cutting of the wound causes pain, that
so pain may be removed by pain, and sometimes venena venenis dispelluntur,
poison is driven out by oison.

The Question answered affirmatively.
And thus much for the Negative, we come to the Affirmative; and in the general
we say,

A godly man committing such a gross sin, till he does repent, is in a state of
suspension from all the effects of Gods Grace in Justication, though not of
abdication, or exheredation. He is under Sequestration, though not Ejection; he
is under an interdiction, though not an exile. He is as Absalom, that was cast
out of his fathers family, though not from being a son. The English Divines
expressed it well in the Synod of Dort, by a leper, who was shut out from his
own house, so that although he had a right to his house, yet he had no claim by
any law to enjoy his house: So though a godly man have a right to pardon of
sin, yet he cannot claim this as due to him, as long as the guilt of sin
abides on him. Hence that is expounded, Purge me with hysop, as an allusion to
the leper, who in such a manner was cleansed, not that this state is to be
conceived a third estate between a state of Justification and Condemnation, but
a suspending of the benefits of the former. In which sense a godly man justly
cast out by Church Officers for a sin, is said to have his sins bound in
Heaven. And in this respect Zanchy says, he does, Quodammodo excidere a gratia
Dei, and that they are made, quasi inimici, as it were enemies. Thus Perkins
also, Upon the committing of such sins, says he, God turns the effects of
his grace, into the effects, cujus dam odii, of a kind of hatred to their
sins, so that quodammodo fiunt inimici Dei. Now that the terror of this
condition may more fasten on the godly to make them cautelous against such
falls, let us consider what particulars this general does include.

And first it supposes a present unfitness for the Kingdom of Heaven, or any
gracious Privilege. There is no aptitude or preparation in a godly man so
lapsed, for comfort or salvation: but like the unclean man is to stand aloof
off from all this. Now how woeful is this to consider, that such a man, who had
Gods gracious Scepter always held out, to bid him come into his presence, must
now find the doors and gates of mercy for a season shut upon him! Now the
Master of the feast may say to him, How came thou in here without a wedding
Garment? When David sat not according to his custom at the Kings Table, it was
excused, he had uncleanness upon him. Alas, it is a godly man's aggravation of
this guilt, why does he not apply the Promises as formerly? Why is he not had
into the Spouses Wine-cellar? Alas uncleanness is upon him. As Christ said to
Mary, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended; we may apply otherwise, the
Promise of Grace, Christ says to thee, Touch me not, lay not hold upon me, for
thou art not yet risen out of thy filth.

2. As there is no aptitude for gracious privileges, So also God does now
change all his dealings and administrations toward them. Those effects of
love, delight, comfort, assurance and sweetness they had, are now turned into
the bitter effects of wrath, displeasure, trouble and grief of soul, sad pangs
and convulsions of conscience, so that they have no peace with God nor
themselves. Thus their sins swallow them up like Jonahs Whale, and they are, as
it were, in the bottom of hell. God is really offended and displeased with
them, hereupon their conscience does truly and sadly accuse them: And all this
being set home by Gods Spirit convincing of them of sin in all the aggravations
of it, O the groans and agonies their souls must needs conflict with! This
David does evidently teach us in what he felt upon him. Hearken then to David's
cryings and groanings, and take you heed how you abuse the Grace of God, either
doctrinally or practically to a secure committing of gross sin. Be sure (if
ye belong to God) your sin will find you out; and no Doctrine of free Grace,
will be Altar or Sanctuary safe enough for you to hide your selves in. God who
was the God of all consolation, is now the God of all sorrow and fear. Thou
think on him, and thy meditations are not sweet but troublesome. Now its not
the Spirit of God, that seals and comforts, but of Conviction and Humiliation.
Now Christ's blood, which thou despisedst, does speak bitter things against
thee. A drop of Gods anger falls into the conscience of a godly man thus
awakened, like a drop of scalding lead into a man's eye. O what comfort do those
pleasures, those lusts now afford him? Now he may say of them, as she of her
husband, Thou art a bloody husband.

3. Although he has a right to the Covenant of Grace, to the privileges
contained therein, yet as you have heard, He may not without renewed Repentance
claim any of these. He cannot say, my God, my Christ, my Pardon; No, God has
spit in his face, as the expression is to Miriam, and the soul is become filthy
and noisome, and she must be washed again, ere Christ will receive her. Though
there be a Well of Salvation, yet thou have no bucket to draw out of it. As
long as a godly man's heart stands thus averse from God, and has a purpose to
continue in sin, all the Promises are like a fountain sealed up, and a Garden
enclosed. He is in a worse condition, then the wounded man in the way to
Jericho, for not only the Priest and the Levite (the Moral Law) pass by him,
but even the good Samaritan, Christ and the Promises pour no oil into his
wounds. All the while he applies comforts to his soul, and supports himself
with hopes of Gods favor, he lives upon spiritual robbery. And he can with no
more truth (if we speak of the actual use and application) say of the Promises,
then the devil of the world, and the glorious things thereof, All these are
mine.

By this they incur the guilt of eternal damnation. There is a twofold guilt,
as some distinguish, one potential (which by others is Reatus simplex, a simple
guilt) another actual (which by others is Reatus redundans in personam, a guilt
falling upon the person. Now it is upon all sides agreed, That by those sins he
deserves eternal damnation. And therefore a godly man so offending, ought to
bewail the forfeiture he has made. If God should deal with him according to
that strict rule, Cursed be every one that abides not in all the things that
the Law requires; where should he appear? But may we not say, they have an
actual guilt obliging them to eternal wrath, not absolutely, but conditionally,
till they take the means appointed by God for their pardon? I see not but in a
sound sense this may be said, for God does not will to them salvation, while
they abide in that state, though at that time he wills to give them such
effectual Grace, that thereby they shall recover, and so remove that gulf which
is between them and God. So that at the same time God does will to give them
grace to repent and recover, and yet he does not will salvation to them, till
they do recover. Here is no contrariety in Gods will, because though this be
about the same person, yet not in the same respects: for Gods will not to give
salvation while in such an estate, and to give Repentance that he may come out
of that estate, do no ways oppose one another; and because of this later
mercy, it is, that we may always say, There is no condemnation to those that
are in Christ Jesus. Their sins are never imputed to them for their
condemnation, but there is a conditional obliging of them, till they sue out
their pardon. So that it is here, as Solomon did with Abiathar* 1 Kin. 2.26.
Thou art (says Solomon) worthy of death, but I will not at this time put thee
to death.

5. Because of this guilt and demerit of sin, it is, that our Divines David
(for example) should die before these sins be repented of, he would be damned;
For if you suppose a justified person to persevere always in gross and vile
sins without reformation, you may as well suppose him to be damned. Hence there
is, as some observe, a twofold impossibility, There is an impossibility that
David elected and justified should be damned; There is also an impossibility,
that David a murderer and an adulterer should without Repentance be saved; but
God by his powerful grace will untie this knot by a certain and infallible
recovery out of his sins, for that is a perpetual and sure rule, Election has
obtained, Romans 11. otherwise, speak of David as in that state before
Repentance, we may say, if he had died in it, he would have been damned. Thus
Beza, Twiss, etc. Yet Gods grace which was so potent at the first to raise out
of the grave of sin how much rather if life be in us, will it quicken us to
turn unto God?

6. From hence further it arises, That he needs a particular Justification
in respect of that guilt, which is to be done away. Some Orthodox and learned
Writers, Abbot and others, distinguish of a twofold Justification, one
universal, whereby a man is absolutely received into the grace and favor of
God, becoming his Son. A second is particular, whereby sins are remitted to
them that are already made the children of God, without which, they would fall
from their first benefit of sonship, The one is called, Justificatio
simpliciter. The other, Secundum quid: and this particular Justification they
make to be often repeated. Thus Peter Martyr, Romans 3. Lapsis post
Justificationem repetita denuo Justificatione per fidem condonari. Thus Bucer,
Defensio, page 85. acknowledges an iteration of Justification after we repent,
and arise from more grievous sins. Others call it not a particular
Justification, but an application of that universal Justification. And
certainly Justification does denote the state of a man, but seeing the
Remission of such sins does not put them into a new estate (for they never fell
from that) we cannot so properly call it Justification, and I know not any
place where the Scripture calls it so, and it would be very hard to say, That
Justification is re-iterated as often as sin is pardoned. Though therefore
there may be some difference in the words, yet the matter it self is clear,
viz. There is a necessity of the removing of this guilt, that so the person
offending may be brought into Gods favor again.

That such a man so offending must renew an act of Faith and Repentance. So
that the former acts of faith and godly sorrow, will not discharge or acquit
from the new sins committed. Therefore lastly, it is a most dangerous error in
practice, to hold, That after a known sin committed, the first thing a
believer is to do, before Repentance or Humiliation, is to believe that that
sin is already pardoned. Thus a late Writer, Cornwell in a Treatise called
Gospel-repentance, wherein he labors to prove, That a believer entered into the
Covenant of Grace, upon the commission of an actual known sin, ought to believe
the actual pardon of that sin, before he actually repent of the same. Now
although this is to be confuted, when we handle Faith and Repentance, yet thus
much we may say, That this Doctrine must needs be very unsound; for first,
There is no sin actually pardoned before Repentance, as at large I have showed;
and no sin is pardoned before it be committed, as in the next Question is to be
showed. So that it would be abominable presumption, yea and falsehood to believe
such a thing. Hence such a persuasion as this, God has or will pardon my sins,
can bring no comfort or peace to our conscience till we repent; for a Scripture
persuasion is, That God enabling me to repent, and to use the means, will
vouchsafe pardon, and in this only can I have comfort* Besides, the Author
makes the last work of Faith, the first; for upon a known sin committed, Faith
is to be exercised, first, in the threatenings of God, to believe those due to
him. In the next place, Faith is to rely upon Christ for pardon, that he may
receive remission of sins; for as Rivet and Perkins urge well, There is no
pardon offered on Gods part, or received on man's, till he do believe, and then
when these acts are done, God does many times incline the soul to believe the
sin is pardoned. But the pardon of sin must be received by a direct act of
Faith, before we can believe that it is pardoned by a reflex. But this is more
largely to be confuted.

Now the Objection may be, Why the guilt of new gros^e sins does not take away
Justification.
How can sin thus far prevail in the filth and guilt of it, and yet the man
so sinning not fall from his Justification? This will be cleared, if you
consider these things.

First, That Justification is an act of God merely, it is not our act. We are
said to be justified, and God he does justify. Now Opus Dei non potest irritum
fieri per opus hominis, Those acts of God which he does, we cannot make void,
but he orders them for their time and continuance, as he pleases.

Secondly, Consider, That sin does not expel the Grace of Justification,
efficiently, or physically, as darkness does light, or coldness heat, but
meritoriously by way of desert. Now God does not with us according to our
desert; when he entered into a Covenant of Grace with us, he so appointed it,
that no sin should break the league of friendship, whereas if he had pleased he
might so have appointed it, that the least sin should have dissolved this bond;
and if sin did expel the Grace of Justification efficiently, the least sin
would have done it. But now, if it was wholly at Gods pleasure to make this
state dissoluble or indissoluble; and if so, then that neither great sins, or
less should break it; and this makes us to wonder, how David in his adultery
and murder could be justified, because we prepossess our selves with this
principle, That sin does by a natural necessity expel the grace of God, whereas
many Schoolmen are bold to determine, That de potentia absoluta, God might
pardon sin, though there were no Repentance, or infused grace at all in a man.

Thirdly, That a particular, partial guilt, is not the immediate opposition to
universal Justification of the person, unless it were to abide in him.
Justification of a man's person will keep him from being actually condemned,
though not from the guilt of condemnation. As a guilty person, thrown into
prison, is kept from the use of his house, goods, and all comforts, but he is
not deprived of them, till he be actually condemned: so a believer falling into
gross sins, is deprived of the use of all spiritual comforts, but not cast out
of the right of them, because he shall never actually be condemned.

LECTURE XXVIII.
PSALM. 51.9. And blot out all my iniquities.


THe next thing in this Text to be considered, is the second Petition, which
though differing from the former in words, yet is coincident in the matter.

The second Petition handled.
In this was observable (as you heard) the Petition it self [ Blot out my
iniquities.]

2. The extent [ All] all my iniquities.

Now from hence we may justly take an occasion to handle that Question, Whether
God in pardoning do forgive all sins together.
Whether God in pardoning do forgive all sins together? So that sins past,
present and future are remitted together, for that is the opinion of some, That
as soon as ever a man is actually entered into the Covenant of Grace, all his
sins, even future, are actually forgiven, and that they are bound to believe
the same, even before they actually repent of any iniquity committed. This at
large Cornwell maintains in his Book of Gospel-repentance. Yea there are some
learned and worthy Authors, who seem to incline this way. D. Ames in his
Medulla, in the Chapter of Justification, says, Not only the sins of justified
persons that are past, are remitted, but also in some sort those that are to
come, Neither (says he) can sins past and present be altogether and fully
remitted, unless sins to come be in some sort remitted also. Only he makes
this difference, sins past are remitted by a formal application, sins to come
only virtually: sins past are remitted in themselves, sins to come in the
subject or person sinning. But this in effect to say, they are not remitted,
but that God by his Covenant of Grace, will as sins are committed, give Grace
to repent, whereby there may be a forgiveness of them. This is to say rather,
No sin shall hereafter actually condemn them, rather then to say, they are
forgiven. Doctor Twisse, Vindic. Gratiae, page 82. de Eurat. lib. 3. Quid si
dicam in Justificatione nostra, etc. What if I say, in Justification, we
receive the forgiveness of our sins, not only that are past, but of future
also, that is, we are made more certain of their forgiveness. For (says he)
that internal act of God, whereby he does remit sins, cannot be renewed in God.
Certissimum esse judico, etc. I judge it most certain (as he goes on) to whom
God once does forgive sins, to the same man he forgives all his sins whatsoever
they are; of which absolution there is indeed a frequent pronunciation iterated
to Penitents often in the Scripture. Thus that learned Author going upon those
two grounds, 1. That Pardon of sin is an immanent act in God. 2. That
application of Pardon to us, is no more then the sense and manifestation of
that pardon, which was from all Eternity. But the weakness of these grounds
has been already demonstrated, and we have other Orthodox Writers speaking
more consonantly to Truth, denying that future sins are forgiven, before
committed and repented of. When Gr^tius had objected, That the Protestants
Doctrine, was, Peccata condonari antequam fiant, That sins were forgiven before
they were committed, Rivet in his (...), page 467 replieth, Imo id nos
absurdissimum credimus, etc. Yea we think such a Doctrine most absurd, and the
imputation of it to us, most unjust; For though (says he) God decreed to
pardon our sins from all Eternity, yet the execution of this is not from all
Eternity. As God decreed from all Eternity to create the world, yet the world
was not from all Eternity. Those that know God has decreed from Eternity to
pardon sin upon the condition of Repentance. Those that know God has not
decreed the end without the means, will never ascribe to themselves Pardon of
sin, without these exercises of Repentance. Thus the same Author in the same
Book, page 533. Absurdum est credere, etc. It is absurd (says he) to believe a
Remission of sins, which are not yet committed, for neither in the Decree of
God is there an actual Remission decreed without Repentance preceding
Remission. To this purpose Perkins in his Book of Predestination, There is no
actual Pardon (says he) offered on Gods part to us, nor on our part received
without Faith and Repentance. When Thomson in his Diatriba, had made mention of
an answer formed by some Author, That in Justification all sins past, present
and future were forgiven, and a justified person was bound to believe this;
Bishop Abbot in his Answer, cap. 24. calls this incommode dictum, an
incommodious expression, and argues against it.

Three things laid down by way of concession.
Having premised this, I come to lay down the grounds, that sins are not
pardoned to a justified person, before they be committed and repented of, and
therefore it is dangerous presumption to believe such a thing. Only these
things must be acknowledged.

sins past to those that repent, He forgiveth all them together. God does not
pardon some, and leave out others. Thus the gracious Promise, Heb. 8. of
remembering our iniquities no more, and blotting them all out, is to be thus
far universally interpreted, that all those sins which then are found in the
lives of believing persons, shall be removed and taken away. All past sins are
forgiven together. And the ground of this Truth is twofold, partly because the
same Grace and love of God which moves him to blot out one, will also stir
him up for the other. And indeed if it were not so, God would have love to a
man as his friend, and hatred to him as an enemy, at the same time; whereas
Remission is Reconciliation with God, and therefore every obstacle must be
removed, partly this arises from the nature of Repentance, for where that is
truly for one sin, it is also for all other sins, and then the guilt of all
must needs be taken away.

That to speak properly, there is nothing future to God, and those things that
are not yet to us, they are present to him; For he calls things that are not,
as if they were; but although it be thus with God, yet we are not to conceive
of things any other ways, then according to that manner of his dispensation,
whereby things decreed from Eternity are produced to act in time; and
certainly, as sins future to us are present to him, so Repentance also future
to us is present to him. And therefore Gods Decree for Remission, was also for
Repentance, and both are present to him.

Thirdly, This must be granted, That although future sins are not pardoned,
before committed, yet by the Covenant of Grace, God will so preserve, that as
sins are committed, so Grace will be dispensed, that no sin shall actually
condemn us. And this may be the virtual Remission of future sins, which some
speak of. So that although a justified person may not believe that his sins are
pardoned, which he shall commit, yet he may believe that God will keep him by
his power through faith to salvation, and that if he fall in sin, God will
renew Repentance in his soul; and our peace of conscience does not simply arise
from hence, That God will pardon our sins, but that he will so preserve us from
evil, and lead us into every good duty, that so pardon may be vouchsafed unto
us.

These things explained, I come to lay down the Arguments, The Question held
negatively upon these grounds.
Why none should presume, that because of his Justification, all future sins
not committed, or present sins not repented of, are forgiven unto him.

The first ground is from those places which presume and necessarily suppose
sin to be committed, before it is pardoned. One place is brought by some
learned men, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth a Propitiation, to declare his
Righteousness for the Remission of sins that are past. Here (say they)
Remission of sins through Christ's blood, is restrained to sins past; and upon
this some argue, Therefore future sins are not remitted. Thus, as I take it,
argue Peter Martyr, Hiperius, Domnam; but it is more probable, that by sins
past are meant those committed before Christ came into the world. And Beza, who
is followed by other learned men, make (...), not to be pardon, but connivance,
as if the sense were, God did pass by the sins of our Fathers before Christ's
coming, and did not manifest his wroth in a Sacrifice expiatory of their sins,
till Christ himself came and suffered upon the Cross: So he makes this (...)
here, with that which is called (...), in Act. 17.30. Therefore I leave this,
and urge one or two places more, 1 Job. 2.1. If any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father. Here we see is intercession for sin, and a way for
Remission; but how? upon a supposition that sin is, If any man. Ezekiel. 18.22.
speaking of a wicked man that turns to God, and now shall surely live, he
expresses it thus, All his transgressions that he has committed shall not be
mentioned to him. Observe, All that he has committed, not all that he shall
commit. A third place is eminently set down, Jer. 33.8. Where God makes a
glorious Promise of the pardon of sin; but take notice to what sins he limits
it, even to those that have been committed, I will cleanse them from all their
iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me, and I will pardon all their
iniquities, whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed
against me. Its of what they have done, not of what they shall do.

the expressions Gods word uses about Pardon; All which do suppose, That sin
goes before, and that God does not antidate his Pardon. Such as these are,
Remember not iniquity. Now although this be attributed unto God improperly, yet
the very sense of the word supposes, That sins were precedent, and how God by
his grace will remember them no more. So the phrase to blot out, supposes sin
was already registered in Gods book. Men do not use to forgive Debts before they
be. Throwing them into the sea, what does this imply? but that sins did appear
before, and that in a terrible threatening manner. Covering of sin, How can that
be understood, if sin be not with some loathsomnes? Thus we might instance in
all the expressions used by Scripture to represent Pardon.

from the necessary qualifications required in those that have Pardon, which
cannot be unless a man have already committed the sin, as 1 John 1.9. If we
confess our sins, he is faithful to pardon. Now confession is always of a
thing already extant. How absurd would it be, for a man to go and confess the
sins he will commit? This would rather be impudence then humiliation; look over
all the confessions made by the people of God for themselves, or in the behalf
of others, as David's, Ezrahs, Nehemiahs, Daniels, and you shall observe them
all limited to sins that have been done, never extended to what they shall
commit. Thus in the old Testament, when any had sinned, they offered
sacrifices. There was no sacrifice appointed for a future sin, but only for
that which was already committed. Thus to pardon is required forsaking of a
man's sin, Prove. 28.13. Now how can a man be said to forsake that which is not,
to leave that which is future? especially, as you have heard, repentance is
commanded as the way wherein only pardon may be had, now how can repentance be
about that which is to come? Can a man repent of any thing but what is past?
The two Greek words (...), to be wise and understand after the fact is done,
and (...), reditus, a turning again to those whom we have offended, make it as
clear as the Sun, that there is no pardon of sin before committed.

Fourthly, There is no promise in all the word of God, made for the pardon of a
sin before it be committed and repented of. If therefore the Word of God give
no such encouragement, what presumption is it to make a faith, that all sins
are pardoned, the Gospel-faith? for grant that such a thing were true, and to
be believed, viz. That all sins are pardoned, yet that could not be the
Gospel-faith, for the Gospel-faith is justifying faith: now the object of
justifying faith, is not ens complexum, a proposition, such as this is, All my
sins are pardoned; but ens incomplexum, a single object, which is Christ
himself, received and applied by faith, I am not justified by believing my sins
are pardoned, but by relying upon Christ for pardon; But this by the way. The
strength of the Argument lies in this, God has made no promise for the pardon
of a sin before it be committed and repented of. Therefore none may either
believe or claim such a thing. The grand charter or privilege for pardon, as
it is laid down in the Covenant of Grace, is contained in Jer. 31.34. which is
also repeated, Heb. 8.12. Now this Covenant of Grace, as it promises pardon of
sin, so also a new heart, and actual exercise of grace, so that they shall walk
in all Gods ways. Now the way wherein pardon is to be had, is repentance and
faith. We must not therefore conceive of the Covenant of Grace, as promising
pardon and forgiveness, without any qualification in the subject: this would
contradict other places of Scripture. Therefore in the Covenant of Grace some
things are promised absolutely, supposing nothing to go before, such are
regeneration, the working of faith in us, giving his holy Spirit to us, and
union with Christ. 2. There are many privileges in the Covenant of Grace, and
those are given, where God has wrought some former effects of his grace, and
suppose them to be: such are Justification, pardon of sin, increase in grace,
Glorification, all these things are promised in the Covenant of Grace, but made
good where there are the former effects of Gods grace wrought in them. We do
not theref^re say, God does not pardon sin, unless repentance go before, as if
God needed repentance, as if he could not do it without repentance, as if
repentance made God the better, or made him amends. These are idle calumnies
cast upon this Doctrine in some Pamphlets. But only God has appointed one
effect of his grace before another in order, and he will not vouchsafe one
before he has wrought the other. As for instance, God has appointed no
unclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, God will not give glory
where he has not given grace. If one should tragically exclaim upon this, This
is to make God need our graces, This is to make grace meritorious with God,
This is to be a Papist, a Formalist, to make men rest in themselves; you would
presently judge this a vain, weak cavil: No less is it, when we are charged
thus, for holding God will not forgive sin but to those that believe and
repent. It is not for any worth in what we do, but because God will have an
order and a method in his graces, Justification where Repentance is,
Glorification where Holiness is. It being not fit to give pearl unto swine, nor
childrens meat to dogs.

then he may have full joy and unspeakable boasting in God, while he lies
wallowing in the midst of sins. The reason of the consequence is this, By such
an act of faith, we have peace with God, and we glory in him. This flows, as
a proper effect of faith, though it do not always follow, yet it may follow, and
happily it is our weakness, if it do^^ ^ot. And if so, then it was David's
weakness to b^ troubled about sin: It was for want of a right considering of
the Covenant of Grace, that he had no joy in his heart, and that his bones were
broken. The Adversary sees the necessity of this consequent, and therefore is
not afraid to say, That a justified person, even when sin is most prevalent,
and the heart most hardened, yet then can glory in Jesus Christ, with a large
heart, breaking forth into thanksgivings. Cornwel of Gospel-Repentance, page
125. How contrary is this to David's experience, Psalm. 32. who, while he humbled
not himself for his sin, found nothing but terror and trouble in his own soul?
And certainly this Doctrine must be very distasteful to ^very gracious heart,
which shall make faith and assurance in the glorious effects of it, amicably
concording (as it were) with great and grievous sins. And let the Adversary
show such an instance in all Scripture. For as for his example in Paul, Romans 7.
who found himself captivated unto sin, doing the things he would not, yet
giving thanks to God through Jesus Christ: this is clean contrary to him, for
Paul did greatly humble himself, and was deeply sensible of this tyranny of
sin, which made him cry out, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of sin. So that we cannot with any color call him an hardened
sinner, Somnium narrare vigilantis est, said Seneca; and to complain of sin,
especially in the first motions and suggestions of it, as Paul did, argues a
tender life of grace in him. No less absurd is it, to bring Habakkuk to
patrocinate this great error, for although he said, He would rejoice in God,
and glory in his salvation, Hab. 3.8, 9. in the midst of Gods judgments upon
the public: yet this does not suppose any personal grievous sins he was fallen
into.

Sixthly, If sins be pardoned thus before committed and repented it would be in
vain to pray for forgiveness of sin, seeing it is already past. This Argument
(as before was said) Gomarus urged against Piscator, explaining that Petition [
Forgive us our sins] for the sense and assurance of it only in our hearts. It
is true, we may pray for a thing that is past, thus far, for the continuance of
it, but not for the thing it self. Although there can hardly be an instance in
all Scripture given of such a Petition. We do not read of any prayer in
Scripture that God would elect us, and predestinate us, yet that might admit of
the same interpretation which they give for pardon of sin, viz. To make us more
assured and persuaded of it in our own hearts. Hence when God speaks of pardon
of sins, he uses many times the future tense, Jer. 31. I will forgive their
iniquities, which if pardoned before, would be very difficult to say; even as
hard, as if God should say, I will predestinate and elect such men. It is
indeed often said, That when we pray for pardon of sin, we pray for the sense
and feeling of it; but let such that interpret so, give any parallel place for
such a sense, yet we deny not (as before has been said) but reductively this
may be included in that Petition.

then in a reprobate man, all his future sins are actually condemned. The
consequence is firm upon that rule, Eadem est ratio contrariorum, there is the
same reason of contraries. Therefore if a man's future sins be pardoned before
they be committed, then a reprobate man's sins shall be punished before they be.
Now how contrary is this to Gods dispensation revealed in the Scripture? Where
can we find any one man punished for a future sin? Were not all the sins men
are afflicted for in Gods Word, because they had done them, not because they
were to do them? Indeed the Scripture, Matthew. 5. sometimes makes the desires
and lusts of the soul after sin, to be the sin it self, but that is because
they are the proxime and immediate cause of such a sin; but we are now speaking
of future sins, that it may be as yet have no preparation at all for them in
any cause.

That God pardons sins future, by the same we can prove, it is because of
repentance future. So that still no sin will be forgiven without repentance.
For suppose that were a true rule to stand upon, Gods internal will to pardon
is an immanent act, and therefore from all eternity, will it not as well
follow, Gods internal will to give repentance, is an immanent act, and
therefore repentance is from all eternity. If another be a true rule, That God
has given us all pardon from eternity, only we have the sense of it, and
manifestation in our own souls; may we not then say, that we had the grace of
repentance from all eternity, but it is declarative in time in our own souls?
For although justification be Gods act, and repentance ours, yet we are passive
in the infusion of this, as well as justification. I speak not of repentance as
an act (which cannot so properly be said to be infused) but of the frame of the
soul. If a third rule should be true, That therefore sins are pardoned because
the Covenant of Grace says, it will pardon all; Does not this hold also for
repentance, seeing in the Covenant God promises to give a repenting heart?
Lastly, If God may be thought changeable, because now he pardons, and once he
did not; will it not as well hold, because he now gives grace to such a man to
repent, and once he did not?

To conclude therefore, it follows with an equal necessity, That if future
sins are forgiven before they be committed, That God also did accept of future
repentance before it was practiced, or else if repentance be not received by
God, till actually performed; so neither is sin forgiven, till actually
committed and repented of.

The result of this whole truth is, by way of Use, Use.
to admonish us, That we make not any Doctrine about grace in the genious and
natural consequence of it, to encourage or harden to sin. If the grace of God
which has appeared to teach thee to deny all ungodly lusts, make thee love
them the more; If because you are under grace, sin has therefore dominion over
you; If there be goodness with the Lord, and therefore you do not fear him:
then know all things work contrary to their nature, and Scripture-directions.
All Gospel Grace is a cleansing, purifying, refining property; it is fire to
get out the dross; it is water to wash away the filth; it is oil to mollify
the wounds of the soul; it is wine to make the heart glad, and rejoice in God.
Do not while you promise your selves a liberty by grace, therein become
servants of corruption; more especially let the children of God, who have had
sweet experience of the Covenant of Grace upon their souls, take heed of falls
and relapses. If the Prodigal son after that reconciliation made with his
father, after all that glory and love vouchsafed to him, had again wandered
into far Countries, prodigally consumed all his estate, living with swine upon
husks, How unpardonable and unworthy would this fact have been? No less guilty
will thou be* who have had the ring put on thee, who have fed on the fatted
Calf, if after this, thou provoke God by gross transgressions. Some have
disputed, Whether it be possible for a godly man to be secure in sinning, and
more willing to offend, because of Gods gracious Covenant, which will
infallibly rescue him out of that sin. But what sin is not possible (except
that against the holy Ghost) even to a regenerate man? Take heed then, lest
thou love the Gospel, because it has always glad tidings, and thou can not
abide the precepts or threatenings, because they speak hard things to thee.
There may be a carnal Gospeller, as well as a Popish Legalist.

LECTURE XXIX.
ACTS 3.19. Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out.


THe Apostle Peter in this exhortatory discourse of his to the Jews, deals like
a wise Physician:

First, Discovering the danger of the disease.

Secondly, Applying an effectual remedy.

The disease is that heinous sin the Jews were guilty of, in killing of Christ,
the Prince of life. Which sin is aggravated by a threefold antithesis:

1. They delivered up, and denied Christ in the presence of Pilate, when he
would have acquitted him.

2. They denied him, though he was an holy and just One.

3. They desired a murderer to be released rather then him. This is their sin.

In the next place, you have the remedy prescribed in two words, Repent and be
converted. Repent, that denotes a change in the heart: and to be converted, an
alteration in the outward conversation, (...), Howsoever it be generally
received that (...) signifies only true and godly sorrow, and (...), that
imperfect and unsound grief which is upon hypocrites, yet this is not
universally true, for (...), is applied to true repentance, Mat. 21.19. and 32.
and (...) to an outward repentance meeerly, Mat. 11.21. The other word is
(...), which is to be understood reciprocally, Turn your selves, or be turned.
This exhortation does not suppose free will in us, it only denotes our duty,
not our ability. Neither is Grotius his assertion better then Semipelagianisme,
when he compares the will of a man to the mother, and grace to the father, so
that as children are named after the father, and not the mother: thus good
actions are denominated from grace, not free will: for in our conversion
free will is neither a total or partial cause preoperant or cooperant, but
the passive subject recipient of that Vim gratiae vorticordiam, as Austin
called it, the heart-changing power of grace. This duty of repentance is urged
from the profitable consequent. Piscator calls it effectu utili, the effect of
conversion, which is, that your sins may be blotted out. It is not an inference
of causality, but of consequence. Blotting out, is (as you heard) from
merchants that expunge their debts, or the Scribe that raceth out those letters
which ought not to be in the paper, or the Painter that defaceth those
lineaments, which should not be in the Picture.

In the next place, you have the time, when these sins shall be blotted out
(that is) when the times of refreshing shall come, (...), is used Exodus 8.15.
Some do not understand this, nor that expression, The times of restitution of
all things, verse. 21. of the day of judgment, but of that preservation the
elect should have, when the destruction of Jerusalem should be. Hence it is,
that they expound the day of the Lord so much spoken of in Peter, and other
places, which is said to be coming upon the believers, of that time when God
came to destroy Jerusalem, but there is no cogent reason to go from the
received interpretation, which makes the day of judgment to be the times of
refreshing to the godly, for so indeed it is, because then they are eased from
all those troubles and oppressions they lay under in this world. Hence our
Savior calls it, The day of our redemption, upon the coming whereof they are to
lift up their heads.

The Observation is,

Observe.
That a complete and full absolution from all sin, is not enjoyed till the day
of judgment.

The Believers have not a full discharge till then: we are in this life
continually subject to new sins, and so to new guilt, whereby arise new fears,
so that the soul has not a full rest from all, till that final absolution be
pronounced at the day of judgment.

Propositions laid down in prosecution of this Observat^on.
Before we show the grounds whereby it may appear, that the remission of our
sins is not fully completed till then: we must lay down some Propositions by
way of a grand work.

First, The Scripture not only in this privilege of remission of our sin, but
in others also, makes the complement and fullness of them to be at the day of
judgment. Redemption is the total sum, as it were, of all our mercies, and
we are partakers of it in this life, Col. 1.14. Romans 3.24. Yet the Scripture
calls the day of judgment, when we shall rise out of our graves in a peculiar
and eminent manner, the day of redemption, Ephesians. 1.7. Ephesians. 4.30. because at
that day, will be the utmost and last effects of our redemption. Adoption, that
also is a privilege we receive in this life; yea a learned man ( Forbes in his
book where he handles the order of Gods graces) makes adoption (as I take it)
to be the first, and to go before justification, yet the Apostle, Romans 8.23.
calls the last day, the day of adoption. Hence 1 John 3.2. the Apostle,
though he says, We are now the sons of God, yet he says it does not appear
what we shall be, because the glory God at the last day will put upon us, is so
far transcendent and superlative to what now we are. Thus Mat. 19.28. the
last day is also called the day of regeneration unto the people of God, yet in
this life they partake of that grace, but because then is the full perfection
and manifestation of it, therefore the Scripture calls it, the day of
regeneration. Even as the Apostle, Act. 13.33* applies that passage of the
Psalm to Christ's resurrection, This day have I begotten thee, because then was
such a solemn and public declaration, that he was the Son of God. No marvel
then, if the Scripture do also call the day of judgment a time, when sins
shall be blotted out, because then is the public absolution of the godly; and
according to philosophy motions receive their names from the term to which they
tend.

Secondly, Howsoever Justification be said to consist in pardon of sin, yet
there is a great difference between the one and the other; for Justification
besides the pardon of sin does connote a state that the subject is put into,
viz. A state of favor, being reconciled with God. Hence it is, that this state
cannot be reiterated often, no more then a wife after that first entrance into
the relation is frequently made a wife. In this sense, the Scripture always
speaks of it, as connoting a state or condition the subject is put into, as
well as a peculiar privilege vouchsafed to such. It is true, There are indeed
learned men, who think Justification may be reiterated, as you heard, Peter
Martyr, and Bucer. Others call it a continued action, as conservation. But
although there is a continuance of Justification, and the godly are preserved
in that estate, yet we cannot say, God does renew Justification daily, as he
does pardon of sin. There are some that think the Scripture gives a ground for
a second Justification, or the continuing and increasing of it, and bring those
places, Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. Rev. 22.11. The learned and excellent Interpreter
Ludovicus de Dieu, in Cap. 8. of the Romans, verse. 4. largely pleads for a
twofold Justification; The first he makes to be the imputing of Christ's
righteousness to us, received by faith, which is altogether perfect, and is the
cause of pardon of sins: The second he makes an effect of the former, whereby
through the grace of God regenerating, we are conformable unto that love in
part, and are day by day more and more justified, and shall be fully so when
perfection comes: of which Justification he says these texts speak, Jam. 2.21,
24. Revel. 22.11. Mat. 11.37. 1 King. 8.32. This twofold Justification he
makes to differ toto coelo from the Papists, whose first is founded upon the
merit of congruity, the second upon the merit of condignity. But the discussing
of this will be more proper in the other part, viz. of imputed righteousness.
Austin seems to hold Justification a frequent and continued act, lib. 2.
contra Julianum, cap. 8. When we are heard in that prayer [Forgive us our sins]
we need (says he) such a remission daily, what progress soever we have made in
our second Justification. He speaks also of a Justification hujus vitae, which
he calls minorem the lesser; and another plenam and perfectam, full and perfect,
which belongs to the state of glory, Tract. 4. in Joannem lib. de spiritu and
lit. cap. ultim. But the more exact handling of this will be in the place
abovementioned. It seems more consonant to Scripture, if we say, That
Justification is a state we were once put into, which is not repeated over and
over, as often as sin is forgiven; neither can it admit of increase or
decrease, so that a man should be more or less justified, for even David while
he was in that state of suspension, was not less justified, though the effects
of Justification were less upon him. It is true, in some sense learned men say,
Justification may increase, viz. extensive, not intensive, as they express it,
by way of extension, when more sins are pardoned, not intensively in its own
nature. Even as the soul of a man in its information of the body, admits of no
increase intensively, but it does extensively, the more the parts of the body
grow, the further does its information extend. But of these things more in
their proper place.

Howsoever an absolution shall be completed at the day of judgment, yet our
justification shall not abide in such a way, as it is in this life. Now our
Justification is by pardon of sin, and a righteousness without us imputed to
us, which is instrumentally applied by faith, but this way shall then cease;
for having perfect righteousness inherent in our selves, we shall need no
covering. It is true, the glory and honor of all this will redound upon
Christ, and he shall not be the less glorified, because he has then brought us
to the full end of all his sufferings. I know some may doubt whether any
righteousness, but that which is infinite can please God, and therefore as some
think the Angels were accepted of God through Christ, though perfect: so it may
of the Saints in heaven; but I see no ground for this. This seems to be
undoubted, That the way of Justification by faith in Christ, arises because of
our imperfection and sinfulness remaining in us, and therefore is justificatio
viae, not patriae, a justification of us in our way, not when we come to our
home.

Fourthly, Although pardon of sin be completed at that great day, yet this is
not to be understood, as if Gods pardon of any sin were imperfect, and
something of sin did still remain to be done away. No, those expressions of
forgivenes of sin in the Scripture, denote such a full and plenary pardon, that
a sin cannot be more remitted then it is. But because we commit new sins
daily, and so need pardon daily, Therefore it is that we are not completely
pardoned till then. As also because the perfect pardon we have here, shall then
solemnly and publicly be declared to all the world.

These things thus premised, Wherein the compleatnesse of the pardon of sin at
the day of judgment consists.
I come to show the grounds or particulars, wherein our pardon of sin is thus
completed.

And first, In our sense and feeling: For howsoever God pardon a sin
perfectly, yet our faith which receives it, is weak. This Jewel is taken with
a trembling and shaking hand. 1. In our sense of that pardon
Hence it is that we have not full faith and confidence in our spirits. We may
see this in David, though Nathan told him his sins were forgiven him, yet his
faith was not so vigorous and powerful, as wholly to apply this to his own
soul; and therefore he had much anguish and trouble of heart afterward; But
now, at the last day, all these fears, diffidence and darkness, will be quite
removed out of our hearts. There shall be no more disturbance in our souls,
then there can be corruption in the highest heavens, we shall then have such a
gourd as no worm can devour. Our souls shall not then know the meaning of
sitting in darkness, and wanting Gods favor. There will then be no
complaints, Why has the Lord forsaken me? Well may Gods children be called
upon to lift up their heads, when such a redemption draws nigh; and well may
that day be called the times of refreshment, seeing the people of God are so
often scorched with the fiery darts of Satan.

Secondly, Pardon of sin will at that day be perfected. 2. In the
accomplishment of all effects of pardon.
Because all the effects of pardon, will then be accomplished, and not so much
as any scars remain, the wound will be so fully healed. Although God does fully
pardon sin, yet the effects of this are delaied, many chastisements and sad
afflictions are to be undergone: howsoever, death it self, and the corruption
in the grave must seize upon justified persons; now these are the fruit of sin,
and howsoever the sting of these be taken away, yet they are not wholly
conquered, till that last day, Then therefore may we justly say, Sin is
pardoned, when there shall be no more grave, no more death, no more corruption,
but all shall be swallowed up in immortality and glory.

3. Then no more iteration of pardon.
Thirdly, Then, and not till then may we say, remission of sins will be
completed, because then shall no more iteration of pardon be. Here in this
life, because the root of corruption abides in us; there are daily pullulant
branches of sins, and so frequent guilt is contracted, whereby as we have
daily sores, so we need daily plasters. It is with original corruption in us,
as in that Tree in Dan. 4.14, 15. although the branches be cut off, yet the
stump is still in the earth, and that sprouts out too fast by the temptations
that are always by it. Hence it is that we always pray, Forgive us our sins,
and because of th^se failings the Apostle 2 Cor. 5.20. writes to, and
exhorts the godly Corinthians, who were already reconciled to God, to be
further reconciled to him. But then this Petition shall wholly cease, then
there will be no serpent to sting us, nor will the eye of justifying faith to
look upon the brazen serpent exalted be necessary any more. The Lord will not
only wipe away the tear of wordly grief, but also of godly sorrow at that time.
Then, and not till then, will it be true, That God sees no sin in his
children. Then will the Church be without wrinkles, or any spot within her. In
this respect it is, the Church of God p^aieth so earnestly for the Bridegrooms
coming. For this it is, They look for, and hasten in their prayers that day.

4. Then justification shall be perfected.
Fourthly, At that day will pardon of sin only be completed, if you consider
the nature of justification. For what is that, but an overcoming the accusing
adversary, and clearing of us against every charge? Now this is most eminently
and fully done in those last assizes. The Syriack word to justify, is also to
conquer and overcome, because when a man is justified, he overcomes all those
bills and indictments which were brought in against him; now this is manifestly
done in the day of judgment, when God shall before men and Angels acquit and
absolve his people: and if the Apostle say in this life, Romans 6.7. of a godly
man dead in Christ, he is justified from his sins, (...), in respect of
sanctification, that sin does not conquer him, but he sin, how much more will
this be true at that day, when all the guilt and filth of sin shall be totally
removed? Oh what a glorious conquest will that be over sin, hell and the devil,
when the Judge of the whole world, shall pronounce them free from all sin,
and command them to enter into his glorious rest!

Having thus cleared the Doctrine, one Question may be briefly touched upon,

Whether the sins of Gods people shall be manifested at the day of judgment,
and God for Christ's sake then acquit them? Whether the sins of Gods people
shall be manifested at the last day.


There are learned men for the affirmative, They shall be published; and there
are learned men for the negative. Those that are for the affirmative, they say
indeed godly men's sins shall not be examined for their ignominy or confusion,
but only that the goodness and grace of God may be made the more illustrious,
For this they urge these Arguments;

First, Those places of Scripture, which speak of the universality of the real
objects, and personal: Of the real; as when it is said, A man must give an
account of every idle word, Mat* 12.36. 2 Cor. 5.10. an account must be made
for every thing done in the body. For the universality of the object personal,
2 Cor. 5. We must all appear before the Tribunal seat.

Again, They urge the opening of the book, which shall be at that day, and that
is nothing, but the manifesting of the consciences of men.

Furtther, Many wicked men's sins and godly men's are mingled together, and there
cannot be a judgment of discussion preceding that of condemnation, unless
godly men's sins also be produced.

In sum, They think this conduces more to the setting up of Gods justice,
the exaltation of his mercy; neither (say they) will this breed shame to the
godly, for in heaven they shall remember their sins committed on earth, but
without any grief or trouble, yea with joy and thankfulness to God, because
delivered from them. Quandoque laeti recordamur dolorum, said Gregory. We may
with joy remember bypast grief.

But those that are for the negative, think this no ways suitable to Gods
goodness, that the sins of the godly should then be published, for these
grounds following.

First, From the judicial process, where Christ calls the blessed of his Father
to inherit the Kingdom prepared for them; and then enumerateth only the good
works they had done; no question they had many sins and failings, but God takes
no notice of them.

Secondly, This agrees best (they say) with those expressions of Scripture
concerning pardon, viz. that God blotteth them out, that they are thrown into
the bottom of the sea.

Thirdly, The godly are said not to come into judgment, and there is no
condemnation to them, yea, they have already life everlasting.

Lastly, Christ is their bridegroom, their friend, their advocate, and how ill
becoming would it be one in such relations, to account or lay open their sins?

Which of these opinions is truest, is hard to say, neither of them have cogent
arguments, and the Scripture does not expressly decide the question, yet the
negative seems to have more probability on its side.

Use 1.
The Use is, First, Of comfort and glad tidings to the children of God,
howsoever in this life they have accusations from within, and from without, yet
the day is coming, when they shall have a glorious and public justification
from all objections: Then Satan can no more accuse Joshua for the noisome rags
upon him; Then Joseph shall be brought out of the prison freed from all guilt
and calumny, and exalted to great glory, and it may be therefore God suffers
thee to be exercised with much guilt and fear here, that thou may the more
long for those days of refreshment. And as this truth is for their great
consolation, so also it demonstrateth their happiness; That that which is so
terrible and dreadful to wicked men, should be such matter of rejoicing unto
them: when they through horror should cry for the mountains and hills to cover
them, these shall desire the graves and the earth to deliver up her dead, that
they may enjoy their Bridegroom. Certainly believers are not believers in this
point as they should be; what an heavenly contempt would it work in them of
this present world, what earnest desires, that this Kingdom might at last come?
This is their marriage-day, the day of coronation. Then death, hell, grave, sin
and Satan, are all conquered.

And if the joy and peace, which remission of sin produces in this life be so
exceeding glorious, what will that be when we shall have no more streams but
that fountain?

2. Use by way of contrary, To terrify and arouse wicked men, Use 2.
for as the godly have but a glimmering, a little pittance in this life, in
respect of that fullness of glory to be revealed hereafter, so the wicked feel
not the least part of that guilt, torment, shame and confusion, which hereafter
shall be poured upon them.

There are many men's sins lie asleep, keep no noise either in their own
consciences, or before God; but then these lions, these mastive dogs that lay
tumbling at the door, will rise up in rage, and wholly devour: Do not therefore
take Gods forbearance for his gracious acquittance; oh do not imbolden thy self
with false encouragements, and say, The worst is over; As the Apostle said,
these light afflictions were nothing to that eternal weight of glory: so on the
contrary may the wicked say; These pangs and wounds of consciences which are
felt here, are nothing to that eternal weight of sin hereafter. Bernard said,
descendamus in infernum viventes, ne descendamus morien^es, let us go into
hell while we are alive by a serious meditation, and holy consideration, that
we may not go into it, when we be dead, by real miseries. As the Apostle
says, we are the children of God, but it does not yet appear what we shall be;
there is more glory then they can conceive: so wicked men are now the children
of wrath, but it does not yet appear what they shall be. Oh therefore that
ungodly men were as wise as Jonah's mariners, who in the midst of tempests,
seeing their ship necessarily sinking, throw away the goods that were a burden,
knowing they and their safety could not consist together. Thus are ye to do:
throw away thy sins, those heavy burdens that put all into danger, and so may
thou safely arrive at last in heaven.

LECTURE XXX.
LUKE 7.47. Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins which are many are forgiven
her, for she loved much.


THis Text is part of a famous history, which may well be called (...), because
of the three great things observable in it; 1. Great sins. 2. Great
repentance and humiliation. ^. Great love and grace of God through Christ in
pardoning: And there is this one peculiar thing well observed about this woman
in the history, that whereas diverse others addressed themselves to Christ for
corporal mercies, this only comes for spiritual, even for remission of her
sins.

An Entrance into the Text, from the consideration of the history.
For the better understanding of the text, let us briefly consider the history;
and first the woman is described by her quality inherent, a sinner, not in a
common sense as all are, but in a more notorious manner; and therefore those
that mitigate her fault, out of some reverence or honor to her, do not so much
increase her honor (as Maldonat upon the place well observes) as detract from
Christ's honor: for the Physicians skill is most commended, where the disease
is more desperate. That she was a known great sinner, appears, in that the
Pharisee wondered at Christ, because he would have any commerce with her.
Whether this woman was Mary, Lazarus his sister or no, is hotly disputed by
Commentators, but impertinent to my scope. In the next place you have her great
repentance expressed, wherein for the general you may see the Apostles duty
accomplished, as she had given her members to be members of iniquity, so now of
righteousness, insomuch that she is the true looking-glass of an humble
convert. Her humiliation is described: 1. In bringing of a box of ointment to
anoint his feet; not his head (say some) because she thought her self so
unworthy, she brought indeed an outward visible box of ointment, but she had
another invisible and spiritual one, even a contrite and broken heart. 2. She
stands behind Christ (as being loathsome in her own eyes) and washes his feet
with her tears; which must suppose that to be true in her, which Jeremiah
desires, viz. Her head to be a fountain of water, but as long as her heart was
such a fervent limbeck, it was no wonder to see such precious distillations:
Chrysologus upon this fact of hers, says, The Heavens are wont to water the
Earth with rain, but ecce nunc rigat terra Coelum, here the earth waters
Heaven. Lastly, The debasement of her self further appears, in making her
Hair, heretofore the instrument of her pride and wantonness, now a Towel to
wipe his feet. In the third place, Christ's love toward her is remarkable, and
in the general it is so great, that the Pharisee puffed up with his own pride,
was offended at it, not considering, First, That though she had been a sinner,
yet now she manifested Repentance. And secondly, That every commerce and
communion with a sinner is not forbidden, but that which is of encouragement or
consent unto his sin: but our Saviors was like the communion of a Physician
with the Patient to heal and cure: Hence our Savior touched the leper, whom he
healed, yet was not unclean, because he touched him to restore him to health:
But as the people murmured because Moses married a Blackmore, so the Pharisees
grudged, because Christ showed mercy to sinners; but Moses indeed could not
make the Blackmore white, whereas Christ does purify the defiled soul. Now our
Savior does aggravate his love to her; First, by a diligent enumeration of
those several acts of service, which she had exhibited to him, not mentioning
any of her former sins; and all this he does with an Antithesis, or opposition
to that carriage which the Pharisee had presented him with. 2. To convince the
Pharisee, he declares a Parable, that so from his own mouth the Pharisee may
judge her love to Christ to be greater then his. In the last place his grace to
her is further declared, by pardoning her sins though so heinous, which pardon
is first declared unto the Pharisee in my Text, and afterward to the woman her
self.

In my Text is the first promulgation of her pardon; now because the words have
some difficulty, and the later part is brought to prove love to be a
meritorious cause of Remission of sins; Two Questions resolved for cle^ring the
Text. Answ.
two Questions are briefly to be resolved: First, When this woman's sins were
pardoned? And the Answer is, That as soon as ever she repented in her heart of
her evil ways, and believed in Christ, her sins were forgiven her; for so God
does promise; and this was before she came to Christ, but she comes to Christ
for the more assurance of Pardon, and not only so, but that he should
authoritatively absolve her from her sin; for Christ did more then declare
her sins pardoned, as appears by the standers by, who with wonder made this
question, v. 49. Who is this that forgiveth sins also? Whereas to declare the
forgiveness of sin only, any Minister may do, as we read of Nathan to David, 2 Samuel 12.13. So that her sins were pardoned by God before, at the first time of
her Faith and Repentance, but now Christ as the Mediator, does particularly
absolve her, and that in her own conscience, therefore he bids her, Go in peace.

1 When this Penitents sin was pardone^. 2. Whether the expression in the
text favor any causality in the Penitents love in reference to her pardon.
The second Question is, Whether that expression, Much is forgiven her, for she
loved much, be causal, as if her love were antecedent, and a cause of her
forgiveness; or consequential only, as an effect, or sign of her forgiveness;
in this sense, She loved much, because God did forgive her many sins, not she
loved much, and therefore God forgave her?

Here is a great and vast difference between these two: many Papists are for
the later, the Protestants generally for the former, and there is this cogent
reason for it, for that Christ does not speak of Repentance, or Love which
should go before, and be the cause of the pardon of sins, is plain by the
Parable he brings of a Creditor, who forgave one Debtor more, another Debtor
less: hereupon our Savior asked the Pharisee, Which of them will love him
most? Simon answered, I suppose him to whom most was forgiven: Now of such a
love our Savior speaks, when he mentions the woman, which is clearly a
love of Gratitude, Because much was forgiven; not an antecedent love of merit,
to procure pardon; so that as from her actions of anointing and washing his
feet, by way of a sign or effect, we gather her Faith and Love of Christ; so by
her Faith and Love as by a sign and effect, it may be gathered, that her sins
are forgiven her. But you may ask, How could she come to know her sins were
forgiven, before Christ told her? I answer, By the promise of God made to every
true Penitent and Believer: though this assurance of hers was imperfect, and
therefore admitted of further degrees, whereas then all this Repentance and
Humiliation was not that sin might be forgiven, but from Faith that they were
forgiven: We may observe this,

That the sense and apprehension of pardon of sins already obtained, Observe. 1.
does not beget carnal security, but a further mollifying and humbling of the
heart in a gracious manner.

This is a practical truth of great concernment. And for the opening of it,
take notice of this distinction, as a foundation, A two*fold repe^ta^ce in
Script^re.
viz. That there is in Scripture a twofold Repentance or Humiliation of the
soul for sin; the one antecedent, and going before pardon, and this the
Scripture requires as a necessary condition, without which forgiveness of sin
cannot be obtained: of this Repentance the Scripture for the most part speaks,
Ezekiel* 14.18, 30. Mat. 3.2. Mark 6.12. Luke 13.3. Act. 3.19. and generally in
most places of Scripture. In the second place there is an Humiliation of heart,
and brokenness of soul for sin, arising from the apprehension of Gods love in
pardoning, whereby we grieve, that we should deal so unkindely with so good and
gracious a God: This, though more rarely, yet is sometimes spoken of in
Scripture, as first in this woman, who out of the apprehension of Gods love in
pardoning so much to her, did pour out her soul in all ways of thankfulness.
After this manner also was David's Repentance, Psalm. 51. for he was thus deeply
affected after Nathan had told him, His sin was taken away: Although it does
appear by the Psalm also, that he had not as yet that sense of pardon, which
did quiet his conscience. This kind of affection was also in Paul, 1 Timothy 12,
13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Cor. 15.8, 9. in which places the Apostle remembering his
former sins, confesses them, and acknowledges thereby his unworthiness of
all that grace and favor he had received; so that the Apostle does not there
humble himself that he may obtain mercy, but because he had obtained mercy. The
most eminent instance of this kind of sorrow and shame, is Ezekiel. 16.62, 63.
where God promises to establish his Covenant with them, and then mark the
event of this, That thou may^st remember and be confounded, and never open thy
mouth more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee.

So then both these kinds of Humiliations are to be owned and practiced; and
therefore it is a false and dangerous error to acknowledge no other kind of
Repentance then the later: The Papists will not acknowledge this later
Humiliation at all, because they deny all Faith and Assurance that a believer
may have of his sins in particular: And others, that there is only this later,
and therefore the forementioned Author, in his Treatise of Gospel-repentance,
makes this only Gospel-repentance: but as Gospel-faith is not that reflect act
of the soul in a man, whereby it is persuaded that Christ is his, but a direct
act of taking and receiving Christ to be ours: so a Gospel-repentance is not
that mainly whereby we are humbled, because we receive Gods love to us in
pardoning, but principally in that loathing of our selves to obta^n pardon: It
is therefore great ignorance in that Author, in his Treatise of
Gospel-repentance, when page 58. he calls Repentance that goes before this
Faith, viz. that my sins are pardoned, a dead work; as if the Faith that
justifies, and without which it is impossible to please God, were the
believing that my sins are pardoned; whereas the Scripture makes it to be, the
receiving of Christ, and laying hold on him: and seeing that the object must in
order of nature be before the act that is employed about it, it follows
infallibly, that I must have Justification, before I can believe I have it:
Repentance therefore may be thought to go before a twofold act of Faith;
First, That whereby Christ is laid hold upon and made ours, and so the
Repentance that precedeth this, may be called legal and slavish. Or secondly,
Before a persuasion that my sins are pardoned, and before this act of Faith,
Repentance must necessarily go, because the Covenant of Grace dispenses pardon
only to such.

The Observation proved from Scripture
But because I have already spoken enough of the former kind of Repentance
anteceding Remission of sins, vindicating the necessity of it, I shall press
upon this later, as being most proper to my Text. And that assurance of
apprehension of pardon, does not beget security, but rather increase godliness,
will appear several ways.

And first thus: Those places which speak of Gods gracious Properties, do
represent them as grounds of duty, as well as of consolation, Psalm. 130.4.
There is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared: Mark that
expression [ There is forgiveness with thee:] which implies forgiveness to be
in God as in a fountain, and therefore he does easily, and plentifully forgive;
but lest any Spider should suck poison out of this sweet flower, he adds,
That thou may be feared; here is no encouragement to security. Thus Hos.
3.5. there is a gracious Promise of God to his children, that they shall fear
him and his goodness. As it is Gods glorious Property to work good out of evil,
so it is a most devilish quality to work evil out of good.

2. The Promises of God, they also require an holy and humble walking, 2 Cor.
7.1. The Apostle having in the Chapter before mentioned those glorious Promises
in the Covenant of Grace, That he would be our God, and we his sons and
daughters, makes this inference, Having those promises, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness, perfecting holiness in the fear of God: So that
here is no danger, as long as we keep close to the genuine use of the
Scripture. Thus also Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the Spirit of God, whereby ye are
sealed, etc. Where Assurance is so far from encouraging to sin, that by sin it
is weakened and destroyed. The more gracious then we perceive God to us, the
more humiliation and debasement we find in our selves. Thus the Apostle Peter,
1 Pet. 1.17. If ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons judges
all men, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. To make therefore
doubting, a duty and meritorious, as some Papists have done, is to betray great
ignorance of Scripture motives.

3. That Assurance of pardon is ap^ to kindle spiritual affections in us, is
plain, if you consider the nature of such Assurance. By reason,


1. Originally it is wrought by the Spirit of God: as a man by Cor. 2.12. The
Spirit whereby we know the things that are freely given us of God, is opposed
to the spirit of the world: If then this persuasion be not the fruit of the
flesh, but of the Spirit, is it any wonder* that it inclines us to holy
things? Again,

in the use of those means appointed by God. 2 Pet. 1.10. By giving great
diligence in the use of the means, we only come to Assurance. How then can such
a persuasion of forgiveness cause a neglect of the means?

Romans 8. Gal. 3. Now where constant powerful Prayer is, that soul is like a
tree planted by the waters side.

Further evidence from experience.
4. That this persuasion of pardon does inflame much to Holiness, appears from
the nature and state of those who are in it. They are sons, Now by experience
we see, that in an ingenuous son, the more apprehension there is of his fathers
tender love and kindeness to him, the more obsequious and serviceable he is;
Can we think that the fathers great love to his prodigal son, was not like
coals of fire poured on him to melt and thaw him? We rather see jealousies and
suspicions of love to breed hatred at last. Hence diffidence works despair,
and despair hatred of God: It is therefore a special duty lying upon the people
of God, to entertain good thoughts of God, and to be persuaded of his loving
kindeness to them.

5. That the people of God do yet mourn and abhor themselves for their sins,
though persuaded of the pardon of them, arises from the sincerity and
uprightness of their heart, whereby they hate sin as sin, and grieve for the
dishonor they have put upon God. It is indeed lawful, yea a duty to repent of
sin, that it may be pardoned, because the Scripture propounds this as a motive
and encouragement to the duty: And it is a vain thing, to affect more high and
spiritual strains then the Scripture. But Humiliation of sin, when pardoned,
and after the knowledge of the pardon, does evidently discover an upright
heart, that the dishonor of God is more trouble and grief to him, then his own
punishment and destruction. Whereby it is, that hedoth so accuse and condemn
himself for dealing so wretchedly and frowardly with so gracious a God.

6. That ingenious principle of Gratitude and Thankfulness which reigns in
the godly, will put them upon all these services. Godliness in the lives of the
godly may be considered two ways: First, as a means wherein they attain to
eternal life: Secondly, as an expression of Thankfulness unto God. Hence Vrsine
in his Catechism inscribeth that part of Divinity, which contains our duty,
de gratitudine, of Thankfulness. Bern. Ep. 107. Justus quis est, nisi qui
amanti se Deo vicem rependit amoris? quod non fit nisi revelante spiritu per
fidem aeternum Dei propositum de sua salute. Who is a righteous man, but he
that returns love to God, for Gods loving of him? And how can this be, but by
Gods Spirit revealing his purpose of Election, concerning the just man's
Salvation?

Use of Instruction, Does the apprehension of great pardon, Use 1.
breed great Humiliation, then we may see the necessity of that Ministry and
preaching, which does discover the depth, To press this use upon us, two things
especially to be insisted upon.
length and breadth of sin. They take the best way to set up grace and magnify
Christ, who do amplify the pollution of sin in us: Now that we may come to be
convinced how much God does forgive us, two points are much to be insisted upon.

1. The Doctrine of original corruption, 1. The doctrine of o^i^inal co^ruption.
for thereby we shall see our selves guilty of more sins then ever we thought
of; a man without this Scripture Light, is like one in a dark dungeon, which is
full of Serpents, Toads, and all venomous creatures, but is not able to see any
of them, and so thinks himself without any danger at all. If therefore thou
would see how much is forgiven, reckon up all the debts thou owe. The mercy
and skill of the Physician will then appear, when the worst of thy disease is
made manifest.

A second Point much to be pressed, is the pure, 2. The strict obligation of
the Law.
strict and exact obligation of the law, which being set as a pure glass before
thee, all thy deformities will appear. In this sense it is good to be a legal
Preacher and a legal Hearer often: that so knowing the holiness of the Law, and
our imperfection, we may esteem the more of Gods Grace in pardoning so much; As
God in the outward passages of his providence does therefore suffer one trouble
to follow another, like so many waves, that so the greater their calamities
have been, his wisdom, power and goodness may be the more conspicuous in
delivering of them. Thus it is also in his spiritual administrations, he will
not reveal the riches of Grace, but to the poor in spirit, nor will he give
ease and refreshment, but to those that are heavy laden and burdened. And this
is the reason, why a Pharisee, a formalist, a moral man, a self-righteous man,
does not love Christ, as converted Publicans and sinners do.

Use 2.
Use second of Admonition, to those who have sinned much, and so have had much
forgiven them, let such know their expenses of practiced grace, must be
according to the receipts of justifying Grace. Let such know, the pardon of
many sins is a talent to be greatly improved. As thou have abounded in many
sins, and God in many pardons, so do thou in much thankfulness. How thankful
would we be to a man who has delivered us often from a temporal death! but
behold a greater love is manifested here. Thou who have (it may be) been the
chiefest sinner of many thousands, be now the chiefest Believer of many
thousands; If thou have been a great sinner, and art not now a great actour,
and spiritual merchant negotiating for God, fear the truth of thy grace; much
love should be like much fire that consumes all dross; quicken up thy self with
such thoughts as these, Lord, who was more plunged into sin then I? whose
diseases were greater then mine? It may be thousands and thousands for less and
fewer sins then I have committed, are now taking their portion in hell. O Lord,
this thy overflowing goodness does overcome me, oh that I had the hearts of all
men and Angels to praise thee.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
FIve absurdities objected by the Antinomians, which (they say) will follow
from the Doctrine that God afflicts his people for sin, vindicated, p. 39, 40,
41 What kind of act forgiveness is, and whether it be antecedent to our faith
and repentance, 166, 167 There are no accidents in God, ib. How afflictions
come upon the godly after pardon of sin, 24 God does not always afflict with
reference to sin, 28 The afflictions of the godly are not legal, but
evangelical, and why? 39 How afflictions on believers agree with the justice of
God, 101 It is a great aggravation to the sins of Gods people, that they have
been committed in his sight, 53, 54 Aggravations and diminutions of sin, 206,
208 The unsound Answers of the Antinomian about the afflictions of the godly,
24, 25 The Antinomian contrary to himself, 33, 34, 93 Three Arguments of the
Antinomian answered, 34, 35, 36, 37 The Antinomians answer to, and evasion of
certain Scriptures answered, 53 How the anger of God is showed toward the the
sins of his people, 76, 77, 78 The Antinomian Arguments answered, 176 to 193
Arguments proving that God does see sin in the justified so as to be offended
with it, 53 Seven Arguments proving our faith and repentance antecedents of
Justification, 169* to 172 Three Reasons proving that Assurance of pardon, is
apt to kindle spiritual affections in us, 269, 270
B
Sins committed after Baptism pardonable, 126, 127 Christ is the advocate of
Believers after Justification, 66, 67 Bellarmines objection answered, 115 How
sin is a blot in the soul, 136 When sins are blotted out, 158
C
A threefold cause of Justification, Efficient, Meritorious, Instrumental,
-- 2 The people of God are not cast off for their sins, 232 It is one thing to
change the will, and another to will a change, 193 It is no derogation from
Christ that sin is in a believer, 40 What the blood of Christ does
meritoriously cleanse, the Spirit does efficaciously, 57 Wherein the
compleatness of the pardon of sin at the day of Judgment consists, 259 260 Six
comfortable considerations gathered from certain Scriptures, 49, ^0 It is of
great consequence to have the Doctrine of Justification kept pure, and why, 3 A
twofold condition of faith, page 191, 192 Comfort to the children of God, 263
Pardon of sin is a continued act, 115 What is meant by covering sin, 216, 217 1
What is 2 What is not
implied in that phrase of covering sin, 217, 218, 219 How sin being in the
regenerate, yet covered, will stand with the omnisciency, truth and holiness of
God, 220, 221 Whether God does see sin when he has covered it. 219, 220
D
Eternal Death deserved by every sin, 206 What in sin is a Debt, 105 Sins
called a Debt in a fourfold respect, 105, 106 There is a great difference
between original and actual sin, and wherein they differ, 20 There is great
difference in the calamities of the godly, 28 The afflictions of the godly and
the wicked for sin, how differ, 29 The difference between a godly man troubled
in conscience, and a man damned in hell, 82 A twofold difference between
actions immanent and transient, 166, 167, 168 An elect person and a reprobate,
how they are alike, differ,
188 Whether a difference ought to be made between great and little sins. Six
Propositions clearing the same, 206. to 212 A Christian is to make a difference
of sins six ways, 208, 209, 210 Four things wherein a Christian is not to make
a difference of sin, 212, 213 A threefold difference between the sins of a
godly and wicked man, 232, 233 Seeing and knowing how they differ, 90 No
difference to our capacity between Gods seeing and knowing, 91 A twofold
difference between Gods forgiving our sins, and our forgiving others, 113, 114.
The Properties of God, and the actions of them, how they differ, p. 97
Justification and pardon of sin, how they differ, 257 The sense of Gods
displeasure for sin, may be retained in us two ways, servilely, filially, 22
The Antinomian distinction examined, 89, 90 Believers have not a full discharge
from sin till the day of Judgment, 256 It is the duty of justified persons, to
pray for pardon and for forgiveness of sin, 113 It is the duty of Believers, to
repent of sin that it may be pardoned, and why? 114
E
Election, is Amor ordinativus non o^ll^ti^us 188, In what sense an elect man,
before conversion is loved of God, ^88 God has other ends then to satisfy his
Justice, when he afflicts his people, 26 There are many errors about
Justification, and the danger of them, 4 The ground of Popish errors about
Justification, 5 The errors of Papists Antinomians
concerning remission of sin, 43, 44, 45 The errors of the Saints displeasing
to God 80, 81 Who they are which do esteem of pardon of sin, and why? 221, 222
Why Creation and Justification are not from Eternity, 167 How sin does, and how
it does not expel the Grace of Justification, 243
F
How the word Face is attributed to God, 226 All men called flesh, 1 A twofold
Faith in all Petitions, Applicative, Fiducial, 61 Forgivenes is the removing
the guilt, though not the nature of sin, 45 Prayer for, and faith in God for
forgiveness, may well stand together, 62 God does reiterate forgivenss of sin,
127 Christians ought to pray for forgiveness, and in what sense? 129. from 113.
to 116 Forbearance of punishment, differs from forgiveness, 143, 144 What
forgiveness of sin is, 214 Whether God in forgiving sin, does forgive all sin
together, 244, 245 The meaning of the Petition, Forgive us our Debts, declared
in eight particulars, 113 to 118 How freedom is extended to God, 96
G
The Glory of God, what, 2 The nature of Gospel Grace, 253 Great sins as we^l
as lesser are forgiven the godly, 51 Two considerations which will much help us
to see the greatness of our sins, 204 Gross sins procure wrath to the godly,
208 Gross sins exclude from the society of the Church, ibid. Gross sins require
many conditions before pardoned, 209 Gross sins require a more intense act of
faith to apply pardon, 210 A godly man falling into gross sins, is under
sequestration though not ejection, 238 Why the guilt of new gross sins does not
take away Justification, 243, 244
H
Hay and stubble, 1 Cor. 3. what, 81 Humiliation and Repentance denied by the
Antinomians, 59, 125 A Christian is to be humbled more for gross sins then
ordinary infirmities, 208, 209 Hyperbolical expressions of the Fathers, 250
I
Five things implied from the subject praying Forgive us our debts, Mat. 6.12.
1. That all are sinners. 2. A sense of sin. 3. Godly sorrow. 4. Earnestness
and perseve^ance until we obtain. 5. Constant renewed acts of faith, 121, to
125 Three things implied in the object matter, Mat. 6.12. 125, 126 The act of
imputation and the ground of it, how they differ, 185 There is a twofold
impulsive cause of Justification, 2 Justification, what it implies, 6 How
Infants are justified whether without faith or no, 181, 182, 183 How Christ is
in us and we in him, 184 A man is not justified until he does repent and
believe, 12 Wherein Justification consists, 17 How Justification can be said to
be the pardon of sin, ibid. Whether the Justification of Believers be the same
under the old and new Testament, 62 How sin is injurious to God, 164 How we are
justified before faith, 177 Justification and faith are correlatives, 183 God
cannot in Justice but punish sinners, 98 The Justice of God admits of a surety,
200 The Justice of God essentially ad intra, and the effects ad extra, how
differ, ibid. Four Propositions showing the nature and time of a believers
Justification, 257, 258, 259 Justification is not reiterated, 115
K
Gods Knowledge and ours how they differ, 89, 90
L
How Gods taking notice of sin to punish it is subject to the mere Liberty of
his will, 95. to 102 God takes notice of little sins, 79
M
Whether the sins of Gods people shall be manifested at the last day, 261, 262
The Ministers of God commanded to bind and retain sins, 65 The spirit does
mortify our sins, 56 External and spiritual mortification how differing, 57
Sin is mortified in us not only declaratively but really, ibid.
N
The Nature of Justification, 116, 117 The nature of sin, what and how
expressed in Scripture, 130, 131, 132 The nature of the sins of Gods people,
230, 231 Faith and Repentance how necessary to the pardon of sin, 140, 141 God
takes notice of the sins of believers, 60, 1^9
O
The answering of Objections sometimes profitable, 41, 42 Antinomian Objections
and distinctions discussed, 88. to 102 An Obligation to punishment follows
sin long before committed, 137, 139 False Opinions liable to the anger of
God, proved, 80, 81 Habitual original sin how truly it may be called sin, 132
The original of justification and assurance, 171, 172, 173 The Orthodox truth
concerning afflictions upon a justified person, against the errors of
Antinomians and Papists, ^6
P
Pardon of sin is not only privative b^t positive, 118 Five Reasons proving
that the sense of pardon does not beget carnal security, 267. Five Reasons why
God does sometimes pardon sin and not manifest it to the soul* 199, 200 Whether
the sins of believers be pardoned before they be committed, 246 Eight Arguments
proving they are not, 247* to 253 Three Directions to a soul tempted about the
pardon of sin, 122 Our sins are perfectly pardoned in this life, 258 Whether
God by his absolute power may not pardon sin without the graces of faith and
repentance, 148 Peace with God, what it is, 34, 35 Whether in that Petition,
Mat. 5.12. we pray for pardon and assurance, 116, 117, 196 Four Reasons proving
that we pray for the pardon it self, and not only for assurance, 196 Four sorts
of men praying for pardon, and the manner of their praying, 195, 196, 197 Four
Reasons proving that not only assurance, but the pardon it self is to be prayed
for, 197 Who are the best Preachers of Christ and the Gospel, 122 The Promises
of God require an holy and humble walking, 172 (...) what is signifies, 2
Thirteen Propositions to clear the nature of Justification, 3. to 13 Nine
Propositions for the understanding the nature of pardon of sin, 18. to 22 Seven
Propositions laid down to clear the truth of that assertion, that God does
afflict his people as a Father, 27, 28, 29, 30 A commendation of the Psalms,
225
Q
There is a twofold Quickening, 177, 178
R
Nine Ranks of Arguments to prove that God sees sin in a believer, and is
offended with it 53. to 68 When we receive the fullness of Remission of sin,
256 Five Rules for the understanding the nature of Justification, 14, 15, 16
Remission of sin is such a taking it away as if it had never been, 43 How the
Papists and Antinomians do agree and differ concerning Remission, 45 Remission
of sin what, declared in fix Propositions, 139, 140. to 145 Remission of sin is
not only ablativa mali, but collativa boni, 145 Remission of sin how obtained,
145, 146 Why repentance and faith is urged as necessary to Remission, 146 Eight
Propositions declaring how repentance being our duty may stand with free grace
in the Remission of sin, 147, 148, to 154 When God remits sin he gives
repentance, 148 How repentance is necessary to remission of sin, 149, 150 Two
extremes in Repentance confuted, 150, 151 Gods free grace and man's duty of
Repentance may be reconciled, 155 Repentance why required, 157, 158 God does
indispensably require Repentance in all, 157 Six Reasons of congruity between
remission of sin and Repentance, 158, to 161 Perfect Repentance cannot take
away the guilt of sin, 161 A twofold Repentance, 267 Why Repentance is not as
great a good, as sin is an evil, 163 Six courses God took to bring David to
Repentance, 228, 229 Imputed Righteousness a more solid ground of comfort, then
the most perfect and exact inherent righteousness, and why? 10
S
The Question whether repentance of it self may not take away sins, answered
three ways, 161, 162, 163 The full satisfaction of Christ to God, takes not
away the precedence of faith and repentance to justification, 189, 190 How
Christ satisfied Gods wrath, 191 In what relation Christ satisfied God, 101 God
sees and is angry with the sins of his people, 225 How God can see sin in the
believers when they have the righteousness of Christ to cover them, 219 Rules
concerning God seeing sin in a believer, 45, 46 Six Reasons proving that God
does afflict his people for sin, 30, 31, 32 Sins may be said to be pardoned
five ways, 18, 19 Six things considerable in sin when it is said to be
forgiven, 19, 20 What it is to have sin forgiven, 20 No sin has a positive
natural being, 40 Sins forgiven are as if they had never been, 50 God is
affected with the sins of his people, 68 Sins of the godly and ungodly how they
are alike or differ, 73, 74 The most eminent sanctified person has sin in him,
121 Every sin has a double weight punishment offense to God,
124 We may ask pardon for great sins* 126 Sin, and the effects of sin, what,
130, to 136 Habitual sin forbidden by the Law, 132 A man cannot intend sin
formally, 133 There is in every sin the Macula and Reatus, 134 Sin^ continue
until pardoned, 135 Two things considerable in every sin in it self, 138 Two
things considerable in sin relating to Justification, 145 Whether sin be an
infinite evil, 138 There are degrees in sin, 206 The sin of David aggravated by
ten circumstances, 225, 226 No sin though never so great for nature (except
the sin against the holy Ghost) but the godly may fall into it, 228, 229 In
what sense the sins of the godly are reigning sins, 230, 231 How far gross sins
make a breach upon Justification, 233, etc. Why sins are called debts, 104
Whether God may not by his absolute sovereignty adjudge man to eternal misery
with consideration of sin, 27, 28
T
Spiritual the^^ what, 7^ Threatenings applied to believers, 71 Not to trust to
repentance, 165 There is a twofold trouble for sin, 41
U
Whether we be United to Christ before Justification, 183 How all sin is
voluntary, 132 God does sometimes upbraid his people, 70, 71
W
There is no new Will in God, 167, 193 Five words used in Scripture to express
Justification, 13, 14 The several words used in Scripture to express
forgiveness of sin, 46, 47 The Word preached and written, differ not
essentially, 86 Words used in Scripture to declare Remission of sin, 139, 140,
141 The effects of Gods wrath upon his own children, how considered, 70, 71
A Table of diverse Scriptures which are opened or vindicated by this TREATISE.
Genesis. Chap. Verse Page 3 21 47 4 13 47 Exodus. 4 14 69 Deuteronomy. 8 2 38 2
Samuel. 12 9 53 12 13 62 Job. 34 32 70 Psalm. 32 12 47, 63, 214 32 5 224 51 4
53 51 7 51 51 9 61 90 4 91, 92 90 8 54, 223 94 9, 10 90 99 8 30 103 12 49 130 4
269 Isaiah. 44 22 48 53 5 36, 37 63 17 83 Jeremy. 9 7 38 50 20 21, 41, 42
Ezekiel. 18 14 84 Chap. Verse. Page 18 24, 26 136, 255 Micha. 7 19 48 Matthew. 5
22 206 6 12 103, 104 12 36 206 18 27 8, 21 18 32, 34 238 Luke. 4 18 140 7 47
264, 265 15 22 55 10 3 141 Acts. 3 19 115, 257, 258 17 30 157 Romans. 3 24, 25
12, 247 5 19 7, 163 5 12 34, 35, 129 6 19 132, 260 8 33 11 1 Corinthians. 2 2 12,
270 3 12, 13, 14, 17 80, 81 4 4 65 11 30 75, 80 11 31 27 2 Corinthians. 7 1 270
Galatians. 5 18 56 Ephesians. Chap. Verse. Page 4 30 68 Colossians. 2 13 3 13
140 1 Timothy. 6 4 41 Hebrews. 4 13 85 7 25 67 8 12 141, 142 9 14 136 10 28,
29, 30 14 12 5, 6, 7, 8 31, 32 12 29 22 James. 1 2, 3, 4 37, 38 1 Peter. 3 13
160 4 17 76 2 Peter. 3 8 91, 92 1 John. 1 9 121 2 1 66, 67 3 18, 19, 20 63 5
15, 17 205 Jude. 23 81 Revelations. 3 19 31

FINIS.

