A SERMON PREACHED Before the late KING JAMES His Majesty, at Greenwich, the
19. of July, 1604.

TOGETHER With two Letters in way of Apology for his Sermon: The one to the
late King JAMES his Majesty; the other to the Lords of his Majesty's then
Privy Council.

BY JOHN BVRGES Minister of Gods Word; since Doctor of Divinity and Parson of
Sutton Cofield in Warwickshire.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Brudenell, 1642.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE KING JAMES his Majesty, at Greenwich, the 19. of
June, 1604.
The Text, PSALM. 122.8, 9. For my brethren and my neighbors sake, I will now
speak peace unto thee: because of the house of the Lord our God, I will
procure thy wealth.


THE title of this Psalm shows the excellency and Author of it: a Song of
degrees, a Psalm of David. The Psalm it self is gratulatory: David's
gratulation to and for the good estate of Jerusalem, the Metropolitan City of
his Kingdom. In which he first professes his joy for the present good estate
thereof, and demonstrates his care for the future. That which he rejoices at
in the present condition of it, is; first, the forwardness of the people to
Gods service: secondly, the good estate of the City, which was built as a City
united, made Jerusalem of Iebus and Salem, the Fort of the Iebusites being
subdued by David, and by building united into one City, now at peace; in which
also Religion was set up, yea the staple of Religion; for thither the Tribes
went to worship; and Justice also, yea the royal seats of Justice.

The demonstration of care for the good of that City hereafter, has in it two
branches. The Kings incitation to all his Subjects to pray for the peace of it;
and he sets them down a form of praye^: the holy Ghost knows well enough how
to pray in a set form. The second thing is his own promise, as it were his
Magna Charta, the Kings great Charter, for the good of Jerusalem, in the words
now read. A great Charter, but in few words, which yet are massy and weighty,
containing the Kings grant in the word of a Prince to gratify Jerusalem in two
things. First, to use her kindly: and secondly, to procure her wealth. To both
which he adds his reasons* as we shall see in their places.

The promise of kind and gracious usage is not so plain in the words of our
translation, as in the original; for where the translation says, I will wish
thee prosperity, the original says, I will speak peace. A speech that every
where as well as here, signifies all kind usage, under one special kind of
it, that is good words. So Psalm. 28.3. where David speaks of some that speak
peace to their neighbors, but malice is in their hearts, they speak friendly.
Psalm. 85.8. God will speak peace unto his people; that is, will use them
graciously. And in Hester 10.3. it is said of Mordecay, he spoke peaceably,
says the translation (peace, says the original) to all his seed.

Whereby it may appear that the first parcel of the Kings grant, is to use
his people graciously, to speak peace unto them. In which parcel (if we mark
it) be four points. First, what he will do; I will speak peace. Secondly, to
whom, to thee, to Jerusalem. Thirdly, for what respect, for my brethren and
companions sake. Fourthly, when? now: but that when is indeed why, as we shall
after hear.

1. Touching the thing what we learn in David's example. First, that it is the
office and care of good Princes to speak peace unto their people. They are
Fathers, a title as of power, so of love, to teach them to use their Subjects
as children. They are Masters, but says Paul to Masters, Ephesians. 6. Know, that
even your Master also is in heaven. The greatest Kings are servants to the
great King of Kings; let them use their servants as they would be used of their
Master graciously. To this end, because the disease of Princes oftentimes is
the swelling of heart, and to dye upon such swellings, it pleased God in the
17. of Deutrinomy both to restrain them from windy and swelling meats,
forbidding such multitude of Chariots and horses as might lift up their hearts
above their brethren, so as to make them forget that they are men and rule over
men: and also to give them a diet, the Book of God to meditate upon, which is
able to moderate and temper the heart of any Prince; without which no Kings
heart, no man's heart can be good as it ought. Secondly, now as it is a duty of
Princes to speak peace, so it is an ornament unto them. Courtesy is a
Christian virtue, commended to all men in the Epistles to the Ephesians and
Colossians. That which is courtesy in a Subject, is graciousnesse in a Prince:
a virtue of the same kind, only advanced to an higher place by the dignity of
the person. And it is an ornament that becomes none so well as Princes, the
images of the gracious God, whose Deputies they are, whose titles they bear.
It was truly said of Pythagoras, that in two things specially we imitate the
nature of God, truth and goodness. A Prince faithful of his word* and
gracious to his people, is a goodly image of God. We see that in greater Maps
things are expressed more plainly then can be in the smaller (though they be
drawn by one skill) so in the greatest personages this ornament is fairest,
when they that of all others have the best: warrant to speak roughly, shall
speak peace. Thirdly, and as it is a duty and an ornament, so is it a bond,
and one of the best that Princes have to obliedge the hearts of their subjects
unto them. It is therefore noted of Mordecay as the ground of his acceptance
among the multitude of his brethren, that he did these two things (which the
King here promises in his Charter) he procured the wealth of his people, and
spoke peace unto all his seed. The strength of this course, to melt the heart
of the Subjects, appears in David in 2 Samuel 19. who understanding the mind of
the ten Tribes to fetch him home again, takes the watchword, and sends to the
men of Judah this message, Why are you behind to bring the King again to his
house? ye are my brethren, my bones and my flesh are ye, wherefore then are ye
the last that bring the King again? And to Amasa this protestation, God do so
to me and more also, if thou be not Captain of the host to me for ever: to
lead the Army for him, that had led it against him; what was the effect? He
bowed the hearts of the men of Judah, as one man, says the text. Such strength
has the gracious usage of a Sovereign in the hearts of good Subjects. Again,
Ioab knew well what strength was in the Kings good speeches, who (finding the
King so wounded for Absolon, that he retired himself, as if he had lost a
Kingdom that very day, in which the Kingdom was recovered, so as the people
also stole away, as men that had lost the battle) comes to the King (and after
other expostulations, rougher then became a subject to his Sovereign, yet
wholesome for that time) come out, says he, and speak comfortably unto thy
servants, for I swear by the Lord, except thou come out, there will not tarry
one man with thee this night, etc. Nor has the holy Scripture alone this
observation, but even among the heathen (that it might appear a truth which
nature is not ignorant of) we find it still observed and recorded as a means
that drew the hearts of the people to their Princes. Thus Suetonius notes of
Titus, that he had that of nature or of fortune, good luck, as we say, to win
every man's good will: and among many things, reports this one gracious speech
of his, that no man should go away sad from speeeh with a Prince. The like of
Augustus, as the means that settled him in the hearts of the people, and by
name this one observation* that when a poor man offered him a Petition
trembling* he encouraged him, and said, Petitions should not be given to a
Prince as meat to an Elephant, that one is afraid of. The like of Traian.
Antoninus, and others is reported, which I forbear to recite. All showing,
that it was observed as a means of gaining the affections of the people, to
speak peace unto them.

Fourthly, and on the contrary, to do otherwise is not safe, neither at the
entrance, nor when a Prince is settled. For the entrance, Rehoboam is a
witness, who being a young King followed young men's counsel (indeed young
counsel though old men had given it) and as they bad him, told the people, his
Father had scourged them with rods, but he would beat them with scorpions (that
is, say some, with whips which have wires in the lashes ends, to make them bite
where they go) his little finger should be heavier then his Fathers loins.
The old men had given him better counsel, To serve the people that day, and
give them good words, and the people would be his servants for ever. But this
good counsel would not down with the young King; What was the end of it? Why,
when the people saw that they were not regarded, they left him, and bad the
house of David look to it self. Thus for want of speaking peace, he put
himself out of the greatest part of his Kingdom. And for an established
State, we have a story of Caesar, that after he was grown great and strong in
his State, yet his very speeches gave occasion of distaste, and conspiracy
against him; as by name, that he said, the Senate (for that I think is meant
by Respublica) was but a name only. This was a mean of loosing their hearts,
and his own greatness; however God plagued those that conspired against him:
as take this for a general rule, God never spares those that rise up against
Princes, how evil so ever they be. Finally, for this purpose Comines has a
grave discourse in his fifth book out of his own observations; I would I
could speak it in his own words, he speaks it so well, I will go as near
it as I can: he tells what is the misfortun of a Prince, It is not (says he) to
take a fall off a horse, or to be smitten with a sharp ague, that is no
misfortune to a Prince; What is it then? When God will not suffer him to reign
(that is a misfortune indeed) but what be the prognosticates of it? First,
says he, God smites him in his wits which is a great blow, he means not
surely in his senses, but in his judgment; then he sets division in his house*
and (says he) the Prince is so far in Gods disgrace, that he flies the
company of the wise, and advances fools, oppressors, and flatterers, and
such as sooth him in all his sayings. If he take a penny, they bid him take
two; if he be angry with a man, they bid hang him. Further, they give him
counsel in any wise to cause himself to be feared; and they also behave
themselves cruelly and proudly, as though authority were their inheritance etc.
This was that wise man's observation, which I have repeated (as I think) very
near in his own words, to show how Princes loose the hearts of their
Subjects* when they grow persuaded not to use them graciously. So then, whether
duty, or ornament, safety or danger be respected, it appears that David had
good cause to promise, and all good Princes to perform, gracious behavior,
toward their Subjects.

2. We have heard what he promised: now let us hear to whom. To thee, says
he, that is, to all his people; of which (as was said) Jerusalem was an
abridgement. To show favor to some, has bin in those that were worst noted.
Nero had his favorites, not worthy to be named. Galbo had his three
Paedagogues, besides Vimius the Broker, that prevailed with Galba as gold did
with himself in any thing: and so others. But this is the princely goodness
of Christian Kings* to be good to all their good Subjects. All are their
subjects, therefore should have the sunshine of their sovereignty: all are
their brethren and companions as we shall after hear: companions in scot and
lot (as we say) I mean in every burden of their troubles; and therefore
should have so^e portion in the common comfort of their favors. And indeed
this is Kingly graciousnesse, to be gracious to all their good Subjects* and to
do good to all; like the Sun that shines to all like Christ that did good
wheresoever he became. There is nothing more grievous to the Subjects then
enclosure of Commons, or overlaying them when great men over-charge them so,
that poor men can make no use of them for their relief: I say there is
nothing more grievous, unless it be Monopolies, and I cannot tell which of
them is more grievous, but there is no enclosure of Commons or Monopolies so
grievous as the enclosure and engrossing of a Kings favors, or to make a
Monopoly of a King. What then, would we have the favor of Princes so common to
all, that it should not specially abound unto some? God forbid: for as the
vital spirits in the body go to the least member, yea to the fingers end, yet
are most plentifully bestowed where nature has the greatest employment of
them. So it is fit that the favors of Princes lying open as a common to all
their Subjects in their proportions, should be specially placed on men of
chiefest use and desert.

3. We see What, and to Whom, let us now see upon what respect. I will speak
peace to thee; Sed quare? (says Augustine) Non propter honores meos, non
propter pecuniam meam, non propter vi^am meam: Not for mine honors, not for my
treasure, not for my life; but for my brethren and neighbors sake^. For thine
own sake I will speak peace unto thee. And indeed this is true love; for love
(says the Apostle) seeks not her own things. And this is trve graciousnesse,
and like the goodness of God himself, who is good to us for his own
goodness sake, and for our good, not for his: He gains not surely by any
match at our hands. For my brethren and companions sake. These very words have
weight, and carry a secret reason of that respect for which he will speak
peace unto them. They are brethren, not of the same womb, but of the same
nature in common: Brethren by the mothers side, the common mother. Companions
(for so the word signifies) not in the Court, but in the same Country;
companions in the house of God, and in the Convenant of grace, and in that
respect brethren by the fathers side; partners of that honor, which all good
Princes take to be (and is) their greatest honor, that they are the children
of God. Brethren in nature a thing which as no Prince will deny, so none need
be ashamed of, seeing Christ himself, though he were the son of God, and
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet in respect of the partnership
in the flesh, was not ashamed to be called a brother, and to call us brethren,
as the Author to the Hebrews says. This consideration is a great motive; it
was so to Job, he durst not contemn the judgment of his servants, no not of
his maid, when they contended with him. For (says he) what shall I then do
when God stands up, and when he shall visit me, What shall I answer? Why so?
He that made me in the womb, has he not made him? that is in effect, is he
not my brother? It yields a gracious meditation for Christian Princes; as to
think in time of famine, these that dye as starved, they are not dogs, they
are my brethren: in the time of Pestilence, this is not a murren of cattle,
they are my brethren that thus perish: in the oppression of a poor man, this
is not an horse overloaden (which yet a man should pity, though it were his
enemies horse) this is my poor brother, whom God made, whom Christ dyed for.
So in their lawful suits and cries, these are not the cries of other
creatures, nor of strangers, but of my brethren: How will my Father take it at
my hands if I the elder brother use not my younger brethren graciously?

So we see in the Kings Grant, what, to whom, and for what respect he
promises. Of all which, the Use is first unto Princes, then unto their
servants about them, and lastly to all their Subjects. As touching to use to
the Lords anointed, having dressed these things with so homely cookery, it will
not become me to be a carver also to my sovereign Lord; but humbly, and in the
fear of God do beseech your Majesty, to give me leave to apply this unto you
in Paul's words to Timothy, Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee
understanding in all things: yea humbly beseech your Majesty to know your
self, and your own most gracious disposition, of which every man reports
that speaks with you in private, and still to use it, and to speak
graciously to your loving Subjects. And for the rest, it remains also, that
your Majesty hunt away two beasts, the tame beast and the wild, the flatterer
and the false informer, which shall attempt to set off your sweet affections
from any of your loving Subjects.

The second Use is to the servants that attend about the Kings person, and to
them it is a word of Admonition, that seeing it is the office and duty of a
King, and the desire and disposition of our gracious King to speak peace unto
his people, they would take heed of doing any evil office between the King
and his good Subjects, by applying unwisely causticks to the sinews: for if it
be a cursed thing to set division between brethren, what is it between the
Father and the children? Assuredly to alienate, by any means, the heart of the
Prince from the people, or of the people from the Prince, is a work for the
Devil, and not for any of the Kings good servants.

And lastly, to us all, it is a word of incitation, that we should know what to
be thankful unto God for, that have a gracious Prince to speak unto us; and
also to pray, that God would ever so dispose of the Kings heart unto his people
and all his people unto him again, that as he came unto us with the greatest
applause that ever Prince entered with all, so he may continue with the greatest
acceptance that ever Prince had, and may make us but one only mourning day,
that is, the day of separation, like the mourning for good Josiah, for whom all
Israel lamented when he dyed. And secondly, how to bear our selves as loyal
and dutiful Subjects, with all reverence to the Lords anointed, that we may be
worthy of gracious usage. And if perhaps something fall out otherwise, let us
remember that of Solomon, If the spirit of him that rules rise up against
thee, go not out of thy place, take not the sturdy. Consider thy self if thou
be a Master, how thou usedsts thy servants; if a Father, how thou art sometimes
passionate to thine own children: and then remember, that Princes have greater
provocations, greater power. And if there be something in them which may not be
justified, yet the reverence and duty of Subjects is to hide it, going backward.

Thus much for the first part of this Charter. Now come we to the other;
wherein he says, I will procure thy wealth. The word signifies to seek, but
with all endeavors to obtain, and therefore is well translated, procure; that
is, I will do thee good. Indeed it is a gracious thing to speak peace unto
them, but more gracious to do them good. We say in an homely proverb, Better
meat without sauce, then sauce without meat; yet (no doubt) two good things
together are best. A child that is hungry may be stilled a while with dandling
and singing, but it must have the breast, or else it will not be contented long,
Good and gracious words please well, but good deeds, doing justice, seeking the
common good, is that which gives the chief content unto the Subjects. But why,
says he, I will procure? had he not done it? yes undoubtedly, but he will do
it still, he will do it more: as he had also spoken peace unto them before,
but will speak it still unto them. God has given Princes such power and
means* that they should, and might be continual fountains of goodness unto
the people. But let us consider now more particularly this part of the Kings
promise. Wherein first, What he would do: and secondly, Why.

The thing, What, has in it two branches. First, the very object of his care;
that is, their good. Secondly, the manner of procuring it, noted in the word of
seeking: which is a word of strong signification, and imports all diligence
and industry in seeking their good. For the former, let it be observed, that
the good of the Subjects is the charge of Princes. For to this end has God
ordained them, witness the Apostle, Romans 13. He is the Minister of God for thy
wealth, for thy good; if then do well, for thy comfort, if thou do ill, for
thy terror, and yet therein for thy good: for it is as good for some to be
terrified, as for others to be comforted. and indeed this is the proper
greatness of Kings and Princes, that God has made them the great instruments
of common good. As if no blessing could be passed to his people but under the
great seal of their office. A wonderful honor unto them: For even as Joseph
in Egypt was set over the corn, so as he might have relieved, or starved, not
the Egyptians only, but the Countries of the World near unto it, in the time
of famine; and this Joseph was there for the second man in the Kingdom. So
Princes are the second to God himself, in that God has put into their hands
to do universal good unto their people. A goodly honor, which as it does
require great residence upon so great a charge; so may it much encourage
Christian Princes to do their office, the benefit whereof is so universal.
And if it might please Princes sometimes to look about them, and when they
shall see a poor man laboring and toyling all day as a servant in base work,
and all for the back and belly, or (perhaps) for a few poor children at home
that cry for bread; and then to think, good Lord, how this man toils, and all
his work is but for himself, where I labor not as a servant, but as a Lord,
in works not base, but honorable; and not only have the good of it to my
self, but am an universal good as a blessing sent of God to the whole Land.
Such a meditation shall greatly encourage them to seek the good of their
people. I will seek, says he, that is use all diligence and endeavor. If
Princes seek not the good of their Subjects, it will not be found. Great
things will not be done without great labor; if they seek not, things will be
other ways done then they would, and (which is the mischief) other men's
faults will be scored upon their accounts. It is said of Galba, that many
things passed under his name, of which he was innocent; yet because he
permitted them whom he ought to have brideled, or was ignorant of that which he
ought to have known, he lost reputation, and opened the way to his own
overthrow. The fault was other men's, the blame his. If they seek not, they may
be abused by such as I spoke of before, Flatterers and Misinformers, such as
will always be about Princes to cast shadows, and stand in the light of their
best Subjects: as Ziba did to Mephibosheth: unless Princes be wise, as an
Angel of God to find out the hand of Ioab in the disguisings of the woman of
Tekoah.

For the house of the Lord. What is that? The Tabernacle, the Temple being not
built as yet. But how was that Gods house? does the Lord dwell in houses made
of hands? or could he be contained in a Tent, that fills heaven and earth?
Surely no; but because he did there reveal himself by Sacramental
representations; as Princes sometimes marry by their pictures, he is said to
dwell there, and that to be his house. The thing is, because of Gods true
worship and service, he will seek their good. Where (I beseech you) that it
may be marked, that this should be the special end of procuring the wealth of
the people, for the house of the Lord, for the religion sake, and the true
worship of God. Indeed this is the special thing, to know God, and fear God
aright. And if Princes provide not this for their Subjects, peace and
traffic, and such like, makes no better provision for them, then is made for
oxen in good pasture, nay not so good; for an ox therein has all he needs,
but a man without this, is left unprovided in the far greater part, even in
his soul. And as Princes without this care provide not well for their people,
so they provide but ill for themselves; for they can have no certain assurance
of their Subjects without it. The great bond of Allegiance is an oath of the
Lord. What if a professed Atheist take an oath, is he bound? He is not sui
iuris. What if he that is an Atheist in effect take an oath, one (I mean) that
denies the power of godliness, that has a dispensatory conscience and will
make licenses to his conscience, as Roagues do to themselves under hedges?
What if a man be a Papist, that believes (as he is bound by their rules to do)
that the Pope has power at his pleasure, to dispense with an oath, and to
dissolve any bonds; has the Prince any assurance of such a Subject, which has
his dependency upon the pleasure of a foraigne power? It is true then that
nothing can cast a sure knot upon the conscience of the Subject, but the true
knowledge and fear of God. So as when Princes do advance the good of Gods
house they establish the good of their own all in one. I add further in this
point* that which is to be observed in all the Kings of Israel and Judah, that
their Stories begin with this observation (as with a thing first worthy to be
Chronicled) how they dealt in matters of Religion. Such a King, and such a
King, and what did he? He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord.
And such a King, he walked in the ways of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, which
made Israel to sin. I spare to cite places, but it is the general
observation of those Books of Kings and Chronicles, as they that read them
know; yea farther it may be marked, that as generally, when Princes have
forgotten to seek the good of their Subjects, to which they were ordained of
God, God has surely plagued them himself; perhaps so much the more severely,
because none may do it but he* and he will do it thoroughly when he takes it
in hand. So yet specially has God humbled Princes, and even povred contempt
upon them, when they have contemned* or forsaken the house of the Lord. Of this
the Scripture gives us examples* as well in such as never advanced the house of
God, as in those that fell off, in part or in whole. As we may see in the
stories of Iehoram, Iehoas and even of Solomon, whose fall I cannot name without
trembling, to think that such a man so wise, that had spoken with God twice
(as it were familiarly) I mean by vision, should in his old days be seduced,
and fall to set up gross idolatry. As for Iehoram, he refused the house of the
Lord; God raised him up adversaries, and after smote him with a disease in his
bowels, of which he died miserably, and when he was dead, his people made no
mourning for him as for other Kings: so he was neither happy living, nor
honored dead, because he sought not the good of his people for the house of
the Lord. Iehoas also did well as long as Jehoida his good Counselor lived*
but when Jehoida dyed, the Kings goodness dyed with him. Then the Princes came
to the King and spoke reverently to him, and compass him with good words as
with a net (for as Solomon says, He that flattereth a man, spreads a net for
his steps;) he yields, and forsakes the house of the Lord. But what became of
it? First, the Aramires came and with a small band they overthrew a great Army
and slew the Princes that had misled the King, and left the King himself in
great diseases; so that he was spared to live longer, to be (as it were) but
longer in dying; and yet at last his own servants slew him: and when he was
dead, they buried him not in the sepulcher of the Kings, as not thinking him
worthy of a Kings sepulcher, that had not done a Kings office for the house of
the Lord. I might speak of others and all to show that God has specially
humbled Princes, when they have forsaken or impugned his true worship; doing
executions upon them on as high a stage, as they played their parts on; that
their punishment, as their faults, might be of special height and note.

I will add one observation more, that through neglect of this care of
Religion, the power of Christian Princes was lost; and while they put off to
the Prelates all the care of the house of God, God also cast from them their
authority, and made them vassals. So they lost their greatness, and the Clergy
found it, and it hurt them both. It is (as I remember) a note of Platina in the
life of Adrian the third, that after they had fully engrossed the Imperial
power, there was never since Emperor of strength, or Pope of virtue: so they
lost both by it. And indeed, as the blood if it fall any way out of the veins
too much, there is some danger, but if it fall into the body extra vasa, there
is more danger, for there it will corrupt and putrify: so was it with the
supreme authority of Princes, when they suffered it to fall unto the Clergy
(as it were) extra vasa. And here I desire to inform a mystery, a mystery of
iniquity, to show how from the authority usurped in Ecclesiastical causes
claim is made to the whole power of Princes. Bellarmine says in his fifth
Book of the Roman Bishop, a fourth and sixth Chapters, that the Pope has
nothing to do with temporalties of Kings, properly (nay his word is directly,
but he has it indirect, indirectly (as true as may be indirectly indeed). As
how? He may not (says he) depose Princes simply as a Lord, but for the safety
of souls, for the good of the Church: so from the care of the Church they
challenge power over Princes. Good cause have Princes then to maintain their
supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, and to be jealous of that title, as also
to use that power for the good of the house of the Lord, lest if they cast away
one moity, God cast away the other.

And here may come in that last branch of the first part, which through haste I
forgot which I desire might be of use, though it come somewhat out of the
proper place; I mean that time, that Now, of which he said, I will speak
peace. Why now? meant he that he would do it out of hand, and keep the word of
a Prince, which is to them as great a band as an oath of the subjects? Nay, but
by this note of time ( Now) as Illericus well observes in his Clavis Scriptura,
not so much the time, as the circumstance of the time is often noted. And so it
carries a reason why he would now speak peace unto them; yea, and (as I
think) why he would now procure their good, for the house of God sake. For I
see not but that it may be referred to the whole Grant, I will now speak peace
unto thee, I will now procure thy wealth. But why Now? Because the people were
so forward* and came thus to the house of God, and said, Our feet shall stand
in thy gates, O Jerusalem. Therefore in this float of good affections in the
Subjects, the Kings heart is enlarged, and he promises now to speak peace, and
now to seek their good.

Wherein it is good to consider, that when God disposes the hearts of the
people to goodness, to Religion, Princes should specially cherish them and
encourage them. It is noted of David in 1 Chronicles. 29. that when the people
offered willingly, the King rejoiced. Of Hezekiah also in 2 Chronicles. 20. when he
drew the people to Jerusalem to worship, and they came and offered, that the
King rejoiced that God had made the people so ready; for the thing was done
suddenly. And indeed then to use them graciously, and then to seek their good
for the house of Gods sake; when God has best disposed their hearts, is a
special means to cherish goodness it self* and is the crown of the
benefit. We read of Ethelbert (that Christian King of Kent) that he would
compel none to Religion, but he drew religious men about him, and countenanced
them, and by that means increased them innumerably. And surely this is a
worthy course to advance godliness and virtue, as strong as any compulsary
means. Because, every man (says Solomon) seeks the face of the Ruler, which
if no man could find but in the way of godliness and honesty, none would
seek to find in the way of vice and flattery. To this circumstance I add,
that as by the course of the Moon, there be spring-tides at the change, and at
the full: so at the change, if any man will change a false religion for the
truth; and at the full, if any man be grown to a full measure, such as we
attain in this poor life; I mean, if any man be well thriven in goodness it
is sit that spring-tides of favor should slow unto such.

But now to return to the consideration of the house of God, for which he will
seek their good. The very words carry their weight, and show why he should
specially seek their good* for the house of Gods sake, and the good of the
house of God: It is the house of the Lord of Jehovah; Should not that be cared
for? there is care of provision for the Kings house, and good cause there
should be so, and he is not worthy to be the subject of a good Prince that
should grudge it. Now should there not be care for the provision of* Gods
house? He adds, our God; that is, his God, and their God. He must needs seek
their good for the house sake of that God which was their God. One God to both,
one house of God to both, chara pignora: one God, one faith, one baptism, one
religion, the sweetest bands. And assuredly, whosoever should go about to set
up several Religions, should also go about to sever the Prince and the people.

Thus have I bin bold this day, but it is before the Lord and before his
anointed. Now for the Use which belongs unto my dear Sovereign; I humbly
beseech your Majesty (and speak it with a kneeling heart, as becomes me, and
in the fear of God) to stir up your own most noble spirit, and to set your
heart to seek the good of your people, for the house of God. God gave you as
this day to be borne, for the good (I am persuaded) of all Christendom. God
has brought you to this goodly Kingdom, and established you in it, with
wonderful peace and acceptance: God has given you goodly knowledge, and it
appears in public how able you are, to teach all the duties of all Kings.
Now I beseech your Majesty remember what great things God has done for you,
and answer him in goodness, and set your heart (as I know you do) to seek
the good of his people, and specially of the house of God: and be assured, that
so long as you shall maintain and advance the house of God, God will establish
your house, and your posterity, so long as they shall uphold the Lords true
service, or else (assuredly) this Word of God has no truth in it.

Now for the house of God, that which is to be done, is, first to repair it
well; and then to keep it so. The repair requires two things: first, that
the people be built up in knowledge. I think the Kings Majesty knows it not
(would God he did know it) that there be very many of his poor subjects
wonderful ignorant: the people in many places are naked, and Aaron has made
them naked, I mean the Ministry: a naked Ministry has made a naked people:
the Lord help them and incline the Kings gracious heart to pity them. The
other thing for the repair of the house of God is that the inside of the Lords
house the gold of the Temple be looked to; I mean, that with knowledge there
be joined the power and practice of religion in a good conversation. And herein
beseech the Kings Majesty to give leave unto his poor servant to inform him
that, which perhaps he knows not, that (from the occasion which some foolish,
turbulent and proud spirits, spirits of separation have given) there is a name
of common scorn cast upon every man, that sets his face toward the
practice of true godliness: Wherein, I beseech your Majesty to consider, if
the life and soul of Religion be let out, what will become of the body of it?
will it not fall and grow ugly and rot? and become a shame unto it self? Now
as the things are to be looked to* for the repair of the house of God; so to
keep it in a good repair, two other things are to be cared for. First that
the common enemy may be suppressed: It was a noble speech (and blessed be God
that put it into the Kings royal heart) to say, He would shed the last drop of
his blood, rather then tolerate another Religion. But the Lord will not suffer
one drop of that precious blood to be shed, that is prepared to be shed for
him. The other thing, is to establish peace in the Church it self. A worthy
work, and fit for a King. It is true, and all men know it, that while we have
striven which way to entertain Christ best, as the Tribes of Judah and the ten
Tribes did, about the receiving, home of David their King, Shebah the Son of
Br^hri has wickedly blown the trumpet of separation, and much hurt has come
in the Church of God, by our unbrotherly and unfruitful contentions, for which
godly men have been much grieved: the division of Ruben were great thoughts of
heart. But now (thanked be God) the hearts of men are more moderate, and
disposed to peace, that a very little thing, a small matter (as I am persuaded)
would establish this Church of God in so good terms of peace, as it never
saw. In which respect, I am bold to speak unto your Majesty, but I speak unto
a most gracious King, and to a wise King that can tell how to pardon things
somewhat foolishly spoken, when they are spoken from a well meaning heart. I
could speak it upon my knees, if the place would bear it, but my soul shall
kneel before my Sovereign: I beseech your Majesty, take unto your self that
Princely work to strike through a peace in this Church of God; I will not
direct, but pray leave to tell a story; It is reported of Augustus the
Emperor, that supping with one Pollio, he was informed that a servant of
Pollios had broken a crystal glass of his Masters; a foul fault if he had
done it willingly, if negligently a fault: but for this the poor servant was
adjudged to be cut in pieces, and cast to the fishes: a marvailous sore
sentence for such a fault. The Emperor reversed the sentence, and thought it
punishment enough to the servant* to have bin in fear of such a punishment;
and after breaks all the glasses, that they might not be occasion of like
rigorous sentence afterward. I will not apply it, but do humbly beseech your
Majesty to use your own most godly wisdom, now to make peace in the Church,
when so small a thing will do it: that so the Bishops may love the poor
Ministers, as brethren and Ministers reverence the Bishops as fathers in the
Lord, as Hierom advises, and every honest man wishes they should do.

The second Use* is to his Majesty's servants and attendants; to whom I may
speak more freely, but yet with reverence (and as becomes me) to beseech
them, that (seeing it is the office and desire of the King to seek the good of
his people, and specially of the house of the Lord) they do their faithful
service herein to the King and take heed that they hinder not any of his godly
purposes toward his people, or the house of God: Curse ye Mero^h (said the
Angel of the Lord) curse ye the inhabitants thereof, because they came not out
to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty. If they were subject
to a curse that came not out to help, what shall such be, as come out to
resist, to hinder.

The last Use is to us all, the Kings loyal subjects, to stir us up to be
thankful to God that has given us a King that seeks our good and the good of
Gods house, and that we strive to walk worthy of such a blessing, in all
loyalty and reverence. And if any man be otherwise minded, let the Lords hand
find him out; yea surely, it will find him out, and make him an example. And
secondly, this should admonish us, to serve God and please him, that so we lose
not the benefit of a good King; which the people sometimes do for their own
wickedness: as we read in 2 Chronicles. 20. The high places were not taken away in
good Jehosaphats time (who was a godly Prince) because the peoples hearts were
not prepared to the God of their Fathers. Finally, seeing the hearts of Kings
are in the hands of God, as the rivers of waters; it is our duty now and
always, to become humble sutours to almighty God, so to guide the heart of our
gracious Lord the King* as he may ever seek the good of Gods people, and
specially of the Church of God, to all our comforts, and his own immottall
honor, and everlasting happiness through Jesus Christ, to whom with the
Father and the holy Ghost be honor and glory now and for ever, Amen.

FJNJS.
The Copy of the Letter, presented with the Copy of his Sermon aforesaid, by
Master Burges, to the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council (being convented
before them for the same) 22. June, 1604.
MOst humbly giving thanks unto your Honors, for so gracious usage of me at my
late convention before you, I now present unto you the copy of my Sermon,
preached before his excellent Majesty. To say that there is no word added,
abated or altered, were a speech not credible of a Sermon penned since, and not
before the preaching of it. But this J profess, before the God of truth, unto
your Honors, J know not where J have varied from my self in matter or manner
of speaking, to the benefit of one word. And therefore, as in the preaching
(through a slip of memory) J lost one whole branch of the first part, out of
the proper place; and recovering it afterward, did insert it in a place not so
fit; so have J willingly misplaced it now, as then unwillingly: yea, for some
allegations, wherein J missed some words of the Author, which J could now by
the Authors have supplied, J have chosen rather to show the then failing of
memory, then now to fail in that (which is a point of honesty) a just report
of my speech, as J remember it, aecording to my promise to your Honors.

For the rest, J do (upon my knees) beseech your Lordships, to lay the whole
together, before you censure the parts of it; and to consider the general
doctrines respectively to his Majesty, by mine own particular applications to
his royal person. As touching the to sparing acknowledgement of his Majesty's
Princely graces, and the unspeakable good we have by him, I humbly pray your
Lordships to believe, and I take God to witness, that I failed mine own
purposes therein: a fault in a speech unset, to one not acquainted with such a
presence, contracted by the time, much more easy to commit it then excuse;
because it is as needful to acknowledge to the full what we have received, as
to incite unto that which is to be continued, or added; lest we seem captious
rather, then zealous, of small things studious, of greater unthankefull.

Farther, my most Honorable good Lords, perceiving his Majesty, out of his
apprehensive depth, to be jealous of some secret purposes in me, to aim
undutifull intentions to his Majesty, under general coverts, as I cannot deny
unto his Highness most just cause of indignation at me for ever, if I should
have intended so, to a King, a Christian King, my King, and in his presence,
and before his servants; so I wish the Lord even so to give me favor with your
Honors, yea with his Majesty, nay with Christ at his ^oming, as my heart and
purposes were upright to God, the King and State, in that service; free from
popularity, and from all purpose of depressing the glory of so worthy a Prince,
or depraving personally any of his Highness servants.

I do also further crave leave to protest, that I had therein no intelligence,
no conference with any man living; but ran that course out of opinion, that it
was my duty to speak before the King and State, of such things as the best
Kings and States shall have need to consider of, while the world stands. As
touching mine own reverent heart, and particular opinion of his Majesty's
gracious disposition, if my speeches to that end cleared it not enough, yet
even that does, which is made to accuse me, my freedom to speak of that duty
so liberally before his presence; an undoubted argument of good times, like
those of Trajan, wherein (as it is said) one might think what he would, and
speak what he thought. Howbeit, I am so sensible of his Majesty's distaste, as
I could not out live the discouragement thereof, if the integrity of my heart
before God in that poor Sermon, and his Majesty's gracious readiness to
receive satisfaction did not relieve me. As for any construction of my speech
by his Mnjesties subjects, whom I have elsewhere and often taught, and incited
to be joyful, and thankful to God for this favor, that (not being best
people) we are blessed with the best King under heaven; I should mourn not a
little, if any spiderly mind, suck poison out of that (not flower, but)
pothearbe, that had no poison in it. And because it is matter of humbling, to
be thought casually, and unwillingly the instrument of any hurt, I do freely
offer, that if the honest wise Auditors will say upon their conscience, that my
Sermon incited them to less reverence of his Majesty, or joy in him; then to
silence my self from preaching, to give up my maintenance, and (if that be to
little) to depart my Country; in which yet, I had rather live under his
Majesty, poor as I am, then to abound in any other Kingdom of the world. But
what mean I to sentence my self? I am in your Lordships, to whom I submit my
self with all reverence: nothing so much fearful of any punishment, as sorry
to have grieved that royal heart, the joy, comfort and contentment whereof I
wish and pray for, more then my life, as I am bound to do 'and shall do,
whether his pleasure shall be to pardon, or punish his poor servant.

And thus professing my self to have great cause already, to think the more
reverently of your Honors while I live, and to pray to God the more earnestly
for you, I humbly crave leave of you, of presenting to your Honors an account
of my self for my twenty years Ministry; which if I shall give untruly in any
point, I ask no favor of your Honors, no mercy of God himself: And for the
rest, beseech God to make you as honorable in life, and happy in death as ever
were any in your places.

Your Honors in all humble duty, JOHN BVRGES.

Master Burges Letter to the KINGS Majesty.
Most mighty King,
MY no less dear then dread Sovernigne, I recount mine own secret intentions
in my Sermon preached before your Majesty, the dearnesse and tenderness of my
heart to your Majesty's person and honor, and the many prayers and tears
spent upon it, that it might be faithful, and acceptable to God and your
Majesty; I am amazed at that distaste which your Highness has taken of it and
of me. But when I review some ambiguous speeches thereof, in which your Majesty
had great reason to suspect undutifull intentions in me; I wonder more at that
divine providence, that carried me unawares upon such things, as gave occasion
of distaste to your Majesty, to me of humbling under your displeasure: which my
sorrow should have bin the less, if your Majesty's dislike had broken out in a
tempest of indignation, and not in a melting grief of a sweet and Princely
spirit. Now God even so deliver my soul out of all adversity, as I was far
from purpose of grieving my Lord the King, and as my heart is wounded for the
grief of your heart. And yet unto this one affliction has come another, that
all that faithful Council, which I meant to have conveyed closely unto my
dearest Lord, as a word in season, and which I thought my self bound unto, as
I would answer it to God, to whom I had vowed it, is now spilt, and made not
unprofibable only, but intolerable, through an evil taste, which my supposed
intentions gave unto it. And yet (that my misery might want no weight) there is
this added, that whiles the marks which your Majesty took notice of, were as
much hidden from the common hearers sight, as they were from mine own
thoughts, I am judged to be now committed for the Doctrines, which were found
and general, and never out of season for any State. And so (as I spoke to the
Lords with tears) I am casually an occasion of that which is no honor to your
Majesty; for whose honor I intended that service, and desire to sacrifice all
things but my soul. And these are the respects for which your poor prisoner
is abased. As for imprisonment, it is, in a sort but to be locked up in my
Study, and death it self were but to fall asleep: nor can I be disgraced in
the world, in which I never had or sought gracing. Now for remedy, I have but
two receipts; the one of prayer to God, that can recover your favor to me: the
other, of humble suit unto your Majesty for relief, not so much out of prison,
as out of your Majesty's displeasure. Together with which suit, I do humbly
present unto your Majesty, upon my knees, an account (more sincere then
cautelous) of such things as your Highness desires to be answered in.

First, Some things I spoke in mine own phrase unpremeditate, as that of the
swelling of Princes hearts, etc. and of their marriage by their pictures: and
some things I aleadged out of Comines; as of a fall from a horse, a sharp
ague, smiting in the wits, division in the house, etc. in all which, I take God
to witness against my soul, if I had any thought of aiming at, or so much as
knowledge of those respects, which I was conceived to glance upon, but spoke
therein as Balaams Ass did, to his Masters understanding, not to his own.

Secondly, for the general discourse of the graciousnesse of Princes to their
Subjects, and the arguments and amplifications thereof, I confess upon my
knees unto your Majesty, that taking notice (to my hearts grief) of the
general murmurings and complaints (which every man hears sooner then your
Majesty, or your nearest servants) as that you grace not your people, you
speak not to them, you look not at them, you bless them not; and therefore
(say they) you love them not; fearing whereto the devil might carry such
conceits, I thought my self bound in conscience as on the one side by sundry
Sermons, and in sundry places, to reprove all unthankful and undutifull
thoughts toward so gracious a King; so on the other side in your own presence,
to propone such general discourse, as your Majesty might make use of, for your
own good and all ours that live (as it were) by your breath; and yet without
touch to your reputation in your peoples hearts. For which, I not only did
intend, but so provide in my particular applications to your Majesty, as I dare
say, that the honest hearers did reverence you the more; as many testified at
the instant, by their tears: arguments of good and not of bad affections
toward their Sovereign.

Thirdly, and as for my speech of two beasts to be hunted away, the tame beast
and the wild, the flatterer and the false informer, being an allusion to a
speech of Diogenes; I protest upon my knees unto your Majesty, I meant not any
two particular persons, but kinds of such evil instruments: of which (there
is no doubt) but your Majesty has more then two about you, though I know them
not.

Fourthly, as to the point of the generality of a Princes favors, and that
simitude of Monopolies used in discourse thereof; I likewise upon my knees
crave leave to protest, that I spoke it not, as thinking your Majesty to be
strict hearted or handed; or because I knew that some have ingrosed your
favors; but because that also is muttered of, as if your favors were not
immediate, nor tole-free: and because it has been the ordinary mishap of the
best Princes to be so enclosed* I thought it my duty, ad majorem cautelam, to
advertise that under a general discourse unto a wise Prince, which I thought
none could possibly, and certainly apply unto particularities, unless the
fault were both certain and open.

Fifthly, For the second part of my Sermon, and that discourse of furthering
Religion; I do upon my knees crave leave to protest before the God of heaven,
that I spoke nothing as doubting of your Majesty's own purposes and integrity
of heart, or to detract from the honor of your former proceedings amongst us,
which unhappily and unwillingly I forgot to relate: but because I thought it my
duty to stir up your pure mind unto those things which belong unto your
royal power, and duty therein; to which (I confess) my heart moved me the
more earnestly, because it is generally complained, that Popery and
licenciousnesse grow upon us; that the new and unwonted urging of the
Ceremonies and Subscription beyond Law (whereby six or seven hundred of the
ablest Ministers in the Land are like to be put out) the general depraving of
religious persons (if they be conscionable) under the scorn of Puritanisme; as
if the body of Religion standing upright, men would yet cut the throat of it:
the connivency at Papists and Jesuits, and too little regard of religious men;
the dignifying of such in the Church, as never were of best desert, gifts, and
report; the withdrawing of Ecclesiastical causes from the Parliament; though
in present, and in your Majesty's days safe, yet in the President and
succession of doubtful consequence, computed with the insolences and brags of
the Papists; make many men sigh and grieve, and say in secret that these things
may be the tracies to Popery: and that though your excellent Majesty intend the
contrary, yet being in your own purposes led out only against Dothan of the
Puritans, you may at last, unwillingly and unawares, find your self enclosed
in Samaria of the Papists.

Sixthly, As to the point of the good disposition of the people to be cherished
by good Princes (which God knows I cast unwillingly into that latter part of
my Sermon) I do humbly confess unto your blessed Majesty, that the time gave
me as good an heart, as the text did occasion to speak of it; the rather,
because I have perceived good men's discourses to this effect. Surely, the
undoubted affections of the most religious Subjects, made the Kings happy
entrance amongst us, to be so open and so easy. Others, when they saw it
unpossible to resist, hasted to be before us in favor, as they were behind us
in affection: no otherwise then Shemei came in first to salute David at his
return, that in his trouble went out to curse him: we were then ready with our
lives in our hands, to have cut out his Ma^esties way to the crown, with our
own swords, and now are ready to dye for him, at any hours warning. Good
Lord, what is it? that we cannot be gratified in a suit so generally made, so
easily, and not safely alone, but profitably granted? and no less (in our
conc^i^s) for the Kings honor and safety, then for our common comforts and
quiet of the Church of God.

Seventhly and lastly, I do upon my knees confess unto your most excellent
Majesty* that by Pollios glasses, I did intend to notify the Ceremonies for
which this Church of God has bin in vexation above fifty years. And though
they be small things, yet have they caused great troubles; as light exhalations
breed great tempests: and the course of Religion has bin much hindered by them,
as is the way of a ship in the sea, by the little fish Remora as Pliny writes.
Things (which I confess) I hold not impious but needless and scandalous, of
some so extremely hated of others so supersticiously affected, as a good man
cannot tell, whether to please himself best, in pleasing or displeasing
others. Many hundred worthy Ministers think them unlawful, and would surely
dye, rather then use them; some others will much more willingly perform their
subjection to your Majesty, in bearing the penalty, then suffer by their
occasion so many to fall off to Brownisme on the one hand, and others to rise
up in scorn, and contempt of their lightness, on the other. Thus is the state
of the poor Ministry, like that of the Britons, betwixt the sword of the
Saxons, and the Sea: in which case, most noble Prince, I protest to God* I
durst not but speak (by way of supplication) before your presence more then
ever I spoke before the people; for what knew I, whether God had brought me
thither for that time? and whether the Kings Majesty would hold out his golden
Scepter unto me? and thought this motion the more seasonable, because the
things yielded upon suit for peace sake, might go out with flying colors, one
side satisfied with their justification, the other gratified with their remove;
both reunited within themselves, and strengthened against the common enemy; the
frame of the present government being still continued with good approbation,
and confirmed by our inward peace.

These Motives, most dread Sovereign, led me into that course which I took,
was without counsel or conference with other person or persons. Now durst I
prefer mine own possibilities of attaining the Princes service to this duty. In
all which, I had no unreverend thought in my heart, to compare my Sovereign to
any of those evil examples, which I alleged in my discourses. For the rest,
I could only plead (as Luther before the Emperor) for pardon of rudeness,
that I have not been acquainted with the tender ears of Princes; but do
only beseech your Majesty, for Christ's sake, to pardon the errors of my love
unto you. Beseeching God to bless your Majesty, and all your progeny, and to
make your name more honorable, then the name of all the Kings your
predecessors in this Land.

Your Majesty's most loyal subject, and poor prisoner in the Fleet John
Burges.


