ANOTHER SERMON Preached to the Honorable House of Commons now assembled in
PARLIAMENT, November the fifth, 1641.

By CORNELIUS BURGES. D. D.

Wherein, among other things, are showed A List of some of the Popish Traitors
in England.

That their Treasons were not occasioned by our Laws, but from Principles of
their own Religion.

That their Priests are bound to infuse suc^ Principles into them.

The courses taken by their Priests and Jesuits to animate them unto Treasons.

An Experimental Prognostication.

Published by Order of the House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for P. Stephens and C. Meridith, at the Gilded Lion,
and at the Craine in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1641.

To the Honorable House of Commons now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHen first I understood that You had designed only my self to preach unto You
at that Great and happy Solemnity upon the Fifth of November last, I enlarged
my Provision, because there was no other to second me in that Service.

But when I came to set before You what the Lord had brought to my hand, The
Tumults in Ireland.
I found You so over laid with business of such high importance as would
hardly permit You to hear any sermon at all. This constrained me to contract
the two first Parts of my Sermon, and wholly to suppress the third; except the
last branch of the last Use, which I found means to affix to my second Point.

It was far from my thoughts, and above my hopes, that such a mangled Piece
should gain such Acceptance with You, as to be held worthy of Your Thanks, or
of Public View.

But seeing Your pleasure is, to Order the Publishing it, I obey. Only I have
now added the remainder of that Provision, with which I could not at first
present You, by reason of those Indispensable Occasions then pressing on You.

The Lord of Heaven direct all Your ways, make them plain before You, prosper
You in them, and hold all Your hearts firm to Himself and in Unity among Your
selves; set You more effectually upon, and carry You more strongly through that
most necessary (and of all other most Important) Work, even the Perfecting of
the Reformation of this Church (by the assistance of a free National Synod, if
Your wisdoms should so think meet) for the further securing of our Religion
from Corruption in Doctrine, from Pollution in Worship, from superstition in
Ceremonies, from Exorbitancy and Tyranny in Ecclesiastical Government and
Discipline, and from Anarchy and Confusion (under a false guise of Christian
Liberty) which is far worse than Tyranny.

He also make You all more zealous to settle a Ministry worthy of the
Glorious Gospel of Christ in every Congregation, and a sufficient maintenance
for all faithful Laborers therein. He raise You higher and higher in honor
with God and Man, and carry You still in his Bosom till he has brought You to
Glory. All of which, is, and shall be the incessant prayer of

Your most humble servant C. BURGES.

PSALM. 76.10. Surely the rage of man shall praise thee, the rest of the rage
shall thou restrain.


THis Text and this day do well agree. Introduction showing. I. The fitness.
Never did day more exactly demonstrate the truth of this Text. Never did Text
more fully set forth the Works of this Day, whether we regard the rage of man,
or the Power of God in overruling thereof to his own Praise and our
preservation.

This is that day wherein the most prodigious rage of man, that ever the Sun
beheld, or that Hell it self boiled up to an height justly execrable to all
the world, was ready to break forth out of the nethermost Pit, against our Late
King, Queen, the Royal Seed, the Parliament, Church, Kingdom, this Place,
our selves, and all ours, all at once. And this is that day wherein our God
came riding to us in his Chariot of Triumph, and made himself fearful in
praises, by doing wonders, and leaving us no more to do, but to praise his
Name, and lengthening out our happiness joyfully to celebrate this Public
Anniversarie of that stupendous Deliverance.

So that, II. The occasion.
while Interpreters contend and sweat about the special occasion of this
Gratulatory Song, whether penned as a Lasting Trophee of the many Victories
achieved by David over the Philistines, Moabites, Syrians, and others (2 Samuel
8.) or of the discomfiture of that formidable Army of the Ethiopians, in the
days of Asa (2 Chr. 20.) Or of the selfe-destroying of that huge Host of the
children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, in the reign of Jehoshaphat. 2 Chapter 20.
Or rather, (which is more probable) as a Pillar of Gratitude in the time of
Hezekiah, for the wonderful defeat of those numberless Forces of blasphemous
Sennacherib, nigh to Jerusalem, where an Angel went forth, and in one night,
and slew 185000. men, in the camp of the Assyrians, King. 19. Sure we are,
Introduction.
that none of all those Great Acts of the Lord, ever administered greater
occasion to advance a Public Thanksgiving, beyond the faint and dull strain
of Prose, to the spritefull courage of a Verse, by the grateful violence of a
Poetic Rapture, truly divine, than that admirable, and even ineffable over
powering of the matchless fury of those Romish Pioneers, employed in that
Masterpiece of Hellish Invention, the Gunpowder Treason, affords unto us, and
all Posterity, of greatest exilience, and of utmost industry to make His Praise
glorious, who justly inhabiteth the praises of Israel, and is (in himself)
exalted above all blessing and Praise.

For, on this Day if ever, and even here also, if any where, brake He the
arrows of the bow, the shield, the sword, and battle, whereby he is become
more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey.

Here, the stout-hearted are spoiled, they have stepped their sleep, and none of
the men of might In that great slaughter in the host of Sennacherib, the
Leaders, Captains, and mighty men of Valor, were all cut off 2 Chronicles. 32.21.
have found their hands. At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the Chariot, and
the horse are cast into a dead sleep. -- Thou did cause judgment to be heard
from heaven; the earth feared, and was still, when God arose to judgment, to
save all the meek of the earth. Therefore we, even we also will for ever say,
and sing to thy Name, as thy people of old,

Surely, the rage of man shall praise thee, the rest of the rage shall thou
restrain.

III. The Sum.
Which words ( Janus like) have a double Aspect. For, they look not only
backwards, as a Thankful Remembrance of what God has already done; but also
forwards, as a Prophetic Resolution, and well grounded Conclusion of Faith,
touching the constant ordering and curbing the rage of all his and our enemies,
so as to get himself glory out of all, to the end of the world.

IV. The Parts of the Text.
If we make a Distribution of the Text, there will be found in it an
Asseveration, and an Assertion.

1. An Asseveration, in the first word, surely. 2. An Assertion, consisting of
two simple Propositions, diversifyed by the various consideration of the
subject of them both, the rage of man; which if we consider, 1. As the
permission of it, by his wise and powerful ordering, may conduce to his
honor; So, the rage of man shall praise thee. 2. As the breaking out of it
further might prove inconsistent with his Glory; So, the rest of the rage shall
thou restrain.

The time allotted me will not be sufficient for a distinct prosecution of
every Observation which these several branches afford. And your weighty
Affairs press for all expedition. I shall therefore fix only upon the
principal points in the shortest way, after a brief explication of the words
of the Text.

Surely. Explication. Surely, (...).
] So I find the Original [Chi] rendered by our English Translators, Old and
New, and by some of the Latin, correspondent thereunto. I acknowledge the
Hebrew word to be most frequently used as a Causall particle [ For, or
Because.] Howbeit it is, not seldom, put for a vehement Asseveration, or
Attestation, and translated, Surely, or Verily. Thus, Jacob to Laban; Gen 31.42.
Surely, thou had sent me away empty. So Judah to Jacob; Genesis 43.10.
Except we had lingered, surely we had returned a second time. And, surely
there is no enchantment against Jacob, said wretched Balaam of blessed Israel.
In all which places, and many more, the Original word is the same that is in
this Text.

This may be sufficient warrant for our Translation, which is both pertinent,
and emphaticall. Pertinent, because, had the word been otherwise rendered, the
sense had been obscured; for that it is not a Reason of the Premises, but
rather a Conclusion deduced from them. Emphaticall also, because it lively
expresses the assurance of Faith in Gods Wisdom, Power, and Goodness for
the happy disposing of that Rage, which he shall at any time please to permit,
and for the mastering and suppressing of the residue, which he shall find
cause to restrain. You see the Asseveration. I proceed to the Assertion.

The rage, from (...) ^al^re (...) Ex a descere.
The rage.] So I translate [Chamath.] not anger; as some; not yet wrath, as
others. Anger is too mild, wrath, too short to express it by. I know anger,
wrath, and rage, (or fury) be sometimes promiscuously put one for another. But
withal, I find them sometimes Anger is cruel, and wrath is raging. So the old
Translation. Prove. 27.4.
distinguished, and in strictness some difference may be found between them.

Anger is the boiling of the blood about the heart, causing a commotion of the
spirits that are near. Wrath is the manifestation of that inward distemper by
looks, gestures, or actions tending to revenge. But Rage is the extremity of
both the former, causing the heart to study destruction Prove. 24.2.
, to meditate and contrive the utmost of mischief and villainy; and, the
outward man to watch, and lay hold upon all opportunities and occasions of
putting it in execution, out of the depth of malice, and in the height of fury.
Besides, it is of longer continuance than anger, strictly so called. It is such
an inveterate anger as Eccles. 7.9.
rests in the bosom of fools, keeps house, and constant residence there;
being deeply rooted, and wrought up unto a settled habit, which (though it does
not always actually break forth, yet) is continually desirous of vent, like
fire impatient of restraint.

That all this is comprised under the word here used, is manifest both by the
judgment of the Learned, who have expounded it, and by the use of it in Sacred
Writ. Therefore some express it by Fervor: Tremellius by Aestus, or a burning
heat like to that of an Oven, or Furnace, which sets the whole man in a flame,
that cannot, without extraordinary means, be quenched, or allayed. And the
Scriptures inform us both of a rage within Psalm. 2.1. Why do the heathen
rage, which is immediately expounded by an internal act, the imagining (or
meditating) of a vain thing: and, of a rage without too, namely, the rage of
the tongue. Hosea 7 16. and the rage of the hand. Cursed be their anger, for it
was fierce, and their wrath (or rage) for it was cruel, said dying Jacob,
touching the bloody butchery committed by his two Sons, Simeon and Levi, upon
the newly circumcised Sechemites, in cold blood. Genes. 49.7. Which also shows
the settled permanencie, and predominancie of such a Disposition in a wicked man.

This rage is amplified by the subject wherein it is, Man. Of man. (...)
For it is called, the rage of m^n. The Text names no individual, whether
Sennacherib (of whose rage God himself took notice, 2 Kings 19.27.
) or any other blastering Tyrant, or boisterous Ajax; but indefinitely terms
it [Chamath Adam] the rage of man, a Livery that fits the shoulders of any
wicked man in the world.

And this indefinite expression is used partly for discovery, and partly out of
contempt of the man that is here demonstrated.

1. By way of Discovery, to point out the vicious quality, and corrupt estate
of the man, in whom this rage reigns. It is the rage of Adam, of the old man,
of every man that has not put off the first Adam, and is not ingraffed into
the second. Therefore is it called the rage of man; because, of every man yet
remaining upon the old Stock, or the first man, which is of the earth, earthly
1 Cor. 15.
. Hence is he called, a man of the earth. Psalm. 10.18 the violent man. Psalm.
18.48. the bloody and deceitful man. Psalm. 55.23. and by such like Epithites.

2. By way of contempt, to show that, be the rage what it will, it is yet but
the rage of a weak silly man, that is of base original, and of too small a
strength to grapple with Omnipotency. Thus, in Psalm 9.19. Arise, O Lord, let
not Man prevail. Where the Strong GOD is opposed to impotent Man. So the next
words. Put them in fe^re, O Lord, that the Nations may know themselves to be
but men: that is, poor weak grasshoppers, Job. 4.19.
whose houses are clay, whose foundation is in the dust, that are crushed
before the moth: so that neither Ezekiel. 22.14.
can their hearts endure, nor their hands be strong in the days that God shall
deal with them Will thou yet say before him that slays thee, I am God? But
thou shall be a man, and no God, in the hand of him that slays thee. Ezekiel
28.9. This is the man; and this, the account which God makes of him in whom
this rage is found. But against whom is it bent? If we consult the story, we
shall find God complaining that it went very high, for it reached even unto
Himself. Explication.
I know thy abode, -- and thy rage against me, says the Lord. 2 King. 19, 27.
that is, first more immediately, by blasphemous speaking against the God of
Jerusalem, as against the Gods of the people of the earth, which were, 2 King.
19.21, 22.
the work of the hands of man. 2 Chronicles. 32.19. Secondly, mediately, through
the Loins of Hezekiah, and such of his people as trusted in the Lord.

Now, what of all this rage of man against God and his servants? The Text tells
you what is predicated of it.

Shall praise thee. (...)
It shall praise thee.] Or, as the old Translation has it, it shall turn to
thy praise. Praise is nothing else but the exaltation of Excellency, whereby it
may be had in reverence and honor. This is that which redounds unto God from
the rage of man: not intentionally on man's part, as if he in his rage aimed at
it: for so, God is not in all his thoughts. Psalm. 10.4. But occasionally on
man's part, and efficaciously on Gods, who brings light out of darkness, and
good out of evil. His Power and Providence so orders and disposes all the
malicious machinations, and bloody designs of the most desperate men, that
they go away with the shame, his people with joy, and himself with the
honor. And this he does not only by mastering them in their greatest rage,
and compelling them to acknowledge his power, but also by giving such issue
thereunto, as shall produce effects quite contrary to those which they
intended. Thus, the rage of Joseph's brethren, in selling him to the Ishmaelites
turned to Gods praise, As for you, says Joseph, Ye thought evil against me,
but God meant it unto good. Genes. 50.20.

Nor is this spoken only in reference to what was already done and past, as
some would seem to insinuate, who render the Verb [Totheka] in the Present
tense (does praise thee:) but as a Declaration of what God will ever do, in
all time to come, so often as the rage of man shall issue forth. Therefore the
best Interpreters render it by the future, the rage of man shall praise thee,
making it to be not only a voice of Thanksgiving, but a conclusion of faith,
as before I touched. So have you the first Proposition explained. The Second
follows,

The rest of the rage] This is the Subject of the later proposition, which, for
substance, is the same with the former, Explication. The rest of the rage.
to wit, the rage of man: Only it is differenced by two Circumstances, which I
must alike open.

One of the Circumstances is, the changing of the number in the Original.

Before it was [Chameth] rage, in the singular number: (...)
now it is [Chemoth] rages, in the Plural; which plainly supposes the
greatness, and the variety of it. The rage of the wicked is not small, nor
terminated in one plott, or practice, nor of one kind: but it is exceeding
great, ever working, and multiplying by continuance, so as there can be no
wicked design so barbarous, no plott so bloody and Devilish, but the rage of
Gods enemies makes them ready for it, and mad upon it. If they once miscarry,
yea if they be often disappointed, they are not discouraged, but they will to
work again and again, never giving over. If one Plot fail, they are ready
with another, and another, of other sorts. The Devil and their own hearts
make them fertile and big with all the inventions of Hell. Justly then, does
the Psalmist call them rages, in the Plural. For, they are as Gad, a Troop;
yea, you may call their name Legion, they be so many.

The other circumstance is, in the word [Sheerith] translated, the rest, the
remnant, the remainder. (...)
And this gives notice of the abundance of it. Let never so much of it break
forth, yet there is still move behind, that throngs after that which got out
before And, as it is with foul stomachs, the best that comes up into the
Basin, is but filthy stuff, but that which is behind, and comes last, is far
more loathsome and bitter, through the abundance of choler and gall: so is it
with the rage of wicked men; the best is abominable, but that which tarries
behind, and would come up in the Rere, is most intolerable; that, is the
bottom of the stomach, the dreggs, the most venomous and malignant part of the
rage, the letting out hereof would be the destruction of Gods people, or some
way or other dishonorable to our God. This remnant it is, of which the
Psalmist, speaking unto God, says,

Thou shall restrain. (...)
Thou shall restraine] This, in the Hebrew, is expressed in one word [Tackgor.]
which imports the begirting, or binding of it in on every side, that it shall
by no means break out, but shall be kept in, as a Dog in a chain, as a Lion
in his Den, how violent soever. The Greek Septuagint, in their Translation,
have wittily expressed themselves thus; the rest of the rage shall keep holy
day unto thee (...).
. Their meaning is, that as men, who are to keep an holy day to the Lord, cease
from labor, doing no manner of work therein, further than may directly tend to
the honor and service of God: so the rage of man, further than God may get
some honor out of it, shall keep holy day too, that is, cease from working or
acting: it shall rest from labor in regard of breaking out, how restless so
ever it be within, because it cannot get out.

But this is not all. Tremellius, in his Revised Translation, supplies one
word, which makes the sense more complete and comfortable. For, thus He;
residuo aestuum accingis (tuos) Thou do begirt thy people with the remainder
of the rages. That is, thou do not only keep in the rage of thine enemies
that it do no hurt, but thou make that very rage, which was intended for
their destruction, to become even as the walls of a City, for their defense
and protection. The upshot of all is this; That wicked men shall be so far
from attaining those ends, which in their rage they drive at, that they shall
be sure to meet with a stop, where they made themselves most sure of going on,
and be occasions of promoting the good of Gods party, which they meant to
destroy. 1 Observation


Thus far the Explication. The Observations which I shall now recommend unto
you from the whole, be these Three.

1. The observations.
The rage of the wicked against God and his people is bottomless and endless.

2. Let the rage of wicked men be what it will, it shall only raise that Glory
to God, and benefit to his people, which the wicked never intended, and, ever
fall short of that issue, which they chiefly projected.

3. The experience of Gods overruling, and mastering the rage of man in times
past, is an undoubted assurance of the like, for all time to come.

I begin with the first.

The rage of the wicked against God and his people is bottomless, and
endless. The rage of the wicked appea^es.
-- This is (as you have seen) the subject of both Propositions contained in
this Text; and that, whereof the the Godly have had sad experience, ever since
there was a world, and wicked men in it. It were an unthristy waste of Time
(now, 1 In particular instances.
so precious) to insist upon the rage of Cain against Abel; of Esau, against
Jacob; of the Egyptians against Israel; of Saul and his party, against David;
of Absalom, against his own Father; of Haman, against Mordecay; of the Nobles
of Babylon, against Daniel; or of Herod, Pilate, and the Jews, against Psalm.
2.1, 2. Act 4.27, 28.
Christ himself. What should I tell you of David's moan, Psalm. 57.4.
My soul is among Lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire; Or,
of his Prayer to be Psalm. 59.2, 3.
saved from bloody men, that lay in wait for his soul; Or, of his complaint
of Psalm. 22.11.
many strong Bulls of Bashan, that had beset him round?

Let the Occasion of this Text and Psalm, speak to this Point. The rage of
Sennacherib, was first bent against Hoshea, King of Israel, whom, together with
those Ten Tribes, after three years war, he took, and carried away Captive.
But, 2 Kings 18.
eight years after (in the Fourteenth of Hezekiah) his wrath brake out against
good Hezekiah, and the Lord himself: for, up he came, and seized into his
hands all the frontier Cities of Judah; whereof Lachish was one. To appease
this rage, thither did Hezekiah dispatch Ambassadors, and craved peace;
Sennacherib propounded the Conditions and Articles; Hezeki^h accepts, and
performs them. But, no sooner was this done, but Sennacherib sends Tartan,
Rabsaris, and Rabshakeh from Lachish to Hezekiah with a great host against
Jerusalem, and with words of blasphemy against God himself: insomuch as
nothing was so eminent and notable in that expedition, as 2 King. 19.27.
his rage against the Lord. And is it not Saint Paul's own confession of his
rage against Christians, before his Conversion; Act. 25 11.
I punished them often in ever City, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being
exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange Cities?

2 In the universality of this disposition.
Nor is this the Disposition of some few only, but even of all the wicked. You
see the Text is indefinite; it takes all before it. This is common to them all;
Psalm. 37.12.
the wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth:
not in a sudden passion only, but in a constant premeditated course. Verse. 32.
The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him: and that, Psalm.
17.12. Psalm. 10.8, 9.
Like a Lion that is greedy of prey, and as a young Lion, lurking in secret
places.

3 Against all the Godly.
Neither is this the hard hap of some few godly men, who through indiscretion
do administer oil to the flame of wicked men's wrath; but even Isay. 59.15.
every one that departs from iniquity, makes himself a prey. Yea, 2 Timothy
3.12.
and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. And,
that not only from strangers, but Mic. 7.6.
a man's enemies shall be those even of his own house. So was it with David;
witness Achiiophel, a Privy Counselor, and Absalom that 2 Samuel 16.11
came forth of his own bowels. And so fared it with Christ himself; witness
the Traitor Judas, who was Joh. 6.7 1.
one of the Twelve.

4 For godliness sake.
Nor is this, or any of this, for any real injuries done them by the godly; but
even gratis, and without a cause, Joh. 15.25.
except their Godliness. Psalm. 59.3, 4.
The mighty are gathered together against me (says David) not for my
transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord: They run, and prepare themselves
without my fault. A thing so palpable in Paul's case also, that he durst appeal
to his very enemies, in the midst of all their rage against him, be fore
Felix, his Judge. Act. 24.10.5. When they rage not outwardly, they rage the
more within.
Let these same here say, if they have found any evil doing in me.

Indeed they do not always discover, and openly prosecute their inward
rancor, because all Times are not for it. And when the times would permit it,
yet opportunities to such and such men may be wanting. In which Case, malicious
Haman, Esth. 5.9, 10.
though fall of indignation against Mordecay, can refrain himself, while he
saw Mordecay countenanced by the Queen, whom he durst not then to displease.
But yet, even then their hearts are full of deadly poison; Psalm. 64.6.
both the inward thought of every one of them, and the heart is deep. Then,
whatsoever craft or subtilty, Counsel or conspiracy can possibly lurk in the
most fathomlesse hearts of men, acted by Him who was a murderer from the
beginning, do all meet, and concentrate in them more than at other times, even
when the outward face of things extort from them a plausible behavior toward
the Godly. Prove. 26.24.
He that hates, will (at such a time) dissemble with his lips, and lay up
deceit within him.

And as their rage is bottomless, so is it endless, 6 All this, without end,
or measure.
and still on the increasing hand. Bray a fool in a mortar, yet will not his
folly depart from him. How often soever wicked men have been in plots and
conspiracies, and smarted for them; they wax not weary, nor give over their
rage, which is like the Hare, that after once conceiving, admits of another
conception, before she be delivered of her former burden. The older, and more
frequent they grow in villainy, the more fruitful their hearts in Devilish
Designs and Inventions, till Psalm. 5.9.
their inward parts become nothing else, but very wickedness, or wickednesses,
as the Psalmist speaks; and, the whole frame of their spirits be Isay. 57.20.
like the raging Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.
If any of them seem calmer than the rest, it is not because he is better, but
because more subtle; not because he has no mind to do mischief, but
because he is better able to conceal a mischievous intention, till a better
opportunity. Whence that Counsel; Pro. 26.25.
When he speaks fair, believe him not, for there are seven abominations in
his heart.



1. It is the natural bent and frame of wicked men's hearts to be mischievous.
It is their very life. Pro 4.16.
They sleep not except they have done mischief, and, their sleep is taken
away, except they cause some to fall. 1 It is the nature of wicked men to do
mischief.
And in this, friends and foes are all alike to them. Sin having turned them
out of course, they turn out of kind; and like a mad Ox, gore all they meet.
If Herod be in his rage, Macr^h. li. 2. Saturnal.
as good be his swine, as his son.

2 The old emnity eggs them on.
2. The old emnitie put between the two Seeds, makes the serpentine party to
adventure a breaking, Genesis 3.15.
yea a crushing of their own heads to pieces, rather than let alone the heel
of the woman's seed, which, with all their rage, they can no more but bruise.
Therefore wicked men, as once the Ezekiel. 25.16.
Philistims, take all opportunities to take vengeance with a despiteful heart,
because of the old hatred. And this emnitie is so hereditary, that never any
Northern High-landers more inherited the malice of their Ancestors Feides,
than the whole Posterity of collapsed Adam, do, the wrath and rage of their
corrupt Progenitors against all the Godly.

3 Contrary conversation augments it.
3. Contrariety of Conversation augments the hatred. 1 John 3.12.
Wherefore did Cain slay his brother, but because his own works were evil,
and his brothers righteous? The wicked Isay. 59.15. sacit ut insanus habeatur.
Tremel.
account him mad, that departs from iniquity. Therefore say they, Wisd. 2.12.
and ve^. ^ 5.
Let us lie in wait for him, because he is not for our turn, but is clean
contrary to our doings. -- He is grievous to us to behold, for his life is not
like other men's, his ways are of another fashion.

4. The honor and happiness that God conferres upon his people, 4 Their envic
a^^^h happiness of the go^ly.
is the wicked man's envy, and adds fuel to his rage. If he must be
miserable, it madds him at heart to see them happy. (...). 11^.10.
The wicked shall see it, and be grieved, he shall gnash his teeth, and melt
away. And this is not the least part of the Devils own quarrel. (...). 1^. ^3.
For when the Dragon saw that he was cast (out of heaven) unto the earth, he
persecuted the woman, casting water after her, out of his mouth, like a flood,
and making war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the Commandments of
God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

5 The w^ked hate God himself. 1 Psalm. 73 9.
5. Their rage spares not God himself. Nor was it one Sennacherib, or
Pharaoh, but it is the property of all the wicked to set their mouths against
heaven, and to be Romans 1.3^.
haters of God. Yea, they first hate him, before their hatred falls upon them
that be his. If the world hate you, says our Savior, Ioh. 15 18.
Ye know that it hated me, before it hated you. And if it hate him first, his
followers are sure to fall under it next, and to pay for all: Verse. 20.
If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. As good men bestow
all their Psalm. 16.1, 2.
goodness upon the Saints, because they cannot extend it unto God himself: so
wicked men wreake all their teene upon the godly, the image of God (as the
Panther, upon the image of a man, when he cannot come at the man himself)
because their rage cannot reach the Almighty.

Uses might be made of it: but I will confine my self unto two or three, most
pertinent to the present Occasion.

And first, Behold this Truth, abundantly fulfilled, this day, 1 Behold this in
the Gunpowder Treason. Nov. 5. 1605.
in your ears, through the implacable rage of the Popish faction, inventing,
contriving, and bringing to the very birth, this day 36. years, the most
barbarous, execrable, hellish Treason that ever came within the hopes of the
most savage and unnatural Assassinates, to bring forth, or conceive. He wished
that Rome had but one neck, and that he might cut it off at one blow.
Caligula indeed wished, but never hoped for such a blow: and his wish was, a
blow with the sword, not by springing a mine from Hell. A cruelty, that he
never dreamt of. Yet such a Cruelty should have been executed here within a
few hours, had not God wonderfully restrained the rest of their rage, when
nothing was now wanting but giving fire (which also was ready) by the cursed
hand of a second Faux.
Mutius Scaevola, who (after his apprehension) avowed the fact, repenting of
nothing but of not executing the Design, whereof (as he blasphemously said) not
God, but the Devil was the discoverer.

Indeed I find one Moody, a bloody Villane, solicited by L Ausbespine, A
French Ambassador, of the Guisian faction, The plot was to deliver the Q. of
Scots then condemned. See the Annalls of the year, 1587.
to kill our late glorious Deborah, Q. Elizabeth, (An. 1587.) to have
propounded the doing of it, by laying Gunpowder under her Chamber, and
secretly firing it: And this, not above 18. 1 Use.
years, before the Gunpowder Treason. But (though that were too bloody, and
perhaps the Embrion of this cursed Monster) that deserved not to be named (for
bloodinesse) the same day with this.

For there, only one Person of the Queen was aimed at; here, King, Queen,
Prince, all the Nobles, Judges, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of Parliament,
had all gone up at one fatal blow. There, only Twenty pound weight of Powder,
in a bag or sack, should have been (but was not) provided, which perhaps might
have miscarried; but here, no less than 36. Barrells were actually laid in,
and covered close with 1000. Billets, and 500. Fagots, not only for hiding the
Powder, if search should be made; but, for more effectual operation thereof,
when it should have been fired. There, the traitorous Instruments of D
Ausbespine (he disdaining the baseness of the invention) disliked the plot,
wishing rather it might be effected by a man of more courage (in a more
generous way) like that of the Prince of Orange, by the Burgundian. But here,
Garnet, and Tesmond, Garrard, and Oldcorne (or Hall) the Jesuits could approve
of the Plot, when propounded by Catesby; and for his encouragement in that
work of Darkness, See Stat. of 3. Jac. ^.
they join in the Conspiracy as deep as any: as appears by the Report of
Roger Widdrington Append. ad supplic.. 12.
, a strong Papist, to Pope Paul the Fifth, beside other testimony.

This therefore was every way Transcendent, beyond all the most horrid Attempts
wherewith any age, or Nation was ever stained. A fact that speaks the Actors,
and Accessories, not men, but Tigers; not Beasts, but Devils. The Hunnes, the
Heruli, the Turcilingi (all branded for inhumane Caiteifs in the height) were
mild and temperate creatures, in comparison of these. Not the sablest Stories,
or Tragedies ever presented such a desperate Scene. No high flowne Poet could
ever reach such a Plot in a fiction. In a word, Ioels Joel 2.30.
Day of blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke, was unable to match it. Such
havoc of Royal and Noble Blood, such heaps of dashed brains, such mountains
of mangled bodies, such piles of torn members, such numbers of ghastly preys
offered up to Death in a moment, could never have been thought of, much less
effected.

This had been, beyond all president, inhumane and terrible; but, the dismal
effects that must have sprung from such an Act, had been much more dreadful.
The destruction (or forcing the residue) of the Royal Stock, the subversion of
the Laws, the ruin of the Kingdom, the utter extinguishing of the Light and
Glory of all, the true Religion, and Profession of the Gospel established among
us, and the retroducing of Egyptian darkness, Babylonish fornication, and
Romish Idolatry, like a flood, to the destruction of souls, as well as bodies,
had all followed at the heels of that Infernal Thunderclap.

Cursed therefore, and for ever cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and
their wrath, for it was cruel. And blessed be that God, who has scattered
first, and divided them into pieces afterward in this our Israel, making them
an astonishment, and an hissing, not in Europe alone, and among Christians;
but, even in Afric (that womb of Monsters) where very Turks and Moors, and
all sorts of Barbarians, that heard of this monstrous Attempt, sat down
amazed, their hearts melting and failing within them at the report.

Indeed, if Jesuits be consulted, they roundly resolve it, not only lawful,
but meritorious; So did Garnet, and the rest before mentioned. What all the
world justly condemns as an unjust rage, that they cry up as a commendable
Zeal Of which more See the later end of the next Use.
anon. But this is so far from excusing the fact, that it does exceedingly
aggravate the offense: for it draws in Heaven, to father their bratts of Hell.
Let them but once proclaim us Heretics and Schismatics, and they may
afterward do any thing else.

For our selves, though they brand as Heretical, those Divine Truths professed
amongst us, Act. 24.14.
we confess (and justly glory in it) that according to that way which they
call Heresy, so worship we the God of our Fathers, believing all things which
are written in the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel too. And indeed, with
them, this is our fault. And whereas they pronounce us schismatic, we have
often made good before the world, that we never separated from the Catholic
Church, but only from the abominations of Babylon, Revel. 18.4.
that we might no longer partake of her sins, nor receive of her plagues.

But let them account of themselves as highly as they please, and rang us among
the rankest heretics that ever were, they be yet to seek of a sufficient
warrant for such a Prodigy: seeing we have the peremptory judgment of Christ
himself to the contrary, for the everlasting confutation of all such damnable
doctrine, and the eternal confusion of all the broachers, and abettors of it.

In the Ninth of Luke, Verse. 51.52.
we find Christ, in a journey from Galily to Jerusalem, to keep his last
Passover, and to offer up himself there a Sacrifice for our sins; and being
on the way, he sends before to a village of Samaria, to take up some lodging.
The Samaritans, for difference from the Jews in Religion, but chiefly about
the Place of worship (than which, at that time, a greater Controversy could
not happen) refused to entertain him, especially now, that he was going up to
that feast. And this heightened their offense of inhumanity toward a stranger,
to an act of impiety against Religion; refusing upon this ground, that he
steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, Verse. 53.
and they knew part of his business there.

His two Disciples James and John (who perhaps had been sent on that errand) in
zeal for their Master, took fire at this, and presently put it to the Question;
Ver. 54.
Lord, will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume
them, even as Elias did? They not only make the Proposition, but avouch a
President of great authority. Elias 2 King. 1.
did so upon the old Samaritans; therefore why not we much more upon these?
That wrong was but to a servant; this to the Son of God himself: And we desire
no other revenge upon these, than he took upon those. But what is Resolved upon
the Question, by Christ their Master? Surely he gives judgment against his
own Disciples, although himself were most concerned in the Cause. He will not
have it so much as attempted, no not upon such impious Samaritans. For he both
sharply rebuked the propounders of such a fiery Motion, saying, Verse. 55.
Ye know not of what spirit ye are; and refuted them too, by the end of his
coming, which would not consist with that Act of Elias; for the Son of man
is not come to destroy men's lives, Ver. 56.
but to save them.

Now then, if the Question be at any time put, Whether a Papist may lawfully
blow up a Protestant, or otherwise destroy him, for difference in Religion, and
upon pretense of Heresy, without Legal Trial? We can not better resolve it
according to the mind of Christ, than by that Resolution, which Himself gave
to a Question of his own Disciples, to this effect, Whether it be lawful for
a believing Jew, yea for Apostles, upon wrong done to Christ himself for
difference in Religion, to set fire on a Samaritan? We see, Christ is clearly
and resolutely for the Negative: which is enough to secure all Cities and
Villages from such a Desolation, and our Persons from such a Massacre, by any
who truly follow Christ, while the World stands.

Let it now be supposed by Papists, that our Religious King, Queen,
Parliament, and all Protestants, were all out as bad as those wretched
Samaritans; and, themselves as Catholic, as Apostles, or as Christ himself:
yet, by Christ's Resolution, Protestants ought to have been no worse used by
Papists, than the Samaritans by Christ.

Would Christ not endure that a contemptible Village of Miscreants should be
destroyed, upon such a quarrel; and yet, authorize these, to destroy a whole
Kingdom (yea Three Kingdoms upon the matter) with one puff, upon a far
less occasion? If he would not permit such a punishment from Heaven, upon only
Delinquents; would he approve the blowing up of many others, who, in the
judgment of the Conspirators themselves were esteemed Innocent? God would not
so deal with Sodom it self, when the cry of their sins called for fire
from heaven.

But, if now we invert the scale, as justly we may; The Instance will conclude
more strongly. If Christ would not give way to the good, to bring fire on the
evil; not to Apostles, to destroy heretics and Idolaters; 2 Use.
nay, not so much as to pray for fire, even from heaven, althought the Prayer
were to be put up by James and John, against Samaritans; would he warrant not
only a Prayer for, but an execution by fire; not from heaven, but from hell;
not by Apostles, but by Apostats; not upon Heretics, but upon sound Professors
of his Truth; not by James and John, whom he dearly loved, but upon Samaritans,
whom all Gods people had cause to hate; but, by Samaritans, Priests and
Jesuits, Traitors and Rebels (abhorred of God and man) upon James and John,
very Pillars of the Church, upon the Lords Anointed, and upon the Assembly of
all the Estates of the Kingdom? Sober and Modern Papists themselves are ashamed
of this, in behalf of those furious Ones, of their own Party, who cannot blush.
Nay, I appeal from Garnet, to Garnet: from Garnet sleeping, to Garnet waking:
from his sleeping Conscience, consulted to approve it, to his Conscience
awakened, when he was upon the Scaffold, to be executed for it. When the
Question was first put to him by Catesby, Whether it were lawful in some Case,
to destroy the innocent with the guilty? This Good Widdrington ubi supra.
Father, so soon as he apprehended the Conspirator to be in earnest,
peremptorily resolved, that, no doubt, it was; if the good coming by it, might
make compensation for the loss of their lives. So that with him, Romans 3.8.
Let us do evil, that good may come thereof, was good Doctrine, though S.
Paul disclaimed it.

But, when he came to die, Conscience compelled him to change his note. Then,
he confessed to a Noble E. of Manch: to whom Garnet confessed, M^rtis
sententiam justissime in cum fuisse pronunciatam, etc.
Lord, yet living, that, for concealing this Treason, the sentence of death was
just upon him. And being led to the side of the scaffold, to satisfy the
people, he (as Me in Regem peccasse confiteor, quod mihi est de^ori, quoad
mali conscius fui, scil. in reticendo Et hoc nomine, veniam a Regia. Majestate
supplex pe^o. Machinatio contra Regem and regnum sanguinolenta erat, quamque si
pe^acta fuisset, ego ipse in imis sensibus and toto animo de^esta^u^^s erum.
Dole^ sane maxim and peracerbe fe^o, Catholicos tam atrox and immanc facinus
suscepisse. Ibid.
Widdrington reports him) freely said, I confess I have offended against the
King, which is now my grief, in that I was guilty of this Treason, in
concealing of it, for which I humbly crave pardon of his Majesty. The
Conspiracy against the King and Kingdom, was bloody; and had it been
executed, I my self should have abhorred it from the secrets of my heart, and
with all my soul. And verily, it is my greatest grief, and with much
bitterness I feel it, that Catholics undertook such a cruel and outrageous
Villainy. And, upon th Gallows, Eosque adhorto: ne ejusmodi proditionibus and
rebellionibus contra Rege^ se ^mmesceant, ibid. inf^a.
he exhorted all Catholics, that they would never more have hand in such
Treasons and Rebellions against their Sovereign. Thus far our first Use: the
next is this.

Learn hence what to expect, as from all wicked men in general, so from all
the brood that be Agents and Factors for Rome in particular; whether Lay, or
Ecclesiastique, Never expect better from them.
Regular or Secular, to the end of the world. Surely, no better than from the
rageing Sea, when it cannot rest. Nothing but rage and wrath, Conspiracy and
cruelty, Treason and Rebellion, so often as power and opportunity meet.
Whether Prove. 29.9.
they rage, or laugh, there is no rest. Mic. 7.2.3. etc.
They all lie in wait for blood, they hunt every man his brother with a net,
that they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the Prince Witnesses Pope,
and other his Adherents.
asks, and the Judge judges for reward, and the Great man utters his
mischievous desires: so they wrap it up. The best of them is a briar, the most
upright is sharper than a thorny hedge, etc. Therefore trust ye not in a
friend, put ye no confidence in a guide, keep the doors of thy mouth from her
that lies in thy bosom, if this way addicted.

What then should you listen to any of their Sirens songs, for abrogation, or
mitigation of the Laws made against them, for toleration of their Religion, or
for trusting of them, as some would persuade? They are no Changelings. Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Jer. 13.23.
then may they also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. I urge this the
rather at this time, not only because the very Deliverance, which we this day
celebrate, rings loud in your cares, neither to trust nor tolerate them any
longer, and strongly moves for a Ne admittas, against them; but, because also,
even during this very Parliament, you find the old spirit of rage and treachery,
walking too openly, and boldly among them, and too often pressing too near
upon you. Let it not move you, that now they are in a Petitioning vein, and
seem to Petition for some indulgence, professing all Loyalty: For just so they
gave out, while they were preparing their materials for the Gunpowder
Treason: then they would Petition for a Toleration of Religion.

Coming they are to manage their Cause, and means they have more than ordinary
to advance their Party: the more reason, you should have a more vigilant eye,
and a more active hand over them, to secure the King, and the Royal Seed,
Religion, your selves, and the Kingdoms, against all their machinations. The
better to quicken this Care in you, I shall humbly leave with you these Four
Remembrancers. First, That they have never been quiet, but continually
contriving of Treasons, ever since the Reformation of Religion. Secondly, That
this practice is not from the Laws made against them, See Discourse of the
Powder Treason in K. James his Works.
but their very Religion it self leads them unto it. Thirdly, That their
Priests are bound to infuse these principles of their Religion into them, and
to press the use of them upon all occasions. Fourthly, That to induce their
Disciples to swallow those Principles, and accordingly to act them when
occasion serves, they propound great rewards and glory to such as shall
attempt them, and defend and magnify those who have formerly miscarried in
them. Each of these I shall now make good unto you in order, with some
enlargement.

I. They have never rested from plotting of Treason since the Reformation.
1. They have never been quiet, but always hammering and contriving or
soliciting and driving on desperate Plotts and conspiracies, to destroy their
Sovereigne, to abolish Religion, to subvert the Laws, and to expose the
Kingdoms to a prey of any foreign Enemy that would lend them either aid, or
countenance, ever since the happy Reformation of Religion in the glorious
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, unto this very day.

It is not my purpose, nor will it suit with the short limits of a Sermon, to
make a relation of the Treasons themselves, but only to give a short Catalogue
of the Chief Actors in them, leaving the rest to Historians, who have reported
them to the World.

I know it goes for current, that the Papists of England were quiet enough for
the first 11. years of Queen Elizabeth, before any Laws were made against
them. And indeed, in comparison of after times, this may be in part admitted to
be true. Howbeit, in those first years, many of them went over Sea, and there
laid the foundation of future mischiefs here. There were others at home, that
held strict intelligence with those abroad, doing that more secretly, which
afterward was more openly pursued, and avowed.

It is true, that while Paul the Fourth, and Pius the Fourth sat Popes, their
unwillingnesse to make disturbance here, held our Papists in more quiet. Yet
when Pius 4. dispatched a Nuncio to Queen Elizabeth, Paul 4. was Pope when Q.
El^z came to the Crown. Pius 4. succeeded next, and sat t^ll the Seventh of
her Reign. Continuat. of Martins history, at the year 1561. out of Cambden
their friend.
with a kind message (as he took it;) his Nuncio could not be admitted to
enter England, because so many, bred up to the Popish Religion, labored to
make troubles both at home and abroad. And this happened about the Fourth of
her Reign.

And if you do but remember, from Whom, the Guises then procured the French
King to claim the English Diadem, and solicited the Pope to excommunicate
the Queen; as did the Count of Foria, at Rome, in behalf of his Master, the
Catholic King, about the same time; and, that diverse English Papists had
applied themselves to those Princes; to assist in reducing the Romish Religion
here; You will find they had no great cause to boast of their loyalty.
Especially, if you consider that Arthur Pole, and his Brethren had no small
party among the Papists here at home, to assist in that horrible Treason
against his Sovereigne, for which he and others were after arraigned, and
condemned.

But when Pius the Fifth, the next Pope, mounted the Chair, our Romanists
began to be more active and bold. For when once his turbulent disposition was
known, the Popish Party, by the help of Cardinal Alan, first obtained a
College for English Seminary Priests at Doway, Anno. 1568. which indeed proved
the seminary of all the Treasons and Rebellions which after followed. That
College was after multiplied into two; one, at Rhemes, set up by the Guises,
the other at Rome, erected by Gregory 13. Anno 1580. after Requesenius,
Governor of the Low Countries under the King of Spain, had thrust them out of
their first Nest at Doway. And from these places were they upon all occasions
sent hither, to poison the Subjects with Principles of Treason, which every
year produced much trouble and danger.

No sooner were they warm in their first Cells at Doway, but Pius 5.
Excommunicated Q. Elizab. at Rome, absolving all her subjects, and cursing all
that should longer obey her. An 1569. After which exploit, he sent over his
Bull Declaratory thereof, by Morton, an English fugitive, who bringing it to
Ridolf a Florentine, diverse Copies of it were first secretly scattered among
our Papists, and then the Breve it self fixed on the Gate of London-House.

By which time, the Priests, and other active Factors for Babylon, had wrought
far upon sundry Nobles and Gentlemen of great place, whom they either found,
or could make discontented with the present Religion, Government, or State of
things, or whom they discerned to be ambitiously affected, or most apt for
intelligence with foreign Princes, that either maligned our Religion, envied
our Prosperity, or cunningly endeavored to possess themselves of this Crown;
which have been the destruction of many a Noble Spirit, and the ruin of many
Ancient Families of this Kingdom.

Among the many Examples of this kind, may be reckoned up the Rebellion of the
unhappy Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, and sundry other their
Accomplices, as the first poisoned fruit of the Popes Bull, in the same year
wherein it was here scattered among the Papists. And from the said cursed
fountain, issued all those bitter streams of Treasons of Stukely in Ireland,
at the same time, of the Stanlies in Darbyshire, of John Trogmorton, and
Brook, of Sanders and Bristow, of the Nortons, Barn, and Mather, of Doctor
Story, the persecuting Civilian, of Shirwin, Parsons, Campian and Kirby, and
many other Priests and Jesuits, to the number of above 120. of Somervile and
his adherents, of Main, Nelson, Tompson, and the rest of that Crew, of Pain,
and his 50. Resolutes, hired by the Pope to murder the Queen, of Francis
Throgmorton, Paget and Englefeild, of bloody Parry, of some inveigled Nobles,
of Babbington, Tichborne, and the rest of that pack, of the same Babington,
Charnock and Savage, in a second Devilish Design, of Lopez, of Stanly, of
Cullen, of York and Williams, of Creswell (who in his Philopater) and of
Parsons (that in his Doleman) fomented that Treason of Stanly and the rest, of
Squire, of Garnet, Winter, See Stat of 3 Jac. 2.
Caresby, Tresham, and others, who in the last year of Queen Elizabeth,
travailed with the King of Spain, to join with the Papists in England, to
depose the Queen, and to extirpate Religion, beside many more that never came to
light.

Nor did their rage die with that Lady, but so soon as King James came among
us, Watson and Clerk found a way to instill Treason into sundry Nobles and
Gentlemen, against the King and Prince, before the Coronation. And for a
Coronis of all, the Saltpeter men in the Gunpowder Treason (of which I have
spoken before) can not be forgotten. I spare to speak of their continual
Treasons and Rebellions in Ireland, or of that memorable Design in 88. which
however it was attempted by Spain, yet all men know the fast tie between our
Papists and the Spaniard, their continual correspondencies and combinations
with him, and the thundering Bull of Pope Sixtus Quintus, then sent abroad, for
confirmation of the several Bulls made by his Predecessors, Pius 5. and
Gregory He held consultation with Spain, to invade England and Ireland both
together, An. 1576. His aim was to make his base Son, James Boncampagno,
(Marquis of Vineola) King of Ireland. Excellent zeal in a Pope! not to gain
souls to Christ, but a Kingdom for his own Bastard.
13. against Queen Elizabeth, to the end our Papists might more cheerfully
assist in that bloody Enterprise, and none dare to adhere to her against a
foreign Enemy.

Nay, let me add, that even now, while this very Parliament is sitting, and
Papists Petitioning See their printed Petit. in the Dial. betvveen a Parliament
man, and a Catholic.
for indulgence and liberty, and for taking away the Laws made against them,
neither England, Scotland, nor Ireland, have been free from desperate
Conspiracies and Treasons, wherein sundry of their Party have been principal
Actors. What should I tell you of the Designs upon the Armies in the North, of
the Damnable Attempts of our Treacherous Fugitives now abroad, and of the open
Rebellion in Ireland: God grant we hear of no more neere-hand. But yet, these
may instruct you, that if you would have Peace with Rome, Rome will have no
peace with you: and that, to pluck up the hedge of your Laws, is to lay all
waste; for they will never be quiet, till either by your Care and Wisdom, you
have secured them from doing more mischief (which will never be, while their
Idolatry is permitted, although but in secret Your Highness may assure your
self, that the Adversaries will not change their Disposition, unless either we
were reduced to their blindness, or they drawn to embrace the Truth with us.
Bishop Carelton, Epist. Dedic. to Prince (now King) Charles, before his Book of
Thankful Rememb.
) or till they have brought us all under the line of confusion.

If it be said, that the only Reason of their often Conspiracies at home and
abroad, has been the strictness of the Laws made against them for the faults
of a few, whom they condemn as much as we: and that if those Laws (now that
the occasions of them cease) were but repealed, they could, and would be as
Loyal as any, notwithstanding their Religion.

I answer, that for the Laws made against them, they may thank only
themselves, that have so much abused Royal Clemency and Goodness. But what
ever the Laws be, none have been put to death, save only for Treason. And
even among those that have come within this compass, many have escaped with
banishment. And when the turbulencie of some have enforced the State to execute
them, yet others too guilty, have been spared. For, Queen Elizabeth, shortly
after the proceedings against Campian, and some of his fellows, Bishop Carelton.
sent away 70. Priests in a very short time out of England; some of which had
received, and the rest had deserved sentence of death for Treason.

Neither have our Laws been so rigid, nor so rigidly executed against Papists
here, as theirs have been against Protestants. Nor have Papists been exposed to
such Butchery, as is too too frequent where Papists domineir. Witness the
Spanish Inquisition, wherinto, if any Lutheran be secretly conveyed, they put
him not to a legal trial, but give him their Marshall Law. For, as Hoffeus
the Jesuit was wont to bragg, they hold it a good piece of Piety, instantly
to commend him to the fire, ut anima ejus in curru igneo ad inferos trahatur,
that so his soul might be forthwith carried to hell in a fiery Chariot; as one
Hassen Muller. Hist Jesuit. cap. 6.
bred among them, reports of him.

Nay, sundry degrees of Dignity and honor, have been (in later times,
especially) heaped upon diverse of them; yea they have been admitted very near
to his Majesty's Sacred Person, and trusted with Offices of greatest honor and
trust in the State. And yet nevertheless, neither any, nor all of these
favors together, either do, or can secure us of them: and that, for the
Reason contained in the second Remembrancer, which in the next place follows.

2. It is not our Laws, 2 Remembrancer; Their it very Religion teaches
Rebellion, and so they drink in Principles of Treason with the Principles of
Popery.
but sundry Principles of their very Religion, that makes them disloyal, and
carries them still on upon Treasons, and Rebellion, and would do so, although
the Laws made against them, were all repealed. So that in this sense, our
Public Prayer, appointed for this day, as it was first penned and published;
viz. that their faith is Faction, their Religion is Rebellion, etc. was no
slander, but a just Character of their Antichristian Profession; and is
unjustly altered, what ever has been boldly said, and published, to justify
the alteration.

To make this good, I shall not need to ravell into all their Doctrine; but
only to give you a list of such Principles of theirs, as are obvious in all
their writings, and notoriously known to all the world.

And first, Read but any of the Popes Bulls, and you need search no further for
proofs hereof.
who knows not that with them all Protestants are condemned for Heretics,
Princes themselves not exempted. 2. That no faith is to be held with Heretics,
because Heretics themselves are fallen from the Faith; and so do forfeit all
Privileges, wherein keeping of Faith with them, might oblige others, or steed
them. 3. That Heretical Princes excommunicated by the Pope, are forthwith
deprived, and deposed of all Princely dignity and Sovereignty, their subjects
are discharged from all alleigance, and are accursed, if they further obey
them. Witness the Bulls sent out against Queen Elizabeth, by Pius 5. Gregory
13. and Sixtus 5. and the writings of not only Bellarmine and Suarez, and
other Foreigners, but of Alan, Saunders, Parsons, Creswell, and sundry other
of our Apostate English, who have defended these Bulls and Positions, even unto
death, 4. Our English Papists do all profess to adhere to the Pope, as
supreme in all Spiritualls and Ecclesiasticalls (their own King having nothing
to do herein, but only in Temporalls;) and, to obey the Pope, before all the
world, in things of this nature. 5. They know that the Pope does profess and
publish, both by doctrine and practice, that he has power to excommunicate
the greatest Potentates, if heretical; to command all Catholics in all
things, in ordine ad spiritualia, that have any reference to the Catholic
Cause; that all Catholics are bound Bulla Pij 5. An. 1569. The Copy of which
Bull you may find in any of the Annalls, or Chronicles of that time.
to obey him (if he command it) under pain of damnation, in opposing their
Sovereign, without disputing his commands; and that he has power to dissolve
all bonds, covenants, leagues and oaths, as he shall find conducing to the
advancement of the Catholic Faith; So that, if he list, no bands, humane or
Divine, no oaths, never so solemnly taken shall bind Papists; for when
occasion serves, the Pope can, and will release them from all obligations of
God or Conscience, of Nature and Nations: And they must submit unto him without
regret. Nor is here any place left for tergiversation. For first, if they shall
plead, that these have been the private opinions of some Jesuits, and
hot-spurres, to bring their Religion under hatred and obloquie; they must
remember, that they may not put the Definitions of Trent, nor the Popes
Definitive sentences e Cathedra, among private Opinions; if they will
acknowledge any thing to be Public, and their Pope infallible, when he decrees
from his Chair, which they dare not deny, without renouncing their Religion,
and incurring the crime of heresy.

If they allege, secondly, as some do, that how ever some Treacherous spirits
have been too blame, and too many Jesuits have been Incendiaries, as well in
their writings as in their practices; yet, the more moderate Catholics have
ever condemned those facts and writings; and that not only by word, but also
by Books published to the world: witness Widdringtons Apology for the Oath
of Alleigance, his Defense of his Apology, his Supplication to Pope Paul the
Fifth, his Appendix to that Supplication, etc. Witness also Watsons
Quodlilets, the Jesuits Catechism, and many more: and lastly, witness their
Petition to the present Parliament, and their Protestation annexed, wherein
they profess all ready and cheerful obedience to the King, in all Civil and
Temporal affairs; to take the Oath of Alleigance, So they be not bound to
swear opinions; to disclaim all foreign Power, Papal or Princely, that
should pretend authority to assoile them of that Oath, etc.

I must briefly answer, that albeit they have in words professed a dislike of
Jesuitical Practices, yet still they hold of the Pope, for the whole frame of
their Religion, and vow obedience to all his public Definitions: and, what
these be, you have before heard in part. Next, it is true, that Widdrington
has written modestly, yet was he feign to purge for it to the Pope; and after
all, to go off with disgrace. And who knows not, that shortly after some
Seminaries had admired, and extolled to the heavens, the Bull of Pius 5.
against Queen Elizabeth, and blasphemously persuaded the world that it was
indicted by the Holy Ghost, they set out a Book (on purpose to lull the Queen
and the State asleep) to admonish the Papists of England not to practice any
mischief upon the Queen, for that Catholics might use no other Arms, but
tears, prayers, watchings and fastings, against their Adversaries? Yet who is
ignorant of the daily conspiracies that the Papists in those times, and during
all the rest of Queen Elizabeth's reign, did desperately involve themselves
into, to their own destruction?

And what though Watson and other Secular Priests (rather out of emulation and
envy, than true Loyalty) wrote some volumes against the Jesuits, when they
began to overbeare the Secular Priests here in England: yet this was not so
great an argument of their fidelity, as of their spite and subtlety: for we
know that even that very Watson and Clerk (another of his Confederates) was
afterward the desperate propounder and ringleader of that foul Treason
against King James, and Prince Henry; for which he and Clerk deservedly
suffered the reward of Traitors, in the first year of King James.

And albeit there be lately cast among you a Pamphlet, or Dialogue between a
Parliament man and a Roman Catholic; what credit can be given to that which no
man avows, no man ever presented to you? It is, I confess, a cunning piece;
but, shamefully blending what cannot be answered. And it is cunningly
published, perhaps for a dangerous end. If the Parliament thrive, and carry on
their business, as is desired; then, this Book shall be vouched as a fair
profer of the Catholics, rejected without consideration. If any disaster
happen, and that Romanists do chance to get a Day; then, if this Petition and
Protestation be pressed upon them, they will boldly ask you, What Catholic
did ever avow, or own it? It is but a Pasquill, they will not be tied by it.

And again, Suppose they take the Oath, and Protestation, mentioned in that
Pamphlet; what are we the nearer to safety, when they still must hold that the
Pope can dispense with any Oath; and therefore with this, even when they have
taken it? For, do we not see them take liberty to do so, with the Popes own
Bulls? Did not Parsons and Campian in the year, 1580. (notwithstanding their
strict Oath, to obey the Pope in all things) procure a Dispensation to free all
Catholics from obeying the Popes own Declaratory Bull of Excommunication
against Queen Elizabeth, till a better opportunity; when as yet in the mean
time, all others should be under the Curse of it, who did not presently obey
it? Quo teneam nodo? what Oath or Protestation then, will hold a Romish
Catholic in obedience to a Prince, by them accounted heretical; when, no
Decree of the Pope himself shall hold them, if they find it not seasonable?
When there is no remedy, they will yield to any thing: but when they see their
time, they will do any thing.

Bishop Andrews on Nov. 5. 1616. on ^s^y. 37.3.
I shall therefore close up this, with a passage or two out of two Grave
Authors, one a great Bishop, in a Sermon to King James. Where speaking of the
prodigious Doctrine of Bellarmine, in reference to the Primitive Christians,
and our modern Papists, and of the reason the Cardinal gives, why the
Christians of old did not rise up against persecuting Emperors, Id fuit quia
deerant vires; the Bishop makes this collection, As much as to say, if they now
in these days be so as they were, carry themselves quietly, it is quia non
sunt vires: and to hold no longer, than Donec erunt: and then you are like to
hear of them, to have them go again with such another birth. You shall have
them as mild, as Gregory the First, when they have no strength; but as fierce
as Gregory the Seventh, when they have. And afterward thus.

See ye not, next under God, whereto to ascribe our safety? Even to non erant
vires: there is a point hangs on that For, while that lasts, while ye keep them
there, ye shall have the Primitive Church of them; have them lie as quiet, as
still, as ever did the barrells in the vault, till vires, like fire come to
them; and then, off go they: then nothing but depose Kings, dispose of
Kingdoms, assoile Subjects, arm them against their Sovereigns: then, do
they care not what. But, if the Powder take not fire, thou shall you straight
have Books tending to mitigation; then, all quiet again. Certainly, thus
standing, it were best to hold them in defectu virium, to provide ut ne sint:
to keep them at non sunt vires; till time they be better minded in this point,
and we have good assurance of it. For, minded as they are, they want no will,
no virus: they tell us, what the matter is; strength they want; they write it,
they print it, and si adessent vires, they would act it in earnest. Thus He.

The other of my Authors having reckoned up a Catalogue of the damnable
Doctrines of Popery; Dr. Prideaux, on Nov. 5 on Psalm. 9 19. Number. 8.
professes to have done it to make it appear to those that would willingly be
better persuaded of their Doctrine, that the Doctrine it self directly
warranteth Treason, let the Traitors be what they will, and that none can be an
absolute Papist, but (if he thoroughly understand himself, and live under a
Christian Prince, 3 Remembrancer. Popish Priests are bound by them, Oath, to
inculcate those Principles of Treason.
that has renounced the Popes Authority) must needs, being put unto it, be an
absolute Traitor. And so I have done with my second Remembrancer.

Thirdly; My Third is this, that you would please to Remember that the
Education and Profession of all Priests and Jesuits that come over hither
under pretense of administering Popish Service and Sacraments to Romish
Catholics, do bind them to infuse other principles of Treason into their
Proselytes, and to stir them up upon alloccasions to act it. I shall not need
to trouble you with a List of the Loyalists Rules, nor of the Testimony of Pope
Vrbane 8. in his Bull of Canonization of Ignatius Loyola, touching that
Society, that beyond all other Fraternities, they are the Chief, and most
strenuous Propugners of the Popes Authority, or rather boundless Tyranny. nor
will I stay you with a repertory of the Jesuits Vows; and how far that of
blindfold obedience, is to be extended. The Secular Priests have done this at
large, See Wa^sons Quodlibets, and Jesuits Catechism, translated by the
Seculars here.
whereby they have concluded the Jesuits to be Traitors both for Tenets and
practice here in England. I shall only acquaint you with what even the Seminary
Priests themselves (who are not Jesuits) are bound unto by the Pope himself,
in his Constitutions for the ordering of the English College at Rome, whereof
we gave a touch before. And I shall give it you out of Mart. Aspilcueta,
Doctor Navarrus, an Author without exception, l. 3. Consil. and Resp. Council.
1. de Regular. Romae in Collegio Anglorum est Statutum, and Constitutio
Papalis, ut quicunque illud ingredi voluerit, teneatur jurare se, post tot
annos, pro defensione fidei Catholica in Angliam profecturum, illamque ibi
public and private praedicaturum. At Rome, in the College of the English, it
is a Statute, and Papal Constitution, that whoever will be admitted into that
College, he be tied to swear, that after so many years, he will travel into
England, for defense of the Catholic Faith, and there preach it both in
public and private. Now what that Faith is, you have heard in part, in the
former Remembrance; and, how they have defended and preached it here, Tiburne,
and such other Pulpits can bear them witness; Dia. between a Parliament man,
and a Catholic. page 13.
And Priests they say, they must have, while there be any Catholics in
England. Nor can it be unknown unto you what influence they have into the
Papal sect, of both sexes here, what power they exercise over their
Consciences, what esteem and honor they have among them, upon this very reason
(among other) that these Priests are in daily hazard of their lives, to do
them service, which makes them more apt to drink down any poisonous Positions
that these Seminaries can administer to ignorant Disciples: and so, under
pretext of Religion, they can, and do at their pleasure, wrap them up in
desperate Treasons, ere they be aware. And whither can they not lead them by
advancing the Popes Authority over all, in ordine ad spiritualia, and by
continually inculcating in their ears, that all Protestants are but a pack of
Heretics, which the Catholics are so to look upon, and prosecute, as the Pope
shall command, and direct.

To say, Dial. between Parl. man, and a Cathol. p. 9.
that no Excommunication can deprive any man of his temporal estate and goods,
at least in Countries where Protestants either are the greater part, or
permitted in great numbers; is but only to cast a mist before weak eyes: for,
first they know, that where the Pope excommunicates a Prince, he commands the
subjects to rise against him, as before appears; Next, the exception here, of
Protestant Countries, or numbers, does clearly discover the Fox in the
Lambs-Skin: for this plainly tells us, that the Popes Censures cannot take
place where Protestants be too strong for Papists; and so, by this you may
discover what they will be at, when their Party shall so much increase, as to
be able to master the Protestants in England; as they begin already to do in
Ireland; which I hope will not be forgotten.

4. My last Remembrancer is this, 4 Remembrancer. Corrupting men's Conscienc^s
and affections with baytes of reward, and glory, to attempt those Treasons
which their Principles do egg men on unto.
That Priests and Jesuits do ever corrupt the Judgments of their Followers,
and Instruments of Assassination and Treason, with poisonous positions,
touching the nature of such Facts; and bribe their consciences with strong
baits of Reward, and Glory to all that will undertake the acting of Treasons
and Rebellions, at their instigation: which is one of the strongest and most
dangerous Incentives to any new villainy, that can be invented. For men that
either are sensible of Religion, or desirous of glory, cannot be kept back from
any Attempt, which is pronounced not only lawful, but noble and meritorious
for advancement of their Religion. Difficulty and danger being then a
whetstone rather than a Dissuasive to generous minds, thirsting after honor
by public service.

It has ever been their manner to animate, not single Assassinates alone (as
Hall did Somervile, the Pope and the Cardinal de Como did Parry, Ballard did
Babington, Creswell did Stanly, Holt did York and Williams, and Walpoole did
Squire;) but even all whom they can draw into any desperate design of Treason,
by maintaining that the Act, being against Heretics, is not only justifiable,
but commendable and glorious. Now what rewards have been promised to Traitors,
if they do the deed, and what glory of Martyrdom they purchase in heaven, in
case they miscarry, all our Chronicles do amply speak.

Thus it fell out in the Gunpowder Treason. Catesby, and some others at first
had, or at least pretended scruples of the Lawfulness of it. Garnet and other
their Ghostly Fathers being consulted, pronounce it lawful, and full of merit,
and encourage them in it. Catesby had likewise grounded himself upon the
Doctrine of Father Creswell, In Philopater.. 2.
that a Prince manifestly heretical, falls from all Princely Power and
authority, even before any Legal Sentence passed by the supreme Pastor
against him, to both which he added the infallible judgment of Clement. 8. who
in two several Breves, one directed to the Catholic Nobility, and Gentry of
England, the other to Father Garnet, enjoined them not to permit any but a
Catholic Prince to succeed Queen Elizabeth: Hence he concluded; He, who
then might lawfully be kept out, may now as lawfully be thrust out. Pope
Clement enjoined the former, Ergo we may do the later. And thus, armed with
poisoned Divinity, He and his fellows resolved (and indeed, who, so
Principled, would have scrupled) most desperately to go on with that
wickedness, impatient of all letts and delays.

Thus other Traitors have found Popish Doctors forward to warrant their most
desperate Rebellions. So had Oneile first, and Tyroen afterward, the public
Approbation of the Universitie of Salamancha in Spain, before they displaied
their Rebellious Banners. Yea so careful are the Popish Priests and Jesuits,
not to suffer their seduced party to cool in their resolute intentions of
holding on any Rebellious course when opportunity serves, that they are ready
to defend and justify the vilest attempts that have mis-carried, lest any of
their faction should be discouraged by the terrible executions done upon
Traitors who have perished in and for their Catholic Treasons.

Hence it is that so many great Pens have been employed to justify the Gun
Powder Treason, and so much honor conferred upon the Arch-Traitor Garnet,
after his execution; and so much grace done at Rome to Tesmond, and Gerrard
that escaped the hand of Justice here. As for Garnet, Vbi supra.
even Widdrington complains to Pope Paul the fifth, that (to the great scandal
of Religion) His Holiness had permitted Garnet to be put in the Catalogue of
Martyrs, his picture to be worn in Medals, his image to be set upon the very
Altars in Churches, and his bones worshipped as holy Relics, etc. and much
ado made about a supposed stramineous Miracle of Garnets face found in a straw,
which Widdrington confutes and derides. And well he might, when Garnets own
Confession at the Gallows, proclaimed him to be far wide of a Martyr, as before
has been showed. He likewise complains that Gerrard, another bird of that
Nest, had been seen taking of Confessions publicly in St. Peter's Church in
Rome under the Popes Nose; and that Tesmond (another of the Conspirators) was
made Public Penitentiary at Rome, and Confessor to the Pope himself: and all
this, after this barbarous Treason was discovered, and echoed over all the
world.

Now, what, I say, can the meaning of all this be, but still, by impudent
bolstring up of such unnatural Traitors, to animate and encourage all
Assasinates and bloody Conspirators to hold on in this Devilish Trade of
Treason, when so ever any good sons of his Holiness shall be called upon to do
him any further Service in the like kind.

Nor is it at all to be heeded that the Papists here do condemn it: for,
openly they dare do no other, for fear of their necks: but, that in secret they
cannot abhor it, is manifest by this, that the Pope has given not only
countenance to it, but laid the foundation of it by those Bulls of Clement the
eighth, last mentioned. They must not condemn that, which their Infallible
supreme Pastor has pronounced (not as a private fact, but even) ex Cathedra,
out of his judiciary Tribunal to be warrantable and necessary, namely, to
keep any man out of the Throne, be his Title what it will, till he take an Oath
to advance their pretended Catholic Faith. For, thence Catesby, as you have
heard, concluded a Warrant for that detestable Treason. And from thence all
Papists in the Kingdom, who attribute any validity to the Popes Bulls, may
draw the like encouragement for any Conspiracy So did Saunders make use of the
Bull of Pius 5. to justify a Treason of Stanly and York in the Low Countries,
in delivering up of Daventry (a strong Town pertaining to the United States) to
the king of Spain; because he kept it in the name of Q. Eliz. who had it now as
a Cautionary town from the States, and she (as he pretended) was deprived by
the Pope of all Soveraigntie, and Dominions, and therefore Stanly did well, and
others might do the like with any of the rest.
and Rebellion in any time to come, against any Successor of Queen Elizabeth,
that does or shall renounce the Pope and Popery, if the Conspirators find
themselves strong enough, or subtle enough, by stabbing, poisoning, blowing up,
or any thing, to dis-throne their Sovereign, and to destroy all that take part
with him, and endeavor to support him. And so I have done with my
Remembrancers, which I desired to leave with you. And all that has been
hitherto spoken in the large prosecution of this second Use, is but to arm you
with Resolution never to give way to any Toleration of Popery, or trusting of
Papists. But this is not all: for, I must briefly add,

A Third Use, to exhort you all, not only not to tolerate Popery, or to trust
the pertinacious imbracers of it, 3. Use.
but also to improve all your wisdom and power to destroy Popery, and to
reduce (if possible) those many thousands of poor seduced souls, that, having
not known the depths of Satan, are miserably hood-winkt by Antichrist to
withstand the light and their own salvation. For, till then, they will never be
at an end of their Rage against us. And whosoever withstands their Idolatry,
if they have power, they will be sure to ruin him; because Popery, like
Pharaohs lean kine, seeks to devour all true Religion that does oppose it,
and all that embrace the the true Religion opposite unto it. They may
dissemble, but can never put off their wrath and enmity against those whom
they behold as Heretics, and as men appointed to make fuel for hell; as, by
their malicious, Idolatrous, Traitorous Priests and blind Guides, they are
taught to judge of us.

It becomes not me to prescribe You the way how to proceed herein, as You are a
civil Body now trusted by the King and Kingdom, with all we have, but our
souls, and our God. I know there be many excellent Laws for this purpose
already made; and oh! that your Wisedoms could find out a way to their
effectual execution! But if any thing may be added, for the taking away of
their children, and training them up (at the parents cost, if they have
wherewithal) in the nurture and fear of the Lord, that so there may not still
be new generations of Papists; I presume it would be a Noble and Pious Service,
for which the souls of many thousands would for ever bless you, by whose means
they should be delivered out of the power of that Egyptian darkness, and
translated into the kingdom of Jesus Christ.

But, for our selves, as we are Christians, let me exhort you still to look
upon all wicked men as having great wrath and rage within them conceived
against us, and that we look upon our selves as not free from their malice and
fury for the future, how often soever they have attempted against us, and been
disappointed by God in all their wicked attempts. And not only so, but that we
carefully exercise our selves in these particulars.

1. Be prudently vigilant over our enemies, watching over them Mat. 10.17.
with all circumspection and prudence; but, no way diffident of our Isa. 7.4.
and 9.
God.

2. Pray that either Psalm. 7.9.
the wickedness of the wicked may come to an end, or that God would Psalm.
10.15.
break the arm of the wicked and the evil man, and that he would Psalm. 58.6.
break their teeth in their mouth. And if this will not do; then, that he
would destroy them, and make them still to fall by their own counsels.

3. But above all, labor to make our peace with God, and to walk humbly with
him. For if the wicked be still out with us, have we not the more cause to keep
in with God? Beware of going on in any course of wickedness, as you love your
lives (to say nothing of your souls,) lest God let loose the strong Bulls of
Basan, and the young Lions that are greedy of prey, upon you. Yea, beware lest
man's rage and Gods wrath do meet, and both fall upon you at once. Oh how
dreadful must that needs be! If Israel be once a people of Gods wrath Isa.
10.6.
, every base, proud idolatrous Assirian shall tread them down like the mire in
the street. Even Sampson shall fall by the uncircumcised Philistines, whom
before he slaughtered by heaps. Thus Israel found it in Joshua's time. When
they had once sinned in taking of the accursed thing, even the accursed men of
Ai shall be too good for them, Josh. 7.4.5.
three thousand Israelites shall not be able to stand against 36. of the
enemies, but fly and be smitten before them. But on the other side, if we
labor to maintain peace with God, if Psalm. 3.6.
ten thousands of people beset us round about, we shall not be afraid: no,
Psalm. 46 2.3.
though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the
midst of the sea; though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, and the
mountains shake with the swellings thereof. We can never miscarrie by all the
rage of all the enemies in the world, so long as we betray not our own selves
into their hands. For, there is a God that sets and orders all, as we shall see
in the next point, to which I now come. 2. Observation.


2. Let the rage of wicked men be what it will, it shall only raise that glory
to God, and benefit to his people, which the wicked never intended; and ever
fall short of that issue which they chiefly projected.

This point has two branches, which we must distinctly prosecute.

the rage (which is permitted to break forth) what it will, The rage that
breaks out turns to Gods praise.
it shall only raise that glory to God, and benefit to his people, which was
never intended by the wicked.

As for the wicked it is as far from their hearts to intend Gods glory, in
their rage, as heaven from hell. If God make them Isa. 10.4.
the rod of his anger against a people of his wrath, to do Gods work (not their
own,) you shall be sure to find them like that Assirian King, who being sent
by God in such an errand, Verse. 7.
He meant not so, neither did his heart think so; but it was in his heart to
destroy, and to cut off Nations not a few. Howbeit the most wise and omnipotent
God who is always zealous of his own glory and his peoples good, intends
himself praise from every spark of fury, and extracts honor out of the least
atome of each man's rage, when, or which way so ever it break out. And this he
does,

1. By diverting their power, 1. By diverting it.
and driving it one way when they meant it another. Thus Sennacheribs power was
employed against 2 King. 19.
Tirhakah, when all his rage was first bent against Hezekiah, And what greater
praise, then thus to have Prove. 21.1.
the heart and the power of so great a King in his hand, as the rivers of
water, to turn it whither soever he will?

2. 2. By letting it go on till his hand may be clearly seen in quelling it.
By permitting man's rage sometimes to proceed so far, as all may see a
necessity of a Divine Power to give it a stop, and behold an immediate arm of
the Almighty in defeating of it. Therefore God permitted Pharaoh to pursue
Israel, not only to the banks, but even into the midst of the Red sea, that by
destroying him there, ^xod. 15.6.
the right hand of the Lord might become more glorious in power.

3. By extorting from his enemies an acknowledgement of his power and conquest,
in the midst of their rage. 3. By making his enemies confess he is against
them.
So he did, from that Dragon and his host which he slew in the Sea, when they
cried out, Exodus 14.24.
Let us flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them against
the Egyptians. And so, from that Atheistical Don Pedro, who seeing the
terrible dissipation of that Invincible Armado, in 88. professed that now he
perceived God was turned Lutheran.

4. By more praise from his own people,
4. But more especially does God receive honor and praise from his own, whom he
delivers from the rage of man. Thus did he, from Israel, when they Exodus 14.30.
saw the Egyptians dead upon the shore. Psalm. 106.12.
Then believed they his words, and sang his praises. Yea then, they proclaimed
him Exodus 15.11.
fearful in praises doing wonders.

5. By producing effects contrary to the intentions of wicked men.
5. In producing effects of man's rage, quite contrary to those which men
intended and expected. If Joseph's brethren will sell him, his bondage shall
procure his advancement; yea, and (though they deserve it not) their
preservation. Genesis 50.20.
As for you (says he to them) ye thought evil against me, but God meant it
unto good, to bring to pass as it is this day, to save much people alive. If
Moses must be cast out into the mud to satisfy Pharaohs cruelty, even
Pharaohs daughter shall preserve him Exodus 4, 16.
to be unto Pharaoh in stead of a God, to plague Pharaoh while he lived, and
then to be an instrument of his destruction, by that very element by which
Moses should have perished. When the bloody plot of Haman for the destruction
of all the Jews, drew near to execution, not only himself and his ten sons
handselled that very gallows which he had prepared for Mordecai; but even all
Esth. 9.1.
the enemies of the Jews who hoped to have power over them, found all turned to
the contrary, and that the Jews had rule over them that hated them. If the rod
of the wicked light on the back of the righteous for some sin against God,
this also shall turn much to his praise: for Isa. 27.9.
by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged (to prevent destruction
intended by the wicked;) and this is all the fruit, to take away sin, which
man's rage never meant. Yea, if the rage prevail so far as to be the death of
the righteous; yet even this also shall turn to his praise, by causing the
death of one righteous man for righteousness sake, to be the seed of many more
righteous that shall rise up in his room. Never such an increase of shining
Christians, as when Christianity is under sharpest persecutions, And, as for
such as loose their lives for Christ's sake, they are sure Luke 9.24.
to save them; that is, for ever to live in glory: so that, for them Phil. 1.21.
to die is gain; and, Romans 8.37.
in all these things they are more then Conquerors through him that loved them.

Thus every way, the rage of man brings honor to God, and good to his people;
and that upon these grounds.

Wicked men's power is only for Gods ends.
if they use that power to rage against his servants, he must and will carry
on his own work, let them intend what they list. Now, Gods end in raising such
men is, Exodus 9.16.
to show in them his power, and that his Name may be declared in all the earth.
How, but by his Exodus 14.17.
getting honor upon them in the strongest pursuit of their rage against the
godly, as he did upon Pharaoh and all his host, when they would have devoured
Israel?

Sennacheribs in the world that rage against his people, God will break the
wicked rather than they should hurt the godly.
in comparison of any one poor servant of his own oppressed by them: Psalm.
105.14.
he will suffer no man to do them wrong, but will rebuke even Kings for their
sakes that rage against them; yea, Psalm. 2.9.
break them to pieces like a potters vessel, Psalm. 69.14.
and scatter them like hay in a whirl-winde, or ships in a tempest, rather than
not make his people gainers by their rage. So he dealt with Pharaoh,
Sennacherib, and many more. This being his peremptory resolution, that Romans
8.28.
all things shall work together for good to them that love him; and therefore,
the rage of the wicked, how much soever they hate them. God outshoots them in
their own bow.


Bow. If Psalm 37.14.
they bend their bow, to slay such as be of upright conversation, he will
shoot that arrow of their wrath further then ever they intended it, and stick
it fast in their own bosoms. Psalm. 45.5.
If Pharaoh shoot at Israel Gods firstborn, the arrow shall fall short; but
then, God takes it up, and he shoots it into the very heart of Pharaohs Exodus
4.22, 23.
firstborn, and he is sure to die for it. Thus, if the devil will still
animate the rage of Herod, and the people of the Jews to kill Christ, that very
arrow which gave Christ his deaths wound, shall be the Hos. 13.14.
death of death it self, and the destruction of the grave, and give the
greatest blow to the devil and his kingdom that ever he received. Little
thought Satan when in his rage he prosecuted Christ to death, that the death of
Christ should be the saving of a world, the rescuing of many millions of souls
out of his power, and the destruction of the kingdom of darkness. But so home
did God shoot this shaft, out of the bow of his Cross, that Heb 2.14, 15.
by death, he destroyed him who had the power of death, that is, the devil;
and delivered them who, through fear of death, were all their life time subject
unto bondage.

I have now given you the first branch of the Point, the other follows, which
in effect is this,

God makes man's rage fall short of their aim.
but shall ever fall short of that which they chiefly projected.

It is true that their rage sometimes goes very far, and does much mischief;
but never beyond what may stand with the honor, truth, and goodness of God,
and with his Covenant made to his people. When the enemy begins to make
himself sure of his will upon the godly, and to say, Exodus 15.9.
I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust shall be
satisfied upon them, I will draw my sword, mine hand shall destroy them. Then
God steps in, and sets their bounds far shorter then wicked men promised to
themselves, saying to them, as to the raging sea, Job 38.11.
Hitherto shall thou come, but no further: and here shall thy proud waves be
stayed. And this he does many ways.

1. Sometimes by filing off the edge of that roughness and malice that is in
them, and constraining them to mildness and gentleness, contrary to their
very natures, 1. By filing off their roughnes and malice.
and settled resolutions long before taken up. Thus he restrained the rage of
Genesis 31.22.
Laban against Jacob, Genesis 32.28.
who shortly after also, as a Prince prevailed with God, to prevail with Esau,
that had long vowed his death; so that at their meeting, the rage and malice of
Esau was tied up, and Genesis 33.10.
Jacob saw his face as if he had seen the face of God, so well was Esau pleased
with him.

2. Sometimes, 2. By giving them work elsewhere.
by giving them so much work elsewhere, that they have neither leisure not
power to pursue the godly any further. We saw it 2 King. 19.8.
before in Sennacherib: and we may see it in 1 King. 22.27, 28.
Ahab at Ramoth-Gilead, when he intended a further persecution of Michaiah; as
likewise in Julian, Greg. Naz. Orat. 4. in Julian.
who resolving to destroy all the Christians, found a necessity to go first
against the Persians, by whom he was overthrown; and so, disabled from
satisfying his rage upon the others. Thus God often gives Tyrannical Princes
business enough abroad, when he finds them studious to destroy their best
Subjects at home.

3. 3. By spoiling them of the instruments of revenge.
Sometimes by dispoiling them of the Instruments whereon they rely, as Exodus
14.25.
he took off the chariot wheels of the Egyptians in their pursuit of Israel:
either by rending from them a great part of their Dominions; as, from 1. King
12.
Rehoboam, when he resolved to go on in his oppression of his petitioning
Subjects; or by weakening that strength which remains with them, as he did that
of the Assirian when he thought none could stand before him, Isa. 10.16.
sending among his fat ones leanness, and under his glory kindling a fire: or
by infatuating their counsels making Isa. 19.11.
the Princes of Zoan fools, and the wise Counselors of a persecuting Pharaoh
to become brutish, and causing them to fall by their own counsels, as Theodor.
hist. li. 3. ca. 20.
Julian before the Persians, when, in a bravado, he would needs burn his ships,
to put the more necessity of valor into his Soldiers; or by infatuating
themselves, that they cannot understand good counsel when it is before them (as
in Rehoboam case 1. Kin. 12.
) but rather follow that which is directly given for their destruction, and to
countermine their own plots; as, when 2 Samuel 17.7, 8.
Absolon followed the advice of Hushai against that of Achitophel, which would
have carried his design that Hushai by his counsel prevented. And indeed this
is one of the greatest misfortunes of a Prince (as a grave Phil. de Co. min.
ll, 5. c. ult.
Author speaks) and a sad symptom of his approaching ruin, when God smites
him in his wits, as he did Rehoboam, to follow the counsels of those who were
brought up with him, and knew how to fit his humor, and to reject the counsels
of graver men, who advised nothing but for his prosperity, and honor.

4. By arming his creatures against them.
4. By arming his creatures against them to suppress their rage; as, he did the
Judge. 15.20.
stars, against Sisera; the waters, frogs, lice, flies, hail, locusts, and
other things against Pharaoh: and, even an Angel, against the host of
Sennacherib. Thus God raised a mighty wind from heaven against Aug. de Civit.
Dei. li. 5. ca. 26.
Eugenius the Tyrant, that beat his Soldiers weapons out of their hands, when
they were to fight against the Christians under Theodosius.

5. By panick fears.
5. By panick fears and strange apprehensions without any ground: as, a mere
casual dream Judge. 7.13.
of a Midianite frighted an innumerable army, and rendered them unable to stand
before 300 unarmed men. So the Moabites were overthrown by occasion of 2.
King. 3.22, 23.
a color of blood upon the waters caused by the Sun, rising very red in the
morning, and shining on the waters between the Sun and them.

6. By making them fall one upon another.
6. By setting the enemies of his people one against another. Thus, in that
great host of Midian and Amaleck, that came out against Israel, Judge. 7.22.
the Lord set every man's sword against his fellow throughout all the host. And
the like we have read in Iehoshaphats time, when 2. Chron. 20.22, 23.
the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Scir destroyed each other.

7. By setting them against themselves.
7. By turning their own swords upon their own breasts. Thus Achitophel, Judas,
Pilate, Nero, and others have done. 2. Sam. 17.
Achitophel hanged himself when his counsel for the destruction of David was
rejected. Mat. 27.5. Tertul. Apolo. cap. 5. Eusebius. li. 2. ca. 7.8.
Judas did the like, when he had betrayed his Master. Pilate the condemner of
Christ, and Nero the persecuter of Christians, did both fall by their own
hands, without effecting what either the one or the other had mainly intended.

8. By discovering their closest plots and counsels before they take effect:
and a Treason discovered is lost. Thus did he discover the plot of Esth. 4.1.
Haman against the Jews; of the Act. 23.
Jews against Paul; And so God did strangely open that plot of the Earls in
the North, combining with the Pope and Spain against Queen Elizabeth, by a
stranger without the Kingdom; in so much as the Pope openly said, Hieron.
Catenae, ubi supra.
That never any Conspiracy was more advisedly begun, nor concealed with more
constancy and consent of minds, being not at all opened by any of the
conspirators. Thus does God provide, that rather then the rage of man shall
take place, to his dishonor, Eccle. 10.20.
a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell
the matter.

You may take the Reasons, in a word.

1. Because Gods power will carry on his own counsels.
1. The power of God is such, that whatsoever Pro. 19.21.
devices be found in the hearts of men, yet the counsel of the Lord that shall
stand. Let their rage be what it will; yet, not theirs, but Gods will must be
done. Pro. 21.30.
There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord.

2. All wicked men, and devils are in Gods hand: 2. All men and devils are in
Gods hand.
and how furiously soever they rage, yet they can run but to the end of their
chain. They may rage, but Psalm. 2.4.
God laughs them to scorn. The devil himself may lay about him, but God holds
him in his hand: sometimes Romans 16.20.
bruising him, sometimes Rvel. 20.2.
binding him: but always mastering and overpowering him, that Mat. 16.18.
the gates of hell shall not prevail against his Church and people.

3. God is engaged by promise to his people that keep his ways, 3. Gods
promise is to beat down all weapons.
that Isa. 54.17.
no weapon that is formed against them shall prosper, and every tongue that
shall rise up against them shall they condemn; and, he pronounces this to be
the heritage of the servants of the Lord. Therefore God is bound to restrain
all that wrath, 1. Use of the second Point.
which would enervate the faith of his people in such a promise, and disappoint
them of performance.

Thus, having given you both branches of the second point, I descend to the
Uses. The Uses.


1. Behold all this fulfilled to our selves.
And first, Behold, all this fulfilled this day, not in our cares only (as the
Treason was) but in our eyes too. What the Rage of man upon this day, was, you
have already heard. Now see how this rage so far as it was permitted, did turn
to Gods praise, and how powerfully he restrained the rest.

Their rage turned to his praise.
How strongly was their plot laid! how secretly, carried! how near, the
execution! how probable, the success! how confident the Instruments, of their
expected issue! How boldly did they vaunt, that they had gotten God himself
into the Conspiracy! God and man had conspired to punish the wickedness of
that time, said the Author of that Letter which occasioned the miscarriage of
all, mistaking the Devil, for God. Yet even then, we see how admirably God
turned all this rage to his praise, by preserving of those that were appointed
to die, and by giving them up as a prey to death who had destinated so great a
sacrifice to Death of so many at once. Insomuch as the greatness of the danger
did not more smite the world with a just amazement, than the extraordinarinesse
of the deliverance took all men with high admiration.

God permitted it so far that all might see his hand as clearly in the rescue,
as in the deliverance of Daniel, in the Lions den; and his judgment on the
Traitors, as in the destruction of Daniels enemies by the same creatures that
touched not him. One spark of fire flying out of the Chimney where they were
drying powder to make resistance, first brought diverse of the principal
Conspirators (by the wounds received from the powder kindled by that spark) to
acknowledge the justice and vengeance of God upon them by powder, At Holbeach
in Worcestershire.
wherewith they intended the destruction of so many. And afterward, Catesby
and Piercy, the principals in that wickedness, were shot to death by one shot
of a Musket, and thereby found Gods own hand taking revenge by powder, before
the justice of man could seize upon them. And not only so, but even Faux the
appointed Executioner, and Garnet (the Arch-Devil to bless their plot)
confessed to the praise of God as well as the rest at their execution, the
outrageous wickedness and odiousness of that hellish design.

Nay further, God raised up an everlasting An Act for keeping of this Day, for
ever.
Pillar of Thankesgiving, from that very Parliament which should have been
blown up; and produced effects quite contrary to those which the Traitors
intended, in preserving not only the Persons, but the Laws, which they meant
to destroy, and in causing more Laws to be made against them who so wickedly
provoked the Clemency of the Prince, and abused the lenity and mercy they
formerly enjoyed; but, in providing more carefully, ever since, for our
preservation.

I need not tell you that, the rest of the rage is happily restrained. Your
eyes behold it, and we all sit under the blessing of it unto this day. Only
take notice, that God did it, not by ordinary means.

Not by abating their rage: for Faux, God restrained the rest, not in an
ordinary,
after his apprehension, repented nothing more then his not giving the blow;
yea the whole crew afterward brake forth into open Rebellion, till some of
them were slain, and the rest taken, in the height of their rage. Not by
diverting them; for they received not the least interruption, till all was
ready for execution. Not by taking off any of their Instruments; for, not a man
of them was touched by death, sickness, or arrest, till after the very trains
were laid to the powder, and all prepared for the firing of it. Not by arming
the creatures against them: for no creature once troubled them, till they were
found out (almost too late) to be Troublers of Israel. Not by smiting them with
Panick fears: for they were never so high floan (before the discovery) with
confidence of success, nor more desperately fearlesse, after they knew that
all was discovered. Nor yet, by setting them one against another: for (like
Simeon and Levi) they held too fast together, 2. Use of the second Point.
even unto death.

but in an extraordinary manner.
But the Lord did it himself, causing one of them (who had taken three Oaths to
conceal it, and kept touch with his tongue) by a writing to reveile it;
verifying that of the Wisest King, that, Eccl. 10.20.
that which has wings shall tell the matter; and, affecting the King with a
spirit of jealousy, (who ordinarily offended rather on the other hand) and
leading him to an interpretation of the Letter, quite contrary to the common
sense. And not only so, but by sharpning the edg of all men's spirits against
the Traitors, See the Discourse of the Powder Treason in King James his Works.
in the Countries where they wandered, to kill some of them, and to apprehend
the rest, even before any Proclamation could overtake them, and before the
people who seized on them, knew any thing of this particular Treason. Thus, He
that sits in the Heavens, laughed them, their rage, and Counsels, to scorn;
compelling them, at length, to acknowledge the finger of God in their
Discovery, and his arm in their most deserved Destruction. O wonderful
Providence! O admirable Justice upon them, and Goodness to his People!

2. Use of the second Point. Incitation to thankfulness.
2. How should this put all our hearts into a flame of the highest Thanksgiving
to Him who has done for us such wonderful things! When their Rage had
concluded that We and all Posterity should for ever wallow in ashes, Nah. 2.7.
taber upon our breasts, and howl like Dragons for that irreparable
Desolation; the God of our Mercies has prevented them, broken the snare, given
us an escape, and hurled them out of the Land of the Living, as out of the
midst of a Sling. Therefore, rejoice in the Lord, and again I say rejoice:
Rouse up your spirits, call up your hearts, and let all that is within you
bless his holy Name. I hope I shall not need to set before you the Institution
of a thankful man; nor, to spend time in directing how to give thanks; On
Septem. 7. 1641.
that Work being excellently performed at your late Public Thanksgiving.
Rather let me bestow a few words to incite you to the Duty, because I find
every where more and more backwardness to it, and coldness in it.

For, however, at first, the meltings of most men's spirits were extraordinary
(their affections being soon upon the wing, The necessity of such an
Incitation.
when the first newse of the Deliverance out-ran the report of the Danger.)
Yet, by Degrees men have so far cooled, that not only too many of the
ordinary sort do wholly neglect this Day; but, not none of the Clergy also,
who have sometimes (for their hyre) declaimed vehemently against that Treason,
in the Pulpit, begin in ordinary discourse to jeere this solemnity of such a
Deliverance; and, in derision, to name it, Saint Gunpowders Day. Papists
persuade their Novices that there was never any such thing. Yea, some (once
ours) have arrived at so much giddiness, as to pronounce the keeping of this
Day to be Will Worship; and, the religious enjoining of it, even by Parliament,
to be a trenching on the Liberty left us by Christ; as if the binding of our
selves (as Gods people of old, in their feast of Esth. 9.27.
Purim, did) to give public thanks for an extraordinary Mercy, were a
violation of true Christian Liberty. O shameful Ingratitude! O Impudent
Ignorance! And how careless the greater part of the better sort are become in
observing this Day, is a subject more fit for my tears than my tongue, even in
this Honorable Assembly.

Wherefore, the better to quicken You, to restore this Day to its former
splender, Motives to the Duty.
that the Great Work of the Lord done herein, may be for ever more honorable,
and glorious, Let Me present You with a few Incentives.

1. Remember that, 1. None but God could do it.
none but the Almighty himself could possibly have wrought such a Deliverance
for us. Psalm. 124.3, 4.
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side when men rose up against us,
they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Let
this first settle upon our spirits, that Psalm. 118.23, 24.
this was the Lords doing, and then it will soon be marveilous in our eyes, so
as We cannot but rejoice, and be glad in it.

2. Think seriously what manner of persons we were, 2. He did it for people
altogether unworthy of any mercy.
for whom he did all this. Are we not a sinful, unthankful, stubborn People,
as ever tasted of mercy? a seed of evil Doers, that call God Ier. 3.4.5.
Father, and yet do as evil things as we can? And yet for all this, God has
opened his hand wider, than ever we opened our mouths, and crowned all our
years and days with such loving kindness and mercy, as never any Nation
under Heaven received greater, or enjoyed longer. If therefore David, upon the
bare promise of a mercy, could not but sit down before the Lord, as one in an
Ecstasy, crying out, Who am I O Lord, and what is my Fathers House, that thou
have brought me hitherto? How much more would our spirits be lifted up beyond
all expression, to glorify his Great Name for so great a mercy actually
conferred, when we consider who and what we are that do receive it!

3. The deliverance is extraordinary.
3. Look upon the Deliverance it self as extraordinary. All the Psalm. 111.2.
Works of the Lord are great: yet, some greater than others; But this is no
less than the raising up of a whole Kingdom from the dead. For, as Heb. 11.17.
Abraham is said to have received his Isaac from death in a figure, when Isaac
had been bound on the wood, and the hand of his own Father stretched out to
kill him; so we, in this Deliverance, received our King, Queen, and Prince
that then were, our King that now is, our Parliament, Laws, Liberties, Lives,
and Religion it self from the dead in a figure, when all these were so near
to destruction that there was scarce a step between them and death, and such a
step as had been easily made, had not the Lord to whom belong the issues from
death, stepped in to prevent it.

4. And altogether unexspected.
4. Take this with you too, that this great Deliverance was a mercy altogether
unexspected. (For, who apprehended any danger?) The work was so strange, as we
could hardly credit when we saw it done. It was with us, as with Zion, Psalm.
126.1.
When the Lord turned her Captivity by Cyrus the Persian; We were like men
that dream: we could scarce trust our own eyes to behold it, or our tongues
to proclaim it. Men gazed on each other as people amazed. And when the thing
was found to be so indeed, oh how our hearts glowed! our affections fired! our
hair stood upright! our eyes sparkled! our joints trembled! our spirits even
failed with us to behold the wonder! And then, oh what might not God, at that
time, have had from us! Let him therefore not go away now with less; seeing
his Mercy, even that Mercy endures for ever, to our benefit and comfort.

5. Behold the Love of God in it, 5. And all this as a fruit of his Love.
makes all to be yet more precious to a thankful spirit. Isay. 43.4.
I have Loved thee, therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy
life, says the Lord. If men, yea, if a whole Nation conspire against thy life,
he will redeem thee from that danger with the price of all theirs. Hence it is,
even from his Love, that he no sooner espies any enemies out against us, but he
arms presently as against enemies to himself; and, not only Lays them at
his own feet, but even at 2 Samuel 22.41. Romans 16.20.
ours, and gives us to wash our feet in the blood of the wicked.

6. Consider, God has gotten him honor, 6. God has gotten him praise from
the wicked that sought our destruction.
and raised himself a praise out of the very rage of those who sought our
destruction, and shall he not have it from those who enjoy this miraculous
Preservation? Shall he have it from his enemies, and go without it from his
Servants and Friends? The Lord forbid.

But oh! far, and for ever far be such neglect from every of You, who being
the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof, ought of all others to triumph
in his praise for these works of his hands. It was a foul Blot to the Elders
of Judah, that, after David was freed of the Rebellion of Absalom they, who
were 2 Samuel 19.11, 12.
his brethren, his bones and his flesh, should be last in bringing back the
King to his House. But much greater would the stain and the sin be in You
the Elders of our Jsrael, unto whom the Lord himself (upon the same grounds
that he has elsewhere said, Psalm. 82.6.
Ye are Gods,) now says, Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh,
should have cause to add, Wherefore then are ye the Last to bring the King
back? Why are You so backward to restore unto Him all that honor that so many
Absoloms and sons of Rebellion have taken from Him? Well, If you be not
first, nay if You outstrip not all others in the Duty of Praise for so great a
Deliverance from the rage of man, 3. Observation.
You must exspect no less Wrath to break out from the Lord upon your selves
and the Kingdom, than befell Hezekiah and all Judah, for 2 Chro. 32.25.
not rendering to the Lord according to a far less benefit done unto him.

There be diverse other excellent Uses of this comfortable Doctrine, but I must
lay them all by, for haste to the Last Point, which is this;

The third Observation.
The Experience of Gods overruling and mastering the rage of man in times
past, is an undoubted assurance of the like for all to come.

This Point, so clearly grounded on the Text which speaks of future
Deliverances built upon former mercies, and so strongly bound down with a
confident asseveration in the front, that surely it shall be even so, I shall
pass over with a light foot.

Nothing more common in Scripture than to conclude what God will ever do, from
what once he has done. David, even in his youth, could be confident of this, 1 Samuel 17.37.
The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of
the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. And
afterward, when that unnatural Rebellion of Absalom brake out so violently as
made Jerusalem too hot for David, 2 Samuel 15.
causing him to flee whither he could by the way of the Wilderness; yet even
then, after God upon his prayer had spoken comfort to him from experience of
former deliverances, David grows so secure, that he that before durst not stay
in his own house for danger, professes now to Psalm. 3.4.
lie down and sleep where he has not an house wherein to put his head; and he
that durst not tarry in Jerusalem with all the power he could raise against his
son, now professes in a wild howling desolate Wilderness, Verse. 5.
I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set themselves
against me round about. Thus, let God do but any thing for him, and let him
alone to live upon that while he lives. If God once lead him through green
pastures; Psalm. 23.1.
his resolution mounts high; Verse. 4.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil;
and, he soon arrives at this Conclusion, Verse. 6.
Surely, goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life. Every
mercy is an assurance of more. Nor was Paul behind David in this divine Art of
argumentation. If God raise him out of his bed from the dangerous arrest of a
desperate sickness, he rayseth his faith higher than God raised his body;
first, setting down the mercy received, 2 Cor. 1.10.
Who has delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver; then inferring
hence, in whom we trust that he will yet deliver. And at another time reporting
a gracious rescue from the rage of Nero, 2 Timothy 4.17, 18.
I was delivered from the mouth of the Lion; he concludes thus, And the Lord
shall deliver me from every evil work; that is, of evil men conspiring
against him before he should have finished his course.

A truth so conspicuous in the eyes of the faithful, that they have pleaded
this unto God himself. Moses, when he saw God in such a rage, as to threaten
the cutting off of all Israel at once, falls to prayer, and pleads with God for
a Pardon of course, because he had given them many before. Number. 14.19.
Pardon, I beseech thee the iniquity of this people, according to the
greatness of thy mercy, and as thou have forgiven them from Egypt even until
now. Never were the people nearer a dreadful destruction, and yet this one
Plea turned God quite about, and draws from him this answer, Verse. 20.
Lo I have pardoned them according to thy word. So David, in a great danger,
when the Philistines took him in Gath, uses the same Plea for deliverance;
Psalm. 56.13.
Thou have delivered my soul from death, wilt not thou deliver my feet from
falling? Which manner of speaking plainly concludes, that it cannot be
otherwise.

Nay more. Not only deliverances given to our selves, but to any others from
the beginning of the world, is an undoubted argument to assure all the people
of God of the like issue in all their straits and distresses. When Isaac was so
strangely delivered, beyond all exspectation, the godly presently made this use
of it, and it grew to a Proverb, in all exigents; Genesis 22.14.
God will be seen in the Mount. When all things are so desperate, that no help
can be expected, yet the very delivering of Isaac on the Mount of Moriah shall
then assure them of a gracious deliverance. And it is Gods own plea to
encourage Joshua to go on where Moses left: Josh. 1.5.
As I was with Moses, so will I be with thee; I will never fail thee nor
forsake thee. Which very Text the Apostle cites as a Legacy bequeathed unto
all Christians, though not in being till many hundred years after Joshua was
dead; to dehort them from covetousnes, and to persuade to contentation of mind
by a firm reliance upon God. Heb. 13.5.6.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such
things as ye have: for God has said, I will never fail thee nor forsake thee;
so that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man
shall do unto m^. What was once, and but once spoken to one Joshua, an
extraordinary person, called to an extraordinary service, wherein he was to
encounter extraordinary difficulties, is made by the Apostle as a concluding
Argument for all Gods people cast upon any strait, to claim the like to the end
of the world.



1 From the nature of God.
1. God is constant and unchangeable in all his proceedings, because he is so in
his nature. If his people alter not too much, he still keeps one tenor. Mal.
3.6.
I am Jehovah, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. His
meaning is, that therefore they still partake of his ancient mercies formerly
showed to Jacob their father, because God is so unchangable.

2. From their constant interest in the Covenant.
2. His people once in Covenant have always the same interest in his wisdom,
power, providence, and goodness, and so may ever plead that whereof they or
any others have been at any time partakers. Hence the Church, long after David
was gathered to his Fathers, thus expostulates with God; Psalm. 89.49.
Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses which thou swarest unto David in
truth. As if they should say, be they not all ours by being in Covenant with
thee, as David was?

3. God never begins a work, but he goes through with it. When he begins he
will also make an end, in perfecting mercies, as well as in filling up plagues.
3. From Gods perfecting what he begins.
It is a note of infamy upon a weak man to have it said of him, This man began
to build, and was not able to make an end. Therefore Moses knew what he did,
when he pleaded for further mercy to Israel on this ground, that it would be
said by the enemy, Deuteronomy 9.28.
The Lord was not able to bring him into the land which he promised them.
Therefore Paul was so confident in this very thing, that he that has begun a
good work in his people, will also finish it unto the day of Jesus Christ.

Thus then we see clear grounds why one deliverance assures many more. Yet take
this truth with this caution. Yet observe a Caution.
Although God deliver his people all alike, effective, yet he does not always
bind himself to give unto all his servants the same deliverance in specie, and
in kind. But when he does it not in kind, he does it,

First, in equivalence: either the same, 1. Deliverance may be in equivalence.
or another as good in it self, and better for thee. 2. Pet. 2.9.
The Lord knows how to deliver the godly, for manner, and kind; as well as
for the means. If life be best, he will preserve thee alive. If death be
better, even death shall be thy deliverance, and thy greater gain.

2. When God delivers not in kind, 2. If not in kind, yet such as satisfies.
yet that deliverance which he does bestow, gives full satisfaction and perfect
content: so as other deliverance would not be accepted if it were tendered.
Those Primitive Saints that were exposed to Martyrdom, Heb. 11.35.
would not accept of deliverance (that is, of an escape with their lives) that
they might obtain a better resurrection.

These things observed, it ever holds good that, The experience of Gods
ordering and overruling the rage of man in times past, is an undoubted
assurance of the like for all time to come.

And this being so, I shall, in the Use, observe my former method, beginning
with a Parallel of this Truth and these Times: no truth being sweeter than
that whereof we have largest taste and experience; nor Use more seasonable, 1.
Use of the last Point.
than that which comes most home to our present condition.

That great Deliverance we now celebrate, was not as a dead bush to stop a
present Gap only, 1. Behold the experience of this upon our selves.
nor a mercy expiring with that hour and occasion; but, intended for a living,
lasting, breeding Mercy that has been very fertile ever since. It was an
inlet to further favors, and an earnest of many more blessings: for which, I
appeal to Your own Experience who have duly observed Gods dealing with you.
Many of You who have now the honor to sit Members of the High Court of
Parliament were unborn, when the Powder Treason should have been acted. Yet you
cannot say, you were born out of due time: for that very Deliverance has,
since that, set down many a rich mercy at all your doors. This very
Parliament speaks out this truth to all the world.

The very Calling of it, and the sitting of it, speaks it. The many
Conspiracies that have been detected, the many Popish Designs that have been
defeated, the many snares that have been broken, the many Mountains that have
been levelled, the mighty Nimrods that have been plucked down, the unsupportable
yokes of which our necks have been freed, those whips of Scorpions the
back-breaking heart-sinking Courts which are now broken and dissolved; the
devouring sword of war brandished in the heart of this Kingdom, that is now
put up; those Rights and Liberties which had been led away captive past hope of
rescue, that are now restored; that Religious, necessary, noble Vow and
Covenant for conservation of Religion, and Protestation against Popery and
Superstition, into which both Houses have worthily entered; that frequencie of
Parliaments for preventing future inundations of misery and bondage, that is
now happily settled; this blessed opportunity of sitting in Parliament, at this
time, for the more effectual and timely quelling of that unhappie Rebellion of
some Papists in Ireland; and the providing for the continuance of this present
Assembly, till all our grievances be heard and relieved, till those that are
complained of as instruments of our destruction be brought forth to trial, 2.
Use of the last Point.
till the Church be purged, Reformation perfected, and our Laws, estates,
Liberties, and Religion be all settled and secured. These, I say, and many more
do all speak and proclaim the manifold, wonderful, and invaluable mercies that
have flowed in upon this unworthy and unthankful Nation from that admirable
defeat of the Gunpowder Treason.

Wherefore Psalm. 107, 2.
let the redeemed of the Lord, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the
enemy, say, that his mercy endures for ever. Yea, let all that fear him,
say, Psalm. 68.19.
Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us with his benefits, even the God of
our salvation; and let them put a Selah to it, Psalm. 102.18.
for the generation to come, that the people which are yet unborn may praise
the Lord.

Terror to the wicked.
and do so exceeding proudly from day to day, as if all were theirs, and that
nothing could hinder the satisfying of their lust upon the Gospel! What stone
have they left unturned? what plot unattempted? And yet, what Treason of the
many which they have contrived, has taken effect? Will they not see that, in
all their rage and conspiracies, they do Psalm. 2.1.
imagine but a vain thing? that they are sure of a hard bargain of it (like
that of a naked body) Act. 9.
to kick against the pricks? that it is a desperate service they daily go upon?
Have they not miscarried, and gone by the worse all along? and may they not,
out of their miscarriages past, as out of an Experimental Prognostication,
read their destiny for all time to come?

Do they not know that God has engaged himself to his people, that Isa. 54.17.
no weapon that is formed against them shall prosper? Even Hamans wife (though
a heathen) could tell her husband enraged against Mordecai, Esth. 6.13.
If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall,
thou shall not prevail against him, but shall surely fall before him.

I know God sometimes in anger, gives his people into the hands of their
enemies, to chastise and humble them. But, mark the issue: the tail of the
storm ever lights upon the rods of his anger. For, the Lord has said it, Isa.
10.25.
Yet a little while, and the indignation (against the godly) shall cease: and
mine anger, in their destruction: that is, of those whom he employed to correct
them. Yea, which is a deeper cut to a malicious heart, God does, at last,
usually bring his enemies to confusion even by those poor, despised, oppressed
outcasts of Israel, whom the wicked in their rage had resolved to devour.
Zach. 12.2.3.
Behold, says the Lord, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling, (or of
poison) unto all people round about, when they shall be in the siege both
against Judah and Jerusalem. And in that day will I make Ierusal^m a burdensome
stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it: that is, labor to
take it up and throw it out, shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of
the earth be gathered together against it.

O that wicked men would yet desist from their conspiracies against the godly,
before the Lords wrath be kindled, and they perish for ever! But, if they will
not be instructed, I must leave with them that which the Lord denounced to the
uncureable enemies of his Church heretofore; Isa. 8.9, 10
Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; yea, gird your selves and
ye shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel together and it shall come to
naught, speak the word and it shall not stand, for God is with us.

Comfort to the godly.
but more especially to You who are now employed by God and the King in the
great service of the Kingdom! Is it so that your souls be among Lions, and
that you lie among those that are set on fire, to plot Treasons against You
continually, and boldly to breathe out bloody threatenings, so that when you go
forth in the morning, you can scarce hope to return in the evening in peace? Do
but cast up your accounts and experiments of Gods former Mercies in protecting,
directing, preserving, and delivering of You hitherto, and you need no other
Prognostication to foretell what will befall you; 3. Use of the last Point.
nor better assurance that God will go on and preserve and cover you, to direct
and prosper You (while you depend on him, and walk with him) maugre all the
rage, and power, malice, and subtlety of all men and devils all together
against you.

Nay could it be imagined that you never had experiment of Gods power and
goodness in any extraordinary preservations and deliverances of your selves at
all: yet, if you do but look abroad upon the many mercies conferred on others,
in any age of the world; yea, if you look but upon this very Deliverance given
to your Predecessors, this will be enough to assure you of like protection and
preservation for ever. For every one of Gods servants are entitled to all the
mercies and glorious works that ever the Lord wrought for any of his people
from the beginning of the world. If you doubt hereof, remember what you have
already heard from the Apostle, who has put it out of question, in the place
before cited, where he voucheth that particular encouragement given to Joshua,
as an undubitable promise to all the godly; Heb. 13.5.6.
I will never fail thee nor forsake thee: so that we may boldly say, the Lord
is my help, I will not fear what man shall do unto me.

4. Be therefore exhorted hence, 1. The last Use. Exhortation.
to make this use of all former mercies. 2. To labor to be capable of this
experiment.

1. Make this use of all former mercies. 1. Make this Use of former mercies.
Look on what we find acted, or written of Gods goodness to his people, not
as bare histories of things done, but as Prognostics and assurances of the
like again; as upon Book-cases adjudged, that may be vouched unto God as
Presidents in this time of trouble and danger. It is the great fault of too
many, when they read in Scripture of wonderful protections and deliverances,
they behold them only to admire the acts done, but not to roll themselves, by
virtue thereof, upon God, for the like. Howbeit, the Apostle tells us, Rom 15.4.
Whatsoever was written afore-time, was written for our learning, The last Use.
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: of
what, but of this; that, as others before us have been graciously born upon
wings of mercy; even so we also shall, with no less power and tenderness, be
carried through all storms and dangers that may set upon us in any service or
suffering for God, beyond all humane helps or hopes of deliverance.

2. Labor to be capable of like mercies.
2. Labor to be capeable of further mercies by virtue of those already
conferred. Although God be graciously indulgent, yet is he not inconsiderately
prodigal of mercies to all that scrape acquaintance with him in their
troubles. There are some to whom God, after many deliverances, says
peremptorily, Judge. 10.13
I will deliver you no more: It concerns all, therefore, to make this sure that
they be such who may exspect further deliverances from the God of their
salvation. To this purpose, three things must be done: You must believe in him,
walk with him, and stand for him.

1. Believe in him.
1. Believe in him. When Iehoshaphat and his people, fearing to be swallowed up
of an huge host that came out against them, were by a Prophet assured of
victory without striking a blow, Iehoshaphat presently inculcates this upon his
subjects, 2. Chron. 20.20.
Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established, believe his
Prophets, so shall ye prosper.

Faith makes a man even omnipotent. Mar. 9.23.
All things are possible to him that believes. It Deuteronomy. 9.13.
binds Gods hands when he would destroy. It commands his help when his people
are in distress; Isa. 45.11.
Concerning the work of my hands command ye me. On the other hand, Infidelity
does weaken Omnipotency it self, in regard of the effects that otherwise would
be produced. It makes him Ier. 14.8.
as a strong man that cannot save. When Christ did so many mighty works in the
days of his flesh, no man felt the effect, but such as believed. Mat. 9.29.
According to your faith be it unto you, said he to the blind men that came to
be healed. So it fell out to those of his own country; Mar. 6.5.6.
he could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick
folks and healed them: the reason is couched in the next words, he marvelled at
their unbelief. Which shows plainly, that let Gods power be what it will, our
necessities as great as can be, and his promises never so firm and punctual
for you, yet, Isa. 7.9.
if you will not believe, surely ye shall not be established. Therefore believe.

2. Walk with God. 2. Walk with God.
This was required of Abraham the father of the faithful, when God promised to
do so much for him and his seed, Genesis 17.1.
Walk before me and be upright. When 2. Chron. 17.3, 4.
Iehoshaphat walked in the first ways of his father David, the Lord was with
him, and strengthened the kingdom in his hand. And Ver. 10.
the fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdoms round about Judah, so that
they made no war against Iehoshaphat. Yea, the most inveterate enemies of
Judah, the Philistines, brought him gifts and presents. Thus God makes his
servants that walk with him so sure of protection, that they become a terror to
those that would be a terror to them.

He that walks with God is sure to fare as God himself does. Fellow travelers
use to communicate each to other such things as they have, if any of the
company fall into distress: so the Lord communicates all his power, wisdom,
and goodness to all that walk with him, as they stand in need of any, or of
all of these. Psalm. 84.11.
The Lord God is a sun and a shield, and no good thing will he withhold from
them that walk uprightly. Yea, 2. Chron. 16.9.
his eyes run too and fro, throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong
in behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him.

3. Stand for him, and he will stand for you. 3. Stand for God.
Be zealous for God, and he will put on zeal as a cloak for you. If you will
help the Lord against the mighty, especially against those proud enemies that
tread down his ordinances, or imbase them with alloyes of their own, you shall
soon find him speaking to you in your straits and difficulties, as Jehoshaphat
to Ahab, 2. Chro. 18.3.
I am as thou art, and my people as thy people, and we will be with thee in the
war.

Give me leave, I beseech You, to speak freely to You; I will do it humbly
too. At Your first sitting down, You expressed many brave and noble
resolutions, of giving Gods business the precedence of all other Your
Affairs: and Your beginnings promised much. Howbeit, I know not how it comes
to pass, but so it is, that Gods Work lies yet undone. Matters of Religion lie
a bleeding; all Government and Discipline of the Church is laid in her Grave,
and all putredinous vermin of bold Schismatics and frantic Sectaries glory
in her ashes; making her fall their own rising to mount our Pulpits, to offer
strange fire, to expel the gravest, ablest, and most eminent Ministers in the
Kingdom, (if not out of their Pulpits, yet) out of the hearts of their people
as a company of weak men, formalists, time-servers, no Ministers of Christ, but
Limbs of Antichrist, having no calling except from the Devil; and to forsake
our Assemblies as Babylonish and Antichristian, so as in short time they will
not leave us the face of a Church. And yet, no course is taken to suppress
their fury, and to reduce them to order, which (as things now stand) will never
be, till You put your hands to the Cure. I know your businesses and diversions
have been extraordinary: yet in the midst of them all, You have found
opportunity to vindicate and setle your own Rights and Liberties. Therefore I
hope You will find both time and hearts to consider what is to be done for
that God who has done so much for You beyond all exspectation.

Far be it from any among You to say, it is not yet a time. Remember how
unkindly God took the neglect of his House by the Jews whom he had restored
from Captivity, albeit they forgot not the daily Sacrifice in the due place,
and were opposed by many potent enemies, (the Kings Great Officers in Judeah)
who procured from Artaxerxes Longimanus a Ezra 4.21.
Decree to stay the building of the Lords House; which caused a cessation of
forty-one years, even Verse. 23.
until the second of Darius Nothus. In this case, much might have been said
for laying aside the Work; yet because the chief of the people did not
constantly solicit the Persian Monarchs to reverse that Decree, that the
building might go on; but, followed their own business close, built their own
houses and seiled them sumptuously, sowed their fields, and omitted nothing for
their own Estates and Liberties, God did continually blow upon all, and cursed
every blessing.

When they marvailed at the matter, He bad Haggai the Prophet to tell them the
reason, and to persuade them to reflect upon their own ways, as the only
cause thereof. Hag. 1.2.
This people say, the time is not come, the time that the Lords House should be
built. To this the Lord makes answer; Verse. 4.
Is it time for You, O ye, to dwell in your seiled houses, and this House lie
wast? Can you find time for your selves, and none for Me? Should I bless you
in pursuit of your own affairs whiles you neglect mine? Nay, Consider your
ways. See what you have gotten, in the issue, by all the Labor you have taken
for your selves, while you have done nothing to set forward the House of your
God. Ye have sown much and bring in little, ye eat but you have not enough,
ye drink but ye are not filled, etc. Thus it was with them, although an
Edict was still in force against building of the Temple; because they did not
cordially do their utmost, to obtain the repeal of that Ordinance, but
rather made use of it to pursue their own business with more zeal and
industry.

And has not the same God begun the same course against us, at this very time?
Consider your ways. When they who solicited the Cause of God, humbly prayed
that the matters of Religion might be put to some issue; the disbanding of the
Armies, was thought more necessary, to put an end to that charge. When that was
done, what followed? Was any thing done for God? Surely, You can best tell. And
what have we gotten? In stead of the former Armies, God has now laid upon You
a business of more difficulty, and likely to prove more costly and bloody, by
kindling a fire in Ireland, to the unspeakable persecutions, and butcheries of
the poor Protestant Party there; and, when those flames will be quenched, or
how far they may extend, is known only to Him whose Cause (I fear) is not
sufficiently taken to heart? But this be sure of, it will never be better; but,
more and more occasion of exhausting your Estates (which You have spent so much
time to secure) will be still administered, so long as You shall defer the
building of the Lords House, I mean, the settling and securing of Religion and
Discipline. This is that unum necessarium which (what ever some think) will
undoubtedly save all: and, without which, all will be lost at home, as well as
abroad.

O therefore let me be bold in the Name of the Lord (whose Servant I am, and
whose Cause I now plead,) to give You the same Counsel that God by his servant
Haggai, gave to the Jews who seemed to approve the Work, but pretended many
Lions to be in the way. Hag. 1.8.
Go up to the Mountain, and bring wood, and build the House, and I will take
pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, says the Lord. What ever your own
thoughts be, lay them aside to consider seriously what God exspects from You.
Try that Course, and see what a blessing will follow; how soon, how strangely
God will turn all things about, remove all difficulties, and work wonderfully
for You and our poor Brethren in Ireland.

This is no Empiricall Dosis, but a Probatum est. For mark the issue of taking
this Counsel, in the Jews Case. Such as believed the Prophet, and feared the
Lord, laid aside the hot pursuit of their own affairs, and did as they were
commanded. They set upon the building of the Lords House. And the next newse
was; Hag. 1.13.
Then spoke Haggai the Lords Messenger, the Lords message unto the people; I am
with you, says the Lord. That is, now they should find him with them to
purpose: first, in carrying up the building, which (beside the several pauses
and interruptions of the Work) had been forty-two years, That House was
forty-six years in building, Ioh. 2.20.
at several times, labored in, and yet not finished; and had then lain
forty-one years together, without so much as a stone laid in it. Now, it
should go up so fast, that one four years more should perfect the work. For,
they Ezra 6.15.
finished it in the sixth year of Darius Nothus, having set upon it in Hag.
1.15.
the second of his Reign, as before is showed.

Nor did God thus prosper them in his own Work only but blessed them in all
things else they took in hand for themselves. And whereas before, there was
nothing but sidings and factions; some Neh. 6.10. etc. and verse. 17, 18,
complying with the Great Officers of the Persian and Medish Emperors that
then ruled over them, others opposing, and all thwarting one another, and
thriving in nothing; afterward, God did on the sudden turn the stream, knit
them together Neh. 9.
in a Covenant with God, and thereby Neh. 10.28, 29.
unitd them also one to another; so as, not only a new face, but a new state
of things presently appeared; and God was as good as his word, not only in
taking pleasure in his house, but in those that built it; For, so himself
tells them; Hag. 2.19.
From this day will I bless you.

This is a memorable Instance; and I would to God You would president your
selves, by it, which till You do, I shall never exspect good of any of your
Labors, or Laws already made for your selves: Nor shall You satisfy the
expectations of those that sent You hither, and put so great a Trust into your
hands. Even men who at other times care no more than Gallio for matters of
Religion; now that they see all men's spirits to be up for Religion, they also
are (in their ways) zealous to have somewhat done in it, and for it, as well
as others.

I beseech You therefore in the Name of that Great God, whom You serve, and who
has hitherto blessed You, and for the peace and prosperity of this Church and
Kingdom, to resume and pursue your first thoughts of setting up God and his
Ordinances, as becomes You in a Regular way, which I have ever taken to be, by
calling to your assistance a free Synod of Grave Ministers of this Nation. Not
that I take upon me to prescribe any thing, but humbly to offer it to
consideration only, that so among the several ways and means propounded,
Your Wisdoms may select and prosecute what You shall find to be the surest
and most honorable way to cure the Ulcers of the Time, that daily fester more
and more: That our Church and the Government thereof may be no longer laid
waste, and exposed to Confusion, under the plausible pretense of not forcing
men's Consciences. To put all men into a course of Order and Uniformity, in Gods
way, is not to force the Conscience; but, to set up God in his due place, and
to bring all his people into the paths of righteousness and life.

You see how God has unexpectedly put you into further necessity of more
supplies from the people, for suppressing the Rebellion in Ireland, and all
that foment or countenance such a prodigious Conspiracy. And you cannot be
ignorant of the general discontent at this, that there is yet no more done for
Religion, by reforming what is amiss, and by settling what should be so
reformed. Would you therefore once go roundly to work in this Great Enterprise,
and make the people to see and be assured of what I know you intend, namely,
the further Reformation of the many things out of order in our Church and
Discipline, and the perfecting of that which has so many years lain
unpolished, You might soon command the hearts, and purses, and lives of all
good Christians in the public service of the King and kingdom, without
regreet, or gainsaying; and be able to do more in a short time, than otherwise
you shall ever effect while you live.

Look upon David. When this was once seriously and sincerely settled in his
heart, to build God an House, God took it so kindly, that though he resolved to
reserve that Work for Solomon, 2. Sam. 7.
yet he sent a message to David, that he would build him an house, and
establish both his house and kingdom upon him. And not only so; but, when so
ever David had need of extraordinary help, God never failed to go out with him
whither soever he went. And it is very remarkable, that most of the Great
Victories which David achieved, fell to him after his resolution of building
the Temple. For the Text says it expressly, that, 2 Samuel 8.1.
After these things, David smote the Philistines; and after that, the Moabites;
then, Hadadazer; and then, the Syrians, and others, none being able to stand
before him.

And thus would it be with you, when, in zeal for God, you follow his steps.
What ever the difficulties and discouragements be, when Zorobabel falls close to
work, what mountain, so great and high, that shall not become a plain? No
plots, no power of hell should prevail against you. Do you carry on Gods work,
he will be sure to carry on yours, and make you the honor and strength of the
King and Kingdom in all the Kings Noble designs for the good of his Subjects.
Those unnatural Rebels that now rage so desperately, should be but bread for
you; and all your enemies should be compelled to lick the dust of your feet. I
shall therefore close all with that of the same David to Solomon his son,
touching the building of the Temple, 1 Chro. 22.16.
Arise, and be doing, and the Lord be with you.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in some Copies, correct thus. The first number shows the page;
the second, the line.
PAge 1. li. 20. dele and. li. 29. r. (2 Chro. 14.) 2. 2. dele the second and.
4. 9. r. not. 6. 2. r. of clay. 7. 15. r. a little. li. 18. r. Chamath. and in
marg. (...) 17. 17. r. our Cities. 20. 2. r. Cunning. 21. 14. r. for. 24. in
marg. r. Hassenmuller. 34. 23. dele the 36. 19. dele not. 49. 1. r. within. and
li. 6. r. which makes. page 53. 8. r. them. 55. 20. r. Godly.


