A CASE, Concerning The Buying of BISHOPS LANDS with, the Lawfulness thereof.

AND The Difference between the Contractors for sale of those Lands, and the
Corporation of Wells.

(Ordered, Anno. 1650. to be Reported to the then PARLIAMENT) With the
Necessity thereof, since fallen upon Dr. BURGES.

August. ad fratres in Eremo. Ser. 52. Duae sunt res Conscientia and Fama.
Conscientia necessaria est tibi; Fama, proximo tuo. Qui fidens Conscientiae
suae, negligit famam Crudelis est.

LONDON, Printed in the year of our Lord, 1659.

To the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.
THis Nation has great cause to bless the God of our lives for ever, who has
so graciously kept off the horrid Distractions and Confusions feared by most,
upon the Death of the Late Lord Protector: and for that he has also put it
into the heart of his Present Highness (Gentis Anglicanae nunc deliciarum) so
seasonably to Call You together, in the ancient way, as a free Parliament, for
settling this Church and Common Wealth, in Truth, Peace, and Righteousness,
according to Law.

Your main Work is Settlement, as Healers of the Breaches. And our Wounds call
for Lenitives, not Corrosives. Now is the time to show the depth of Wisdom,
not height of Animosity; to seek peace and pursue it, not to be for war: and,
to let your moderation to be known to all men.

You cannot be ignorant that there ever have been, and will be many
Quack-Salving spirits, who fancying to themselves new Models of Government for
sinister ends, think You to be very weak if You differ from them. Such will
never be for any settlement at all; but, run up and down both City and Country,
like so many Ignes fatui, to inveagle well-meaning men (ignorant of their
devices) to subscribe their Factious Petitions. Wherein, under pretense of the
Public, they design to make You, first, to hold the stirrup; and then to be
their footstool, to get themselves into the saddle.

Little do those turbulent Polypragmatists know of what spirit they are: much
less do they consider that Ignatius Loyola ever lies at the bottom of all
those Divisions which their seditious zeal would kindle among You. But I trust
Your Wisdom will timely see through such self-ended Projects, and resolutely
reject such destructive Endeavors to Divide You, that they might reign.

If Your Counsels miscarry: and, in stead of quenching old fires, new flames
break out; Woe, woe to this Nation. For that, in all likelihood, (unless men
will tempt God to work Miracles as the Devil did Christ, to command Bread out
of Stones) this will devour Us. And then, who shall save You? I beseech You
(therefore) to mark those that cause Divisions and offenses, and avoid them.
For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly;
and, by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple.

Pardon this boldness in him that has, by the space of 40 years, been a
diligent Observer of, and a faithful servant to Parliaments, so far as they
seriously sought the Public Good; and so resolves to be to You. Upon which
account, he humbly makes this Address: The occasion, this.

Many, and loud have been the Clamors against the late long Parliament, for
seizing, and selling the Lands of Bishops, and other Cathedral men. For this,
They, their Agents, and all purchasers are proclaimed guilty of that odious sin
of Sacrilege; and none more than this Your servant. Hereupon, he has often
been pressed to Vindicate the Parliament, and thereby to right himself, who
has long felt the scourge of tongues, and been made to drink the gaul of Pens,
for purchasing some of those Lands; and, for his just endeavors to possess
what he has paid for, by some most unjustly detained from him, in the
judgments of the honorable, first, the Commit of Parliament; and after, the
Commissioners, for Removing Obstructions in the sale of those Lands. Which last
(being by special Act of Parliament impoured thereunto) have Heard and
Determined the same: but, to no purpose, if Contempt may prevail.

Both these, are here faithfully spread before You; not by way of Complaint,
but of Account: You being the most proper Patrons of the Vindication of a
Parliament; and best able to judge both of their frauds that have abused the
State; and, of their Contumacy who being, upon a full Hearing, Ordered to
Reconvey what they have fraudulently gotten into their Conveyance, refuse to
obey any Orders whatsoever. And threaten to bring all before You; not as hoping
to get any Orders made against them reversed; but, as promising to themselves a
lodging of the Cause once more in a Committee, thereby to prevent all further
proceedings against them elsewhere.

Now, the Good Lord make You all, men that have understanding of the times, to
know what Israel ought to do: And, so temper Your spirits, and govern Your
Councels, that You may be such a Blessing to this Nation, as that the Children
yet Unborn may call You Blessed. This is, and shall be the daily prayer of him,
that (without art or private ends) is,

Feb. 9. 1658 -- 9. Your most humble and real servant Cornelius Burges.

THE FIRST PART, Declaring The Occasion of Dr. Cornelius Burges his buying of
Bishops Lands. With The Lawfulness thereof.
THe barbarous Massacre of English Protestants in Ireland, by the Bloody-Popish
Rebels of that Nation, in the year 1641. moved the Parliament then sitting
here, to pass an Act, both for a Contribution for relief of the remaining
persecuted Brethren there, who (forced to leave all they had in Ireland) fled
into England and Wales for shelter; and for a Voluntary Loan, for bringing
their Persecutors to just punishment Upon this, Dr. Burges (after his duty
performed in the former) voluntarily lent 300 l. to that last Service, which he
accordingly paid in. But, that Loan not sufficing, another Act passed the same
year, for Subscriptions of moneys to be adventured for the Lands of those
Rebels upon certain Propositions, for more speedy subduing of them. To this Dr.
Burges subscribed, and accordingly paid in 700 l. more.

The next year after, that Unhappy Difference between the late King and his
Parliament, brake out also. And, the Parliament Declaring that the King
(seduced by evil Counsel) had deserted them, raised an Army against them, and
erected his Standard of War at Nottingham, whereby he had put both Parliament
and Kingdom out of his Protection; the said Parliament published the Necessity
of an Advance of Money, Horses and Plate, by a voluntary Loan, upon the Public
Faith, for defense of the King and Parliament, and for bringing to condign
Punishment those evil Counselors about the King, which had engaged him in
that destructive Design. Dr. Burges taking notice of this Declaration, out of
the integrity of his heart to the King and Parliament, lent several sums of
Money, for defense of both; being resolved to have suffered any death, rather
than to have lent one penny, or to have spoken one word in that Cause, upon any
other account: as he after expressly professed and protested to a Committee of
that Parliament sitting to examine him (among others) touching a Printed
Vindication of the Ministers in and about London, that had been unjustly
charged with having some hand in promoting the late Kings Death.

And whereas by that Dismal Division, sharp and bitter Wars had been, for some
years waged, and vast sums of Money (raised on the Public Faith) exhausted,
the Parliament held themselves bound in honor and justice to pay those debts,
contracted by that War, mainly promoted against the Parliament and Kingdom (if
not by, yet) in favor of the Archbishops and Bishops (one of them having
called the forerunner of it, Bellum Episcopale, or the Bishops War:) therefore
the Parliament passed an Ordinance, October. 9. 1646. for an absolute taking
away, and abolishing the Name, Title, Dignity, and Office of Archbishops and
Bishops, who (having before incurred a Praemunire) were thenceforth utterly
disabled to hold or exercise the place or function of Archbishops or Bishops
within England or Wales. And their Lands, and Possessions held in right of
their Bishoprics (being by that abolition escheted) were vested in certain
Trustees; subject to such Trusts as both Houses of Parliament should appoint
and declare.

Which Parliament, by another Ordinance, of November. 16. 1646. appointed and
ordained all those Lands and Revenues to be sold, for raising of 200000 l. for
the then present use of the State. In which Ordinance they invited all that had
before lent Money, Horses, Plate, etc. for the Service of the King and
Parliament, upon the Public Faith, to double the same: and so, to take the
whole so doubled, out of Bishops Lands, either in Money or Lands. For which
purpose, they engaged the Grand Excise, and Bishops Lands: not without
intimation, that such as doubled not, must exspect no other security for what
they had lent, but the then-despised Public Faith; nor to be paid, till all
Doublers were satisfied.

Dr. Burges seeing this necessity of doubling, to prevent hazzarding of all,
doubled all his Bills, which (upon doubling) amounted to 3400 l. beside his Loan
and adventures for Ireland. All which, he endeavored to receive back in Money,
but was therein hindered by such as labored all they could to engage him in the
taking of it out in Bishops Lands. He therefore, having a wife, and ten
children to provide for, that must all be undone, if that money miscarryed; and
finding the Divisions of Parties that now managed the Public, and pursued
several Interests, to be daily increased, and more heightened, and himself ill
requited for all his faithful Service, was put upon this strait, to take out
his Moneys in Bishops Lands. This was the only reason of his purchasing of
Bishops Lands.

Since which purchase, it has pleased the Wise God to exercise him with many
sharp afflictions; among which the scourge of tongues has not been least. And
he has fallen under so much prejudice with such as never heard, or scarce ever
saw him, that not only sundry Suites at Law have been commenced against him,
and Verdicts given for his Adversaries, even when their own Witnesses and
Counsel yielded the Cause; but his Ministry also, (although acknowledged by his
very Enemies to be useful) has been of small use. Most of which has befallen
him by sundry false aspersions of virulent foul-mouthed Mercenaries, that stick
not to transgress for a good meal, albeit he has (as it is very well known)
deserved far better at their hands who have so traduced him.

Nor is it unusual with Satan and his Instruments, to cast most dirt in the
faces of such as oppose his Kingdom, that he may sully and disparage their
persons by whose doctrine he suffers. For this cause, that eminent Light and
glorious Martyr Cyprian thus wrote to Antonianus, touching Cornelius (a good
Bishop of Rome, and an holy man) greatly defamed by Novatianus and his fellow
Schismatics and Heretics; Epist. ad Antonian.
Quod quaedam de illo inhonesta and maligna jactantur, nolo mireris; cum scias
hoc esse semper opus Diaboli, ut servos Dei mendacio laceret, and opinionibus
falsis gloriosum nomen infamet, ut qui conscientiae suae Luce clarescunt, in
alienis rumoribus sordidentur. I would not have thee strange at it, that sundry
foul and malignant reports are thrown abroad touching him; seeing thou know
this to be ever the Devils work, by lying to revile and make odious the
glorious name of the servants of God, that they who by the light and testimony
of their own consciences appear brightest, may by false rumors be rendered most
sordid and vile.

Hence many, not knowing, nor caring to know the true state of the Doctors Case
and Cause, but resolved (not for want of ignorance, envy or malice) to blast
him; are ready to hunt after all the base and false reports they can against
him; and (as Jeremiah's enemies served him Jer. 20.10.
to encourage all to speak the worst they can of him, [Report, say they, and we
will report it,] how false soever. Yea, so far have they proceeded in this
hellish lawlesness of their tongues Jam 3.6.
, as to impute all the troubles that have befallen him, to the just hand of God
upon him for buying of Bishops Lands, pronouncing him guilty of that odious sin
of Sacrilege for so doing.

Now albeit he resolve to suffer much, rather than to take notice of every
false report; and to wait Gods time for the clearing up of his innocence in
other mattets; yet this is of so foul a nature, reflecting so deeply upon not
only his person, but the very Ministry it self, that there is a necessity of
some Vindication, and of endeavoring the satisfaction, if not of all, yet of
such as are rational and sober men, by a brief Discourse of the nature of that
sin of Sacrilege, properly so called; and of the Lawfulness of buying Bishops
Lands.

Of Sacrilege. 1. What it is not.
There are, who deny that there is, or can be any such thing as Sacrilege, now
under the Gospel: they being confident, that nothing is now due by Divine
Right, to Ministers of the Gospel. But this being (as shall after appear) a
palpable Error, deserves to be with contempt exploded, rather then seriously
confuted. Others, in another Extreme stretch Sacrilege so far, as to involve
every man in that sin, that deviateth from their Constitutions and Laws, or
offends in any thing which they please to call Sacred, or Holy; although
never made such by Gods Ordination.

Thus the Roman Emperors stigmatize the Violation of their Civil Laws, L. 11 c.
de Crim Sacril. l 6 de appel. in C. Theodos. Vide Lexic. Jurid. Calv.
and fasten that Crime on all who wilfully neglect, or knowingly break their
Commands. L. 1. c. ut digni.
The Canonists extend it to the aliening, invading, wasting, stealing,
purloyning, or perverting of any thing, and to the abusing of any Person,
Place, or Thing once dedicated and by them called Holy, although without Word
or Warrant from God, or the Municipal Laws of Men: and hereupon they require
restitution, and full satisfaction, upon pain of Excommunication. Decret. par.
2. q. 12. Cause. 12. c. 13. Nulli liceat.


Upon this sandy Foundation, most of the Schoolmen, Summists, and Casuists,
build their Discourses of Sacrilege; Aquin. 22. q. 99. ar. 1. Alex. Alens.
par. 1. q. 168. m. 2. Hostien. l. 5. c. de Crim. Sacril. Lindw. l. 1. C. Ignor.
Sacerd. verbo Sacrileg. Bonavent. to 6. Centiloq. Sect. 30. Azor. Moral. l. 9.
c. 27.
and (according to the Interest of their Party) bring within the compass of
that sin, the profanation, violation, or any abuse of any thing, place, or
person which they call Holy. The striking of a Priest, Deacon, Nun, or other
Votary, upon any occasion whatsoever: The defiling of them by Uncleanness, etc.
the renouncing of their Orders, Vows, or Votary States: The abusing and
profaning of Churches, Chapels, Oratories, Churchyards, and other
consecrated places, by buying, selling, stealing, even ought that is common;
the committing of Whoredom, acting of any Civil Affairs, etc. in them; the
polluting of Sacraments, by unworthy receiving, or not adoring of their Host;
the abusing, or denying of any of those additional Sacraments, which are but
their own Fancies, is, with them Sacrilege. The alienating, converting to
common Use, or otherwise detaining of any Lands, Goods, Bequests, Vestments,
Utensils of Churches, Altars, etc. devoted and given by Men upon any account
whatsoever, to Churches, or Religious Houses (as they call them) although never
so superstitiously, fraudulently and superfluously, or any other way
unwarrantably conferred, and which God never required at their hands, is all,
by them, pronounced and declared to be Sacrilege. In a word, what ever
crosses, prejudiceth, disgraceth or hinders the Profit of the Pope, or any of
his Clergy, or Creatures, that bear but the Name of the Church, or ought
pertaining to it, is proclaimed and thundered against as Sacrilege, which no
satisfaction can expiate; unless it be to the great advantage and gain of those
that call themselves the Church.

That many (although not all) of the before-named particulars are great sins,
is willingly granted. But that they are all Sacrilege, is denied: For, if we
consider the Etymology of the Word, or the proper Nature of the Thing, in holy
Scripture, we shall soon discover the unsoundness of that Assertion.

As for the Etymon of the Word, whether (...), or Sacrilegium, 2. What
Sacrilege is.
it denotes the lurching, or stealing of somewhat that is sacred. Hence
Civilians l. 6. and l. 9. ff. ad. L. Jul. pecul.
term him Sacrilegus, qui publica Sacra compilavit. So Basil Orat. de piece.
calls an Hypocrite, (...), a Sacrilegious Person, because he robs God of his
heart, which, at God's Command, Prove. 23.26.
he pretends to give unto him. The Latin word Sacrilegium, is a Compound of
Sacrum and Legere: and he is Sacrilegious qui Sacra legit, id est, furatur;
Brisson.
who gathers, that is, steals sacred things. And here, it may not unbeseem
men pretending to School-Learning, and to Antiquity, to take with them that of
the Learned and Acute Isidore of Sivil, Isid. Hispal. li. Differentiar. lit. S.
touching the difference between Sacrum, Religiosum, and Sanctum. That (says
he) is Sacred, which is Gods due; that, Religious, which pertains to Religious
Men; and that, Holy, which is devoted or dedicated by Men. To which he adds,
Sacrum vero, and Sanctum est: Sanctum vero, non continuo Sacrum est. Whatever
is Sacred, is also Holy: but all that is Holy, is not Sacred. This gives light
into the nature of the thing or sin of Sacrilege, according to the use of the
Word in holy Writ, and the Language of the best Antiquity.

For, all Sacrilege must needs refer to somewhat properly sacred, in sense of
Scripture. Hence Hales, Aquinas, Ubi supra.
and other ancient Schoolmen, describe Sacrilege to be rei sacrae violatio,
the violation of somewhat that is sacred: That is, Which God has ordained to
be set apart for his Service and Worship. Of this Solomon, or rather, God
himself by Solomon; Prove. 20.25.
It is a snare to the man that devoureth that thing which is holy; and after
the Vow to inquire (or, to recall it.) Where Tremellius renders (...) by
Sacrum. And Junius, in his Annotations keeps to the same word; understanding
thereby (as the Text intends it) the things of God, or His just due.

Great Use is made by a great Zealot Mr. Will. Walker Ser. against Sacrilege.
against Sacrilege, of some sharp passages of Mr. Cartwright, in his
Commentary upon that of Prove. 20.25. who is said to have been forced, by
evidence of truth, to confess, That now, in the time of the Gospel, whatsoever
is either established by Law, or conferred by man's Liberality for the Uses of
Gods service, is all to be accounted sacred, or holy: And for this cause both
the taking away of the whole, or the diminishing of any part of such holy
things, is Sacrilege, condemned in Deuteronomy. 23.21, 22, 23. And it is true, that
Mr. Cartwright (with too much confidence, following, in this point, the Popish
Doctors) in his first expressions, speaks to that effect. But yet, not as if it
were in man's power, by a voluntary Vow or Dedication, to make a thing sacred,
whether God has given all the Rules or Directions about it, (as he did in all
the Voluntary Offerings, in the time of the Levitical Law) or not. For he never
meant it of Gifts made of men's own accord, wherein God had not prescribed all
the Rules and Laws touching both Matter and Manner of their voluntary Gifts
unto God.

Wherefore, how heavily soever he falls upon the sin of Sacrilege, yet he
concludes all with this Explication and Limitation. Quod tamen non ita accipi
debet, ac si vota nulla cujuscunque generis rescindenda sint, cum haec de
legitimis Votis and ex prescripto Verbi factis, sint intelligenda. Which
Expression (of mine, says he) is not so to be taken, as if no Vows of what
kind soever, were to be rescinded or recalled; Seeing these things are to be
understood of lawful Vows made by the prescript of the Word.

That place, in Deuteronomy. 23. although it leave a man free, in a
Free-Will-Offering; yet it ties him in case of a Vow made: But withal, he is to
perform his Vow according to the prescript of God. Whatever is vowed or
devoted to God, for a divine use, or for his service and worship, is Worship.
But whatever is so offered, if not prescribed by God, is Will Worship, which he
abhors. Mat. 15.9.
They might not offer what they listed; no, nor so much as they pleased, even
of what he had prescribed: not thousands of Rams, or ten thousand rivers of
Oil, Mic 6.7.
(although Elies sons, and Papalins too, would have found room enough for all;)
but, what and how many Rams, and how much Oil, God, in his Law, had appointed.
This is so clear in the Levitical Law, that he that runs may read it.

If therefore the devoting of Free-VVill-Offerings could not then legitimate
and make them sacred, unless God himself had given the rule therein: how can it
be seriously affirmed, That any thing given by men under the Gospel can be
sacred, unless it be such as they have received VVarrant and Rules from God,
for the giving of it? And, if not sacred, how can it be Sacrilege to alien it
to common Uses? Will God own any thing as Holy, for which Himself has not
given Order?

More Orthodox and clear is the Exposition In Pro. 20.25.
of that holy (and now blessed Saint in heaven) Mr. John Dod: To devour that
which is holy, is (says he) to pervert those things which are by God's
Ordinance appointed for His service, from the right Use of them to a man's own
private gain and commodity. Thus the learned Danaeus gives almost the same
description of things properly called Sacred, which to purloyn, or alienate,
makes guilty of Sacrilege. Res Divinae appellantur quae sunt ad sacrum Dei
cultum destinatae, quasve sibi interdicto prolato Dominus reservavit, and in
usu commercioque hominum esse vetat. Quarum rerum furtum, dicitur Sacrilegium.
They are termed divine things, which are destinated to the sacred Worship of
God, or which by some interdict or prohibition of God, he has reserved for
Himself, and forbidden to be employed for the use or commerce of men. The
stealing of which things is called Sacrilege.

So then, Sacrilege Sacrilege described.
(according to Scripture) is the robbing of God, by alienating, detaining,
purloyning or perverting that which is Gods own, by Divine Right, and thereupon
due to the Ministers of the Gospel; whether the things be set apart by express
Command, or voluntarily given by men, by virtue of some special Warrant and
Direction from God.

That Sacrilege is a robbing of God, we have His own Word for it both in the
Old Testament Mal. ^.8.
and in the New Romans 2.22.
. It is opposed to offering to an Idol; therefore it must needs be a taking
from God. And that this is committed by aliening, detaining, purloyning or
perverting of things due to Ministers by Divine Right, is clear by that of the
same Apostle; 1 Cor. 9.9.
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, etc. applied to prove the Divne
Right which Gospel Ministers have to maintenance from those to whom they
preach. Of which, Bishops Lands were never any part, being no where commanded
or directed by God. So that the buying of them now, cannot be Sacrilege.

It has been indeed confidently affirmed, that Dr. Burges himself, openly
acknowledged at the Bar of the House of Commons in Parliament, in May 11. 1641.
his Answer to Dr. Hackets speech there made, in the names of all the Deans and
Chapters in England (for preventing the alienations of their Lands and
Revenues) that To take away those things from the Church, was Sacrilege. But
this is an unjust Aspersion: Dr. Burges did indeed declare a concurrence with
Dr. Hacket, in admitting that the alienating from the Church any thing settled
upon it by Divine Right is Sacrilege: but, nothing else. It was far from him
to include all that Cathedral men enjoyed, to be theirs by Divine Right, or to
admit that it was Sacrilege to alien any thing that was theirs not by Divine
Right; as that flashy jeering Author of the late published History of the
Church (upon hearsay only, and out of Resolution, calumniari fortiter) has
falsely reported him.

He intended no more in that speech, then what he had long before An 1625.
published, in a Preface to a little Tract of Personal Tithes: where he uses
these words: To that Tenet ( viz. that Tithes are due jure Divino) I subscribe
Affirmatively, ex animo. But, with Cautions. 1. Tithes (I say not ought else)
are due by Divine Right to Ministers of the Gospel. 2. I never was, nor (I
think) ever shall be of that Opinion, that all Tithes within such or such a
Circuit of ground, now by positive Law made but one Parish, are absolutely and
without all Exception, due by Divine Right, to the Person of one single
Incumbent there: But to the Church Or rather unto Christ her Lord; and thereby
to her.
, in whose name he receives them.

Had he granted more, he had deviated from Truth: And should it be proved by an
hundred Witnesses, that he fully concurred with Dr. Hacket in that Point, this
could not make Sacrilege of larger extent then what it is indeed. What he then
spoke was on the sudden, not having an hours time to ponder his Expressions.
That is to be taken for his Judgment, which upon serious study, he had
published so many years before. And if any such thing as is charged upon him,
fell from him in the House of Commons, he does renounce it as an Error.

If any man shall upon this occasion, A Digression for further clearing of what
is here undertaken.
and for more full clearing of this Point, demand some further Scripture
Grounds, to make it out, that neither the late selling nor buying of Bishops
Lands is Sacrilege; let him without prejudice or passion, ponder these two
things. First, That Tithes are the proper maintenance set out by God for the
Ministers of the Gospel, and cannot be alienated without Sacrilege. 2. That
there is no Warrant in Scripture for the giving of Lands to Bishops, nor
argument to prove God's acceptance of them, as holy to the Lord. And therefore
it cannot be Sacrilege now to alieu them, or purchase them from the Church.

The first thing undertaken is this, That all yearly tithes of the Ground,
Cattle, Fruits, and of all things else, are still due by Divine Right unto
Christ, and by him are given to his Servants in the Ministry of the Gospel, and
may not be alienated.

For proof hereof, consider these six Particulars:

1. Tithes are Jure Divino.
1. Tithes are called by God himself, his Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 18.1. where he gave
to the Levites, two things, the Offerings and Tithes, for their maintenance.
They shall eat the Offerings of the Lord made by fire, and his Inheritance;
that is, the Tithes. For these only were his Inhetance, which is there
distinguished from the Offerings made by fire. So he declared himself unto the
Levites, Number. 18.24. When ye take of the children of Israel the Tithes, which I
have given you from them for your Inheritance. He that gives them as their
Inheritance, must first have a propriety himself in them as his own
Inheritance. Hence he charge with sacrilege such as detained either of these
from the Priests and Levites, as robbing of himself. Ye have robbed me in
Tithes and Offerings Mal 3.8.
.

2. Nor was this a new Title, raised only for maintenance of the Levites, with
reference to the Levitical Service only; But Tithes were Gods due long before,
and paid as God appointed, where ever he set up a Priest and public
Priesthood, Evangelical as well as Legal. In so much as Levi himself, before he
was born, is said to have paid Tithes in Abraham Heb 7.9.
. For, he was yet in the loins of his Father when Melchisedeck met him Verse. 10.
. To whom the Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the very Spoil he had taken
in War Verse 4.
. Melchisedeck was (no Legal, but Evangelical) Priest of the High God, at least
in type. For Christ himself is a Priest for ever of the same Order, and so has
the same right to Tithes, that Melchisedeck had. Of which, more by and by.

3. If we consult Gospel Times, it will appear that albeit Gospel Ministers
were not in actual Possession of Tithes, at the first preaching of the Gospel,
nor during the Ten grand Persecutions, no more than were the Levites in the
Wilderness: yet Gods right was still the same, and he by Ordinance settled them
upon the Ministers of Christ, even from the first calling them to preach. For,
as of old, They that ministered about holy things, lived of the things of the
Temple; and they which waited at the Altar, were partakers with the Altar: even
so has the Lord ORDAINED, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.

Hence the same Apostle who wrote this to the Corinthians, gives it in charge
to the Galatians, (and in them, to all) that had received the Gospel, that
every one that is taught in the Word, see that he communicate unto him that
teaches, in all good things, Gal. 6.6. At that time, Christ's propriety in
Tithes, could not be available to Ministers, there being no Laws among them, to
recover them. Therefore He requires them for that present to lay out such
maintenance as they could well raise; yet so, as they should communicate (...),
in, or of all their goods, (as some not improperly translate the Original:) as
the Israelites did to the Levites attending the Ark, in the Wilderness.

4. Neither that last mentioned Ordinance of God, nor the Charge given to the
Galatians, could extend to any Offerings made by Fire, or of any other
Levitical Profits, all which ceased, when Christ (our High Priest) had once
offered Himself up to God, and thereby accomplished all which those Offerings
typified, and changed the Priesthood. Therefore it must be meant of
Maintenance by Tithes, so soon at least, as the Gospel should be received by
their Covernours, and Laws could be made for putting Gods Ordinance in
Execution for that standing Maintenance by Tithes; not in Levi's right, as
Successors to him, but as Servants to Christ.

5. That this was the Apostles meaning, is evident, because Tithes being first
paid (long before Levi) to Melchisedech, a Priest of Christ's own Order; and,
Abraham the Father of the Faithful, (and in him Levi) paid Tithes unto
Melchisedech, as the forerunner of Christ, in respect of Priesthood; it
necessarily follows, that Tithes are still due to Christ, in whose name and
right, his Servants the Ministers ought to take, and enjoy them. For the
Apostle, upon this very ground, proves Christ to be a Priest after the Order of
Melchisedech, not only because he lives, but because also he receives
tithes. Here, says he, (meaning in Judea, during Aarons Priesthood) men that
die receive tithes: but there (that is, where Melchisedech's Priesthood is
exercised) He receives them, of whom it is witnessed that he lives Heb. 7.8.
. Which he there applies to Christ, and to no other.

6. Therefore all yearly tithes (by some called Dr. Tbo Godwin, in Mos. and
Aaron lib. 6. cap. 3. of Tithes.
the first tithes) are the proper standing Maintenance set out by God, for
Ministers of the Gospel, in all settled and well-governed Christian
Commonwealths, which in obedience to God make Laws for the due payment of them:
for that they still belong to Christ as His inheritance and portion, payable to
his Ministers, by way of homage unto him, as his right, from all his people.
And therefore to alien or employ them to any other use (under any pretense
whatsoever) is plain Sacrilege, not only in those who so alien them, but in
them also who so possess and employ them, if they be not Ministers of Christ;
or being Ministers, preach not the Gospel, or procure not others, (if
themselves be disabled by age or sickness) to do it: it being no other but a
robbing of Christ, of what is his proper due, and by God made holy to himself.

The Second Point here undertaken, is, That there is no Warrant in Scripture
for the giving of Land to Bishops, nor Argument to prove Gods acceptance of
them as holy to the Lord, and that it can be no Sacrilege now to alien them.

This Point has two branches to be prosecuted distinctly.

1. That there is no Warrant in Scripture, for the giving of Lands to Bishops,
nor Argument to prove Christ's acceptance of them, as holy to the Lord. Which
appears thus.

1. There is no word in the New Testament that requires, or countenanceth such
endowments.

The Ordinance for Ministers Maintenance, recorded by St. Paul 1 Cor. 9.
extends no further then to what was allowed to Levites, while they continued:
nor, to all that neither. Offerings made by Fire, are by Christ extinct. It
reache^^ indeed to all good things: that is, to Goods, (not Lands) in the
judgment of all Expositors, ancient and modern, Popish as well as Protestant.
It extends therefore to Tithes only, as the constant standing Livelihood of
Ministers of the New Testament, where Tithes may be had; and, in the mean time,
to such other competent allowance, in Goods or Money, as could be raised for
them.

There are some Wyre-drawn Arguments (or rather futilous Fancies) for Proof of
the extent of God's Ordinance, for Evangelical Ministers Maintenance, even unto
Lands also, produced by the confident Author of a printed Answer to a Letter
said to be written at Oxford, Anno 1647. superscribed to Dr. Samuel Turner,
touching the change of Church Government by Bishops, and the alienating of
their Lands. Which the said Author undertakes to prove to be impossible to be
done with a good Conscience. His Arguments are taken from sundry Scriptures,
viz. from Mat. 25. [ I was hungry, and ye fed me, etc.] as also from Mat.
10.40. [He that receives you, receives me.] and from Act. 5. [touching
Ananias and Sapphira] and from Romans 2.22. [Committest thou Sacrilege?] But his
Arguments from those Scriptures to prove what he undertakes, are so je june and
frigid, that they deserve no answer. Howbeit, lest he should be wise in his own
conceit, let him take what follows. That Author undertakes to prove the
alienating of Church Lands of Bishops to be Sacrilege. To make way hereunto,
he premiseth these things; 1. That God accepts of things given him, and has a
Propriety in them, as well in the New as in the Old Testament. 2. That God gets
this Propriety as well by acceptance of voluntary gifts, as by his command for
the giving of them, etc. Now unless he make it out, that Gods Acceptance and
Propriety, (as he phraseth it) reach to Church Lands of Bishops, his labor is
in vain: and his Arguments from those Texts, are no other then a gross abusing
of the Scriptures, like that of those unlearned and unstable ones, who wrest
them to their own destruction 2 Pet. 3.16.
.

His first Text out of Mat. 25. neither does nor can extend to Christ's
Acceptance of, or Propriety in Church Lands, voluntarily given to Bishops for
their Maintenance. It speaks only of Alms, whereby the Hungry, Naked, Sick or
Persecuted Members of Christ are Christianly relieved: Not the accepting Lands
for Bishops, (such especially, as that Author declares for) who Lord it over
God's Heritage, by appropriating the sole power of Ordination, and Jurisdiction
to themselves; two of the most senseless Dreams that can be fathered upon those
Scriptures, which the same Author abuses Page 20.
to that purpose. Nor is there the least hint of Christ's Acceptance of Lands,
for any Uses whatsoever; but only of present supplies of Food, Raiment, and
other Necessaries, suitable to the instant wants of his distressed Members.

But, says he; Does Christ thus accept of meat, and clothing; and not of
those Endowments that bring these to perpetuity? Will he take meat, and refuse
Revenues? and he concludes it of both: adding, that it were a strange thing,
Christ should take those Gifts so kindly, for provisions of all called His, and
that only His Apostles and His seventy Disciples should be excepted from
sharing therein.

This would not seem strange to him, were he not a stranger to the Scriptures.
He might by further search, know, That though Christ accepted of Gifts for the
Poor, yet when they were more then there was present use of, they were abused,
even under Christ's own Nose, by that thief Judas, who bore the Bag Joh. 12.6.
. And would it were a slander to say, That most of those that since have been
trusted with that Bag, and with the large Revenues given to that Use, are too
near of Kin to that first Treasurer.

Under the Old Testament God made many provisions for the Poor; but none in
Land it self: And how much the Poor get by the gift of Lands (especially after
one Age or two) under the Gospel, is too obvious and lamentable to behold. That
Author therefore begs the Question by way of a confident Interrogation [Will He
take Meat, and refuse Revenues?] which should the Author be kept from, till he
prove it, he might, perhaps, starve to Death.

But as for Christ's accepting of and having a Propriety in Lands given to the
Church, for Bishops, etc. he is out, toto Coelo, as far as the East is from the
West. That Christ took care for the Poor, is evident; and that his care was no
less for his Ministers, is no less a Truth. For he that of old made that a Law,
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the Corn Deuteronomy.
25.4.
; did he it as taking care (only or chiefly) for Oxen? nay, for our sakes no
doubt is it written; yea, altogether for our sakes, says St. Paul 1 Cor. 9.10.
in behalf of all Ministers that labor in the Word and Doctrine. Howbeit, from
hence to make it good, that that Text in Mat. 25. extends or is extendable to
Christ's acceptance of the gift of Lands for Himself, or for His Apostles, or
His seventy Disciples, or any of their Successors, will require time till the
thirtieth day of February, or the Greek Kalends come about.

As for Christ himself, (although he were of the Blood Royal, of the Lineage of
David, both by his Mothers side, and by his supposed Fathers too) Luke 2.4.
He professes that very Foxes and Birds were better provided then He; for the
one had Holes, the other Nests, but he had not so much as a Room or Pillow on
which He might lay His Head Mat. 8.20.
: And when He sent out the Twelve, His charge was Mat. 10.9.10.
, Provide neither Gold, nor Silver, nor Brass in your Purses, nor Scrip for
your journey, neither two Coats, etc. Not, that He meant to starve them: for He
took care that provision should be made for their present supply, by those to
whom they preached, so as they wanted nothing Luk 22.35.
: and that upon this account, That the labourer is worthy of his hire Mat.
10.10.
. May it not then, upon better grounds, be retorted, Christ would accept of no
Lands or House for Himself, and forbad even Gold and Silver to His Apostles,
therefore he will not accept, own, or hold the Lands of Bishops, especially of
such as he never owned? Not that it is unlawful now, for Ministers that preach
the Gospel, to receive allowance, but that those words of our Lord, in Mat. 25.
had no relation thereunto.

And albeit (if we give credit to Platina, Petrus de Natalibus, and others)
Pope Urban 1. about the year of Christ 233. by an Epistle Decretal, ordained,
That the Church might enjoy praedia, quorum proventibus alendos statuit
Ecclesiae Ministros, etc. Possessions, out of which Profits, he appointed the
Ministers of the Church to be maintained; and forbad the alienating thereof,
under pain of Excommunication: which Pope Lucius 1. afterward An. 255.
seconded; and Pius 2. long after him An. 1459.
confirmed as a Law. Yet he that shall trace the best Ecclesiastical Histories,
shall find, that the Church was endowed with no Lands, even in the greatest
advancement of Bishops by Constantine the Great. It is true, that in the
suppositious Donation of Constantine, it is said, That upon the Churches which
he erected to the honor of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, possessionum
praedia contulit, he conferred the spoils of Possessions (gotten by War:) Yet
this, in the Language of those times, and of the Civil Law, did not extend to
the Lands themselves, but only to the Profits of them.

Before Constantine, Bishops could enjoy no Lands: for even in the beginning of
his reign, the Bishop of Rome himself, Sylvester, and his Associates in the
Ministry, were fain to hide for safety of their Lives, in the Hill Saracte,
about twenty miles distant from Rome, since called, Monte di Sylvestro; as by
that very Donation appears. Nor did that Emperor endow the Bishops with
Lands, but only gave them large Allowances out of Lands: for which a voice is
said to be uttered from Heaven, Hodie seminatur Virus in Ecclesia.

But be it as the Papalins, and this Author perhaps, would have it; that such
Decrees were made by Urban 1. Lucius 1. and others, for enjoying of Lands; yet
the very best Original Title of Bishops to Church Lands, is not from Christ
himself, by virtue of what he spoke Mat. 25. but only from some Popes of Rome,
His pretended Vicars.

Touching the second Text, Mat. 10.40. it is so clearly meant of the Apostles
Ministry (not Bishops Lands) and of their entertainment for present supply of
Necessaries (not for Pomp and State, and of giving them Gold and Silver enough
to maintain it) that it may well be wondered (even by a wise man) with what
forehead that Author could apply that Scripture to Christ's accepting and
owning the Gifts of Bishops Lands, which in those times, were not so much as
dreamed of by any Bishop or Apostle of Christ's Ordination.

All which that Text can imply, is but this, That he that receives His
Apostles, receives Himself, and His Father also; by virtue whereof, He and His
Father will effectually move the hearts of the Receivers, to see that His
Apostles shall want nothing, while they are employed in preaching to them.
Which what it can conduce to prove Christ's acceptante of Lands for a perpetual
Maintenance (which by no Story appears to be enjoyed) of His Apostles, must
be left only to Impudence to make forth.

Nor was Ananias and his wife smitten, or so much as questioned, Act. 5. for
selling of Lands devoted to God and the Church; but for their dissembling, and
lying unto God. For whereas in the first receiving of the Gospel by the
preaching of Peter, many thousands were likely upon that very account (at that
time) to starve, being hated and persecuted for believing in Christ; such as
were rich sold their Estates, and put all into one common Banck or Purse, for
Relief of the whole Community of Believers. Ananias and Sapphira pretended to
do the like; they sold their Lands, yet brought but part of the price to the
Apostles, and pretended, that what they so brought was the whole. And being
questioned by Peter, whether this were All, they sold their Lands for; they
both with impudence, stood to their first Lie; and, for that, were condemned,
and smitten with death: not for Sacrilege by selling Lands; but for
Hypocrisy, in making the world believe more then was true; and by defrauding
the Church of part of that which he pretended to dedicate unto God, for the
Relief of (not Ministers, but) the poor Brethren, that then held all things in
Common: There being then no Lands or Revenues sold, or set forth for Ministers,
nor did these Hypocrites pretend unto it. Howbeit, in as much as they pretended
to give all, and yet kept back part of the price, which they professed to
devote to that public Service of God and his People, they are not to be
excused of Sacrilege; Not because they voluntarily devoted it, without a
Command (for Christ himself, in such cases of Extremity had commanded the
imparting of what might be spared Luke 3.11.
;) but because they had defrauded the Church, and abused the world, the
Apostles, and God himself, of what they had with great show of piety and
charity, professed freely to give, even when the giving of the whole was not
required.

But that great ruffling flourish which this Author makes thereupon, That
generally all the Fathers both of the Greek and Latin Church, make his crime
to be a robbing of God of that wealth, which by Vow or Promise was now become
Gods propriety; is nothing, as to the aliening the Lands of Bishops, or of the
Church, (which is the point he undertook to prove;) for his crime in lying, and
defrauding, lay not in selling or alienating of Lands, but in the price of
them. And so all Expositors Ancient and Modern agree: which comes not up to our
Authors purpose.

But, whereas he, page 26. alleges Calvin and Beza, as being of the same
judgment with the Fathers herein: it is worth the noting to observe how
corruptly he translateth their words which he produces. Calvin, says he,
speaking of that fact of Ananias, Sacrum esse Deo profitebatur; which this man
thus translateth, He professes that his Land should be a sacred thing unto
God. And Beza too, Praedium Deo consecrassent: the man and his wife had
consecrated their Land unto God. This he does, to wiredraw that Text, to make
it reach to the unlawfulness of selling of Church Lands of Bishops: whereas he
abuses both these Authors, and the Text it self, by such a false Translation.
Calvin says not, that Ananias professes his Land should be sacred unto God;
but the money he made of it, should be all sacred unto the Lord. Nor can Beza's
expression of praedium, signify Lands; for that were expressly to contradict
the Text, which speaks it of the price, not of the Land. Nor is he blamed for
selling Land devoted to God; but, for being false in his account of the sale,
which he pretended to make unto Peter; yea, unto God the Holy Ghost himself.
Oh, what Fig Leaves is Error forced to cover its nakedness withal, when called
out by Truth to show it self in the open light!

And, as touching that of the Apostle, Romans 2.22. [committest thou sacrilege?]
It is not denied, but that there is now such a sin as sacrilege, under the
Gospel in the New Testament; that it is as odious in a Christian, as ever it
was in a Jew; and is more immediately a transgression against God, than other
sins against the second Table. But still this Author begs the question in
extending this to Lands, while he produces no proof or instance at all for
such an Interpretation. Yea, those very instances which he alleges out of
Iraeneus and Origin, refer to goods, not to Lands. And, what he adds, [viz. So,
the Fathers generally] must, by his own instances last mentioned, be limited
to what himself has alleged out of Irenaeus and Origin. Else, it were
ridiculous to say, So the Fathers generally, if they speak in another sense.
How Kings have, long after the reign of Constantine the Great, given Lands,
etc. to the Church, shall after be showed in due place.

But whereas this Author, to prove Gods propriety by voluntary gifts, not
commanded, gives instance in the Temple, as a thing accepted and owned, but not
commanded of God; he was surely asleep when he did it. Did not God foretell,
and fore-Ordain a Place which himself should choose to cause his name to dwell
there? Deuteronomy. 12.11. And if our Author do not take upon him to be wiser then
Solomon, he must confess this to be meant of that very Temple. For so Solomon
himself calls it the place of which God had said, My name shall be there, 1
Kin. 8.29. And albeit David, for that he had been a man of war, and had shed
blood, 1 Chro. 28.3. was forbidden to build that house: yet Solomon, by Gods
express appointment (which has the force of a Command) was chosen to build
that House, ver. 6. Who could imagine such frothy stuff to prove his second
Proposition, of Gods propriety in things voluntarily given, without a command,
could fall from the bold pen of such an high-flown Author?

He also confidently affirms, Page 29.
that to say, That God accepts of money that Land was sold for, and not of the
Land it self (and instanceth in the very case of Ananias) is contrary not only
to all reason, and practice of all the world; but, to what God himself has
expressed in the Old Testament: this (in his sense) is so false, that it cannot
but astonish a modest Reader that knows the truth, to find him so boldly to
affirm what there is no foot-step for in all the Old Testament: As shall now
appear in the ensuing Discourse, wherein that Authors Impertinencies shall take
up no more room. To return therefore to the proof of the first branch of the
point before undertaken, That there is no warrant in Scripture, for giving
Lands to Bishops, nor proof of Christ's acceptance of them; take notice,

2. The Priests and Levites, especially Aaron himself, were prohibited to have
any Inheritance in Lands by divine Lot, among their Brethren Number. 18.20.
. And this was to be a Statute throughout their generations for ever ver. 23.
. The Reason was given before unto Aaron, I am thy part and thine inheritance,
etc. That is, his portion in Tithes and Offerings, due from Israel unto him,
should be theirs. For, of these, to wit, Tithes, he there expressly speaks,
ver. 24.
I have given them to the Levites to inherit, therefore I have said unto them,
Among the children of Israel they shall have no inheritance.

Levi was a Tribe that made up a twelfth part of Israel: yet so careful was God
to prevent their claim to any Lands, by divine Lot, that, when the rest of the
Tribes were numbered, in order to their several Lots in Land, God gave express
order to Moses, not to number the Tribe of Levi, nor to take the sum of them;
but, to appoint them over the Tabernacle of the Testimony, etc. Whereby, is
more then employed, that their Office of Priesthood was then a bar to their
inheriting of Lands; to such especially as were chief among them, and were
always to attend the Tabernacle; as did the High Priest.

Indeed the inferior Priests and Levites, being numerous, did not, could not
all attend the Altar at once; but had their several courses and orders for
waiting there. Therefore were they appointed by God, to spread all over Israel
(when their courses at the Altar were over) to instruct the people in the Law
of God Deuteronomy. 33.10.
, in their turns. Which being so, there was a necessity of preparing some
places for their own habitation, and some ground for their Cattle, which they
were to make use of, as well for their domestic provision, as for traveling
between those habitations and the Altar, when their turns came about.

Upon this ground, God by Moses, laid his Command upon the children of Israel,
that they should give unto the Levites, of the inheritance of their
Possessions, Cities to dwell in -- and Suburbs for the Cities round about, for
their Cattle, Goods and Beasts, Number. 35.1, 2, 3. But of these none were
appointed to the High Priest, who was always to reside about the Tabernacle and
Altar. His portion, and such as served at the Altar in Person, consisted in
Offerings, and in a Tenth of the Tithes, which the Levites were to pay, before
they shared the rest among themselves Neh. 10.38.
But Lands he had none.

And, as for Levites, dispersed over Israel, although they had Cities and some
Lands: yet God limited both. For the Israelites might not give what they would;
but, so many Cities and no more; so much Land about them, and no more. The
number of Cities were in all 48. Number. 35.2, 3. etc.
(among which, six were to be Cities of Refuge:) the names of all which, and
the allotment of them to the several Families of the Levites, are set down in
the 21 of Joshuah. Their Suburbs also were bounded by a set number of Cubits.
For so God commanded the Israelites, saying Number. 35.4.
, The Suburbs of the Cities, which ye shall give unto the Levites, shall reach
from the Wall of the City, and outward, a thousand Cubits round about. The
Israelites might not give, nor would God accept one Cubite more; although the
Levites were (as is before said) a twelfth part of Israel.

But here take notice, that those Cities were not inhabited by Levites only.
Others dwelt therein, and had shares also in the residue of the Lands adjacent
as well as they: Only care was to be taken, that in every one of those Cities
and Suburbs, so many of the Levites as were designed to each City, should be
first accommodated and well provided for: and the remainder, if any were,
should still be inhabited by the Owners of those Cities now allotted to the
Levites.

That this was so, is evident by the City of Hebron (or Kiriath-Arba, the City
of Arba The Father of Anak. Josh 15.13.
, a Great man, that first founded it:) for that City being given to the
Kohathites, who (among the Levites) had the first Lot Josh. 21.10, 11.
, was yet inhabited also by Caleb, to whom Joshuah had before given it for an
inheritance Josh. 14.13, 14.
. Therefore, after mention of disposing Hebron to the Kohathites by the free
Lot of the Israelites, it is said, But the Fields of the City, and the Villages
thereof, gave they to Caleb the Son of Jephunneth for his possession Josh.
21.12.
. Out of which Fields, it is manifest by the next verse, that the Suburbs were
excepted: for these were given to the Sons of Aaron the Priest ver. 13.
.

Now then, if Bishops take upon them (as of late they did) to be above ordinary
Priests, Presbyters, or Ministers, as Aaron, above the ordinary Priests and
Levites; it is as clear as Analogy can make it, that there is no color or
show for a warrant out of the Old Testament to enable Bishops to hold any
Lands; or, for others, to give them: but an express Law against it. It is true,
that after the Temple was built, there was (no doubt) convenience of
habitation, and perhaps of some Lands for the Cattle of the High Priest, who is
not to be thought worse provided for, than his inferiors. And when Bishops can
make it out, that they are as Aaron, above the rest of Christ's Ministers, the
like ought be allowed to them, while they continued.

Nevertheless, those Cities of Refuge, and the rest, set out for the Levites,
with the Suburbs pertaining to them, for the Cattle of those Levites that were
employed in the several parts of Israel to be teaching Priests 2 Chr. 15.3.
of the Law of God to the people, (which Lands, by Gods command were not to be
alienated Lev. 25.34.
;) may, by analogy, be a good argument to prove that Lands settled upon the
faithful and painful Ministers of each particular Congregation, or Parish
Church, as Glebes, for their habitation, and necessary provision of Cattle for
their use, are accepted of God, as sacred; because Himself commanded the like
for the Priests of the Law, who had sundry other obventions and in-comes by the
Levitical Offerings and Sacrifices, which Ministers now cannot enjoy: and, it
cannot be thought that God or Christ will be more wanting to Ministers of the
Gospel, than to the Priests of the Law. And as God forbad the sale of those
Lands while that Priesthood continued; so it will accordingly follow, that
parochial Glebes are not to be sold from the Church, so long as they be
employed for the maintenance of such Ministers as truly and faithfully preach
the Gospel to the people of those places, where such Lands are given. For the
very Churches to which they are annexed, were built by men of quality and
piety, for the good of the souls of the living: and those Glebes were
bestowed, for the encouragement of such Godly Pastors as ministered unto them
the bread of life, so far as the Founders were able to judge.

Indeed, where Popes have appropriated them to his Italian tools and
Creatures, or unto those Augaean Stables, the Monasteries erected in height of
Popery, who never took care to feed the Flocks of God in those places; there,
they that called themselves the Church, first led the way to Sacrilege, in
the point of Glebes, by perverting and aliening them from their true use, to
pamper the bellies of Epicures, and to maintain the State and Pomp of Atheists,
under the name and habit of the Prelatical Clergy. Let none therefore who are
of the Prelatical Party, and cry out so much against Sacrilege, blame the late
Parliament for selling some Glebes that had been so appropriated, and
impropriated; for they did but therein follow the same path which those carnal
Prelates had trodden out unto them. Which, if it be Sacrilege, it is nothing
but what the Papal Church had taught them to commit.

If any should dream, that the setting out of the holy portion of Land about
the Sanctuary Ezekiel. 45. and cap. 48.
, showed to Ezekiel in a Vision, (as a type and prophecy of the state of the
Churches of Christ under the Gospel,) is both a vvarrant, and command to set
out Lands to be holy unto God, under the New Testament: that would be no other
but a manifest perverting and overthrowing of the genuine sense of those
Scriptures.

For, although it be on all hands agreed, that from the 40 chapter of Ezekiel
to the end of that Book, the main scope is to decipher and describe the state
of the Church under Christ and his Gospel; yet it is not affirmed by any one
Author, that the Temple there intended, and Gods command there given touching
the setting out of Lands for the same, are to be understood properly according
to the Grammatical construction of the words, as if God meant to erect another
new material Temple at Jerusalem in Judea; and, to revive and establish the
same Levitical Offerings and Sacrifices formerly offered by Aaron and his Sons,
to be again offered by Zadock and others of Aarons Order. But, See Jun. in
Ezekiel. 40.
that all is spoken in a figure, and in a spiritual sense; yet, under legal
expressions, and by way of allusion to the material Temple of Solomon, as
being the most glorious instance that could then be found, to illustrate and
most lively to set forth the far more glorious estate, and spiritual endowments
of the Evangelical Church of Christ, the New Jerusalem, which should so far
exceed that in Judea, as the Heavenly Jerusalem Heb. 12.22.
does the earthly; and, as the spiritual Temples of the living God do excel
that of Solomon. Wherefore, to dravv an argument thence, for the consecrating
of Lands in a proper sense for the maintenance and state of Bishops, is not
only to proclaim him to be a weak man that does it, but to publish to all the
world that there is no ground in Scripture (as indeed there is not) to found
any Title of Bishops Lands upon.

The Original of Bishops Lands in England.
The Original then (and by consequent, the Title) of Bishops Lands, in this
Kingdom, can derive no further or higher than the abused magnificence and
bounty of Princes and others, nuzzelled in ignorance and superstion, both
before and since the Conquest, in the height of Popery; whereby Monasteries
and Cathedrals have been endowed with large portions of Land and other
Revenues, under the specious pretense of giving them to God, and Holy Church:
even to the impoverishing not of private Families alone, but of the Kingdom
also. Nor were they given indeed to maintain a Preaching Ministry, to instruct
the people in the true knowledge of Christ and his Gospel (for this, most of
those men that held those Lands ever persecuted;) but, for Superstitious ends
and uses; and employed (for the most part) to maintain the Riots, Pomp and
State, and other excesses and lusts of Abby-Lubbers, and other belly-gods and
drones, to the great dishonor of God, and scandal of the Gospel.

Therefore it is to be observed, that the greatest and richest indowments of
Cathedrals and Monasteries with Lands in England, were made when Satan's Throne
was most exalted, and his Kingdom in greatest peace, even in times of thickest
Popish darkness; when even Kings themselves, and Nobles scarce knew a letter,
nor the rest understood any thing of Christ or Religion; no, nor of the very
Laws of the Nation, but what the Prelatical Popish Clergy (whose policy and
interest it was to keep all in grossest ignorance) thought fit at some special
times, for their own gain and advantage, to communicate. The Clergy being the
sole Masters of the times, and holding all the chief Offices and Places of
Power and Judicature even in the State, as well as in the Church, did what
they list both with King and People. And with their familiar spirit of
Excommunication (the great Mormo and scarecrow of the Laity) they could and
did conjure in to their own and other Churches, what quantities of Lands, or of
ought else that was beneficial, they pleased.

But in nothing did they exercise so much tyranny, as over the consciences of
men, according to what was prophesied by their greatly pretended Patron and
Pillar, St. Peter 2 Pet. 2, 1, 3.
, who gave warning long before of their wiles and tricks, whereby, through
covetousness, with fained words, they would make merchandise of the people.
This they did, not only as they of old, that swallowed up the needy, first by
making them poor; and then buying them for silver, and the needy for shoes
Amo. 8.6.
; but as those Merchants of Babylon, whose Merchandise was not of beasts and
sheep, of Horses and Charets, of Slaves and bodies alone, but of Souls of men
Rev. 18.13.
.

And as they kept the people in ignorance, the more easily to prey upon them:
so they purposely winked at all their wickedness, their adulteries, rapes,
murders and other villainies which they committed against others of the Laity,
till they saw it most seasonable to carve large gobbets out of their Estates,
when they had them sure within their Nets. Then, they would (to this end)
fall foul upon them, terrifying them with unsufferable torments, first in
Purgatory, and afterward in Hell it self; unless they speedily gave such large
portions of their best Lands as these Harpies pleased, to expiate their sins,
and to prevent those miseries. Which if they did, they were presently absolved,
and proclaimed meritorious; especially, if they could be drawn to give so much,
as might redeem the souls of their deceased Ancestors too, out of Purgatory
tortures. By this, they merited Heaven; but, without this, they must expect
Hell for their portion. Strong Arguments to weak and silly Souls abused by
blind Guides.

All which Donations, they were made to believe were given unto God, and to
some Saint: whereupon they needed not to doubt of their own pardons, and the
release of their Ancestors out of Purgatory fire, which kept the Kitchins of
those soul-killing Prelates so warm.

All those Charters must (for the better grace of the business) begin with the
Name of God, as if all were given to him, and that he accepted thereof;
meaning, to themselves, to cramb their purses and panches, to the use of the
Devil. Therefore when he or his imps had any mischief to act, they usually made
In Dei nomine Amen [In the name of God Amen] the Preface to it. Whence that old
Proverb, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum. When they had a mind to fleece
any man, God himself must be made a party, to countenance their avarice; even
when God was not truly and indeed in all their thoughts Psalm. 10.4.
; and their eyes and their thoughts were not but for their covetousness Jer.
22.17.
.

Nor would the Donors have parted with such ample Territories, but as being
made to believe by those Merchants to whom they gave them, or by their Agents
and Factors, that thereby they satisfied God for their sins, and expiated the
guilt of some hideous and heinous wickedness which they had before committed:
or, as hiring the Priests and Monks that were to enjoy those Lands to redeem
the Souls of their Ancestors out of Purgatoty, or to curse their Enemies with
Bell, Book and Candle, as the manner then was, the more to please (or rather
fool) the ignorant Founders, whom by such means they cheated of such large
donations; as any indifferent man versed in the Histories of those times,
cannot but know.

And lest this should be thought a slander, take but these few instances for
proof thereof. First, in the very Body of the Popes Canon Law, (which is enough
to silence for ever all such as plead for such Popish Donations) it is declared
as a Maxim not to be denied, Ille qui donat, pro redemptione Animae suae, non
pro commodo Sacerdotis offerre probatur Decret. par. 2. cause. 12. q. 3. C.
Pontifices.
. He that gives ought to the Church, does it for the Redemption of his Soul,
not for the gain of the Priest. And this Shooing-Horn was held out, the more
easily to draw on other men's Revenues, upon their Feet, who gave out this for a
Law, that all such Gifts redeemed the Souls of the Donors and of all others
that they pleased to mention in their Donations: which was, indeed, to give to
the Devil, not unto God: because it makes man his own Savior, and denies the
satisfaction made by Christ; which is a Doctrine of Devils.

How the Bishops Lands at Wells, were first given
In this manner did Kenulph, King of the West Saxons, about the year of Christ
766. endow the Church of St. Andrew in Wells (then a Monastery) with a large
Patrimony in Lands, in and about Wells, Mendip, and other places adjacent; some
of which Dr. Burges has now bought. For in his Charter Godw. of Bps, page 358.
Monast. Anglic.
he declares that he did it, pro expiatione delictorum suorum, nec non (quod
verbo dolendum est) pro vexatione inimicorum suorum Cornubiae gentis: For the
expiation of his sins, and (which he was sorry for) for the vexation of the
Cornish People. That is, to hire the Monks of Wells, to curse the Cornish Men,
which he could not subdue by his Sword. And verily he had need to do somewhat
for expiating his sins, as the Doctrine of those times, (wherein the
sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction for true Penitents was concealed) ran. For
he was so much given to Adultery, that even after that great gift, he could not
leave that sin, but rather grew more bold to continue it: as appears by his
going in that Errand to one of his Concubines which he kept at Merton Sim
Danel. cited by Speed and Isaakson.
(or Marton) in Devon, where he was discovered, surrounded by Enemies, (in all
probability the Cornish, who knew his haunt) and there slain. So Divine was the
gift of the Manor of Wells. And so highly did God accept and own it as His
Propriety, that the Curse which the King intended to fall upon his Enemies,
fell upon his own head, by those very Enemies whom he had hired the Monks of
Wells to curse.

And that this was the Highway wherein the Popish Clergy of England, long
before (as well as since) the Conquest, constantly travailed: Take one
Testimony more of that famous Gildas the Elder, (surnamed Sapiens) who being a
Britain Presbyter, within the Sixth Century, or hundred of years after Christ,
thus charge the Popish Clergy of his time, who had sucked their Principles
from Augustine the Monk, sent from Rome on purpose to advance the State and
Pomp of the Clergy, under color of planting the Christian Faith in England:
For thus he Eccles. Ordin. Corrept. Bibl. Patr to 5. par. 3.
: Britania habet Sacerdotes, sed nonnullos insipientes; quamplurimos Ministros,
sed multos impudentes; Clericos, sed quosdam raptores, subdoles; Pastores ut
dicuntur, sed occisioni animarum lupos parates: quippe non commodo plebis
providentis, sed proprii plenitudinem ventris quaerentes. Ecclesiae domos
habentes, sed eas turpis lucri gratia adeuntes, etc. Britain (says he) has
Priests, but some of them very Dolts: very many Ministers, but many of them
impudent ones: Clergymen, but very Thieves and Cheaters: Pastors, as they are
termed, but in truth Wolves, standing ready to slay and flay the Souls of the
Sheep; for that they seek not the good of the People, but the crambing of their
own Bellies: they have Church-Houses, but never repair to them, unless for
their own filthy Lucre. Again, that he might let all men see that he involved
the Bishops of those times, yea even the Pope himself within this Charge, he
adds, Sedem Petri Apostoli immundis pedibus Vsurpantes, sed merito
cupiditatis in Judae Traditoris Pestilentiae Cathedram desidentes. With unclean
feet, they Usurp the Seat of the Apostle Peter; but through Covetousness, they
rather sit indeed in Judas his Chair of Pestilence. This, with much more, that
highly esteemed Author, writes of the Clergy of his time: which future ages did
not make better.

For, since the Conquest, the Prelates and Monks have been more high-flown, and
grasped more Lands (upon the same account with the former) into their
Possession, then their Predecessors; in so much as the Clergy, Monks and Nuns
of England, being not a fortieth (nay not a hundredth) part of the Kingdom, had
by these wiles and devices gotten (as some intelligent men have computed) a
third part of all the prime Lands in the Nation, into their clutches, at what
time King Henry the Eighth began to seize the lesser Monasteries: and all upon
the same ground of meriting Salvation for themselves and their Relations, dead,
or unborn.

Thus Henry the Third, in the ninth of his Reign (himself being then but
eighteen years of age) was hooked into that Great Charter, Magna Chartae.
(so much cried up by the Prelatical Clergy) to which he thus prefaceth: Henry,
by the Grace of God, King of England, etc. to all Archbishops Bishops, etc.
Know ye that We, unto the Honor of God, and for the Salvation of the Souls of
Our Progenitors and Successors, Kings of England, etc. have given and granted,
etc. to which all the Bishops and Abbots, as well as others, were of Counsel,
and Witnesses: by which it appears, that this Charter was granted to merit
Salvation: so as however the honor of God be mentioned, yet the dishonor of
God and Christ lay at the bottom of that Grant, in reference to the Foundation
laid in his heart by the Prelates.

The same is after declared in the Statute De Provisorib. Beneficior. in the 25
of Edw. 3. where it is expressly said: That the Church of England, was founded
in the State of Prelacy within the Realm of England, by his Grandfather, (which
was Edw. 1.) and his Progenitors, and by the Earls, Barons, and other Nobles
of the said Realm, and their Ancestors, to inform them and the People of the
Law of God This was ever pretended, but never performed, unless by some few,
very rarely; as the stories of those Times plainly testify. See Mat. Paris ad
ann. 1253. Fox his Martyrol. of the same times.
; and to make Hospitality, Alms, and other Works of Charity, in the places
where the Churches were founded for the SOULS of the Founders, their heirs,
and all Christians, etc. In which Act, the Bishops, as well as others, joined,
thereby proclaiming to the world, the superstitious Foundations of getting so
many Lands to the Church.

Yea, so zealously bent were the Prelates of those times to augment the
Churches Patrimony, that a Constitution Lindw. l. 5. tit. de poenit. and
remiss. ca. Cum anima.
was made in a Provincial Synod under Richard Withershed (alias Weather-head)
in the Reign of Hen. 3. not to suffer any Physician to administer any Physic
to any Patient whatsoever (be he in never so great Extremity and Danger) till
the Patient were first shrived by a Priest, under pain of Suspension ab
ingressu Ecclesiae. The pretense was, to physic his Soul first: but the
meaning was, to get a collop to some Chantery, or Monastery to pray for his
Soul in Purgatory: upon which the Priest absolved him; and not before. And this
was that which occasioned so many Chanteries, justly vacated and seized by Edw.
6. being given to him by Parliament, 1 Edw. 6.14.

Nor were the Kings and Parliaments (especially after King John) so hood-winked
and cowed, as not to take notice of, and provide against those excessive gifts
of Lands to the Church (as they called it) which so greatly robbed the
Commonwealth. For the same Hen. 3. who first granted the Great Charter, Cap. 36.
wherein he confirmed the Rights and Liberties of Holy Church (as that Idolized
Crew was then termed) did in the same Chapter, enact (a) That it should not be
lawful from thenceforth to any, to give his Lands to any Religious House, and
to take the same again, to hold of the same House Because Lands so held were
free from all Tithes, Taxes and Eschetes. Therefore many did so convey Lands,
to cozen the King, and other chief Lords.
. Nor shall it be lawful to any House of Religion to take the Lands of any, and
to lease the same to him of whom he received it. And that, if any from
thenceforth gave his Lands to any Religious Houses, and thereupon be convict,
the gift should be utterly void, and the Land accrue to the Lord of the Fee.
Here then was a Liberty of resuming Lands dedicated to the Church, and an
employing of them to such secular uses as the Lord of the Fee should appoint,
without incurring the guilt of Sacrilege.

Next after Henry the Third, succeeded his Son, Edward the First, who confirmed
Magna Charta, in the 25 of his Reign (and with it the Clause or Chapter last
mentioned:) but before he did that, even in the seventh of his Reign, he made a
strict Law against Mort-main (by advice of the Prelates, as well as others) to
make all gifts and Purchases of Lands (without special License from the King)
to be null and void, and the Lands forfeited to the chief Lord, if he took the
advantage within a year and half; or else to the King, in case the chief Lord
neglected the seizure within the said time therein limited and appointed for
his seizing thereof, for his own use.

Which Law however it were mitigated at the importunity of the Clergy, by
Edward the Third, who in such Cases enacted the taking of Fines in stead of
Forfeitures; Yet afterward, in 15 Rich. 2. that first Statute of 7 Edw. 1. was
not only set on foot again, but extended to all Guilds, Fraternities and
Corporations, yea, to all Donations of Lands for Churchyards, or for any other
Church Use. And that if, contrary thereunto, any should presume to give, or to
receive any Lands upon a Church account, or otherwise, without the Kings
special License, they should either procure his License, or sell away those
Lands by the then next Michaelmas.

By all which it is manifest, that neither the Kings, nor Parliaments, nor
Bishops themselves in Parliament, ever took all Lands given to Churches to be
Sacred, and Gods Propriety Jure Divino, or so much as lawful for the Church to
hold them, without License from the King or other chief Lord of the Fee, of
whom such Lands were before holden. Witness the many Statutes against Mort-Main
(or against the falling of Lands into a dead hand, that is, the Church;)
whereby neither King nor Kingdom could receive any thing out of them, for
Defense of the Realm; nor the chief Lords enjoy the benefit of chief Rents,
Services, Fines of Alienation, or Eschetes; which being an apparent wrong to
all, occasioned those Statutes.

Not that it is unlawful to endow particular Parochial Churches with Glebes or
Lands necessary for building of Churches upon, and for the accommodation and
provision of faithful Ministers of Christ, that faithfully dispense his
Ordinances to their Flocks, so it be with leave from Authority, and all
interessed in them; and that it be done moderately, for necessary sustentation
of them and their Families. The Levites that might have no large Territories,
answerable to the rest of their Tribes, had yet several Cities set out for
their habitation, and Suburbs for their Cattle. But withal, they might not
grasp all that the People would give, but were con^^^ed and limited to such a
quantity, a thousand Cubits outright from the wall, round about their several
Cities, and no more, as was before showed. And so far has it ever been
accounted from being lawful for Bishops to lay Field unto Field, Manor to
Manor, to impoverish many to enrich one, upon the account of the Church, and
Gods acceptance thereof, as sacred and holy, that even an Archbishop Spalat. de
Repuo. Ecclesiast l. 9. c. 7. n. 36.
(having deserted the Romish Church) has proclaimed it Sacrilege, and rapinam
injustissimam, and most unjust rapine. This is not (says he) to enable men to
labor in the Gospel, but to supply them with Fuel for Riot and Excess; and to
pervert what was given for the benefit of the Church and for necessary
provisions, to the shame, scandal and ruin of the Church; it is not to take
off, but to multiply the impediments of the saving of Souls.

Thus we see the Title of Bishops Lands, what it was; and upon what grounds,
and in what manner, procured, and enjoyed; which argues them to be (in the
construction of Scripture) far from being sacred and holy unto God, by such
corrupt Dedications; and particularly, of those very Lands purchased by Doctor
Burges.

It remains now to make out, That the aliening, diverting, No Sacrilege or
sin, to buy or sell Bishops Lands.
or purchasing such Lands for common use (notwithstanding their first
dedication) neither is, or can be Sacrilege, or otherwise sinful or unlawful.
This is in great part evident, by what has been before set forth; yet, for
more full satisfaction, somewhat more shall be added.

To begin with the Cities and Suburbs of the Levites, will be a good step to
the clearing hereof. First, their Houses might be sold, even by themselves
without sin. For that Law which was made for the redeeming of it at any time
(which others might not do, that sold Houses in a walled City, unless they
redeemed them within the compass of the first year after sale;) and for the
return of it, at the next Jubilee Lev. 25.32, 33.
in case it were not redeemed before, plainly implies a lawfulness for any man
to buy an House that pertained to a Levite, if it were to be sold; and that it
was no sin to detain it, till it were either redeemed, or returned at the
Jubilee, as all other Lands sold by others were to be. This might be done
without the least branding of the seller or buyer; Yet those Cities were by
Gods own appointment, set out for the dwelling of the Levites.

Indeed God forbad the Levites to sell their Lands; to wit, the Fields of the
Suburbs of their Cities; for it was their perpetual possession Ibid. ver. 34.
It was the same in effect with our Parochial Glebes: and so, might not be
aliened, or sold, so long as their service and Priesthood continued. Howbeit,
afterward, when their service was ended, and the Priestood removed, they
might as lawfully sell their Lands as their Houses. Else Joses surnamed
Barnabas, a Levite, had committed Sacrilege, for that he (after Christ changed
that Priesthood) having Land sold it, and laid down the money at the Apostles
feet; which is recorded by the Spirit of God as an eminent act of exemplary
piety and charity, and of the sou^^lness of his faith and conversion.

Now, if it were no sin in him then to sell, it could not be a sin in others to
buy such Lands, (and other Lands the Levites might then have none) albeit those
Lands, by God's own Edict, were to be continued in the Priests while their
Priesthood lasted. Can it then be so haynously sinful to sell, or purchase
Bishops Lands (which no Law of God ever settled upon them) after their Office
and Function is wholly taken away?

But it is happened to some of those rash Censurers, as it did to those Oxen,
of whom Columella (that famous Husbandry-Writer, in the days of Claudius
Caesar) notes De re Rust. lib. 2.
, that feeding upon some rank grounds, ran wild with the fatness of their Food.

And whatever some think now, that it is Sacrilege to aliene any thing once
pretendedly dedicated unto God; yet even the Bishops themselves in Parliament
have thought and determined otherwise, as well as Kings and the rest of the
Parliament, in the Acts formerly mentioned; wherein, especially in one of them
15 Ric. 2.5.
they make all Lands given without License, to be forfeited, and to be seized,
unless they procure a License to amortise them, or sell or alien them (to some
other Use) before Michaelmas then next coming. This shows plainly, that albeit
it was not held lawful for Bishops, Monks, or others, to receive or purchase
Lands in Mort-Main: yet it was lawful (if they had so done) to sell them (for
the Parliament directed the sale) and therefore lawful for others to purchase
them for common uses, when once it should be discovered that those Lands were
so given and dedicated as therein was forbbidden.

To which may be added, 1. That Bishops Lands especially, were at first given
to maintain their State and Magnificence, as Lords, with special reference to
State-Imployments; For that the Kings were wont to have the greatest part of
their Counsel, for the safeguard of the Realm, when they had need, of the said
Prelates and Clerks so advanced Stat. de Provis. Benefic. 25 Edw. 3.
. 2. That neither in those times, nor since, did many of them (yea scarce any)
take pains to teach the Law of God to the People, which was one end for which
Bishops were endowed with such large Revenues, as the Statute De Provisoribus
Benefic. before cited, expressly declares. So that this being neglected, they
lived in so great a sin, as (in the judgment of those few of them, who made
more conscience of their Duty in this kind) next to the sin of Lucifer, there
could not be a greater. Witness that Learned and Zealous Bishop Robert
Grosthead, Bishop of Lincoln, in the reign of Hen. 3. who having received a
Command from Pope Innocent the Fourth, Mat. Paris. ad Ann. 1353.
to admit one Frederick de Lavania, that Popes Nephew (that is, his Bastard) to
be a Canon and Prebend of Lincoln, that Bishop wrote back to the Pope a flat
refusal of that his command: telling him moreover, Post peccatum Luciferi, etc.
That next to the sin of Lucifer (which shall be in the latter time, to wit,
Antichrist, the Child of Perdition, whom the Lord shall destroy with the breath
of His Mouth) there is not, nor can be any kind of sin, so repugnant and
contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles and holy Scriptures; and to our
Savior Christ himself more hateful, detestable and abominable, then to destroy
and kill men's Souls, by defrauding them of the Ministry of the Pastoral Office.
Which sin, by most evident places of the Scripture, such men are known to
commit, who being put into the Pastoral Office, provide for themselves of the
milk and wool of Christ's sheep, that by his appointment were to be vivified and
saved, but do not administer to them their due: for, the not administering of
the Pastoral Ministration, is by the Testimony of Scripture the slaying and
perdition of the Sheep. 3. That not only all their Civil Employment in
State Affairs (for which they were exalted so high,) is wholly taken off by
special Act of Parliament, with the Royal Assent 17 Car. c. 28.
; but their very Function and Office, (as Archbishops and Bishops, as
themselves and theirs were pleased to distinguish them from, and to set them
above the rest of their Brethren in the Ministry) has been since by the same
Parliament plucked up by the roots. Therefore their Lands must needs Eschete
and revert to the Commonwealth, the proper Heirs of the first Founders and
Donors, being long (yea, many Ages) since dead, and their own particular
Heirs, and Memory perished from off the Earth.

The Parliament therefore had as good right to sell or alien them to any other
use, as the first Donors had to give them to those uses expressed in their
several Donations; or as that Parliament in 15 Ric. 2. (which had the consent
of the then Bishops in Parliament) had to appoint or permit all such as had
gotten any Lands, without License, to sell or alien them to private uses; or,
as any particular Lord in chief (by the same Act of Parliament, Ric. 2.) had to
seize and sell any such Lands so given, if fallen unto him by such Forfeiture
and Eschete. So that now, it is no more Sacrilege or sin, to buy and enjoy
Bishops Lands, after the final and total abolition of Bishops, then it was for
Joses (or Barnabas) the Levite, to sell his Lands; or for any man at this day
to buy any of those Suburbical Lands of those forty eight Cities, heretofore
set out for the Levites.

This might suffice, if it were not ever too true of some, non persuadebis,
etiamsi persuaseris, Thou shall never persuade me to be of thy Opinion,
although by Reason thou sufficiently convince me. Therefore Answers must now be
given to such plausible Objections, as seem to carry most strength of Reason in
them.

Divine Right, or, (which is Equivalent) of Apostolical Constitution: and
therefore could not by any law of man be taken away, as the Levites might, and
ought to be, when Christ himself had put a period to their Service and Office.

not as Lords over Gods heritage 1 Pet. 5.3.
; they could not be taken away; for such are of Divine Institution, not to be
abrogated by man. But 3. Our Bishops would none of this. Nothing sounded so
harsh in their Ears, as a Parity. This was not only Schism, but Heresy, in
their Construction. They claimed a Power and Dignity (even by Divine Right)
above other Presbyters or Ministers, as a distinct Order from, and superior to
that of Presbyters: And that in the two greatest points of Authority. For, they
appropriated Ordination and Jurisdiction solely to themselves, and to their
Officers in their Right; which is expressly contrary to the Testimony of
Scripture, both touching Ordination, 1 Timothy 4.14. Act. 13.1, 2, 3. and
Jurisdiction, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8. and verse. 10. And as upon
this Account, they looked upon themselves (even in the beginning of that
Parliament, which after threw them out; witness that Book of Episcopacy by
Divine Right, written by Jos. Exon; and published, Anno 1640.) and had their
Lands vested in them, as appears by that Statute of 25 Edw. 3. before
mentioned: So the Parliament taking them at their own words, looked upon them
too; and upon that very ground threw them out. Since which time, none of them
have vouchsafed to assert their Title to be Jure Divino. If therefore the
Levites, who had a clear plea for their Divine Institution, justly lost their
Lands, and other Revenues, with their Offices; there can be no scruple of
conscience to buy or enjoy Bishops Lands (whose Title was never so good as that
of the Levites) after the Bishops themselves be laid aside for ever, as
Usurpers over the Ministry, as well as over the rest of Gods Heritage. They are
no otherwise cast out of their Office, then Diotrephes who loved to have the
pre-eminence 3 John 9, 10.
, was by St. John himself, cast out of the Church, whom that proud Prelate
persecuted, by his prating and malicious Words.

That the Bishops were Ministers too (although aliquid amplius, somewhat more)
and preached as well as others; and were moreover, of great Use for the good
Government of the Church, and support of the Truth, which since their ejection
has extremely suffered. Therefore at least, as Ministers, they and their Means
should have been continued.

Answ. Admitting (but not granting) all this to be true: yet what they really
did, might have been and still may be done as Ministers, although not as such
Bishops. It is their Episcopal Dignity, not their Ministry that is taken from
them. And their Lands were fixed (as has been shown) to their Episcopacy, not
to their Ministry: to their State of Prelacy, not to the Presbytery. If any of
them (as very very few of them had) had a mind to preach the Gospel (as that
Archbishop, Dr. Usher did, so long as he was able, and was therefore honored
and encouraged both living and dying) they might have had liberty so to do,
notwithstanding the abolishing of their Episcopal Usurpation. But the
generality of them were so far from it, that they did their utmost against it,
while their Power continued.

Was it not by their procurement, that preaching was prohibited, especially in
the After-noons of the Lords Days, and the Book of Sports, compiled and
published with Authority, and countenanced by them? was not strict inquiry made
in their Visitations, whether every Minister had published that Book, in his
Church: and they severely punished, that refused it? was it not their great
study and contrivance to put down Lectures, not only on those days, but on
week-dayes also? was it not fully proved (not by Puritans, but by such as after
turned head against them) that one of those Bishops thanked God, that he had
put down all the Lectures (even Mr. Crookes also, which was preached gratis,
and at his great Cost) within his Diocese? were not even conformable Ministers
(how able soever) scorned and persecuted as Praters (not Preachers) if they
took so much pains in preaching as might justly shame the laziness and
idleness of Drones and Prelatical Pluralists, who held it to be an Evidence of
their great Parts and deep Learning, to preach but seldom? was it not piacular
for any Animalculum praedicabile, or Preaching-Coxcomb (as Dr. Lindsey styled
Bishop Usher himself, for his often preaching) that is, for any faithful
Minister to preach twice a day; being by another Bishop, compared in a scoff,
to a bruit Animal, Virgil's Cow, that (bis venit ad mulctram) came twice a day
to the Payl?

And as for the Bishops own preaching, (especially at last, when they designed
to gain all those Places and Offices of Trust, Power and Judicature of the
Commonwealth, which the Popish Bishops in former Ages aspired unto) it became
an Offense unpardonable, to mind them of their Duty in preaching, when many of
them had laid it aside, as too mean and low a thing for their Greatness, and as
a thing unnecessary and incompetent with their greater and more weighty
Affairs. Among other Instances, take this for one.

Anno 1635.
Doctor Burges, preaching a Latin Sermon to the London-Ministers, in Alphage
Church, near Sion College, pressed all possible sedulity in preaching: to
drive which nail to the head, among other Arguments, he urged what was
anciently required herein, even of Bishops themselves. For which purpose, he
first minded them of the Third part of the Public Homily against the Peril of
Idolatry: wherein it is said of the Primitive Bishops, That they were preaching
Bishops, more often seen in Pulpits, then in Princes Palaces; more often
occupied in His Legacy, who said, Go ye, into all the World, and preach the
Gospel, then in the Embassages and Affairs of Princes. After which, he recited
an old Canon, of the sixth General Council in Trullo, with Zonaras his Note
upon it: which Canon enjoined Bishops To preach often; at least, every Lords
day; or to be Canonically admonished, for their neglect: whereupon, if they
reformed not, they were to be excommunicated or deposed.

For this, some of his Prelatical and dronish Auditors informed the Archbishop
of Canterbury against him, who forthwith complained of the Doctor to the King
himself. Shortly after, he was by Letters Missive summoned into the High
Commission Court, (then, little better then the Spanish Inquisition) to answer
this heinous Crime. Upon his appearance, Articles were exhibited against him,
as being disaffected to the Book of Common Prayer, the Ceremonies, and
Government of the Church; as also for charging the Bishops with conniving at
the then too palpable growth of Arminianism and Popery, Act. 12.
and their too much conforming thereunto, etc. But chiefly, For that he seemed
to tax and accuse diverse Prelates and Reverend Bishops of this Kingdom, for
neglecting to preach often: and for alleging to that purpose, that the ancient
Bishops were frequent and diligent Preachers; quoting an old Canon, that every
Bishop should preach every Sunday; and if negligent herein, he should be
admonished; upon which, if he reformed not, he was to be excommunicated or
deposed: without considering their many and weighty Affairs.

This, made them spurn so furiously against him, that their Party everywhere
gave it out, that he should be both Deprived and Degraded. And doubtless it had
been so, had he not given them enough in his Answers to their cavilling
Articles, and in his Protestation annexed to the Copy of that his Sermon
delivered to Archbishop Land, who after perusal thereof, never troubled him
further, he having professed to stand to what he had said in that Sermon,
against all Opposers to the Death.

This was the third time wherein the Doctor was called into that Court. Once
An. 1622.
he was brought thither by a potent Adversary (who had made a strong Party
against him) for being disaffected to Episcopal Government, and for permitting
some, to sit, at receiving the Lords Supper. Another time An. 1629.
he was questioned there, for refusing upon a Thursday (he being then requested
to preach the Lecture at St. Mary Overies for the then Lecturer there) to read
Common Prayer in his Surplice and Hood, before the Sermon: On purpose to deter
Godly Ministers from preaching Lectures.

And as they thus grew incorrigibly negligent in the duty of the Ministry (here
and there one or two black Swans excepted) so did they as much over-lash in
another extrem; being too pragmatical and conversant in Civils. Insomuch as by
reason of some affronts put upon one or two of them as they were going to the
House of Peers assembled in Parliament, many of them privately drew up a
Protestation, which they after delivered, (contrary to the Privilege of
Parliament) to the King, not to the Parliament it self, against all Acts and
Proceedings in Parliament, in their absence, as null and void. This high Act of
theirs drew upon them the hatred and scorn not only of their supposed enemies
(who as yet had done them no harm,) but of their friends also; yea, so did it
incense all against them, it that occasioned the throwing them, first, out of
the Parliament; and then, out of their Episcopal Office and dignity for ever.

admitting they were justly ejected, yet so many direful Curses have been
denounced against all such as should aliene, sell, purchase, or employ those
Lands to other uses, that it may justly make any man afraid to meddle with them.

Curse (as in Deuteronomy. 27.) there is cause to fear Cursing. If an Elijah King.
1.10. and and 12.
, an Elisha 2 Kin. 2.23.
, a David Psalm. 109.
, a Peter Act. 8.20.
; (acted by Gods Spirit) shall denounce a Curse; woe to such as fall under it.
Such Curses shall surely take effect. God himself will own them, and requires
all his people to say Amen to them Deuteronomy. 27.15 etc.
. But, as the bird by wandering, and the swallow by flying, (escapes the Nets
and Snares set by the Fowler for them) so the causless Curse shall not come
Prove. 26.2.
. That Providence that preserves the sparow from falling to the ground Mar.
10.25.
, till God will have it so (let the Fowler do what he can to take him;) does
likewise so order the matter in a causless Curse, that it shall never reach him
against whom it is intended; yea, God blesses most, where wicked men, or
others, belch out the most bitter curses. Let them then be afraid of those
Curses, who find a warrant from God for such cursing. A cursed people is ever
a cursing generation Romans 3.14.
.

Who set them on work to Curse? Even the same who indeed set on Shimei to curse
David Sam. 17.23.
, not God, as David feared; but the Devil and Ahitophel, as David afterward
plainly found; that 109 Psalm, being chiefly bent against Ahitophel, of whose
cursing we never read, but that, by the mouth of Shimei: David fared never the
worse for their cursing. But themselves that cursed, fell under their own
curse. For however in David's time, Shimei felt not the Curse; yet it came home
to him with a witness by Solomon 1 Kin. 2.44.
. And as for Ahitophel, he drew a Curse from David, that reached his very neck
and life. For, as he loved cursing (by setting Shimei on work) so it came unto
him. As he clothed himself with cursing, like as with a garment which covers
him, so it came into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones, etc.
when he hanged himself. Those busy Cursers of the Prelacie have found this
effect upon themselves and Successors; their curses being come home to the
Bishops and the rest of the Prelates, many hundreds years after their mouths
were so full of cursing and bitterness. Let therefore such as please themselves
with frighting others with curses, beware they meet not with some share in
those very curses, which now they so groundlesly seek to scare their brethren
vvithal, it being no other but an engine of Antichrist forged in Hell.

Be it that Bishops are justly cashiered, their Lands forfeited, and rightly
taken from them by the Parliament: Yet it is generally held by all sound
Divines, that those Lands and Revenues (although at first superstitiously, or
superfluously given) being once dedicated unto God, may not be aliened, sold,
or diverted to any secular or common use; but ever continued for the
maintenance of the true worship of God,

This objection is plausibly received among honest Godly men; Yet is capable of
Answer, thus:

Semel dicatum Deo non est ad humanos usus ulterius transferendum. Which
wherein, and how far forth it holds good, has been above declared, and need
not to be repeated. Things once given to God, by his command, warrant, or
approbation, may not be aliened to other uses, while the use of Gods
appointment does continue: But, not all that men pretend, or say, they give
unto God. As in Persons, so in things, such only as the Lord chooses, or
accepts (and none else) are holy Number. 16.7.
, let men say and think what they will to the contrary. To pin therefore
Bishops Lands upon God, because once pretendedly given to him, is like those
gifts of the Israelites in the absence of Moses, pretended to be given unto
God, when they brake off the golden earrings which were on their ears, and
brought them unto Aaron, to make them Gods to go before them Exodus 32.3.
. They intended them as gifts to the true God, as they thought; yet were those
gifts far from acceptance with him; or reserved for holy uses, after the folly
and wickedness of the Givers was discovered, and punished.

2. It is apparent that those gifts to Bishops were to be no longer continued,
than the function of those to whom they were given, remained: Datur
Beneficium propter Officium; Office and Benefice are relatives; like twins,
they live and die together. The Bishops share in the goods and Lands of the
Church, has been for many hundred years severed, and known from the rest of
the Churches Patrimony that was to maintain others; and so cannot be claimed
by others, when the Bishops Order and Office is taken away.

3. When the vastness of the Revenue, or unlawful procuring of it, is a vvrong
to the Commonwealth, or to any particular Family; this is not a dedication to
God, which he will own; but an abusing of him, by fathering upon him the
acceptance of that, which is a vvrong to others; and a profaning of his name,
by teaching all to take that for a vvarrant, to deny to others their due. That
position therefore now urged, would be of dangerous consequence, if taken
universally and without due bounds.

4. Things voluntarily dedicated, by Gods own appointment, cannot be aliened.
If it has been abused, that must be rectified, and the things continued, for
some other holy use, although not at first intended by the Donors. Thus, the
Censers abused by Korah and his Companions, were no more used for incense; yet,
because they were hallowed, they were converted into broad Plates to cover the
Altar Number. 16.37
. But in things not appointed by God from the beginning, this Tenet holds
not. For, being dedicated upon false grounds, and for superstitious ends (most
derogatory to God and Christ) to maintain, feed, and increase the pomp and
pride of Harpies that lay in wait as he that sets snares and traps to catch
men Jer. 5.26.
, thereby to fool them out of their estates upon false pretenses, for ends of
their own; this dedication is no whit better, than the hire of a whore, or the
price of a dog, (that is, then money gotten by whoredom, or by the sale of a
dog,) brought into the House of the Lord, and dedicated to him; both which, he
abhors Deuteronomy. 23.17
. Such are all those gifts of Lands dedicated to God, first gotten by rapine
and spoil; or, to put Christ out of office of saving souls, and to do it by
such gifts. He looks no otherwise upon them, then as the offering of swines
blood, the cutting off of a dogs neck, or the blessing of an Idol Isay 66.3.
. When it can be proved that God accepted of such offerings in time of the Law,
then also it may be granted that he will own such mongrel Dedications in the
days of the Gospel.

5. Things dedicated to God, without his order and allowance, is a laying
aside Mar. 7.8.
, and a rejecting the Commandment of God ver. 9.
, and a making the Word of God of none effect ver. 13.
. It is the Pharisees Corban ver. 11.
, which they (for filthy lucres sake) taught children to plead, and thereby to
break the fifth Commandment) when required to relieve aged and needy Parents.
If a father demanded ought of his son, and his son answered, This is Corban, a
gift devoted to God, therefore you must excuse me; Vows must be paid, and
things once dedicated must not be recalled or aliened: This, by the Pharisees
Doctrine, was so sacred unto God, that (if the child should be willing to
pleasure his parent with some part of it) they would suffer him no more to do
ought for his father or mother ver. 12.
. Did Christ take this for a dedication that might not be aliened? nay, he
abhorred it, and them that taught it. Such are all dedications of men's
inventions and fancies, without a Rule from him: And therefore to be aliened
to other uses, that God may no longer be abused and provoked by them.

6. The same thing has been for many years, and still is done every day by the
greatest Censurers of the present Purchasers of Bishops Lands. Even they who
now cry loudest against buying Church Lands (because once dedicated to God) and
make it high Sacrilege in others, can yet be content and quiet to hold things
of the same kind (in respect of dedication) heretofore aliened from the Church.
They can digest Abby-Lands, Canonical Houses, yea (which is worst)
Appropriations of Tithes first made by that Arch-Thief the Pope, in favor of
Monasteries, and other his Creatures, who neither would nor could do service to
their souls that paid them; and after their dissolution, devolved to private
hands and common uses, as Bishops Lands now be.

How many Nobles and Gentlemen who now cry Sacrilege against present
purchasers, do possess many Lands and Manors of Bishops, alienated since Henry
the Eighth began to destroy Monasteries? Many of those Lands being by secret (I
say not Symoniacal) compact between Petitioners for Bishoprics, and their
friends at Court, exchanged, or otherwise aliened from the Church, upon
condition to get such a Bishopric for them. If any doubt hereof, it is his
ignorance; let him but inquire into that one Bishopric of Bath and Wells, and
he will find, that since the 30th of Hen. 8. the Mannots of Wokey, Blackford,
Comptondando, Congersbury, Yaton, Chew, Wike, Puckle-Church, Wester-Leighe,
Hampton, Claverton, Cranmore, Ever-Chritch, Kigsbury, Chard, Wellington,
Lidford, Compton Parva, and Chedder (to omit many Appropriations, Hundreds,
Burroughes, Farms, etc.) have been alienated from that Church, before ever the
late Parliament seized the rest; and are to this day held by Laymen, to their
own private uses, without scruple or blame. Yea, this is not the first time
that the Manor of Wells has been alienated from the Church; for in Hen. 8. it
was aliened by the Bishop himself to him that was afterward Earl of Hertford
and Duke of Somerset; and by him held without clamor, until by his attainder it
escheted to the Crown, and thence returned to the Bishop again.

Nor is there any scruple made of purchasing those many Canonical Houses in
Wells, which formerly belonged to the Church; yet, were a part of the Bishops
Land and Manors of Wells, and are held of the same Manor unto this day; yet
none of the Possessors hold it to be any fault in them, while some yet condemn
the same thing as Sacrilege in Doctor Burges, albeit he performs more
service in that Church than any Bishop that ever sat there.

Let not such think to wash all off, by saying these were things done before
their times, which they could not help; for, they can without scruple enjoy,
yea purchase them. An accessory in sin long before committed, must share with
the principal in punishment 2 Commandment.
. And this all acknowledge to be a truth; Non firmatur tractu temporis, quod de
jure ab initio non subsistit. No house will grow strong by long continuance,
whose foundation is on the sand. Time will never make that to be no sin, which
from the beginning was sinful. They therefore that thus censure him, Romans 2.1.
are themselves inexcusable: for wherein they judge him, they condemn
themselves, because they that judge, do the same things (g). If this satisfy
not, yet it behooves such Censurers to be quiet; and to let him that is without
sin, cast the next stone at the Doctor.

Romans 14.4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own Master
he stands or falls.

THE SECOND PART, Declaring The Differences between Dr. Burges and the
Corporation of Wells, With The Necessity thereof, on his part.
DOctor Burges is not (in common repute) so weak, as not to apprehend the great
disadvantage which a single man has in encountering a Corporation, wherein
there are ever some Spirits that pretend to see further into, and to be more
zealous of the good of that Community, than the rest, thereby to engage them in
Controversies; and that others of them, gaining thereby, will not fail to add
fuel to the fire, when once the coals are kindled between a whole Body, and
any one particular man that shall be so hardy as to oppose them, (although
never so justly) concerning any thing unjustly done by them. Insomuch as it is
taken for a maxim among such, (if they have a mind to transgress) that many
subtle heads combined, a common Purse (to make great Friends, and to impoverish
and weary a single Adversary;) and the difficulty of obtaining Justice against
them, is enough (in their conceit) to justify their greatest frauds and
oppressions; and to proclaim and doom him the only Offender, that dares to seek
Justice against them. This hardens them in their wickedness, and draws into
common obloquy and reproach, any one that (being necessitated to maintain his
own rights) shall presume to question their foulest encroachments.

This, the Doctor has found, in prosecuting the Differences here after
related. Wherein, he first appeared, in behalf of the Parliament, having
discovered sundry gross wrongs done to the State by some Agents for the
Corporation of Wells. Afterward, he was enforced to pursue the same contest,
in behalf of himself, being by the Contractors for sale of Bishops Lands, and
by the then Committee of Parliament for removing Obstructions in sale thereof,
drawn to purchase the Manor of Wells, and what else there then remained
unsold; which they promised he should quietly enjoy.

Hence sprang all the Differences between him and that Corporation, which (to
his great grief) have been sadly ventilated almost ten years, notwithstanding
his utmost endeavors to compose them in vvays of love and peace. The first
Rise and Sum of all which, is now exposed to public view, that they who have
been abused by false and scurrilous clamors against him, may now be better able
to judge which Party has indeed been in fault, in causing or occasioning the
beginning and continuance of those unhappy Contentions.

In publishing whereof, it will be requisite to advertise, that it is not
here intended to rip up all the particular affronts and injuries done to the
Doctor; but only to set forth: 1. What was the Original of all the Differences
between them; and how that has been since prosecuted. 2. That what is after
alleged in reference to any former Mayors of Wells, is not imputed to their
own personal aversness from peace, but as they have been the mouth of the rest
that have put them upon what they have spoken or acted herein. 3. That albeit
this Narrative often mentions the whole Corporation, yet it is not meant to
involve all alike in the same Charge; some of them being better inclined to
reason and peace. 4. That the Contractors were the first Plaintiffs in this
Cause; not the Doctor. He was only forced afterward to undertake the same
business, upon the same grounds and evidence which the Contractors had done
before: for that the Corporation refused to make good the engagement of their
Agents made not only to the said Contractors and Committee of Parliament; but,
to the Doctor himself, under their Hands and Seals, after he had been drawn to
be a Purchaser at Wells.

For the better understanding of the whole business, take notice, That an Agent
for the Corporation contracted for certain Royalties, in December. 1647. but
perfected not the Conveyance until the 22 of March then next following; and
that Dr Burges did not purchase until March 16. 1648. and that then he bought
many things (some of them being of great value) which the Corporation by
general words, and by surprise and fraud had before gotten into their
Conveyance, without contracting for them at all. How, and by what means they
did it, is first to be laid open; and then the course used to right the
Commonwealth, and the Doctor therein.

After the Surveyors had made a return of their Survey of the Manor,
Borough, and Hundred of Wells, one John Casebeard, a Burgess of Wells, took
upon him at first (without Order) to treat with the Contractors for sale of
those Lands, in the name of the Corporation of Wells, for the purchase of
certain Royalties of the late Bishop of Bath and Wells; upon which the said
Contractors granted this Warrant following.

Die Veneris 26 Nov. 1647. At the Committee of Contractors for sale of Bishops
Lands.
Warrant of a Particular.
AT the request of John Casbeard Gent. on the behalf of the Mayor and Communalty
of Wells, It is this day Ordered that the Register do forthwith make forth, and
fairly engross in Parchment a particular of the Royalties and Hundred of Wells
and Wells-Forum, with the Fairs of Priddy and Binegar in the County of
Somerset, parcel of the possessions of the late Bishopric of Bath and Wells,
whereupon we may proceed to make sale thereof. And that he do deliver the said
particular examined and signed under his hand, unto us, or any six or more of
us, according to the Ordinances and instructions of both Houses of Parliament
in that behalf made and provided.

This was the only Warrant granted for a particular. Two days after which, the
Corporation of Wells wrote a Letter to Casebeard: of which this is a true Copy.

Mr. Casebeard,
HAving by your means received information that the Bishops lands are now upon
sale; The Towns Letter to Mr. Casbeard.
and that you out of your good affection to the Corporation, have had some
conference with the Trustees concerning the Royalty of Wells to be purchased by
the Corporation: We forthwith upon such intimation, met together at the
Chequer, and did there unanimously consent, that the purchase should be
prosecuted with effect: and truly could not but much resent your love to, and
remembrance of the Corporation in this kind. And we thought fit to give you
advertisement what our desires were to purchase, and what the burdens were upon
it, that we might with more certainty proceed in the purchase.

We desire to procure and buy the Royalty of the Town and Hundred of Wells and
VVells-Forum, that is to say, the Baylywick of the Town, the Court of Record,
three Weeken-Court, and Leet or Law-day for the Town, the 3 Weeken-Court or
Law-day for the Forum, the four Fairs in the Town, and Binegar and
Priddy-Fairs, and the chief rents (if they be incident unto the Law-day) and
Felons goods and Clerk of the Market, etc. and Return of Writs, and such Issues
and Amercements as fall upon any Townsmen, whether in our Sessions, or in the
County, which are granted by the Letters Patent of Edw. 4.

For the profits of the Market and four Fairs within the Town, you know it is
received, and does belong to Mr. Gorman the Bailiff, who has a Patent thereof
for his life and young Crosses.

For the three Weeken-Court, and Court of Record, the profits thereof belong to
the Steward, except the Benefit of forfeitures, and other small inconsiderable
things. And for the profits of Binegar and Priddy-Fair, it is received by the
Bailiff of the Hundred; which after disbursments allowed, the remainder cannot
be great.

So as the mean present profit must arise out of the Law-days, and that chiefly
upon amercements, wherein extremity may not be used (we being the more desirous
to make this purchase, that we may be thereby be enabled to show mercy, and not
to use rigor.)

Thus much in particular we thought fit to inform you, that, as occasion should
be offered, you might the better give satisfaction to the Trustees, and
extenuate the price.

We have made bold to write to Mr. Walker and Mr. Long, our Burgesses, about
this business, whose assistance and furtherance herein, we presume will be
readily extended to us upon all occasions. We have also written to Mr. Morgan,
for his best assistance, who, we know, will be a great furtherer in any thing
that concerns the good of the Corporation; and therefore shall desire you by
all means to apply your self unto him for his aid and direction; and presently
upon receipt, to show him this Letter, that he may see our desires herein,
before you conclude.

We shall be glad to receive some quick notice from you what the lowest price
of the purchase desired may be, and when to be paid, that we may the better
know what money to raise, and how to be able to make payment accordingly.

You have herein our desires, and we shall presume on your care and
furtherance; which if it take effect, will be a grand-work for the Corporation,
and will not be forgotten by us,

Your very loving friends, Tho. Salmon Mayor. Barth. Cox. William Baron.
Thomas Jones. Rob. Rowly. Rich. Casebeard. Joseph Gallington. William West.
Richard Friar. Robert Hill. Rob. Hurman. John Niblet. Hug. Merefield. Henry
Baron. Jos. Plummer. Will. Atwel. Robert Hole. John Cox, etc.

Wells, November. 28. 1647. Postscript.
We dare not meddle with the profits of Mendip, it being too high a purchase
for our purse.

For our very loving friend Mr. John Casebeard, at his lodging.




This Letter, John Casebeard, being by the Contractors Ann. 1648. complained
against to the Committee of Parliament for removing of obstructions; produced
to that Committee. Besides which Letter, the Corporation sent up to London this
Letter of Atturny following.

Letter of Atturny. Dec. 4. 1647.
KNow all men by these presents, that We the Mayor, Masters, and Burgesses of
the City or Borough of Wells in the County of Somerset, have constituted,
ordained, and appointed, and by these presents do constitute, ordain, and
appoint, our trusty friends, Robert Morgan Gent. one of the Masters of the City
or Borough of Wells in the County of Somerset, John Cox one of the Capital
Burgesses of the same City or Borough, and John Casebeard Gent. one of the
Burgesses of the same City or Borough, to be our true and lawful Atturnies,
for us, and in our names, to treat, contract, and agree with the Honorable
Committee of Contractors for the sale of all Bishops lands within the Kingdom
of England and Dominion of Wales, for the purchasing of the Inheritance of the
Royalty of the Liberty of the City or Borough of Wells, as also of the
hundred of Wells and VVells-Forum, and the two Fairs of Priddy and Binegar
within the said Hundred. Hereby ratifying, confirming, and allowing, all and
whatsoever our said Atturnies, or any two of them, shall do for us in the
premises. In witness whereof we have set our Seal of Maioralty of the said
City, the fourth day of December in the 23 year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord Charles by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland Kings,
Defender of the Faith, etc. And in the year of our Lord 1647.

Thomas Salmon Mayor. Barthol. Cox. Tho. Jones. William Baron. Will. West.
Richard Casbeard. Will. Smith. Robert Hill. Robert Thomas. John Web. Hugh
Merefield. William Hiat. Robert Hurman, Robert Hole. William Atwel. Joseph
Gallington. Joseph Plummer. Josias Cook.



This Letter of Attorney, which enabled any two of the therein named Attorneys,
to Contract, being received; one of them adventured single upon the work, and
Contracted as follows.

Die Mercurii 15 December. 1647.
AGreed with the Contractors for the Purchase of the Royalties of Wells, and
Wells forum, in the County of Somerset, Welby Contract
mentioned in the Particular thereof, delivered in under the hand of the
Register, and also for the Bayliff-wick of the Town and Forum of Wells,
aforesaid, with all and singular, the Fairs, Markets, Clerkship of the Market,
and Profits thereof, and all other things to the said Bayliff-wick pertaining.
And also for the Office of Stewardship, for the Town of Wells aforesaid; and
all Profits and Advantages thereunto belonging, mentioned also in the said
Particular, at the rate of Twenty Years Purchase, for the present improved
yearly values of all the said premises, amounting in toto, to the sum of
nineteen pounds and ten shillings in Possession. And for an improvement of
value upon the said Bayliff-wick, after the determination of three Lives in
being, at the rate of four years Purchase, for the said increase of value,
being five pounds, thirteen shillings and four pence in Reversion. I say,
agreed accordingly on the behalf of the Corporation of Wells,

Per me, John Casbeard.

This Contract, so refers to the first Particular, that without sight of that,
no man can say punctually what was purchased: but rather what not was
purchased, till that particular be produced. And whereas the Contract mentions
the Bayliff-wick to be but 5 l. 13 s. 4 d. improvement, after three Lives in
being, it agrees not with the Survey, which says it is 40 l. per annum.

This Contract lay (as the Contractors thought) sleeping, from the 15 of
December, till the 15 of March following. In which time, the Agents of Wells
slept not; for they being told by somebody, that if they could but get the
first Particular out of the Registers hands, and draw up and return another in
the room, they might get much more into their Purchase and Conveyance, then
they had indeed Contracted for. Which some, employed in this Purchase,
accordingly did. And in room of the first Particular, the Particular here
following (without any new Contract or warrant from the Contractors) was thrust
in, and brought to the Contractors ( March 15.) to sign. The Contractors,
being by Ordinance of Parliament to look no further then to the Registers hand
affixed to the Particular, for their Warrant to sign the Contract made
thereupon, they then used not to have the whole read again, but only the sums
for the Purchase to be paid; how much in Possession, and how much in Reversion,
and how many years Purchase for both. Which done, they signed it, and gave
their Warrant to the Trustees, for passing a Conveyance accordingly.

The last Particular, which the Contractors signed in March 1647. ran thus:
Parcel of the Possessions of the late Bishopric of Bath and Wells.
Com. Summers. The last partilar for the Corporation.
THe Royalty of the City or Borough of Wells, and of the foreign Fee,
Bayliff-wick, or Hundred of Wells, commonly called Wells, and Wells Forum, with
the Rights, Members and Appurtenances thereof, in the County of Somerset,
together with the said Hundred. And also the Courts, and Courts of Record, or
Court and Courts of Pleas, Hundred Courts, Views of Frank-Pledge, and
whatsoever to view of Frank-Pledge appertains, Court Leets, Courts Baron, and
other Courts, to be holden from three weeks to three weeks, or otherwise,
holden, or to be holden from time to time, within the City or Borough of
Wells, and the Liberties thereof, or within the Hundred of Wells and Wells
Forum, aforesaid. [Together, with the Guild Hall, and the ground and soil
thereof, wherein the said Courts are usually holden. And the prison or prison
House thereunto adjoining. And all Fines, Issues and amercements, requisites
and profits, as well at the said Courts, and every of them, as at the Sessions
of the Peace, holden from time to time at the City or Borough of Wells
aforesaid. And also, all Fines for License of Alienation, and post-Fines, and
all other Fines, Forfeitures, Issues and Amercements at the Assizes or
elsewhere, before whatsoever Judge or Justices, either in the High Court of
Chancery, the Court of Kings Bench, or Common Pleas, or of Exchequer, due and
payable, or happening from time to time to be due and payable by any person or
persons within the County of Somerset aforesaid.] And also the Bayliwick and
Office of Bailiff of Wells, and of the Hundred of Wells and Wells-Forum
aforesaid, And of the said Liberty of the said Bishop of Bath and Wells, within
the said County of Somerset. And also full Power and Authority to keep the
aforesaid Courts, and every of them, and the accustomed Writs and Process of
the aforesaid Courts and Courts of Record, to be from time to time issued and
awarded, To bear Test in the name of the Mayor of the said City or Borough for
the time being successively. And to be kept by the Mayor, or Recorder, or by
the Steward of the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses of the said City or
Borough, and their successors for the time being, and such other Officers of
the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses and their successors for ever, to be from
time to time attendant upon the said Courts, and to serve and execute the Writs
and Processes of the said Courts, and other matters and things in the said
Courts (as were usually attendant in and upon the said Courts in the time of
the late Bishops there.) And also power to distrain for all sums of money due
and payable for or by reason of the said premises. And all other remedies and
means for the having, receiving, levying or enjoying the premises or any of
them. And all fairs with their appurtenances. [And all Markets holden and kept,
and to be from time to time holden and kept within the said City or Borough of
Wells, or within the said Hundred of Wells and Wells-Forum, or any other part
thereof.] And all Tolls, Customs, Piccage, Stalage and other benefits, profits,
commodities and advantages, happening or coming, arising or growing, for or by
reason of the said Fairs and Markets or any of them. And also all Eschetes,
Waives, Estrays, Deodands, Goods and Chattels of Felons, Felons of themselves,
and of Fugitives, outlawed persons, and of persons put in exigent, happening
or coming [within the City or Borough of Wells] or within Wells-Forum
aforesaid, or the Liberty or Liberties of the said late Bishop of Bath and
Wells within the said City or Borough of Wells, or Wells-Forum aforesaid. And
also the Office of Clerk of the Market, and whatsoever to the said Office
appertains, the correction of the Assize of Bread, Ale, and Beer, and other
Victuals, and the Trial of all Weights and Measures. Together with all Fines
and Forfeitures happening by reason of the same within the Liberty and
Liberties aforesaid. And also all Streets and ways, and the ground and soil of
the Market place in the said City or Borough. AND also all other Royalties,
services, franchises, Liberties, Privileges, immunities, profits, commodities,
advantages and emoluments whatsoever, of what nature or quality soever, within
the said City or Borough of Wells, and within the said Hundred of Wells and
Wells-Forum, or any part of parcel thereof, unto the late Bishop of Bath and
Wells, or any other Bishop there in right of the late Bishopric of Bath and
Wells, at any time within ten years before the beginning of the Parliament of
England now assembled at Westminster, belonging or appertaining.] All which
premises are of the present yearly value of nineteen pounds ten shillings. The
improvement of the Bayliwick after three lives in being per annum, five pounds
thirteen shillings four pence.

This particular is grounded upon a Survey Not so.
taken by Benjamin Avry Gent. and others, the sixth day of April 1647. and is
made forth, examined, and Signed by order of the Contractors of the sixth day
of December 1647. This Order was never produced, but denied by the Contractors.


H. Elsyng Register.
Contracted for 15 Dec. 1647.


The Premises above mentioned are contracted for and agreed to be sold unto
John Casbeard Gent. Not so.
on the behalf of the Corporation of Wells in the County of Somerset.

This particular is rated in fee-simple for the said Corporation of Wells, at
twenty years purchase for the present yearly value of the aforesaid Royalties
of Wells and Wells-Forum, being nineteen pounds and ten shillings in
possession; and of four years purchase for the improved value of the said
Baylywick after the determination of three lives in being; being five pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence in reversion. According to which rates and
values, the whole purchase-mony payable into the Treasury, upon Sealing the
Assurance, amounts to the total sum of four hundred and twelve pounds thirteen
shillings and four pence.

Whereof one full moiety to be paid in to the Treasury upon Sealing the
Assurance, the other moiety is to be paid at the end of six months thence next
ensuing. For payment of which second moyty, security is to be given to the
Treasurers by a Lease to be made of the Premises hereby contracted for, for
fourscore and ninteen years. Nevertheless, if the whole purchase-mony shall be
paid in to the Treasury upon Sealing the Assurance, interest is to be allowed
for the second moyty for six months, according to the Ordinance of Parliament
in that behalf.

Henry Elsing Register.
In Attestation of the Contract and Agreement above mentioned, We the
Contractors whose names are subscribed, have hereunto put our hands, this
fifteenth day of March, Anno Domini 1647. John Blackwel. Tho. Airs. Ja.
Russel. Richard Turner. Edw. Cresset. Ti. Middleton.


THese are to desire and Authorize the Trustees named and appointed in and by
several Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament for the sale of the Lands and
Possessions of the late Archbishops and Bishops, or any five or more of them,
to draw up and Seal a conveyance of the Premises hereby contracted for, unto
the Mayor, Master and Burgesses of the City or Borough of Wells in the said
County of Somerset, and their successors for ever, according to the Contract
and Agreement above mentioned. To have and to hold unto the said Mayor, Masters
and Burgesses of the said City, or Borough of Wells, and their Successors for
ever. As amply as the said Trustees by the several Ordinances of Parliament for
the sale of the Estates of the late Archbishops and Bishops ought to hold and
enjoy, and are enabled to convey the same. And also discharged of all demands,
payments and encumbrances, as amply as is ordained by any the said several
Ordinances of Parliament made and provided in that behalf. Dated this 15 of
March, Anno Domini 1647.

John Blackwel. Tho. Airs. Ja. Russel. Richard Turner. Edwa. Cresset. Ti.
Middleton.


According to which Warrants, the Trustees sealed a Conveyance of all the
Premises to the Mayor, Masters and Burgesses of Wells aforesaid, word for word
as the same is above expressed in the said forged Particular. Which Conveyance
bears date, Mar. 22. 1647. and being enrolled in Chancery, needs not here to be
recited. By virtue whereof the Corporation have seized and enjoyed all and
every the premises, and sundry particulars belonging to the Manor of Wells,
and of Westbury too, because within the Hundred of Wells. How Dr. Burges fell
into these briars, and espoused the States quarrel with that Corporation.


About July 1648. Doctor Burges (having no hope to get his money (lent to the
Parliament) in kind) resolved to take it out in Bishops Lands. This being made
known, some Parliament Men and others used all importunity to draw him on
thereunto. Whereupon several Purchases were propounded to him; as Witney in
Oxfordshire; Muncton-Farly in Wilts. Thornton-le more in Lincolnshire; Another
place in Warwickshire, Paddington in Middlesex, Banwel in Somersetshire, etc.
In every of which, some persons of note got before him.

At length, the same Parties that had propounded those other particulars, put
him upon buying the Manor of Wells; to which he was very hardly drawn,
partly because many pieces thereof had been before sold by parcels to others,
which might occasion differences to an after Purchaser, and partly by reason of
other great disadvantages that accrue to him that should purchase a Bishops
Seat; but chiefly, because he saw it would cost much more than all his moneys
lent to the Parliament. Howbeit, through the incessant persuasions of friends,
he did yield to make that purchase. The manner of his Proceeding in it, is here
first briefly set down upon Oath made by a then Parliament man, that was very
active for the State in discovering the frauds of the Agents of the Corporation
of Wells, as he was a Member of that Committee of Parliament for removing
Obstructions, who ordered him so to do; And then follows a more full
Narration of the whole.

The Oath is this.
Affidavit of Col. Harvy.
COlonel Edmond Harvie of Fulham in the County of Middlesex, makes Oath, That
he, in the year 1648. understanding that Dr Cornelius Burges, having lent
several sums of money to the then Parliament upon the Public Faith, had some
desires to take it out in the purchase of Bishops Lands; and, requesting this
Deponent to make some purchase thereof for him, this Deponent acquainted the
Contractors for sale of the said Lands, and some other persons of quality
therewith. And it being conceived that it would be for the service of the
Parliament to engage Ministers, and especially the said Doctor, in the purchase
of those Lands, it was thought fit to put him upon purchasing the Manor of
Wells, parcel of the Possessions of the late Bishop of Bath and Wells, and of
all else, there, then uncontracted for; the Contractors declaring that they,
having made diverse sales of sundry parcels thereof before, resolved to make but
one contract more for all then unsold.

That the Doctor being told hereof, said, he would first go to Wells and see
it; and afterward, wrote to this Deponent to purchase it for him. This
Deponent thereupon desired a Particular thereof to contract upon. But before
any Contract signed, the said Doctor told this Deponent, and the said
Contractors, that having informed himself of the Conveyance to the Corporation
of Wells, made almost a year before, he found that diverse things now put into
his Particular, were passed before to the said Corporation; and therefore he
refused to contract, till those things were cleared; saying, he would not
purchase to himself suites in Law, instead of Bishops Lands; or words to that
effect.

That the said Contractors taking this into consideration, and finding it to be
so, they first (as this Deponent has credibly heard) wrote to the said
Corporation to rectify the same in a fair and friendly way; which they not
doing, the said Contractors Certified the same to the Committee of Parliament
for removing Obstructions, as a great obstruction in sale of the said Manor,
praying their aid for redress. Which Committee thereupon issued Summons to the
said Corporation to answer the same.

That upon their appearance, and hearing of both Parties, that Committee
ordered the said Contractors to certify more particularly what they did indeed
sell to the said Corporation; and wherein they were surprised. Which the
Contractors accordingly did, about the beginning of March 1648. as this
Deponent believes. After which, the said Committee of Parliament appointed
some of their own number, to draw up the full state of this business, and to
report it to that Committee, that it might afterward be Reported to the then
Parliament, in case the said Corporation should not give satisfaction therein.
Of all which the said Dr. Burges was to have Copies. And the said Committee and
Contractors being together, assured him that they would endeavor to see all
rectified, and reconveyed, if he would go on in the purchase of the said Manor
and premises.

That the said Dr. (as appeared to the said Commissioners) being satisfied
herewith, desired this Deponent to Contract for the same; which he accordingly
did: and the Dr. Signed the said Contract, paid in his purchase-mony, and had a
Conveyance thereof Sealed before the 25 of March 1649. as this Deponent
believes, to which he refers for more certainty.

This Deponent further deposes, that the Sub-Committee of the said Committee
of Parliament, having drawn up and certified the State of this business to that
Committee, the said Corporation in April following (as this Deponent has heard
and believes) did empower some of their Members to treat with the said
Committee of Parliament, and to end the same. But, this coming to nothing, the
said Committee committed to safe custody John Casbeard, as one of the Agents of
the said Town of Wells: and fining yet no satisfaction, they Ordered the said
Case to be reported to the then Parliament as it was, if satisfaction should
not be given in one month. And this was done (as he remembers) in or about May
1650. he being then a Member of the said Committee, but refers himself to
the said Order and Report.

That after making of this Order, a Reference was desired, and there were
chosen by the said Town, or their Agents (as this Deponent believes) Lislibone
Long Esquire; (now Knight and Recorder of London) and Colonel Dove, for the said
Town: and the said Dr. Burges chose this Deponent, and Major Salway, for him,
to arbitrate and agree the same. VVhereupon, out of a desire of friendly
composing all differences herein, this Deponent met the said Persons; and often
met with the said Lislibone Long, and, in the presence of some of the said
parties or their Agents, did, after many Debates, two several times agree the
same, with the said Lislebone Long, who desired that he might acquaint the said
Corporation with the said Agreements before Signing; to which this Deponent
consented. But afterward the said Lislibone Long told this Deponent, that the
said Corporation did not like the Agreements. After which, this Deponent heard
nothing more hereabout from that Corporation.

Edmond Harvy.

This contains a Brief of the Business from the year 1648. to the end of the
year 1652. and therefore is here inserted, that the Readers may be satisfied
both with the matter, and manner of proceeding, so far forth as that Affidavit
extends.

Now that it may appear he has deposed nothing but truth, hereunto is added a
more full and distinct relation of the several steps of proceedings of the said
Contractors and Committee of Parliament, concerning this business: as well as
what after happened between the Corporation and the Doctor, when he coped with
them upon the account of a Purchaser. Where first, take notice that the Doctor,
having been at Wells to take view of what was there to be sold, had some
conference with the then Mayor, who refused to part with any thing comprised in
their Conveyance. The Doctor therefore at his return to London, told the
Contractors that he had no hope to recover any thing back which by words the
Town had gotten into their Conveyance. The Contractors thereupon wrote this
ensuing Letter.

Gentlemen,
Contractors to the Corporation.
WE find upon the Sale of the Manor of Wells (whereof you never bought any
thing) that there is a very great Obstruction in perfecting the conveyance of
the said Manor, by means of sundry words which over and above the Contract
first made with us, you have by Counsel gotten into your Conveyance, to the
surprisal of this Committee, and the prejudice of the State. We are very
unwilling to impute any thing to your Corporation but what is just and worthy
of it, but rather apprehend it at present to be a piece of the skill of your
Counsel, to give you words enough; and, without due limitations. We therefore
desire you to send up some of your Members forthwith unto us, with full power
to clear all things that are now doubtful, and to quit whatever appertains to
the Manor of Wells or to any other Manor of the late Bishop of Bath and
Wells. The interest of the State (to which we are sworn) requires us to press
you that this may be done by you before the thirteenth day of December. next.
Otherwise we shall be enforced to take such speedy course herein, as to justice
and equity shall appertain, in the pursuance of the Trust of

Gurny-House, 10 Nov. 1648. Your very loving friends, Ti. Middleton. John
Blackwel. Tho. Airs. Will. Roberts. Rob. Fenwick. Edw. Cresset.

To our very loving friends, the Mayor, Masters, and Burgesses of Wells in the
County of Somerset, These.




This Letter being delivered, and taking none effect, the Contractors Certified
to the Committee of Parliament for removing of Obstructions, as follows: To
the Honorable, the Committee of Lords and Commons for removing of Obstructions
in the sale of Bishops Lands: The humble Certificate of the Contractors for
Sale of the said Lands.
WHereas at the suit of the Mayor, The first Certificate of the Contractors
against the Corporation.
Masters and Burgesses of Wells in the County of Somerset, we did, 26 November.
1647. grant an Order for the making forth a Particular of the Liberties and
Baylywick of that Borough, VVells-Forum and Wells Hundred (who have ever been
distinct from the Manor of Wells) late parcel of the possessions of the late
Bishop of Bath and Wells, and upon Treaty did Contract with their Agent for
the premises only, but not for any part of the Manor of Wells:

Now so it is, that when we came to Sign that Contract, It has been said in
excuse of this change of the Particular, that nothing is more ordinary, then to
alter the Particular, to satisfy a Purchaser: but this was never to be done
but by special Order of the Contractors themselves; who, in this Case made no
Order at all. Nor did they ever give warrant to alter, after a Contract made;
or to put in any words that might carry more then was really to be paid for.
and a VVarrant to the Trustees for the drawing up a Conveyance, another
Particular was presented to us, with the said Contract and VVarrant entered
thereon. In which Particular diverse general words being by the Counsel
inserted, without due limitations (the extent whereof, partly through
multiplicity of business lying upon our hands, and partly also through the
pressing importunity of their Counsel hastening us for a dispatch, we did not
so well apprehend) we did set our hands to the said Contract and VVarrant for
drawing up a Conveyance according to that Particular: but, with no purpose to
pass any thing pertaining to the Manor. VVhereupon their Counsel took
advantage so to have the Conveyance drawn up, as now appears to be greatly
prejudicial to the State: Having in it sundry general words, which (in time)
possibly may be construed to take in so much of the Royalties and profits of
the Manor of Wells (of which we never sold them, nor they desired to buy any
thing) as may amount to a considerable value above what they paid for their
purchase, beside much wrong to the Manor, and to the purchaser thereof. Yea,
when we came to sell the Manor, it appeared to us that we have been so far
surprised in the said Particular and Conveyance passed to the said City, that
we cannot perfect any Particular of that Manor to the satisfaction of a
Purchaser, until the Conveyance passed to the said City be first reviewed and
rectified. By means whereof, the State suffers damage to a great value.

So soon as this was discovered, we desired the Trustees in September last, to
direct their Order tot the Surveyors of that Manor, forthwith to enquire and
certify what was peculiar to the Manor, distinct from the Borough and other
the premises. Upon which the Surveyors did their endeavors, and dealt with that
Corporation to state the same, but received a dilatory and unsatisfactory
answer. Whereupon we did, on the tenth of November last, write a more pressing
Letter to the said Corporation, to let them know they had abused not us alone,
but the State also; requiring them to send up some of their Members fully
empowered, to clear all doubts, and to disclaim whatever appertains to the
said Manor, before the 13 of this month: which was delivered to the Mayor upon
the 18 of November last. To which the Mayor has sent no other answer, but a
desire to be excused till the next Term, pretending they had not their Counsel
by them; not considering how much the State is prejudiced thereby, and that it
is matter of fact, not of Law, that is now in question: and that they might
have had their own, or any Counsel present, in case they had needed Counsel. We
therefore in discharge of our Trust, held it our duty timely to represent this
to your Honors: Humbly submitting it to your grave consideration.

William Roberts. Edw. Cresset. Ti. Middleton. Robert Fenwick. John Blackwel,
Thomas Airs, James Russel.
Gurny-House, 22 December. 1648.



Upon consideration had of this Certificate, the said Committee of Parliament
issued an Order of Summons, December. 28. 1648. Requiring the said Mayor,
Masters, and Burgesses to attend the Committee, by themselves or by some others
sufficiently instructed herein, within ten days after notice thereof, etc. to
answer the premises: and hereof they were not to fail.

Order of Feb. 16 1648.
Feb. 16. 1648. they appeared by some of their members and Counsel; and being
heard, a Sub-Committee was appointed to examine the whole business at
Gurny-House, and to State and report the same upon Wednesday following. Order
of Feb. 27 1648.
But this being not done, The Committee resumed the matter upon the 27 of the
same Month, and then it was Ordered that the Contractors should forthwith more
particularly certify what Royalties, Hereditaments, Liberties and
appurtenances of the possessions of the late Bishop of Bath and Wells they
intended to sell unto the Town of Wells, and for what sum. And likewise whether
they did intend by any general words after the first Contract Signed by the
Agent for Wells, to sell unto the said Town any thing more then was
comprehended in their Order of Contract and first Particular and Contract
Signed by the said Agent? And whether any thing so sold unto the said Town, be
any part or parcel of the Manor of Wells, or of other the Possessions,
Hereditaments, or Royalties belonging to the said Manor? And, if any; what
Possessions, Hereditaments or Royalties belonging to the said Manor, they so
sold.

This Order being transmitted to the Contractors, they certified as follows:
To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons for removing of Obstructions in
the Sale of Bishops Lands. The Contractors 2. Certif. Mar. 7. 1648.
The Humble Certificate of the Contractors for the sale of the said Lands.
IN pursuance of your Honors Order of the 27 of February last, touching
Wells, we do humbly certify as follows:

In the first Particular, the things brought in amount to 25 l. 03 s. 04 d. per
annum.

The things in the Survey valued and contained in that Particular, do make up
that sum. Which things are these, viz.

The Royalty of VVells-Forum, within which are two Fairs, to wit, of Priddy and
Binnegar, valued in the Survey, at the yearly sum of 01 l. 10 s. 00 d.

The Collection of certain Post-fines and Amercements issuing out of the
Exchequer, called the Green-wax, within the Liberty of the said Bishop, valued
at the yearly sum of 10 l. 00 l. 00 l.

The Leets or Law-days within the City of Wells, and every week a Court of
Record, and every three weeks a three weeken-Court, valued in the Survey at the
yearly sum of 08 l. 00 l. 00 l.

The four Fairs in Wells (the Profits whereof go to the Bailiff for three
lives yet in being) valued at the sum of 05 l. 13 s. 04 d.

The whole sum for this Purchase at 20 years for the 19 l. 10 s. in possession,
and for 5 l. 13 s. 4 d. after 3 lives, at four years purchase, amounts in all
to 412 l. 13 s. 04 d.

But we certify, that the Hundred was included in the nineteen pounds ten
shillings per annum in possession. And that the Markets were thrust into the
first Particular, as valued under the five pounds ten shillings four pence for
the Fairs in Wells; which we now find to be a mistake, and surprise. The said
Markets were severed from the Fairs, in the Survey, and not valued, though
valuable.

We also certify, that being informed by Casbeard that the Baylywick
contained nothing more then is comprehended in the Particulars here above
specified (unless what is made out of the Bailiffs labor) upon that ground
only, we did admit the Baylywick to be put into the said Contract; wherein we
also find our selves mistaken, and surprised, it being of greater value and
extent.

We did likewise intend to sell to the said Town, all VVaives and Strays,
Felons goods, etc. (as in the Survey) within the said Town, and Forum,
belonging to the said Town or Borough, and Forum only, And the VVays and
Streets mentioned in the said Particular, were no otherwise intended by us to
be sold unto them, but in reference to the Fairs, and Market place only.

As for the Guild Hall and Prison, we neither did, nor could intend to sell
these unto them, they being not at all in the Particular, by which we
contracted with the Town. And how they came in afterward, we do not know, they
being not then returned in the Survey.

Other then the Particulars hereabove specified, we never intended by any words
general or special, to sell them any thing (although within the said Town of
Wells, or Hundred of Wells and VVells-Forum.) Nor do we know that those
things are any part of the Manor of Wells; of which, or of any other Manor,
we never meant to sell them any thing. Only we intended that, as on the one
side the Corporation should be free from the Lord of the Manor; so, on the
other side, that they should have nothing to do with the said Lord, or with any
of his Tenants, or with his or their Possessions, by way of Jurisdiction over
him or them, by virtue of their said Purchase.

Gurny-House, 7 Mar. 1648. Will. Roberts. Ti. Middleton. Rob. Fenwick. Ja.
Russel. John Blackwel. Rich. Turner. Thomas Airs.



This being certified, It was Ordered that a Sub-Committee should draw up a
Report of the whole business, to be by that Committee Reported to the
Parliament, in case the Town of Wells, (some of them confessing the truth of
that Certificate) should not forthwith relinquish and reconvey the residue
unduly thrust into their Conveyance. And then the said Contractors, and
Committee of Parliament pressed Dr Burges to go on with the purchase of the
Manor of Wells; which he accordingly did. For on the 16 of March then
instant, he contracted for the Manor of Wells, and for whatever else was then
unsold that belonged to the late Bishop of Bath and Wells in or about Wells,
in right of his said Bishopric.

But before the Contract was signed, Colonel Web came to the Contractors with a
Message from the Trustees, to des re them to beware what they did in selling
the Manor of Wells, and what else was the Bishops there; for that those
Trustees were informed that there were diverse things belonging to the said
Bishop in and about Wells, that were not surveyed. Doctor Burges then desired
him to instance what those things were; but none could be given. Whereupon the
Doctor, having before met with some, etc. that, so soon as they heard he was
about that purchase, sought to deter him from it, he took it to be some
Artifice of theirs, to hinder his present proceeding. Therefore he first
appealed to the Contractors and Register, whether they could upon a bare
suggestion, refuse to sign a Contract made according to Ordinance of
Parliament? They answered, No.

Doctor Burges then offered, that, whereas diverse purchases of several things
in and about Wells, had been made before his, if the Contractors would engage
to allow him a Reprise for whatever should appear to be sold before, or not to
be part of the premises for which he now Contracted, he would enter an
engagement to them to pay for whatever more than was then Surveyed, should be
after (within a fixed time then to be agreed upon) discovered, according to the
rates at the Contract agreed upon. Provided he might have his Conveyance in
such comprehensive words, as might take in all, without a new Deed of purchase.
The Contractors consented, and set six Months for the time of discovery. Dr
Burges then signed the Contract, with this clause in it. On the 19 of that
Month, the Contractors signed the Contract, which was to be absolute,
according to the Particular, therefore they took no notice therein of this
Agreement. Yet, for discharge of their Trust, they after certified it to the
Trustees, and gave the Doctor a Duplicate thereof, subscribed with their own
hands, in these words: WE the Contractors whose names are subscribed, do
hereby Certify, That we have taken an engagement of Dr Burges purchaser of the
Manor of Wells in the County of Somerset, under his hand, That in case any
other Land, Tenements, Rents, or hereditaments shall within six Months, to be
accounted from the 16 day of March instant, be discovered, which may possibly
pass by the general words contained in his Particular, albeit not comprised or
mentioned in any of the surveys; The said Doctor shall pay for the same at such
proportionable rates as he has Contracted for other the premises. With whom
also we have agreed, that a Reprise shall be allowed to him, according to such
proportionable rates, for whatsoever Lands, Tenements, Rents, or Hereditaments
mentioned in any of the said surveys, which at any time hereafter shall appear
either to be already sold, or not to be parcel of the premises by the said
Doctor Contracted for, Witness our hands this 23 of March 1648.

William Roberts, Rob. Fenwick, Will. Methwold, Ti. Middleton, Tho. Airs,
Ja. Russel, John Blackwell.



This Certificate being transmitted to the Trustees, the next day the Trustees
sealed unto Doctor Burges a Conveyance of the Manor of Wells, with the Rights,
Members and Appurtenances thereof in the County of Somerset. And also all Rents
of Assise, free Rents, customary Rents, or Copyhold Rents, Rents seek, Rents
service, Fee-Farm Rents and other Rents and yearly sums of money whatsoever, to
the said Manor and Burough of Wells or either of them belonging or
appertaining, etc. And also all and singular, the Messuages, Cottages, Tofts,
Croffs, Mills, Houses, Edifices, buildings Orchards, Gardens, etc. to the said
Manor and premises, or any of them, or to any part or parcel of them or any of
them belonging or appertaining. OR WHICH the late Bishop of Bath and Wells,
or any his Predecessors in right of the said Bishopric at any time within Ten
years before the beginning of this Parliament, or sithence, had, held, or
enjoyed, or ought to have held or enjoyed WITHIN the said Manor and premises,
or any of them.

And this they might very well do (authorized thereunto by the Contractors
Warrant of March 19. 1648.) for that the Doctor had voluntarily entered into the
engagement abovesaid, never put upon any other Purchaser, albeit their
Conveyances ran in General words, as his did.

While this was a doing, Colonel Harvie by Order (as aforesaid) drew up the
State of the whole business between the Corporation and the Contractors, to be
after Reported to the Parliament (if need rerequired) as follows:

Col. Harvy's Report.
THe Contractors for Sale of Bishops Lands in December last, Certified this
Committee, that the Corporation of Wells in the County of Somerset, have by
their Agents in their last Purchase of the Liberties and Royalties of that
Borough, and of the Hundred of Wells, surprised the Contractors, Certif. of
Dec. 22. 1648.
and very much wronged the State by an undue Particular drawn up without
Warrant, whereby the Contractors could not make sale of the Manor of Wells,
whereof they sold nothing to the Town. And that the said Corporation refused to
rectify this in a private way.

Hereupon this Committee sent out an Order, December. 28. 1648. summoning the
said Mayor and Corporation to send up some of their own members, or others
fully instructed to give an account hereof within 10 days after notice. Which
Order was served upon them.

Upon the sixteenth of February the said Corporation appeared by Mr. Robert
Morgan, and John Casebeard, two of their members, who avowed that the
Corporation had bought a great deal of the Manor of Wells (referring to the
Conveyance:) which a Sub-Committee of the Contractors (then present) denied.

It was then Ordered that some Members of that Committee should examine all
papers and proceedings therein at Gurny-House, and thereupon state and Report
matter of fact unto you, by that day seven-night.

Your Sub-Committee not meeting, this Committee resumed the whole business,
Febr. 27. and after full examination thereof, both parties being present, it
appeared,

That at the request of the said Casebeard, the Contractors made an Order to
the Register November. 26. 1647. VVarrant it self.
to make forth, and ingross a Particular of the Royalties of the Hundred of
Wells and Wells-Forum, with the Fairs of Priddy and Binegar, parcel of the
Possessions of the late Bishopric of Bath and Wells. And this was the only
Warrant for any Particular, in reference to the said Corporation.

Letters of the Town.
That the said Corporation (November. 28. 1647.) gave Instructions to Casebeard in
a Letter, to purchase (beside the former particulars) the Baylywick of the
Town, the Court of Record, the 3 Weeken-Court and Leet, and Law-day for the
Town; the three-Weeken Court, or Leet or Law-day for the Forum, the four Fairs
in the Town, and the chief Rents (if incident to the Law-day) and Felons goods,
and Clerk of the Market, and Return of Writs, and such Issues and Amercements
as fall upon any Towns-man, whether in the Sessions at Wells, or in the County,
granted by Letters Patents of Edw. 4.

Letter of Atturny.
But the Mayor and Communalty of Wells did under the Seal of the Maioraltie,
Dec. 4. 1647. Authorize the said Morgan, Casebeard, and one Cox to be their
Agents with the Contractors for the Purchase of the Royalties and Liberties of
the said Borough, and of Wells-Forum, and Wells Hundred, with the Fairs of
Binegar and Priddy. And Mr. Morgan confessed that this was all.

That Casebeard indeed pretended that he had another Letter in December. 1647. to
buy more, viz. the Guild Hall and Prison: but he produced none such. Nor were
the Guild Hall and Prison then at all Returned in the Survey, and so could not
be put into any Particular grounded thereupon.

Contract.
That upon the 15 of that December. the said Casebeard did Contract in the behalf
of the said Town, for the Royalty of Wells, and Wells-Forum, the Baylywick of
the Town and Forum of Wells, with all and singular the Fairs, Markets,
Clerkship of the Market and profits thereof, and all other things to the said
Baylywick pertaining. And also the Office of Stewardship of the Town of Wells,
and all the profits and advantages thereunto belonging. This Contract takes in
all Fairs, Markets, Clerkship of the Markets, Baylywick of the Hundred, and
Stewardship, which were not warranted by the Contractors to be put into the
Particular, nor desired by the Town in their last Instructions under Seal, nor
are grounded upon the Survey. This Contract was Signed by Casbeard: nor was
there any other made at all by the said Town.

Notes of the Committee.
It was confessed by Casbeard, that the said Corporation had not bought the
rents of the Borough, nor the Lot-Lead, nor any thing of the Manor of Wells:
That he, and one Couper had away the first Particular upon which he Contracted
for the Town. That there was never more then one Contract made for the said
Town. That the Particular, which (after the Purchase was ascertained) was
offered to the Contractors to Sign, as a Warrant for the Trustees to receive
the Purchase-mony, and for the Trustees to pass and Seal the Conveyance of the
said Purchase, was not the same with the first, but drawn up by Mr. Thomas
Salmon then Mayor of Wells. And what is become of the first Particular, the
said Casbeard knows not.

That the said last Particular does contain much more then ever the said Town
bought, or paid for, or then the Contractors ever intended to them to sell.
According to which Particular, their Conveyance was drawn up and Sealed, and
enrolled. Which has already occasioned much damage to the State, and may
occasion much more, if not speedily prevented.

Order of Feb. 27.
The Committee finding so great a difference between the Certificate of the
Contractors, and the last Particular and Conveyance made to the Town of Wells,
did Order the said Contractors to certify more particularly what Royalties,
Hereditaments, Liberties, and Appurtenances of the Possessions of the late
Bishop of Bath and Wells they intended to sell unto the said Town, and for what
sum. And likewise whether they did intend by any General words, after the first
Contract signed by Casebeard, to sell them any more then was comprehended in
the first Contract and Particular? And whether they sold any part of the Manor
of Wells unto them, and what part thereof?

Certif. of Mar. 7. 1648.
The Contractors certified, Mar. 7. last, That they sold to the said Town these
particulars.

The Royalties of Wells and Wells Hundred: and the two Fairs of Binegar and
Priddy at 30 s. per annum.

The Collecting of Post-fines and Amercements issuing out of the Exchequer,
called the Green-wax, valued at 10 l. per annum.

The Leets, or Law-days, the three-Weeken Courts, and Court of Record, valued
at 8 l. per annum.

All these were in possession, and amount to 19 l. 10 s. per annum, and sold at
20 years purchase.

The four Fairs in Wells, after 3 lives in being, valued at 5 l. 13 s. 4 d. at
four years purchase.

Which sums, at the rates abovesaid, make the total sum of the Purchase 412 l.
13 s. 4 d.

This was the just sum for which they Contracted according to the values in the
Survey. And more then these things, the Contractors never intended to sell them
any thing.

The said Contractors do further Certify these Particulars wherein they were
surprised; viz.

The two weekly Markets were unduly thrust into the sum of 5 l. 13 s. 4 d. at
which the four Fairs in the Town alone, are valuable; which is not warranted by
the Survey. And the Markets are valued at a considerable sum by themselves, for
which nothing is paid in the Purchase.

They were persuaded by Casebeard, that the Baylywick contained no more but
what is before expressed under the 25 l. 3 s. 4 d. and thereupon the
Contractors put it into the Contract: whereas the Survey, beside all the
particulars before rehearsed, afterward mentions and values the Baylywick
distinctly, and by it self, at 40 l. per annum, in reversion after three lives;
which the Town has gotten into their last Particular and Conveyance, paying
nothing for it, and left 14 l. 6 s. 8 d. chargeable upon the Manor for the
Bailiffs fee, to be paid by the State notwithstanding: which must be reprised
to the Purchaser of the Manor.

They further say, that the Guild Hall and Prison neither were in the first
Particular, nor at all Contracted for. Nor were they at all returned or
mentioned in the Survey whereupon that Particular was grounded: and so could
not be intended to be sold unto them.

They say, they never intended to sell, nor did the Town at all desire to buy
any part of the Manor of Wells, or of any other Manor. Only they intended to
sell the Royalties of the Borough and Hundred, so, that the Lord should not
have ought to do with the Corporation, nor they with him, or any of his
Tenants, by way of Jurisdiction, by virtue of their Purchase.

They Certify that they never intended, by any words General or Special, to
sell any thing to the said Town, more then was truly and really intended to be
sold unto them in the first Contract.

The Town therefore have greatly abused and wronged the State both in Special
words, as also in General words thrust into the last Particular.

By Special words, they carry these things which were never sold unto them: viz.

The whole Baylywick, valued after 3 lives in being at 40 l. per an.

Two weekly Markets in the City of Wells, which are of good value.

The Guild Hall and Prison, which have ever belonged to the Lord of the Manor.

All VVaives and Strays, Deodands, and Felons Goods, etc. upon the Manor,
which were ever distinct from those of the Town and Hundred.

All Courts Baron, and Minery Courts, valued at 40 s. per an. All VVays and
Streets, which have ever belonged to the Lord of the Manor.

By General Words, they have taken into their last Particular and Conveyance.

All Royalties, Services, Franchises, Liberties, Privileges, Immunities,
Profits, Commodities, Advantages and Emoluments whatsoever, of what nature or
quality soever, WITHIN the said City or Borough of Wells, and WITHIN the said
HUNDRED of Wells and VVells-Forum, or any part or parcel thereof, unto the late
Bishop of Bath and Wells, or any other Bishop there, in right of the late
Bishopric of Bath and Wells, at any time within ten years before the beginning
of the Parliament of England now assembled at Westminster, belonging or
appertaining.

Under these General words, so unduly thrust into the last Particular (by
virtue whereof their Counsel told you, that they conceive they have bought very
much of the Manor of Wells) may be comprehended, and hereafter claimed, as
being within the Hundred of Wells,

1. The Royalties of the Lot-Lead, valued per ann. at 80 l.

2. The Royalties and Services of the Manor of Wells, and rent both of the
Manor and Borough, valued per ann. at 150 l.

3. All Wastes, Herriots, Commons, Services of Tenants, etc. which are many and
great.

To say nothing of the Manor of Westbury, within the same Hundred also.

These things valued in the Surveys, amount per ann. to 250 l.

Which, after the rates of the Purchase made by the Town, comes to 5000 l.

By means whereof the Contractors have had the Manor of Wells lying upon their
hands for diverse months. And the State has all the while paid Interest for at
least 5000 l. for that the said Contractors could not perfect a Particular of
that Manor, till this Obstruction he removed; which the Town refused to yield
unto in an amicable way, although earnestly desired by the Contractors so to do.

This abuse the Contractors were unwilling to charge upon the Corporation it
self, but first imputed only to their Agents. But, upon the Summons of the Town
hither, they have openly owned and avowed it by their Counsel; and the
imbezelling of the first Particular, and the drawing up of a new one by the
said Mayor, without Warrant (whence all this mischief to the State is risen)
has likewise been confessed by Casebeard, then appearing and speaking in the
name of the whole Corporation.

Lastly, What means have been used to persuade them to rectify this in a more
private way, without troubling the House; and, how much they have slighted it,
cannot be forgotten.

Edm. Harvy.

On the Backside of which Report was witten by Mr Noel the Clerk Register to
that Committee of Parliament, as follows, by Order of the present
Commissioners for removing Obstructions. June 27. 1655.
THis Report was delivered in by Colonel Harvie to the late Committee of
Parliament for Removing Obstructions, mentioned in their Order of the fifth of
April 1649. to be then read; and also to be read the eighth of May 1650. before
the said Committee, without any alteration, so far as I can remember; and then,
Ordered to be Reported to the Parliament, unless, etc. as in the said Order.
And on the 20th instant offered to the Commissioners for removing Obstructions
to be proceeded upon.

Edw. Noel.


That he had Warrant for this Endorsement, (beside the Command of the present
Commissioners) further appears by the Books of that Committee of Parliament
kept by the said Mr Noel, wherein is entered this following Remembrance.

Die Jovis 5 April 1649.
COlonel Harvie delivered in his Report, concerning the Contractors and the
Town of Wells, according to former Order of this Committee: which Report was
read.

On which day, this Order also was made, and after sent to Wells.

Die Jovis 5 April 1649. At the Committee of Parliament for removing
Obstructions in the Sale of Bishops Lands.
UPon hearing the business the 27 of February last, between the Town of Wells,
and the Contractors for Sale of Bishops Lands; And, upon the Confession of John
Casebeard, Agent for the Town then present, it appeared, That both the Contract
signed by the said Casebeard, in behalf of the Town, and the last Particular
drawn up without Warrant, by which the Contractors were surprised, and the
State abused, do refer to the first Particular upon which the Contract was
made; which first Particular was taken away by Casebeard and others, from the
Contractors, and will not now be found. It is therefore Ordered that the said
John Casebeard and Thomas Salmon the then Mayor of Wells, be forthwith summoned
to attend this Committee within ten days after notice hereof, in Sir Edward
Bruncards House in the old Palace at Westminster; And there produce the said
first Particular upon which the said Contract was made, and to show by what
Deputation from the Town, and by what VVarrant, the last Particular afterward
offered to, and signed by the Contractors, was drawn up, and signed, after the
first Contract made. And hereof they are not to fail.

By this it is evident how unwilling the Committee of Parliament was to use
extremity, in hastening a Report to the House; in that they would not so much
as then Order the Report to be made to the Parliament, but only summoned two
Agents of the Town to appear before themselves, to give Account of their
miscarriages, thereby intending to awaken the Town to make satisfaction by a
Reconveyance without further trouble.

John Casebeard and Thomas Salmon being served with the Order of Summons, Mr
Salmon procured a Letter of Attorney from the Corporation, which ran thus:
Letter of Attorney from the Town, the 24. of April 1649.
KNow all men by these presents, That we the Mayor, Masters, and Burgesses of
the City or Borough of Wells in the County of Somerset, by this present
Writing indented, have constituted, ordained, and appointed; And by these
presents do constitute, ordain and appoint, our Trusty and well beloved
friends, Thomas Salmon one of the Magistrates of the said City or Borough, and
Justice of Peace within the same, Robert Morgan another Magistrate of the said
City or Borough, William Smith one of the capital Burgesses of the same City
or Borough, and John Casebeard Gent. or any three or two of them, to be our
true and lawful Atturneys, for us, and in our names to appear before the
honorable Committee for removing of Obstructions in the Sale of Bishops Lauds.
And with them for us, and in our names to Answer to what shall be objected
against us by the said Contractors of the said Lands, for the purchase of
certain Royalties and Liberties contracted for with them, for, or concerning
the said Purchase by us, or our Agent or Agents. As also to treat, compound,
and finally to end and determine any Controversies, Suites, or demands arising,
or which may arise by reason of the same Purchase, so far forth, and in as
ample manner, as though we were personally present. Ratifying, confirming,
and allowing all and whatsoever our said Attorney, or any three or two of them
shall do for us in the premises. This Letter of D^putation was exhibited to the
Doctor, and a Copy left with him, which was examined by two VVitnesses with the
Original, one of which was a public Notary.
In witness whereof, We the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses have hereunto set
our common Seal the 14 day of April, in the year of our Lord God 1649. And to
the other part thereof remaining with the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses,
the said Thomas Salmon, Robert Morgan, William Smith, and John Casebeard have
set their Hands and Seals, the day and year above written.




Upon this, Mr Salmon and Mr Morgan came to London. But, both the Contractors
and the Committee of Parliament then told them, that now they must apply
themselves to Doctor Burges Purchaser of the Manor of Wells, and reconvey to
him what they had so unduly gotten into their Conveyance, and which he had now
both bought and paid for. And here began the first business between the Doctor,
and that Corporation.

For Mr Salmon hereupon came to Dr Burges, and made agreement with him
according to what had been agitated in, and declared by the said Committee of
Parliament, and desired it might be put into vvriting, promising that he and Mr
Morgan would sign it. When the Agreement was drawn up, Mr Salmon, and Mr Morgan
came again to the Doctor, who read over the whole unto them, and no exception
was taken to it. Only Mr Morgan desired that, whereas the Paper then read,
mentioned a Deed to be afterward sealed by the Corporation to Dr Burges, as it
should be advised and prepared by his Counsel according to that present
Agreement; that, before sealing, it might be perused by Lislibone Long then
Esquire (now Knight and Recorder of London:) not, to alter the Agreement, but
to satisfy the Corporation that the Deed was according to their then present
Agreement. To this, the Doctor innocently (but improvidently) yielded; and so
in the issue all came to Nothing. The Agreement was this: WHereas the Mayor and
Burgesses of the Borough and City of Wells, in the County of Somerset, have
bought sundry parcels of the possessions of the late Bishop of Bath and Wells,
which are mentioned to be sold unto them by the Trustees for the Sale of Bishop
Lands, or by five or more of them, in and by one Indenture bearing date the 22
day of March, Anno Dom. 1647. And whereas Cornelius Burges of London Doctor in
Divinity, has likewise bought sundry other parcels of the Possessions of the
late Bishopric of Bath and Wells, which are mentioned to be sold unto him by
the said Trustees, or by five or more of them, in and by one other Indenture
bearing date the 24 of March 1648. Now, for as much as by reason of some words
and expressions in the said Indentures, sundry differences and Suites may
possibly arise, if not timely prevented; for the prevention whereof, and for
the better maintaining of a right understanding, peace, and amity between the
said Parties, and for diverse other good causes and special considerations, the
said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses of Wells aforesaid, have by one Letter of
Attorney or Deputation under the common Seal of the said Corporation (which
Letter of Attorney or Deputation bears date the 14 of April, Anno Dom. 1649.)
appointed, constituted and authorized Robert Morgan, Gent. and Thomas Salmon,
Gent. two of the Masters of the said City or Borough, together with some
others therein named, That they or any two of them, should treat of, and
conclude and determine all matters and things that now are, or hereafter might
be in doubt or difference concerning the premises, or any of them; and that in
the name and behalf of the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses, who thereby bind
themselves to allow, ratify, and confirm, whatsoever their said Attorneys or
Deputies, or any two of them, shall do in the premises; as by the said Letter
of Attorney or Deputation (a Copy whereof is now left with the said Doctor
Burges) appears. And therefore the said Robert Morgan, and Thomas Salmon, for
and in behalf of the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses, and by virtue of the
said Letter of Atturny and Deputation, after Treaty, and after mature advise
with and full debate of their Counsel learned touching the premises, do finally
conclude and agree to and with the said Cornelius Burges, That the said Mayor,
Masters and Burgesses of the said City or Borough of Wells aforesaid, shall
grant and assure unto him, his Heirs and Assigns, by good and sufficient
Conveyance in Law under the Common Seal of the said City and Corporation, in
such wise as by the Counsel learned of the said Dr. Burges shall be devised and
prepared, within ten days after the draught thereof shall be engrossed (being
first perused and approved by Lislibone Long of Lincoln's Inn Esquire; and rendered
to the said Mayor of the said City for the time being for that purpose. All and
all manner of Interest, Right, and Title, which they have or pretend, or claim
to have to, and in all and every the Particulars hereafter following viz.

Imprimis, All and every the Royalties of Lot-Lead upon the Forest of Mendip,
and all Royalties, Courts, Perquisites of Courts, Possessions and
Hereditaments, Rents, Fines, Heriots, Services, Eschetes, Waives, Strays,
Wastes, Commons, Ways, Streets (except hereafter excepted) belonging to the
Manor of Wells, together with all Rights, members and appurtenances thereof,
for ever.

Item, The free use of the Guild Hall in Wells aforesaid, from time to time and
at all times (except only such times wherein the said Mayor, Masters and
Burgesses shall make use of the same, for holding of their own Courts there) to
keep and hold all Courts Baron, and other Courts of what kind soever, not
herein and hereby excepted, in his own name, or in the name or name of his
Heirs and Assigns, or any of them for ever; and by his or their Officers only,
at his or their pleasure constituted and appointed, for ever. As also free
ingress and egress for himself, his Heirs and Assigns, and for all Officers and
persons resorting thither upon those occasions. The said Dr. Burges his Heirs
and Assigns for the time being, paying only one penny per annum for the same,
upon the 29 day of September for ever, if it be demanded.

Item, All other Fines, Suites, Services, Royalties, Courts, Perquisites of
Courts, Immunities, Privileges, Possessions and Hereditaments whatsoever
lately enjoyed by any of the late Bishops of Bath and Wells, in right of the
said Bishopric within the Manor or Borough of Wells, or Forest of Mendip, or
any of them, within ten years next before the beginning of this present
Parliament.

EXCEPTING nevertheless, to the said Mayor, Masters, and Burgesses, the
Royalties of the City or Borough of Wells aforesaid, and of the foreign fee
Baylywick or Hundred of Wells, commonly called Wells and Wells-Forum, with the
rights members and appurtenances thereof in the County of Somerset, together
with the said Hundred. And also all Courts of Record, or Court or Courts of
Pleas, Hundred Courts, views of Frank-pledg, and whatsoever to view of
Frank-pledg appertains, Courts Leet and other Courts to be holden from three
weeks to three weeks, from time to time within the said Borough, or within the
Hundred of Wells and Wells-Forum aforesaid, belonging to the said Borough or
Hundred.

And except also the Fines, Issues, and Amercements, Perquisites and Profits,
as well at the said Courts hereby excepted, as at the Sessions of the Peace
holden, or to be holden from time to time, or in the said City. And all other
Fines, Forfeitures, Issues and Amercements at the Assizes or elsewhere, in the
High Court of Chancery, the Court of Kings Bench, or Common Pleas, or of the
Exchequer, due and payable by any person or persons whatsoever. And also
Excepted the Baylywick and Office of Bailiff of Wells, and of the Hundred of
Wells, and of VVells-Forum aforesaid, and of the said Liberty of the said
Bishop of Bath and Wells within the said County of Somerset. And also
Excepted, all Fairs with their appurtenances, and all Markets holden and kept,
and to be from time to time holden and kept within the said City or Borough of
Wells, or within the said Hundred of Wells and VVells-Forum, or any part
thereof, heretofore or now holden there, with all profits and commodities
thereto belonging. And also excepted, all Deodands, goods and chattels of
Felons, Felons of themselves and Fugitives, Outlawed persons, and of persons
put in exigent. And also excepted, the Office of the Clerk of the Market, and
whatsoever to the said Office appertains; and the correction of the Assize of
Bread, Ale, Beer, and other Victuals, and the trial of all weights and
measures, together with all Fines and Forfeitures happening by reason of the
same within the Liberty and Liberties aforesaid. And also the inheritance of
the Guild Hall and Prison, and the way unto them, and the soil thereof, as also
all other the soil, Streets and ways necessary and used for holding of the said
Markets in the said City.

Item, It is likewise Agreed, that the before recited Indenture passed and
sealed by the said Trustees as aforesaid, to the said Mayor, Masters, and
Burgesses, bearing date the 22 day of March 1647. shall be enrolled in the
Court of Exchequer holden at Westminster, and there remain upon Record for ever.

To the due and full performance of this Agreement, and of every part thereof,
we the said Robert Morgan and Thomas Salmon do in pursuance of the before
mentioned Letters of Atturny or Deputation, bind our selves and the said Mayor,
Masters and Burgesses of the City or Borough of Wells aforesaid, firmly by
these presents. Witness our hands and Seals this 9 day of May, Anno Domini 1649.

Rob. Morgan. Thomas Salmon.

Signed, Sealed and delivered in presence of He. Mintern. Jo. Mintern. Ralph
Gall.



According hereunto a Deed was drawn up, which being first perused by Robert
Woolrich of Greys-Inn, and Matthew Hale of Lincoln's Inn Esquires, and by them
both attested under their hands to be agreeable to the foregoing Agreement, it
was after tendered to several Majors successive to each other at Wells to seal.
But they waved the Agreement, resolving to hold what they had gotten; denying
that they knew of any thing granted to them but what was really intended to be
bought by them, (and they are confident was really intended by the Honorable
Contractors to be sold unto them, and therefore conceived it lawful for to
improve their best endeavors for the enjoyment thereof. This, with much more,
was sent in a Letter to the Doctor, in the name, and by the Order of the whole
Society, Jan. 5. 1649. Signed by the Mayor.

Mean while the said Committee of Parliament, minding their promise, and
finding the business to be so foul, and that the Town would not Seal any
Reconveyance, Order of Aug. 11. 1649.
made an Order the 11 of August 1649, to the Sergeant at Arms attending the
Parliament, or his Deputy or Deputies, forthwith to apprehend the Body of John
Casebeard, and to bring him up in safe custody, and him to keep in safe
custody, until the said (first) Particular be brought in to the (Contractors)
Registry, or that the said Casebeard do clear himself from any concealment or
imbezelling of the same.

He was apprehended accordingly, but had a friend that first got him loose, not
by Order but connivence, till the 14 of September 1651. Then he got his Liberty
till the 15 of November following. Upon the 21 of which month, he alleging
that the Town and Dr. Burges were agreed, he got an Order for his dismission
that day seven-night, if nothing were further alleged to continue his
restraint. Howbeit he was not dismissed till the 12 of December following,
witness this Order.

8 May 1650.
Order of Dec. 12. 1651.
IT is this day Ordered that John Casebeard be discharged from his restraint in
the Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending the Parliament, Mr. Lislibone
Long having undertaken for his appearance before this Committee at any time in
Term-time upon Summons.

But long before that, the same Committee of Parliament, finding the
Corporation so pertinacious in holding what they had so unduly gotten, Ordered
the former Report to be offered to the Parliament. The Order was this.

8 May 1650 At the Committee of Parliament for removing of Obstructions in the
sale of Bishops Lands.
Order of May 8. 1650. To Report to the Parliament
WHereas the Report formerly made by Colonel Harvy touching the business of the
Purchase made by the Mayor, Masters and Burgesses of Wells, was this day read;
upon Debate thereof, It is Ordered to be reported to the House as now it is.
Unless the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses do before this day month, give
satisfaction to a Sub-Committee touching the same. And it is Ordered that Col.
Jones, Mr. John Corbet, Mr. Alderman Allen, and Colonel Harvey, be the said
Sub-Committee; and they, or any three of them, be desired to receive what shall
be offered by, or on the behalf of the said Mayor, Master and Burgesses of
Wells therein, and report the same to this Committee.

All this notwithstanding, nothing was offered nor done herein by the
Corporation. Sundry Overtures and Letters were addressed to them by the Doctor,
for an end. Diverse References were made, wherein, two several times, all
businesses were agreed. But the Corporation resolved to part with nothing: for
having made friends, who understood not the case, to stand by them therein,
they encroached daily upon the Doctors Wastes, Commons, Pounds, Estrays, etc.
threatening more. Especially since they so strongly engaged sundry of the
Soldiery (who were set to keep peace, not to intermeddle in differences, or to
become parties in them) by sweating three Officers of one Troop (who had not
any foot of Land, or other Estate within that Corporation) Burgesses of their
Town. Then, Belly-gods, and every railing Shimei gladly made it their business
to run up and down to Gentlemen's Houses; yea, anywhither, where any good cheer
was to be had, to make the Doctor odious by false reports, where they supposed
they could command belief of their confident tales. Yea, so far did some proud
Wiselings of their Faction proceed, that if any friend were but in any
neighbourly manner familiar with the Doctor, or invited any of his to their
Houses, they would take occasion to quarrel them for entertaining their
enemies: insomuch, that scarce any person of quality durst to own the Doctor,
or to come near his house, much more to own his cause. All which, the Doctor
bore, with what patience he could; knowing, that nothing but Nettles and Briars
can be expected from Dung-hills.

That which remains, is a brief account of prosecuting that Report which was
to have been made to the Parliament: but never could find opportunity to be
reported there.

An Act passed, October. 12. 1652. to enable the present Commissioners for
removing of Obstructions (among other things) to hear and determine all such
reports of particular Cases, as by the late Committees of Parliament for
Obstructions were ordered to be made to the then Parliament. Which Act, gives
them that power that never was in the Committee of Parliament for Obstructions,
or in any Court of Judicature, but only in the Parliament it self, to redress
those abuses that otherwise, in an ordinary course of Justice, were not to be
cured.

This Act, the Doctor for two or three years made no use of; in hope the
Corporation would at length be drawn to do him right; because such as were
discreet and moderate among them, on all occasions professed themselves very
inclinable to peace. But they frustrated his expectation: for the more he bore,
the more was laid on him; which opened his eyes to see that they who began upon
trifles, would (when they saw their time) proceed to seize upon more; yea, upon
all that their general words might include. And this was no less, then all he
had; except the soil of the Manor. For, they might on the same ground carry
all his Rents, Fines for Copyholds, and Leases, Forfeitures, Lot-Lead, all his
Courts of the Manor; and, in a word, whatever else he could make one penny
profit of. And all this, because it was within the Hundred of Wells, and late
the possession of the Bishop of Bath and Wells, in right of his said Bishopric.

The first difference began on their side, upon a small business: namely, their
setting up Pens for Sheep at a Fair, against his Walls, in a place called
South-over, which belonged always to him that kept the Bishops Park, purchased
by Dr. Burges. Of this, when he had complained, the Corporation sent up a
Certificate that they had made little of it, and that it should be restored, if
it appeared to be the Doctors right. This being but a trifle, the Doctor passed
it by, without farther contest.

After this, the Corporation claymed, and took fifty couple of wild Fowls due
to the Bishop from the Decoy-pool near Westbury, because, within the Hundred of
Wells. Which Fowls had been rated and sold to the Doctor, at 25 s. per annum.
He being made acquainted therewith, forbad payment of any more to that
Corporation: So also did, one Captain Bagnal, that after bought the Manor of
Westbury. The Corporation, or their Agent, hereupon complained to the Committee
of Parliament for Obstructions, for wrong done to them in denying these Fowls.
Their Petition was preferred in the year 1651. as follows.

To the Honorable Committee for removing Obstructions in the Sale of Bishop
Lands. The humble Petition of the Mayor, Masters and Burgesses of Wells in the
County of Somerset.
Humbly shows,
THat the Royalty of Westbury belonging to the late Bishop of Bath and Wells
1648 1647.
was granted by the Trustees, amongst other things to your Petitioners, and
enjoyed accordingly, until of late Dr Burges, Mr Robert Bagnal, and Mr John
Couslour, by virtue of some general words, in several Grants of other things
from the said Trustees, pretend a Title thereunto, and do accordingly interrupt
the quiet enjoyment thereof. That within that. Royalty there is a Decoy-Poole,
which is of considerable worth to your Petitioners, and cannot admit of their
trouble, without much prejudice.

Your Petitioners humbly pray your Summons against the said Dr Burges and
Robert Bagnal, that the right thereof may be quieted and settled, according to
the truth thereof.

Cop. Ex. Edw. Noel.
And the said Petitioners shall pray, etc.
By this it appears, that however the Corporation had bought only the
Royalties of the Borough and Hundred of Wells, they meant to grasp all within
the Hundred, that had been the Bishops. This also the Doctor then passed over,
without much struggling, albeit the Contractors Certified to that Committee of
Parliament; and afterward, to the Commissioners for Obstructions, that they
had sold those Wild fowls to Doctor Burges.

Not long after, they began to claim some Chambers over the Prison parcel of
the Bishops House, (and never used with the Guild Hall or Prison) upon pretense
of their purchase of the Guild Hall and Prison: which in the Report before
cited, is denied; and, by the said Committee of Parliament, Feb. 11. 1649.
declared to be within the Doctors Purchase, of which they ordered him
possession.

After this, they seized his Pound in Southover, discharged his Heyward, set
another in the room, and have ever since detained it, and all Waives and
Estrays at any time brought thither; resolving to keep it, although it be upon
part of the Wast of his Manor, and was never possessed or used by the Bailiff
of the Borough, but by the Reeve of the Manor, till they so seized it; as
appears by many Depositions of record in the High Court of Chancery, which make
it parcel of the Manor.

Nay, they wanted not some, who gave our that the Lot-Lead upon Minedeep, which
was rated and sold to the Doctor at 80 l. per annum, belonged to that
Corporation. Yea, one of the most moderate among them told the Doctor, that it
was conceived that all Fines also imposed by his Mineral Juries on Offenders
upon Mendip, that were awarded to him as Lord of that Liberty and Manor,
belonged to the Corporation, by virtue of their said Purchase. By all which it
is evident, that they began with trifles, in hope the Doctor would not stand
upon such poor things, which if they carried, the way was open (when they saw
opportunity) to proceed further, and to carry all the rest; which some among
them did not forbear to threaten, and that loudly enough, as many persons of
credit yet alive can testify. And wherein soever he did but question them (not
by Suites at Law, but by Discourse only) they proclaimed him covetous,
contentious, and one that claimed what was theirs, not his.

The Doctor now found it high time once more to endeavor to bring things to
some issue and Conclusion in his life time, to prevent the unavoydable
Oppressions, which otherwise would after his decease, in all probability light
on his Family, who knew little of the Difference, and less, how to defend their
Right against such Adversaries. He therefore resolved before he began any Suite
at Law against the Corporation, to write once more to a Leader among them (and
a chief instrument at first of all these differences) Mr Thomas Salmon, in hope
that he being a Magistrate of the Town, and (in common repute) an honest man,
would do his endeavor to put an end to all Controversies; the rather, because
he was one of their Atturneys and Deputies to make and seal the Agreement with
the Doctor above recited. For the nonperformance whereof, the Doctor had
before called him and the rest into the Chancery; where, in their Answer, the
Corporation denied their Letter of Attorney, as to ending any differences with
the Doctor; and Morgan and Salmon, in their Answers, pleaded they were
surprised; which is a gross untruth. The Letter which the Doctor wrote, was
this: Sir,
IT is above five years sithence your self and Mr. Robert Morgan made a full
Agreement with me in behalf of your Corporation, touching the differences
between them and me in the matter of our Purchases. I tendered a draught of a
Deed in pursuance thereof to Mr. Smith and several others of you, in the time
of his Maioralty. I was then told, Mr. Morgan should carry it to Mr. Lislibone
Long to peruse. After which, you would give me further Answer. Mr. Long had the
perusal of it, put some notes in the Margin. Whereupon a Deed was engrossed and
tendered to Mr. Rob. Morgan in his last Maioralty. He promised to call a
Chequer, and return their Answer. The issue was, the ceasing of proceedings in
Chancery, and the renewing of a Reference, to Mr. Long and Col. Harvy. They met
diverse times, and still the charge was born by me; with promise of satisfaction
by Mr. Morgan of the moiety. But neither have I received my money, nor any
conclusion of the business. By means whereof both parties suffer more and more;
nor are there wanting endeavors to make the breach wider.

Mr. Morgan is dead, and you and I be ancient men. It concerns me therefore to
press on for an issue, while we continue alive, to prevent trouble and charge
to posterity. I desire you therefore to procure the Deed to be Sealed,
according to the Agreement, or let me know forthwith your final Answer, that I
may advise with Counsel what is fit further to be done by,

Sir, Your loving friend, C. Burges.
From my House, October. 16. 1654. For my honored friend Mr. Tho. Salmon one of
the Masters of the City of Wells: These.



They answered the 27. of that Month by their Town Clerk John Standish (as
scorning, or ashamed to give it themselves) That the Doctors Letter had been
offered and read to the Mayor and the rest at their Chequer, to which they
commanded him to give this Answer.

That they were sorry that there was a difference at any time between him and
them; supposing that what so was, was causlesly started by him, without any
wrong done, or intention thereof to be done to him by them; but that on the
contrary he thereby intended their injury, by intruding on their proper Rights
and interests; which likewise is supposed he very well knew.

That they in their own concernments, are as displeased as he, that this
frivolous 250 l. per an. is but a trifle with them.
and contentious jar has received no full conclusion as yet; notwithstanding
the many References, wherein the several Referrees have not failed on their
parts to do the Offices of very loving friends with their unwearied pains and
studies; which what they have both done and said, might satisfy, if the
restless humors of some men might once receive satisfaction.

That they directly know not, who was at the charge of the Referrees meetings,
imagining that Mr. Morgan in his life would neither so much undervalue the
Corporation or himself, as to be beholding to you as it were their Common
Enemy, for half a meals meat. But, if he did, and made you a promise, you must
look after it.

That as they were not Authors of the breach at first, so neither are they
willing to embrace any thing that may widen the same, if it may be possible to
be closed. But if it may not be, they are resolved to defend themselves in
their own propriety as well as they may.

That as he remembers mortality in his Lines, so that he would put the same in
ure in the passage of his life, in being content with his own, and not disturb
the quiet of others with vexatious suits; that their living Corporation and his
present self, and future posterity may be, and continue friends.

That they intend nothing less, then really to perform what Conclusion either
the joint Counsel, or Referrees shall indifferently consider of, or adjudge
between them and him. But, whether there yet has been an end made, and
writings accordingly drawn up and engrossed, or where such ingrossment is, they
as yet know not. But promise that Mr. Morgan's Study should be forthwith
searched after it.

This was Declaration enough of their purposes to hold all that they had so
fraudulently gotten into their Deed of Purchase. What will not such men speak
of the Dr. to others, that can have the forehead to write thus to himself, to
justify themselves in seizing upon what they never bought; and, to charge him
with intruding on their proper Rights and Interests, for demanding his own, as
both the Contractors and Committee of Parliament had expressly declared long
before?

They confess several References, and justify the Referrees; and tax the
Doctor as not satisfied with what the Referrees had done: whereas the
Agreements made, were sent down to themselves, and there stifled and buried:
their Referree, Sir Lislibone Long having told the Doctors Referree, that the
Corporation did not like those Agreements, as is before attested upon Oath. Let
any man judge where those restless humors, that will not once receive
satisfaction, are lodged.

And is it not a piece of great honesty and gallantry (well becoming such a
Corporation that would by no means be undervalued) to charge the Doctor, to be
their Common Enemy, and to put him to bear the whole charge of the Referrees
meetings; and then, to tell him, that if any promise were made for repayment,
he might look after it: that is, where he could get it. Whereas the promise was
made by one of themselves in behalf of all, in their own business; and, by
their own appointment, Referred.

They indeed, in the close, deal plainly. For, in this answer of theirs, Sect.
6. They tell him, That they intend NOTHING LESS then really to perform what
Conclusion either the joint Counsel, or Referrees shall indifferently consider
of, or adjudge between them and him. And verily, this only he has found to be
true all along. Therefore finding a necessity of it, he did commence a suit
against some of their Officers and Agents, in Hillary Term 1655. in which he
and the Defendants joined issue: but he forbore the Trial, to see if by any
fairer way he might at length reduce them to Reason.

But, before that time, even in the end of the year 1654. after he had received
that answer last mentioned from the Town, he Petitioned the Honorable Committee
for removing Obstructions, to Hear and Determine the Report that was to have
been made to the Parliament in this Cause, according to the Power given them by
that Act of Parliament, October. 12. 1652. Summons being granted the 9 of May
1655. they appeared, and were heard June 20. then next following. The said
Report being read, was Referred to Mr. Jukes, of Counsel for the Commonwealth
with the Trustees for the sale of the said Lands, to peruse the said Report,
and all such papers, Orders, Affidavits, and Writings as should be offered unto
him by parties concerned on either side, and to state the whole Case in
difference, and make Report therein by the 4 of July then next. And for better
stating of the Case, that Edward Noel their Clerk, should transmit unto the
said Counsel, all such Papers, Orders, Affidavits, and Writings remaining with
him touching the premises, as should be thought meet by the said parties
concerned, or either of them.

But the Agents for the Corporation who were present at the making of this
Order (perceiving that this course would not be for their advantage) went the
very next day (unknown to the Doctor) to the Contractors for the sale of
Bishops Lands, and delivered in these Lines: Gentlemen,
WHereas it has been a long time questioned that the Corporation of Wells have
gotten more into their Conveyance then really they purchased, It is now our
desire in behalf of the said Corporation, to purchase and pay for what shall be
made really appear is not already purchased by them. We confess the Borough
Rents is not yet purchased, amounting to 4 l. 17 s. per annum, of which we
desire a Particular, as also of anything that is yet uncontracted for by the
Corporation, as to the Baylywick, or any thing else within our purchase, or
within the Manor of Wells unpurchased.

Your Servants, John Casbeard, John Standish, David Barret, Agents for the
Corporation of Wells.
21 June 1655. Allowed a Particular to be made out against Friday next, and
Doctor Burges to be then heard. T. A.*

Copia vera. Ex. per William Tayleure.




Dr. Burges was not then heard, nor had any notice of this Warrant. Mr. Jukes
having received the Commissioners Order of June 20. appointed the next Saturday
being the 30 day of the same month, at two of the Clock in the afternoon at
his Chamber in the Inner Temple, to peruse such Papers, Orders, Affidavits, and
Writings as should be offered unto him by parties concerned on eitherside, in
order to the stating of the whole Case in difference, according to the said
Order of the Commissioners.

Row. Jewkes.
27 Jun. 1655.



Upon the 30 of that month of June, both sides appeared. All papers and
writings were brought in. Mr. Jewkes examined all: and afterward Certified as
follows.

To the Right Honorable the Commissioners for removing of Obstructions in the
sale of the late Bishops Lands.
ACcording to your Order of the 20 of June last, made in the Cause upon the
Petition of Cornelius Burges Doctor in Divinity, against the Mayor, Masters and
Burgesses of Wells, touching the matters therein mentioned, whereby it was
referred to me to peruse the Report therein mentioned to have been made to the
late Committee of Parliament, and all such Papers, Orders, Affidavits, and
Writings as should be offered unto me by parties concerned on either side, and
state the whole Case in difference, and make Report therein by the 4 of this
month. And for the better stating of the Case, that Mr. Noel your Clerk,
should transmit to me all such Papers, Affidavits and Writings remaining with
him, touching the premises, as should be thought meet by the said Parties
concerned, or either of them. I have perused all the Papers transmitted to me
by Mr. Noel: and, amongst others, a Paper without either date or direction, but
subscribed with the name of Edmond Harvy, and certified by Mr. Noel (by an
indorsement thereupon, Dated 27 of June last, and subscribed with his name) to
be the Report which was delivered in by Col. Harvy to the late Committee of
Parliament for removing Obstructions mentioned in their Order of the 5 of April
1649. to be then read; and also read the 8 of May 1650. before the said
Committee without any alteration, so far as he could remember; and then Ordered
to be reported to the Parliament, unless, etc. as in that Order, and to have
the 20 of that month offered it to you to be proceeded upon. And, upon perusal
thereof, finding the Case therein, as I conceive, fully stated; and, that I
might therein the better satisfy the parties, and Return to you the clearer
account thereof, I did in the presence both of the said Doctor Burges, and of
Mr. Dodington of Counsel with the Coporation of Wells, and of Mr. Casebeard and
others in behalf of the said Corporation, read the said Report, and examine the
same with the Certificates, Orders, and Letters therein mentioned. All which
were produced, save only the Letter of Atturny, and the Letter in December. 1647.
mentioned in the said Report, both which (though neither of them were produced)
Mr. Casebeard acknowledged: and, upon examination, it was agreed on both sides,
that there were such Orders, Certificates and Letters as in that Report are
mentioned.

And therefore finding this thus agreed on both sides, and finding this Case
already stated by that Report to the late Committee for removing of
Obstructions, etc. And humbly (with your favor) conceiving that the
proceedings which were before them, and from them transmitted to you, are the
grounds of your proceedings in this Cause; and there not appearing to me any
evidence, proof, or other Cause to alter, or impeach that Report, I do, as to
the matter of fact, humbly refer to that Report wherein it is already stated.

But there having been now produced to me by the said Doctor Burges, Copies
attested under Mr. Noel's hand, several Orders not mentioned in the said
Report, made to the said late Committee there, I do humbly Certify them, as
those which I conceive material for the further clearing of the matter of fact
in this Cause, viz.

An Order of the fifth of April, 1649. which I took to be that of that date in
the said Certificate of Mr. Noel, wherein it is mentioned, That upon the 27 of
February last, between the Town of Wells and the Contractors for sale of
Bishops Lands, and upon confession of John Casebeard Agent for the said Town
then present, it appeared that both the Contract signed by the said Casebeard
on the behalf of the said Town, and the last Particular drawn up without
Warrant, by which the Contractors were surprised, and the State abused, do
refer to the first Particular upon which the said Contract was made; which
first Particular was taken away by Casebeard and others from the Contractors,
and would not then be found: it was Ordered that the said Casebeard and Thomas
Salmon the Mayor of Wells, should be forthwith summoned to attend that
Committee within ten days after notice thereof, and then produce the said first
Particular upon which the said Contract was made, etc. as thereby further
appears.


And underneath this Copy is written thus: Die Jovis 5 April. 1649.
Colonel Harvy delivered in his Report concerning the Contractors and the Town
of Wells, according to former order of this Committee, which Report was read.




This is attested by Mr Noel to be a true Copy.

An Order of the eighth of May 1650. wherein it is mentioned, That the Report
formerly made by Colonel Harvy touching the business of the purchase made by
the Mayor, Masters and Burgesses of Wells, was that day read; and upon debate
thereof, it was ordered to be reported to the House, as it then was; unless the
Mayor, Masters and Burgesses of Wells did before that day month give
satisfaction to a Sub-Committee touching the same. And it was ordered, That
Colonel Jones, Mr. John Corbet, Alderman Allen, and Colonel Harvy, be the said
Sub-Committee, and they, or any three of them, were desired to receive what
should be offered, by or on the behalf of the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses
of Wells, and to report the same to that Committee.

All which, with reference to the said Report, Orders and Certificates (which,
together with the rest of the Papers transmitted by Mr. Noel to me, are all
herewith restored) and humbly submitted to your Judgments.

2 Jul. 1655. Row. Jewkes.


This Report being read the fourth of July 1655. before the said Commissioners
for Obstructions, in presence of both parties; and afterward fully debated,
this following Order was made.

4 July 1655. By the Commissioners for removing of Obstructions in the sale of
Bishops Lands.
Upon reading of the Report of Mr. Jewkes made in pursuance of our Order of the
20 of June last, in the cause in difference between Dr. Burges and the Town of
Wells, Thomas Salmon, and John Casebeard, and also the Report signed by Colonel
Harvy, and hearing of Counsel and Parties on all sides, it is thought fit and
ordered that it be referred to the Contractors for sale of the said Lands, and
they desired to consider of the said matters in difference: and if they can, to
conclude the business by sale, and conveying to Dr. Burges, what ever is
contained in the said Report belonging to the Manor of Wells: and, what
belongs to the Hundred of Wells, to the Mayor and Burgesses of Wells, according
to the said Report. And to recall the Conveyances. And if there be not a
Submission to what the Contractors shall Order them, to certify to us the
party that shall so refuse.

On the sixth of July then instant, the Contractors sitting, Doctor Burges
delivered to them the Order last foregoing. But the whole being now under a
Reference, Doctor Burges first desired the Contractors to ask the Agents of
Wells then present, if they had any Letter of Attorney impowring them to submit
to a Reference? they answered, No. The Doctor then told them, it was in vain to
proceed till they were empowered hereunto, for that the Town would stand to no
Reference, if they liked not the Conclusion.

It was answered, That they would no doubt ere long obtain power to submit to
it. The Doctor then desired all might be respited till that time. Only he gave
in a Writing to testify his submission, so far as the business was before the
said Commissioners for Obstructions; saving to himself, the rest. This was not
accepted. Upon this, both parties were dismissed sine die. No word was then
spoken of the Towns intention to make a new purchase, nor of the Warrant made
for a Particular, wherein it was ordered, that the Doctor should be heard;
which he was not, until they had made their second purchase.

In August 1655. the Town desired Mr. Dodington, their then Recorder, to treat
with the Doctor about their differences. This Mr. Doddington accordingly did.
The Doctor freely yielded to the Town (for he had never questioned it) All
Royalties of Wells, and Wells Hundred, the two fairs of Priddy and Bineger,
the collecting of all Post-fines, and amercements issuing out of the Exchequer,
the Leets or Law-days, and three weeken Courts, and Courts of Record, the four
Fairs in Wells after three lives in being, the Markets and Bayliffwick.

The things he stood upon to have, were, All their claim to, and title and
interest in any part of the Manor of Wells, with the Rights, Members and
Appurtenances; and himself and Tenants to be wholy freed from all Jurisdiction
of the Corporation: also the Guild Hall and Prison, which ever belonged to the
Lord of the Manor, and was not really purchased by them, nor could be, it
being not returned till after their Contract: all hawking, hunting, fishing,
fowling, vvithing his Manor: all Pounds, Waives and Strayes there, all
Deodands, Felons Goods, etc. happening on his Manor, the Ways and Streets, and
soil thereof, etc. all Courts Baron, and Minery Courts within his Manor.

Mr. Doddington asked if this were all? the Doctor answered, Yea: then said Mr.
Doddington, We will have an end of these to your content: I will come again to
Wells this Summer, and put a Conclusion to it. But he came not. Whereupon
Doctor Burges waited upon him at Lincoln's Inn, about the midst of October
following; and it was there agreed, that on Friday seven-night after, Mr.
Doddington should come to the Doctors lodging, and make a full end of all.

But before that day, the Town sent up by Mr. Standish and David Barret a
Letter of Atturny dated October. 22. 1655. to Authorize him, them and some others
to answer all the Doctors complaints, and Objections: to buy the Borough
rents, Baylywick and whatever was then unsold: but not one word of submitting
to the Co^tractors: taxing the Doctor with causless contests, etc. and
justifying themselves in all that they had claimed and usurped.

Being come to London, they forthwith acquainted Mr. Doddington herewith; and
no persuasions of his for ending of the Controversies in the way wherein he and
the Doctor agreed, could prevail; but, before the Doctor knew any thing of
their intentions of a new purchase, they Contracted, upon the 26 of October
then instant (which was but the fourth day after the date of the Letter of
Attorney) for the Bayliffwick, the Guild Hall and Prison, the Borough Rents,
and seven Canonical Houses in Wells (comprised within the Doctors first
purchase; and which he often offered to pay for, had it been accepted on the
terms contained in his first Contract) never giving him notice that he might
have been heard, as they had been ordered to do, June 21. 1655.

This now began more Broils and sharp Contentions on their parts, which were
after tried at the Common Plea's Bar, where the Doctor had fair Justice done
him by the honorable Court, and Jurors. Howbeit, by the failer of some
Witnesses who came not; but especially, by means of a desperate Oath made by
one that was a party, who knew what he swear to be false, a Verdict and
Judgment passed against the Doctor, and he was thereupon outed of those Houses,
etc. But the Narration of the foul carriage of the Agents of that Corporation
in that whole business, is not here intended. Only this may be taken notice
of, that whereas they were referred to a Trial at Law, by the Commissioners for
Obstructions, June 23. 1655. upon the account of their said second purchase
alone; they, at the Trial, produced only their first Conveyance dated in March
1647. to prove their Title to the Chambers over the Prison; and, upon that,
carried them (even after those rooms had been adjudged to the Doctor by the
Committee of Parliament for Obstructions, in the year 1649.) albeit they had
not, till seven years after, indeed purchased the Prison under those Chambers.

With this Conquest, the Corporation, their Agents, Officers and Tenants were
so flesht, that now they supposed they might do any thing against the Doctor;
insomuch as it grew to a common speech, that whoever has any trial with him,
may be sure to carry it, be the Cause what it will. And upon this account,
their Agents came upon his Land, took away a Mare (which they might, with as
good vvarrant, have robbed him of) upon an illegal Presentment, touching the
repair of a Bridge (of which he never heard word, till the time set for
repairing, was expired:) for which Mare he took a Replevin, granted by their
own Steward; but Mr Mead (the arch-incendiary between them and him) denied the
execution of it, and caused the Mare to be kept in a secret place where the
Doctor might not come at her, nor know where she was.

Doctor Burges vvaited a while, to see if the Corporation would right him. But
they owned all; for having kept her from him, from July 1657. till April 1658.
they then sold her. And, when the Buyer (fearing belike, he might be
questioned) craved a Certificate of his buying of her, This Certificate was
given him.

Wells City in the County of Somerset.
THese are to certify all whom it may concern, that this present first day of
April, 1658. Jews Love-lace of Cardiff in the County of Glamorgan in Wales (as
he says) bought one white Mare, with an S. in the near Buttock, which Mare did
belong to this Corporation, and by the said Corporation sold unto the said
Love-lace. In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal of
Mayoralty the day and year aforesaid.

W. S. Mayor.

Not content with this, they endeavored to draw in one Amur, a young fellow of
very mean condition, that newly set up the Trade of a Carpenter, or
mungrel-Joyner, to buy not only the Guild Hall and Prison, but the Chambers or
Rooms over the Prison. The Doctor hearing of it, sent for him, and let him
know, it would not be safe for him to purchase things in Controversy: and
that, albeit they had gotten it by a Trial at Law, yet he meant not so to give
it over.

Amur thank't the Doctor for this friendly premonition, and promised not to
purchase it. But afterward he was so far drawn in, that he did purchase the
said Guild Hall, Prison and Chambers over it (as he has since said) of the
said Corporation, (who had forfeited that, and all the rest of their second
purchase, above two years before.) And when he had got Possession of it, he
did so affront the Doctor, both in words and deeds, as (it is doubted) will
in the issue fall too heavy upon himself. And for all, he pretends the Order
and Warrant of the Corporation.

These affronts, seconded with perpetual scorns, derisions, and raylings,
(especially by one Bridger,) enforced him upon mature advice, to commence some
Suites at Law against their Agents; yet not one half so many, as their bold
Town Clerk, and Mr Mead, more suo (it being afternoon) averred to the
Commissioners for Obstructions, in June 1658.

But the Doctor, remembering how much it still concerns him to seek peace and to
pursue it, even when it flies most from him, forbore a Trial at Law for that
present, and petitioned the honorable Commissioners for removing of
Obstructions, to hear and determine all differences between him and that
Corporation. Summons thereupon issuing, in May last, The Corporation, by their
Agents and Counsel appeared before the said Commissioners, the 23 of June last,
and were heard.

See the Order June 23. 1658.
AT which hearing, the Counsel for the Town alleged, That there had been a
Trial in the Case, at the Common Plea's Bar by consent; and upon that Trial,
the Town of Wells obtained a Verdict, Judgment, and Execution; and that the
said Trial was (by like consent) to be final, as to the Tenements in question
between them; and produced a Rule of the said Court, to that purpose and
effect; and that the Petitioner has diverse Actions depending at Law; and
therefore moved that the whole matter might be left to Law.

But, Doctor Burges being present, alleged that he was vvilling to stand to
the judgments of the said Commissioners upon the whole matters in Difference,
and to vvave proceedings at Law. And that his present Addresses to them, were,
for Hearing and Determining of a Report Ordered by the Committee for removing
Obstructions to have been Reported to the Parliament; and, by the Parliament
Referred to their determination. That he insisted not upon the Title of those
Houses which by their Order was referred to Law, and there tried; unless of
those Canonical Houses and Borough Rents adjudged to him by former Orders of
the said late Committee. And prayed a Confirmation of the Orders of the said
late Committee of Parliament for preventing of further Suites, etc. Upon
consideration of all which, and of what was further offered on both sides, It
was Ordered, that the (said) Cause between the said Doctor Burges, and the
Mayor, Masters, and Burgesses of Wells, their Agents and Tenants (should) be
taken into Consideration on Friday, the 12 of November (then) next, in the
forenoon, the said Dr Burges having given his Consent that all proceedings at
Law, concerning any matter to be heard by them (the Commissioners) should be
stayed in the mean time, Mr White of Counsel for the Defendants being present
taking notice of this Order.

But when this was Ordered, the Commissioners, at the same time advised, that
all Differences might in the mean time, be, by some reference, ended by
friends; Doctor Burges taking hint from thence, held it his duty to attempt
this, yet once more, as well knowing that the determining of Controversies by
consent, ever produces a more firm and lasting peace, than a forced
Conclusion. Therefore he made his Addresses to their greatest friend, the Lord
Disbrow; and obtained of his Lordship, first a perusal of most of the Orders
and Papers before recited, by which he might be fully informed of the true
State of the Cause; and then, a recommendation of it to friends in these words:
WHereas upon serious and Christian consideration, it is held fit and necessary
that there be a firm and speedy Agreement made between the Mayor, Masters and
Burgesses of Wells on the one part, and Doctor Cornelius Burges on the other
part, touching ALL Controversies and Differences between them. To which end,
the right honorable the Lord Disbrow, has, out of his earnest and pious
desire of the good of both parties, propounded, that Robert Hunt, John
Harrington, Francis Roll and John Buckland Esquires, being persons of known
abilities and integrity, should be jointly desired, and indifferenly chosen by
the said Corporation and Dr Burges, to be Arbitrators to hear and determine All
matters in difference between the said Parties, either by themselves the said
Arbitrators, or by the major part of them. To which the said Dr Burges has
very willingly assented: upon condition, That the Parties do mutually become
bound in a Bond obilgatory of two thousands pounds each to other, to submit
unto, and to execute and perform the Award of the said Arbitrators, or of the
major part of them, or of the Umpire chosen by them, before they enter upon
debate of the Differences. And that such choice of the said Umpire so made, be
given in writing to each of the Parties, under the Hands and Seals of the said
Arbitrators, at the beginning of the said Treaty, upon the sealing and delivery
of the Bonds aforesaid by both Parties to each other, in presence of the said
Arbitrators, at the first meeting: And also that the said Award, or Umpirage be
made, and a Duplicate thereof written, Signed, Sealed, and delivered to each
party concerned therein, before the first day of October next coming: And that
the charge of all meetings of the said Arbitrators and Umpiere hereabout, and
of writing, and other incident expenses, be equally born by the said
Corporation and Dr. Burges.

C. Burges.


White Hall Jul. 1. 1658.
I desire a Concurrence in both parties to what is here propounded.

JOHN DISBROW.




This, by his Lordships direction was brought to him Jul. 1. of which he
desired a Copy to be given by himself to the other side; which was done, and
delivered to them ere he Signed the Paper before set down: for he did not Sign
it until July 5. So soon as the Doctor got home to Wells, he gave notice
thereof to the Mayor; and shortly after, attended the Mayor at his house for
prosecuting of this course. Their Recorder and Town Clerk, then present, said,
that they told the Lord Disbrow when they received the Paper from him, that as
touching the Houses by them recovered at Law (the trial being to be final, by
consent) the Corporation could not refer them, because there was now no
difference between them and the Doctor; and therefore no Reason they should be
referred: and that his Lordship thought so too.

To this the Doctor answered, that his Lordship spoke nothing to him of such an
exception, when he Signed the Reference, after they had so spoken unto him. But
he must insist upon those, as now the chief difference: because albeit the
Trial was by consent, to be final; yet this was only to assure the Court in
which it was tried, that they should be no more troubled therewith: nor did he
ever consent upon such an account, that if the Cause were carried by a false
Oath (as that was) he should never seek justice elsewhere: it being very well
known, that no consent or Order in one Court, can bind up any man from seeking
remedy in another.

The Mayor promised to acquaint his Brethren with it at a Chequer, which he
accordingly did; and having read the Paper of Reference to them Signed by the
Lord Disbrow, they thereupon made this following Order.

At the Convocation held the 23. of July 1658. these were present.
Mr. William Smith Mayor. Mr. Rich. Thomas. Mr. Hugh Merefield. Mr. Sam. Read.
Mr. Robert Hurman. Mr. Thomas Salmon. Mr. Richard Friar. Mr. Jos. Gallington.
Mr. John Davidg. Mr. Thomas Nixon. Mr. Robert Hill. Mr. Robert Hole. Mr. Hen
Baron.


AT this meeting this House being acquainted with the transactions that passed
this last Term between the Corporation and Doctor Burges, and of the
interposition made by the Right Honorable John Lord Disbrow, and his mediation
of peace, and of the proposals made by Dr. Burges, to Mr. Mayor and our
Recorder, since his coming into the Country, in pursuance of a Reference: It is
agreed by all here present, that Mr. Mayor, Mr. Recorder, Mr. Salmon, Mr. Mead,
Mr. Gallington, and Mr. Standish be entreated to take upon them the burden of
meeting and answering the demands of Dr. Burges, and of consulting together,
what is to be done concerning the said Reference. And this House does likewise
agree, and they will assent unto whatsoever the said Gentlemen, or any five or
four of them shall do in the premises. Provided that when they have brought
things to a good perfection, that they at the next meeting of this House
afterward, being thereunto required, shall give an exact account of their
proceedings.

A true Copy, examined by me, John Standish T.C.

Upon this, Mr. Mayor and Dr. Burges agreed upon a Letter to be drawn up, and
Signed by them both, and after sent to each of the four Gentlemen before named
in the Reference (together with a Copy thereof) which was sent by one of the
Corporation and one of the Doctor's sons (going together) to every one of them,
as follows.

Honorable Sir,
IT is the pious desire and endeavor of our Noble friend the Lord Disbrow,
that all Differences between the Corporation of Wells and Doctor Burges should
be friendly composed by your self and the other Gentlemen mentioned in the
enclosed Paper, which is a true Copy of the writing which his Lordship has
Signed.

Our humble and joint request to you is, that you will please to do us that
office of piety and love, to meet the rest of the Gentlemen, at the Sign of the
Crown in Wells upon Thursday in the next week, there to confer and agree upon
the course of proceeding herein: and upon a further meeting afterward to make
us both happy, by perfecting that work which we on both sides cordially desire
as the greatest obligation you can lay upon, Sir,

Your humble Servants, most ready to serve you. C. Burges. Will. Smith.

Wells, Jul. 28. 1658.

On Thursd. Aug. 5. Mr. Roll, Mr. Buckland and Mr. Harrington met accordingly;
the Mayor, Recorder, Town Clerk, and Mr. Thomas Mead (Agents for the Town) were
present. These Agents first pressed Dr. Burges to give in a Paper in writing,
of the differences between him and the Town, before Bonds (which the Town Clerk
had drawn) were sealed, or the Umpire chosen: which the Dr. for a while
refused, because the first thing to be done was the choosing of an Umpire, and
Sealing the Bonds: but they still insisting upon giving in the Heads of the
differences, the Dr. gave in these: The Differences concern,

1. All the encroachments and intrenchments of the Mayor, Masters and Burgesses
of Wells, and of their Agents and Instruments upon the Manor of Wells, and
what ever else of the late Possessions and Hereditaments of the late Bishop of
Bath and Wells, that has not truly and indeed been sold before the 16 day of
March 1648. within the Manor or Borough of Wells, although passed by General
words, by surprise, in any Conveyance to the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses.

2. Their second Purchase made in the year 1655.

3. The Cathedral Church in Wells and the Liberty thereof.

4. The Bishops Almshouses in Wells.

Aug. 5. 1658.

These are are all the Heads of the differences I shall insist upon, unless the
Corporation shall own any private Differences or suits between me and others.

C. Burges.




In the draught of the Bond that was to be sealed by the Corporation, no
particular persons were named in it; but it runs thus: We the Mayor, Masters
and Burgesses, etc. Doctor Burges excepted against this, and desired their
several names might be expressed in the Bond: for that a Bond being a personal
security, could not after be put in suit against any person or persons, but
such as are here named in it. This spent some time in Dispute. But upon the
motion of one of the Referrees, it was at length resolved, That the Bonds then
drawn up should be sealed, de been esse, till the Doctor should be satisfied by
Counsel. And, if Counsel should declare such Bond to be invalid, the Town
should seal another. Then Mr. Harrington was requested by the other two
Gentlemen (who intended to return to their homes that night) to receive and
keep the Bonds on both sides till the Doctor had at the approaching Assizes, or
elsewhere, received satisfaction from his Counsel. The Bonds were to be sealed
the next morning, and Mr. Harrington agreed to receive them.

On the same fifth of August, the Agents for the Town, when they had read the
Differences given in by the Doctor, they excepted against the second, as being
now no Difference, seeing it had been concluded by a Trial at Law, which by
consent was to be final. The Doctor repeated what he had before spoken in
private to the Mayor in answer thereunto; adding this, That so soon as the
Umpire was chosen, and the Bonds sealed, they might, if they pleased, urge this
to the Referrees, without prejudice: for when these Gentlemen had heard the
reasons on both sides, they would easily judge whether that were now a
difference or not. And if they found cause to adjudge it to be none, they knew
the Doctor would be fast enough bound to stand to that Declaration as part of
the Award.

This at the present seemed to satisfy: but these things were so long in
debate, that nothing more could be done that day, but only to order the
preparing of the Bonds against the next morning.

Friday being come, August 6. Mr. Buckland (who went not home on Thursday night
as he had intended) and Mr. Harrington met again in the same place, expecting
the sealing of the Bonds. But instead thereof, the Mayor, the Town Clerk, and
two Gentlemen more of the Town, told the Referrees, That the Corporation had
that morning met, and resolved, That neither now, nor hereafter would they
become bound to the Doctor by their personal named: and that they were now also
resolved, That their second purchase should not be referred as a Difference,
but be excepted out of the Reference, in the Condition of the Bonds.

Dr. Burges then pressed the Agreement made the day before, for altering the
Bond, if by Counsel it should be found to be of no force. And next, that the
putting such an exception in the condition of the Bond, was not at all
mentioned on the Thursday. And if they excepted that difference, it must needs
argue their dissidence in the Gentlemen jointly chosen to arbitrate the whole;
yea, that if before Bonds were sealed, the Corporation would thus limit and
bind up their own Agents, there could not be any hope of their standing to any
thing debated and determined by those Gentlemen.

Hereupon the Doctor drew up and delivered a second paper, at the same time, to
the said Mr. Buckland and Mr. Harrington, in the presence of the other side;
which Paper contained the same Heads of Differences he had given in the day
before: whereunto he added the following Lines, viz.

Now forasmuch as the Reference signed by the Lord Disbrow, July 5. 1658.
(since he spoke with the Agents for the Town) expresses ALL Differences,
without exception; and, that not only the Mayor subscribing Letters to all the
Arbitrators, but two several Acts of the Council or Convocation of the
Corporation of Wells (the one held July 23 last, the other August 2 instant)
enabling several of their Members to treat, and to prosecute the Reference so
signed, do not at all except any of the particulars above mentioned: I do
absolutely refer all, without exception, to the said Arbitrators, or to the
major part of them, or to the Umpire chosen by them, according to the said
draught of Reference signed by the Lord Disbrow: not waving the same in any
thing; and do earnestly desire the Corporation to do the like; forasmuch as
without this, there can be no firm peace.

C. Burges.
May 6. 1658.

The Agents for the Town pleaded that their hands were bound up, so that they
could not yield hereunto. Presently after, the Gentlemen brake up that meeting,
and never more met about it. Whereupon the Doctor having drawn up the short
Narrative foregoing in Writing of the Proceedings at that time, the Gentlemen
were pleased to certify the truth thereof thus.

This is the substance of what passed in the Reference between Dr. Burges and
the Corporation of Wells.

John Buckland. John Harrington.


Mr. Roll did the like for so much as passed on the Thursday, Aug. 5.

This Reference (as all other before had done) coming to nothing, the Doctor
was now necessitated to attend the honorable Commissioners for removing of
Obstructions, for an Hearing at Worcester House, Nov. 12. according to their
last Order. But some of the Commissioners being then absent, the Hearing was
put off until the 25 of November, which was no ordinary sitting day, but
assigned on purpose for that only business, that nothing might intervene to
interrupt them in the full hearing of it.

That day being come, both sides, with their Counsel, attended. The honorable
Commissioners entered upon the Cause a little after three of clock, which held
until past eight at night. And having fully heard both sides, and after debated
the whole alone by themselves, they made this following Order.

25 November. 1658. By the Commissioners for removing Obstructions in the sale of
Bishops Lands.
WHereas the Cause upon the Petition of Cornelius Burges Dr. in Divinity,
Purchaser from the Trustees, for sale of Bishops Lands, of the Manor of Wells,
in the County of Somerset, against the Mayor, Masters and Burgesses of Wells,
and their Agents John Casebeard, John Standish, David Barret, and others (upon
a Report of the Case drawn up by the late Committee of Parliament for removing
Obstructions, which by their Order of the eighth of May, 1650. was to have been
reported to the then Parliament) came before us this day, to be heard and
determined, (by Virtue of an Act of the said late Parliament, bearing date the
12 of October 1652. in this and the like Cases made and provided,) in the
presence of the said Doctor Burges and Mr. Graves his Counsel; and of Mr.
Maddison, and Mr. White, of Counsel with the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses;
the matter of the said Petition being, to be relieved against the said Mayor,
Masters and Burgesses of Wells (amongst other things) for undue keeping from
the Petitioner, by color of a Conveyance made to them from the Trustees for
sale of Bishops Lands, bearing date the 22 of March 1647. of diverse things not
contracted for by them, which did of right belong to the said Manor of Wells,
contracted for by the said Doctor Burges, and accordingly conveyed unto him by
the said Trustees on the 24 of March 1648. And it now appearing unto us, upon
reading the said Report of the said late Committee of Parliament, that as well
by Certificates from the Contractors for sale of the said Lands, as upon
examination of the matter, they found, That at the Request of the said
Casebeard, the said Contractors made an Order of the 26 of November, to the
Register of the said Lands to make forth a Particular of the Royalties of the
Borough and Hundred of Wells and Wells-Forum, with the Fairs of Priddy and
Bineger, parcel of the possessions of the late Bishop of Bath and Wells: and
that this was the only Warrant for any Particular in reference to the said
Corporation: That the said Corporation, after their Contract made with them,
the 15 of December, 1647. by their Agents surprised the said Contractors, and
much wronged the State, by taking away of the first Particular, upon which the
said Contract was made, and the drawing up of a new one, without Warrant, by
one Mr. Thomas Salmon. And that this last Particular contains much more in it
then the said Town bought and paid for, or then the said Contractors intended
to sell to them. And that accordingly to the latter Particular, their
Conveyance was drawn up, and Sealed. And that by the Special words of that
Conveyance (amongst other things) they carry these following, which were never
Contracted for, nor sold to them, (viz.) the whole Baylywick, valued after
three lives in being at 40 l. per annum: which they now allege they have since
purchased: Two weekly Markets in the City of Wells, the Guild Hall and Prison,
which have ever belonged to the Lord of the Manor: which said Guild Hall and
Prison, they also allege they have since purchased. All VVaises, Estrayes,
Deodands, and Felons Goods upon the said Manor. All Courts, Baron and Minery
Courts, all VVays and Streets, which have ever belonged to the Lord of the said
Manor. And that by the general words, unduly thrust into the said Particular
and Conveyance (of all Royalties, Services, Franchises, Liberties, Privileges,
Immunities, Profits, Commodities, Advantages and Emolument whatsoever, of what
nature or quality soever, within the City or Borough of Wells and Wells Forum,
or any part or parcel thereof, to the late Bishop of Bath and Wells in right of
his said Bishopric of Bath and Wells belonging) may be comprehended, and
hereafter claimed the Royalties of the Lot-Lead, the Royalties and Services of
the Manor of Wells, and Rents both of the Manor and Borough, and all Waifs,
Heriots, Commons, Services of Tenants, etc. All which are valued in the Surveys
to amount to 250 l. per annum.

Now, upon consideration had of the said Report, and of the Powers and
Authority given us by the aforesaid Act of Parliament, of the 12 of October
1652. whereby we are Authorized and empowered to Hear and Determine all such
Cases, as were by the said late Committee Ordered to be Reported to the
Parliament; and upon full and deliberate hearing of Counsel on both sides, We
do Determine, and so Order, That the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses of Wells
shall at, or before the 8 of January next ensuing, by such good Conveyance in
the Law as by Rowland Jewks Esquire; shall be advised, and with usual Covenants
as well against all encumbrances in Title, charge, or Estate, as for quiet and
peaceable enjoyment, against the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses and their
Successors, and all claiming by, from, or under them, or any of them, Convey
and assure unto the said Cor. Burges his Heirs and Assigns, all the Right,
Title, and Interest which they have, or claim to have by virtue or color of
their Deed of Purchase from the said Trustees, dated the 22 of Nov. 1647. in
and to all Waives, Estrays, Deodands, Felons goods upon the said Manor, as
also all Courts Baron to the said Manor of Wells belonging, and Minery Courts,
all Ways and Streets, the Royalties of the Lot-Lead, the Royalties, Rents and
Services of and belonging to the Manor of Wells, and fifty couple of
Wild-Fowl, formerly payable to the said late Bishop out of the Decoy-Pool
within or near the Manor of Westbury. And all Heriots, Commons, Services of
Tenants, together with all other Royalties, Services, Franchises, Liberties,
Privileges, Immunities, profits, commodities, advantages and emoluments
whatsoever, of what nature or quality soever, of or belonging to the said
Manor, or any part or parcel thereof, to the only use and behoof of the said
Cor. Burges his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

William Roberts. Jo. Berners. To. Aldworth. Henry Pyt.

On the same 25 of Nov. the said Commissioners made another Order, in another
Difference between the Doctor and that Corporation: (in confirmation of a
former Order of May 8. 1650. made therein by the forecited Committee of
Parliament, upon a full hearing of that Case, in presence of both parties, and
upon examination of the said Doctors conveyance) after hearing of both parties
again, and of what could be alleged by Counsel on behalf of the said Mayor,
Masters and Burgesses, That the said Mayor, Masters and Burgesses do pay unto
the said Dr. Burges, the Arrears of the said Rent behind and unpaid, and
continue the payment of the said yearly Rent to the said Doctor Burges,
according to the said former Order. And the said Dr. Burges be allowed Costs
upon a Bill to be brought in upon Oath.

Since which time, Oath has been made of serving these Orders upon the present
Mayor of Wells; and of sending to him a Deed engrossed and attested by Mr.
Jewks to have been drawn by his Advice, for the said Corporation to Seal; and
of a demand made of the said Rents and Arrears, on the 11 of Dec. last. All
which the said Mayor promised to impart to the rest of his Brethren, who
thereupon appointed some of their Members to treat with the Dr. with whom a
Treaty was had in a friendly manner, and great hope was conceived of a fair end
of all. But when ( Jan. 1.) the Dr. sent a second time for the said Rent and
Arrears, the Mayor answered, that he was commanded by the House (that is, the
Corporation) to return this Answer, That the Corporation would pay neither
rent, nor arrears: nor did they think fit to seal the said Conveyance.

The Dr. sent again to him, to tell him that he would not take that for a final
answer, for that they had yet a full week more allowed by the Order for sealing
the Deed: and therefore out of his earnest desire of peace, he prayed the Mayor
to call one Chequer more, and to consider better of that matter, before they
returned their last Answer by which they meant to stand. The Mayor did so.
After which, several of them treated with the said Dr. again. But then, they
insisted upon his Sealing of a Deed to them to confirm their second purchase of
the Borough Rents, Baylywick, Guild Hall and Prison, and the 7 Canonical
Houses, by them purchased, Ann. 1655.

All which, the Doctor had before petitioned the honorable Com^missioners for
Obstructions to hear and determine; and after, desired ^^ Refer that whole
business to four Gentlemen, chosen by both Parties ^^ decide all Differences:
they refused both, as being before dete^^mined by Law, as before is set forth.
Nor were these things now b^^fore the said Commissioners; but, Referred to the
Law. The Doct^^ further made it evident, that he should be very greatly
damnified, if b^ any Act of his (after he had sold those Houses) he should
confirm an a^^ter purchase thereof to them; which the Town had unduly procured
a clancular way, without acquainting him therewith before their Con^tract, as
they were Ordered to do. And so they refuse to obey bo the said Orders.

Which contempt they are animated unto, by their Agents Mr Thom^^ Mead, and
John Standish, as also by their present Mayor, and su^^ others of that
Corporation, as they could draw to side with them. ^^ may appear thus: Mr Mead
and Standish, have had an allowance of 6 apeece per diem, for following this
business against the Doctor; an^ upon that account, gotten Grants of most
things purchased by the said Corporation, to satisfy that salary; (albeit it
be too well known, t^^ at the same time, they came up to London in businesses
of their ow^ which would have forced them to keep Terms here, although the
Co^^poration had not employed them.) Now, they seeing that if the Tow had
submitted to those Orders, that submission would not only have p^^ an end to
their gaining by these Contentions, but perhaps outed them several things
granted to them by the Town: Therefore on the sa^^ 25 of November. last, so soon
as the honorable Commissioners had declar^ themselves, and Ordered what is
before recited, the said Agents, before they went out of the Room where this
Cause was heard and Ordere^ were overheard to say, that they would warrant,
That the Corporati^^ of Wells should never obey those Orders.

And the said Mead, after the first Treaty had with the Doctor in Wel^^ said
further, in the hearing of diverse persons, that the Doctor hoped the Town
would do what the said Orders enjoined; but he would be d^^ceived. And being
then told, that if the Town obeyed not the Order course would be taken to send
Messengers for such as refused; Me^^ replied, That before the Doctor could
procure that, they would brin^ it into the Parliament, and there they would
have men that should de^^ well enough with him; or words to that effect. And
when the sai^ Mead was again chosen at another Chequer to treat a second time
wit^ the Doctor, be refused, as displeased at any more Treaties for peace.

And the Mayor (upon an old grugdge) while he made fair shows of de^siring
several Treaties, to make a peaceable Conclusion, dealt under hand with John
Casebeard (often before mentioned) (to undertake the business again, as he had
formerly done) against the Doctor, before he re^turned the Answer of the
Corporation to the Doctor, as the Doctor hat^ been credibly told by one that
will make Oath of it, if need require.

Legenda.
IN marg. page 6. Dan. Ethic. Chr. l. 2 c. 15. p 20 mar. r. Dunel. l. 44.
paratos. p. 24 mar. parag 2. r. Act. 4.36, 37. p. 53. l. 3 r valuable. p. 57.
l. 15. r. Mayor, Masters. p. 64. l. 44. much dis^^^^sed.


