Spiritual Refining: OR A TREATISE OF GRACE and ASSURANCE. Wherein are handled,
The Doctrine of Assurance. The Use of Signs in Self-examination. How true
Graces may be distinguished from counterfeit. Several true Signs of Grace, and
many false ones. The Nature of Grace under diverse Scripture Notions or Titles,
as Regeneration, The New Creature, The Heart of flesh, Vocation,
Sanctification, etc. Many chief Questions (occasionally) controverted between
the Orthodox and the Arminians. As also many Cases of CONSCIENCE. Tending to
Comfort and confirm Saints. Undeceive and convert Sinners.



Being CXX Sermons Preached and now Published by Anthony Burgess sometime
Fellow of Emanuel College in Cambridge, and now Pastor of the Church of
Sutton-Coldfield in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed by A. Miller for Thomas Underhill at the Anchor and Bible in
Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-door, 1652.

TO THE READER.
IAm not discouraged to publish this plain Practical Treatise to the world,
although it bring no Peacocks from Ophyr, no strange affected words or
opinions. You shall not come out to see here, A man clothed with soft
raiments, but rather one like that man of Jericho, greatly wounded, desiring
oil to be poured therein. And indeed holy and spiritual matter has most
convincing Majesty, when words do not obscure it; Painting of a Diamond hinders
the luster thereof: What Tully said of the Philosopher, is much more true of
the Divine, Si affert eloquentiam, accipio; si non habet, non admodum flagitem.
Therefore it being my main scope to bring the Reader into a powerful
experimental Discovery of True Grace upon his own heart: I thought Words,
Opinions, Notions and Controversies would be like Asahel's Carcass in the way,
to move men to gaze on them, while they neglected more necessary and excellent
matter. The true Work of Grace separated from the Counterfeit, with the
assurance thereof, is the main Subject of this Book, and should be of our
constant thoughts and meditations; this will be useful, when all other things
will vanish; As Noah's Ark continued on the Waters, when all the stately Palaces
of the world were overwhelmed. Grace justifying is indeed the treasure of a
Christian, but Grace sanctifying is the Key to open thereunto: Grace justifying
is much to be pressed, either to broken contrite hearts, or when corrupt
Doctrines (as in Popery) have dangerously infected; but Grace sanctifying is
constantly to be urged to every natural man, and all unbottomed Professors: Now
there is no man that knows how it fares with us in these days, but must
acknowledge this Subject very useful. The vitals of godliness must be in a
special manner preserved; that inward infused heat must not be weakened by
useless evaporations: Disputes: Opinions and Differences of Judgment, must not
be suckers to draw away nourishment from the substantial parts of holiness. Our
Savior himself chose this subject above all other to preach to his hearers; It
was not their flocking after him in multitudes did content him, but upon all
occasions he instructed them in the deep, sure and rooted work of Grace: even
in his Ministry, he separated the Sheep from Goats, the Wheat from the Chaff,
and the good Ground from the bad, the wise Virgin from the foolish. This then
is the one necessary thing, and they choose the better part who prefer it
before all controversal matter. Oh that all would be invited to taste and see
how sweet the Practical Power of Grace is above all Notional Discourses! And oh
that this Book, if thou vouchsafest to read it, might be to thee like Elisha's
stretching himself upon the dead Child, to bring spiritual life with the
Operations thereof! I have also (the matter requiring) dispersed through the
Treatise Practical Arguments against Arminianism, which is not only repugnant
to many eminent pregnant places of Scripture, but (as Doctor Ames well urged
against Grevinchovins) is contrary Communi sensui fidelium, The Experience and
sense all the faithful have had of Gods gracious working upon them. It has
greatly grieved me to see men of great Repute amongst their Disciples at least,
publicly to avouch such Doctrines, without any trembling or hesitation; for
who will not be ready to fall down and worship the gilded Image of Error, at
the sound of such Sackbuts and Psalteries. But I hope the People of God will
say to such Teachers, Non est disputandum de gustu, That which we have seen and
felt, as it were, upon our Souls, that we will adhere unto. I shall shut up all
with Luthers Prayer, A Doctore glorioso, Pastore contentioso, and inutilibus
quaestionibus liberet Ecclesiam Deus, From a Doctor that seeks only his own
glory, from a contentious Pastor that affects to remove the bounds of Truth,
and from unprofitable Questions, Let God deliver his Church.

Amen.
Sutton-Coldfield July the 3d. 1652. ANTHONY BURGESS.

A Table of the Texts and Contents of each SERMON in this TREATISE.
SECT. I. THe Doctrine of Assurance and Signs.
SERMON I, II. 2 Corinthians. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the
faith, prove your own selves, etc. How necessary and advantageous the Assurance
of our being in the state of Grace is. SERMON III. Whether hypocrites may not
attain to some measure of practical Knowledge in matters of Religion. SERMON
IV. That Assurance may be had. SERMON V. Handles the adjuncts of Assurance,
viz. The Possibility, Excellency, Difficulty, and Necessity of having it.
SERMON VI. Shows the difference between true Assurance and Presumption.
SERMON VII. Contains Remedies against carnal Confidence, with Directions to
the Godly that mourn under the sense of the want of Gods favor. And why God
does deny Assurance, where he has given Grace. SERMON VIII. Holds forth
diverse Propositions and distinctions about Marks and Assurance. SERMON IX, X.
Showing the lawfulness and duty of proceeding by way of Signs: And proving
that inherent gracious Qualifications within a man, evidence his Justification.
And answering many Doubts about Signs. SERMON XI. Shows how many ways men
may miscarry in the work of Self-Examination by Signs.
SECT. II. Containing many true Signs of Grace.
SERMON XII. 1 John 2. 3. And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep
his Commandments. Handling Obedience as a sign of Grace. SERMON XIII. 2 Cor. 1.
12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in godly
simplicity and sincerity, etc. Handling Sincerity as a sign of Grace. SERMON
XIV. 1 John 3. 9, 10. Whosoever is born of God sins not, because the seed
abides in him; neither can be sin, because he is born of God: In this the
children of God are manifest. That Opposition against, and Abstinence from sin,
is a sign of Grace. SERMON XV. Psalm 26. 2. Examine me (O Lord) and prove me,
try my reins and heart. That for a man to be willing to have his soul searched
by God, is a sign of Grace. SERMON XVI. John 15. 2. Ana every branch that
bears fruit he purges, that it may bring forth more fruit. Growth in Grace,
a sign of Grace. SERMON XVII. 1 John 4. 13. Hereby know we that we dwell in
him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. Spiritual
performance of Duties a sign of Grace. SERMON XVIII. 1 John 3. 18. We know that
we have passed from death to life because we love the Brethren. Love to the
Godly is a sign of Grace.
SECT. III. A Discovery of many false or unsufficient Signs of Grace which
carnal men support themselves with.
SERMON XIX. Rom 2. 28, 29. For he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, etc.
Church Priviledges no sign of Grace. SERMON XX. Matthew. 7. 22. Many will say
unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, etc. Gifts and Parts in matters of Religion no
sign of Grace. SERMON XXI. Hebr. 6. 9. But beloved we hope better things of
you, and things that accompany salvation. That there may be affections and
sweet motions of heart in holy things, which yet evidence not Grace, nor
accompany salvation. SERMON XXII. Romans 14. 17. For the Kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, but Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Shows,
That from Judgments, Opinions and Disputes, Arguments of the Truth of Grace
cannot be drawn. SERMON XXIII. 1 John 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit,
but try the spirits, whether they be of God. Declaring what deceits men lie
open to, in Judging those things to be Works of the Spirit, which indeed are
not. SERMON XXIV. 1 Cor. 13. 3. And although I give my body to be burned, and
have not charity it profits me nothing. Manifesting that the greatest
sufferings for Christ, are not infallible Evidences of Grace. SERMON XXV. Mat.
19. 20. The young man says unto him, All these things have I kept from my
youth up, What lack I yet? Showing that, and whence, men have such strong
persuasions of their exact keeping of Gods Law. SERMON XXVI. Acts 26. 5. Which
knew me from the beginning (if they would testify) that after the straitest
sect of our Religion, I lived a Pharisee. Declaring that many rest upon a
strict way of Religion, which yet comes not up to, but often is beside the
appointment of the Word. SERMON XXVII. Mark 7. 7. Howbeit in vain do they
worship me, teaching for Doctrines the traditions of men. Zeal and diligence in
false Worship, no ground of Comfort. SERMON XXVIII. Mat. 5. 20. For I say unto
you that except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of heaven. External
obedience to the Law of God, no sure evidence for heaven. SERMON XXIX. James 2.
26. For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead
also. That a Divine faith or persuasion of the truths in Religion, is not
evidence sure enough of our being in the state of Grace. SERMON XXX. John 8.
54. If I should honor my self my honor were nothing, It is my Father that
honors me, of whom you say, He is your God. That every peaceable frame of
heart, and persuasion of Gods love, is not a sure Testimony of saving Grace.
SERMON XXXI. Deuteronomy. 9. 4, 5. Speak not in thy heart, after that the Lord thy God
has cast them out from before thine eyes, saying, For my righteousness the
Lord has brought me in to possess this Land, etc. That outward success,
prosperity and greatness in the world is no true evidence of Grace. SERMON
XXXII. 2 Pet. 2. 20. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the
world, through the knowledge of Jesus Christ, etc. That a man's leaving those
gross sins he has lived in, is no sign of Grace. SERMON XXXIII. Mat. 19. 20.
When the Disciples heard this, they were astonished, saying, Who then can be
saved? The Difficulty, and in some sense, impossibility of salvation,
notwithstanding the easiness which men fancy to themselves thereof.
SECT. IV. Wherein is handled the Nature of Sanctifying Grace, under the Title
of Regeneration, with the Counterfeit thereof.
SERMON XXXIV. John 3. 3. Jesus answered and said, Verily, verily, Unless a man
be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of heaven. Showing what the New Birth
or Regeneration is. SERMON XXXV. John 3. 10. Art thou a Master in Israel, and
know not these things? Showing how ignorant, men of great Learning and
outward Righteousness in the world, may be of Regeneration. SERMON XXXVI. John
3. 6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh. The ground of the necessity of
Regeneration is the corruption of men's nature. SERMON XXXVII. John 3. 8. The
wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can
not tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes, etc. Of the Unexpressablenesse
of this New life. SERMON XXXVIII. John 3. 3. Unless a man be born again he
cannot see the Kingdom of heaven. Laying open the Counterfeits of the
New Birth. SERMON XXXIX. Declaring what both by Duty and Privilege a son of
God is, which he becomes by the New Birth.
SECT. V. Treating of the nature of Grace under the name New Creature, with the
Counterfeit of it.
SERMON XL. Gal. 6. 15. For in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision or
uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new creature. Showing the Necessity of
the New Creature. SERMON XLI. Shows, That the Production of the New Creature
is from God alone, and what Attributes are conspicuous in the work. SERMON
XLII. Showing what the New Creature does not imply, and to what it is opposed.
SERMON XLIII. Concerning the supernaturality and excellent Qualities of the
New Creature. SERMON XLIV. Answering those carnal Objections men are apt to
make against such a change in themselves. SERMON XLV. Showing the Counterfeit
of the New Creature.
SECT. VI. Handling Grace as Gods Workmanship, and Good works as the end
thereof.
SERMON XLVI. Ephesians. 2. 10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus
unto good works, which God had before ordained, that we should walk in them.
The New Creature is Gods workmanship: Also its necessity and Dignity. SERMON
XLVII. That God gives Grace to the most indisposed. SERMON XLVIII. Of Good
works, What to be created unto Good works implies, and what works are good.
SERMON XLIX. Setting forth diverse Distinctions and Axioms to clear the Doctrine
of Good works.
SECT. VII. Of the Sanctifying work of the Spirit under the nation of Grace,
with the Counterfeit of it.
SERMON L. Hebr. 13. 9. For it is a good thing that the heart be established
with grace. not with meats, that have not profited them that have been occupied
therein. Of the hearts being established with Grace, and in what sense it is
so. SERMON LI. Showing why Grace in the heart is better then unnecessary
Disputes in the head, together with rules how to manage Disputes and
Controversies without prejudice to Grace. SERMON LII. That there is a work of
God upon a man's heart, which is called Grace: And why inward holiness is
called Grace. SERMON LIII. Characters and Properties of a Gracious man. SERMON
LIVE. Romans 2. 15. And show the work of the law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, etc. Of the Counterfeit of inherent Grace,
viz. Natural honesty: And why God has continued in wicked men the use of
Conscience. SERMON LV. Showing the causes of the senselesness, silence and
stupidity of the Consciences of most men. SERMON LVI. Showing how prevalent
Natural conscience has been in Heathens in reference to good Laws, Books,
Affections, Lives; and how it should stir up Christians to jealousy. SERMON
LVII. Demonstrating, that Natural piety, Honesty and Sobriety, which is in
Heathens or any others, is not Grace. SERMON LVIII. Of Ethics or Moral
Philosophy, that it leads not to salvation: And that the moral virtues of
Temperance, Fortitude, Justice, Liberality, etc. are not Grace.
SECT. VIII. Treats of the Nature of converting Grace, under the Notion of
Washing or Sanctifying.
SERMON LIX. 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
by the Spirit of our God. To undeceive men, that think, though they live
wickedly, yet they shall die happily: And how it comes to pass that men are so
prone to deceive themselves. SERMON LX. That Gods grace of conversion is
sometimes vouchsafed to the worst of men. SERMON LXI. Of the Washing and
Cleansing of a sinner. SERMON LXII. Of the Grace of God sanctifying a sinner.
SERMON LXIII. Signs and Characters of sanctified ones. SERMON LXIV. The
Counterfeit of Sanctification, That devotion in superstitious customs, or Gods
own Ordinances, or in being externally in Covenant with God, do not really
sanctify a man. SERMON LXV. Comfortable Directions to poor doubting
Christians.
SECT. IX. Of the work of Grace under the Notion of Conversion or Turning unto
God.
SERMON LXVI. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Say unto them, As I live faith the Lord God, I have
no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way
and live: Wherefore turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; For why will ye dye,
O house of Israel. Showing, that the damnation of wicked men, is unpleasing to
God, and that which he delights not in. SERMON LXVII. Diverse Propositions or
Considerations introductory to the Doctrine of Conversion. SERMON LXVIII. The
impediments and obstruction of Conversion; and what kind of persons are most
unlikly ever to be converted; not to drive them to despair, but to awaken them
out of their security. SERMON LXIX. The motives and grounds of our turning unto
God. SERMON LXX. Answering some prejudices and cavils of ungodly men against
conversion or turning unto God. SERMON LXXI. That ungodly Friends and Relations
are great hindrances of ones Conversion: With some helps or directions to those
that are thereby kept in their sins. SERMON LXXII. Some Helps and
Encouragements to those that are discouraged, because of the fruitlesness of
their Resolutions to repent, or the hainousness of their sins. SERMON LXXIII.
Jer. 18. 11. Thus says the Lord, Behold I frame evil against you, and devise a
device against you: Return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your
ways and your doings good. Of Gods framing and devising evil of Calamities,
that men might turn from their evil doings: Also, what Gods framing and
devising evil implies; and why judgments and afflictions, which are the good
effects of Gods Justice, Wisdom and Power, are called evil. SERMON LXXIV. Of
Afflictions, the difference between penal destructive calamities, and those
that are Medicinal: And how Afflictions are operative to the Conversion of men.
SERMON LXXV. Of the time of turning unto God (viz.) Presently. SERMON LXXVI.
That Conversion puts a man upon leaving his beloved sin: The Reason of the
difference of Darling sins in men; and the signs by which a man may know his
beloved sin. SERMON LXXVII. Shows that all persons have need to turn unto
God: And sets forth the true acceptable motives to repentance. SERMON LXXVIII.
Jer 18. 12. And they said, There is no hope, but we will walk after our own
devices, and we will every one do the imaginations of his evil heart. Of the
wilful obstinacy that is in some men, with the causes thereof: And that
ignorance of ones duty is no excuse. SERMON LXXIX. Joel 2. 12, 13. Therefore
also now, says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping and mourning, and rent your hearts, and not your
garments, etc. Of turning not only from sin, but to God; and how many ways men
may do the former, and not the latter: Also, what it is to turn to God. SERMON
LXXX. That our turning to God must be with the whole heart: Wherein hearty
Conversion consists, with the effects of it. SERMON LXXXI. Of Tears and Sorrow
for sin, and that they must accompany conversion. SERMON LXXXII. The nature and
necessity of godly sorrow and weeping for sin, as accompanying Conversion.
SERMON LXXXIII. Jer. 23. 22. But if they had stood in my Counsel, and had
caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their
evil ways, and from the evil of their doings. Of the Ministry of the word, as
the means of Conversion, with the other ends thereof, etc. SERMON LXXXIV. Why
Gods power unto Conversion, does not always go along with his word, though
dispensed by a faithful Ministry: And whether corrupt or profane Ministers may
be a means of Conversion.
SECT. X. Of the nature of Grace, under the Expressions of Taking away the
Stony Heart, Giving a Heart of Flesh, and, Writing Gods Laws in the Heart, with
the counterfeit thereof.
SERMON LXXXV. Ezekiel. 32. 26. I will take away the stony heart out of your
flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. Displayeth Gods Sovereignty and
Dominion over the hearts of men. SERMON LXXXVI. Of the Heart of Stone, and what
wickedness that name implies. SERMON LXXXVII. Of Gods making a true Converts
heart tender and flexible for every duty: Also, what Heart of flesh imples,
with the effects and consequencies of it. SERMON LXXXVIII. Holding forth
inducements to get this promised Heart of flesh: Also, showing the counterfeit
of it.
SECT. XI. Handling Grace under the Notion of Gods putting his Spirit within
us, and Causing us to walk in his statutes.
SERMON LXXXIX. Ezekiel. 36. 27. And I will put my spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep my judgments, and do them. Of
Gods giving his Spirit to a man, and what that promise implies: Also, of the
operations and effects of the spirit of God, where it so comes. SERMON XC. That
the work of Grace is a deep, powerful and inward affecting of the whole man:
And how far Grace may be tendered or rceived, and yet not be put effectually
into our inwards: Also, what this inward deep work of Grace is, with the signs
and effects of it. SERMON XCI. Of the order and method that God takes in our
Conversion: First working in us inward principles, and then causing us to walk
in his statutes, opposite to the Doctrines of Pelagians, Papists, Arminians,
and Moral Philosophy: Also, signs to discover whether our outward duties
proceed from Grace within, or from Humane respects. SERMON XCII. That true
principles of Grace within, must needs demonstrate themselves by an outward
godly life. SERMON XCIII. Gods not only infusing the inward principles of
Grace, but also vouchsafing his quickening, actuating, assisting Grace unto his
people, inabling them to walk in his statutes, maintained against Pelagians,
Arminians and Papists: Also, the happy condition of those who have this latter
Grace, as well as the former. SERMON XCIV. Showing that true Converts make
godliness their ordinary practice: And what to walk in Gods statutes implies.
SERMON XCV. That converted persons are very careful and tender of the worship
of God, observing that, and only that which he has commanded. SERMON XCVI. Of
Righteousness and Equity between man and man: And how tender and conscientious
a true convert is therein. SERMON XCVII. The Hammer of Arminianism,
demonstrating, That God converting and changing a sinner, works after an
Omnipotent efficacious and irresistible manner, against the Patrons of
Freewill, and power of man to supernatural things. SERMON XCVIII. The freeness
of Gods grace in conversion, displayed and maintained against Arminians and
others.
SECT. XII. Handling the work of Grace under the Title of Vocation, or Calling.
SERMON XCIX. Romans 8. 30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also
called, etc. The nature of Vocation opened, in respect of the efficient and
instrumental causes of it. SERMON C. Holding forth the nature of vocation or
divine calling. SERMON XCI. A further Explanation of the nature of effectual
calling, by showing from what, and to what God calls us: As also, the Epithets
the Scripture gives it. SERMON CII. Contains some choice properties or effects
that accompany effectual vocation, whereby men may examine and try themselves
whether they be so called or no. SERMON CIII. 1 Cor. 1. 26. For ye see your
calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble are called. Sitrring up to serious and fixed Meditations upon
this calling, in respect of the manner and time of it, and the persons called.
SERMON CIV. Of true spiritual wisdom, the nature and properties of it,
discovering who are the real wise men in the world. SERMON CV. Wise men after
the flesh Characterized, and (by God for the most part) rejected. SERMON CVI.
Reasons why God passes by Humane wisdom, with the difference between it and
true spiritual wisdom: Also, the commendation of Humane Learning, and how
necessary it is for a Minister. SERMON CVII. Of the consistency of earthly
greatness and nobility with godliness: And yet notwithstanding, how rare it is
for such men to be called and saved. SERMON CVIII. Mat. 22. 14. For many are
called, but few are chosen. The Gospel feast, and who are welcome Guest, and
who not. SERMON CIX. That most of those that are called, come short of what is
absolutely necessary: And who they be. SERMON CX. A plea for stickness in
Religion. SERMON CXI. Of Election and Reprobation, and of the fewness and
properties of those that are chosen, answering the Objections of men, and
clearing the Justice of God. SERMON CXII. More signs and effects of Election,
with directions to those that are overwhelmed with thoughts and fears whether
they are elected or no. SERMON CXIII. Ephesians. 4. 1. I therefore the Prisoner of
the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are
called. Of Christians walking worthy of their calling, what to walk worthy
implies; and what are the properties and actions that will become and grace our
holy calling. SERMON CXIV. Of the nature, extent and example of that holiness
to which God calls a man. SERMON CXV. Of the glorious estate of the Saints in
heaven, to which God calls all sinners repenting and believing. SERMON CXVI. 2
Pet. 2. 10. Wherefore the rather (Brethren) give all diligence to make your
calling and election sure. The Nature, Possibility, Duty and Means of the
Assurance of ones effectual calling. SERMON CXVII. The possibility and duty of
Assurance of our calling demonstrated: And the Reasons why some think a certain
assurance impossible; with Answers to the Objections brought against it. SERMON
CXVIII. The advantages the godly have by assurance: How it may be known from
presumption; with directions to the godly that want it. SERMON CXIX. Acts 2.
29. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Shows in how many respects
wicked men (before their effectual Calling) are afar off from God, and
consequently miserable. SERMON CXX. That not all mankind are called with a
saving call; How absurd it is to hold, That the works of God, the Sun, Moon and
Stars, etc. may so call men: And Gods Justice cleared in that point, stirring
up all to behold the severity and goodness of the Lord.
A TREATISE OF GRACE and ASSURANCE; Being CXX. SERMONS.
SECT. I. The Doctrine of Assurance and Signs.
SERMON I.
How necessary and advantageous the Assurance of our being in the state of
Grace is.

2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith, prove your own
selves, etc.
THe Church of Corinth, though it was a Garden immediately planted by the
Apostles, yet quickly was filled with noisome weeds, whereupon the Apostle
threatens it with severe Discipline, if they repent not; Ecclesiastical
Discipline being in the Church, as the Sword is in the Commonwealth. The
Corinthians distaste this severity, and question his Apostolical power and
authority: Love to men's lusts, and a desire of security in them, rather then
any solid Arguments, make men question the Jus Divinum of Christ's institutions.
The Apostle proves his Calling by that spiritual success and powerful
efficacy which his Word had among them, and therefore instead of proving and
examining him, he commands them to try their own selves. This very Argument may
the faithful Ministers of God in England use against many who now condemn
their Calling.

In the words you have a Duty enjoined. 2. The object matter of it, Which is
illustrated from an absurd consequent, if this duty be neglected.

The Duty is set home in two emphatical words (...), Examine your selves, and
(...), Prove your selves. The former word does in the general signify to take
an experimental knowledge of any thing that is either uncertain, unknown or
hidden. Hence that knowledge which we have by general arguments and abstracted
reasons, cannot be called (...) an experimental knowledge. Now because, besides
the bare knowledge, there may be also a good end or bad propounded in
examination, therefore in an ill sense the word is applied to the devil and his
instruments, and in a good sense to God, and here in the Text to our selves. It
is further to be observed, that these words do imply that men are great
strangers to themselves, and that so much self-love does blind them, that they
know not themselves. Again, These words also imply that there are certain Marks
and Signs, whereby a man may come certainly to know what he is, otherwise this
command would be in vain. To the same purpose is the word also (...) implies a
severe and diligent inquisition into our selves, so as to have a full
experience of what is in us; hence Romans 5. 5. (...) is used for experience.

In the next place you have the object matter, Whether ye be in the faith. He
does not here speak of Fides quae creditur, the Doctrine of faith; but the
saving grace of faith, as appears by the other particular, Know ye not that
Christ is in you? The Apostle says, Ye in the faith, rather then faith in you,
to show the large extent of faith, that we are Subjects who do not contain it
wholly; as he uses contrary phrases to be in sin, and in the flesh rather
then sin, and flesh to be in us; so some observe that, Enter thou into thy
Masters joy, not thy Masters joy into thee; though that seem to be a fancy, and
the true meaning is, Enter into the place of thy Masters joy, for so (...) is
used in Esther. The Popish Commentators to elude this place when brought by the
Orthodox, to prove, That a man may be certain of true grace in him, do answer,
That the Apostle speaks not here of the saving works of the Spirit, but the
miraculous works; This is made an Argument that they were the Apostles of the
true Messiah, because of the miracles wrought among them. And Gal. 3. 5. the
Apostle proves the true Doctrine of Christ to be among them, because of
miracles done to them; we may add also Math. 11. 5. when John's Disciples come
to know, Whether he were the true Christ, Jesus returns this answer, The
blind receive their sight, the lame walk, etc. As if he should have said,
These wonderful works demonstrate me to be the Messiah. Now though it should
be granted, that this were part of the meaning, when the Apostle calls them to
an experimental proof of his Apostleship among them, yet this cannot be all,
because Christ is not said to dwell in us, according to the Scripture phrase,
or to be in us by a mere miraculous faith only.

The consequent absurdity is in those words, Unless ye be reprobates. Piscator
takes reprobates here as opposed to those that are predestined; but I
prefer Baza's judgment, who understands it of a corrupt and unsound mind,
thus, They might easily discover the work of Christ to be in them, or among
them, unless their understandings were in part depraved; for that he does not
suppose a total unsoundnesse in them, appears by the Greek, (...), where
(...) does mitigate the speech; therefore it is rendered by some, Unless in
something you be unsound. That a reprobate mind is a corrupted mind,
appears 2 Timothy 3. 8. Men of corrupt mind, reprobate concerning the faith,
and Tit. 1. 16. Although we do not take reprobates here as opposed to
predestined, yet I see not why we may not well translate it Reprobates, not
as taking it for such who are out of hope of salvation; but as the Scripture
calls Reprobate silver, Jer. 6. 30. which has no worth or fitness in it for
trade. Though the Apostle writes here to the whole Church, yet the duty is to
be observed respectively by every believer; Neither is that true of Estius, who
to avoid the orthodox Arguments for Assurance of grace, says, It may be
easilier known, Christ is in such a Church or Congregation, then in the heart
of a particular believer: for the Text speaks not of Christ's being in his
Doctrine and Ordinances among them, which indeed is easily discerned; but of
his spiritual inhabitation by sanctifying grace in them.

It is a duty of special concernment for the people of God to be assured of
such a true Observe. 1.
and saving work of grace in them, as thereby they shall be differenced from
unsound hypocrites.

There are certain Notes and Sign^ of grace, whereby a man may discern what he
is. Observe. 2.


A Practical and Experimental knowledge of Grace does far transcend a mere
Notional and Theoretical: There is a great difference between him that has
heard Honey is sweet, and him that has tasted it. It is a rule among the
Hebrews, That Verba notitiae, quandoque significaut affectum and effectum.
Words of knowledge do sometimes signify the affections in the heart, and the
effects thereof in life, how well were it if they did always so signify among
Christians. In former times Christians did much labor after an experimental
knowledge, now they luxuriate into a mere brain-knowledge; howsoever in physic
we call that man by way of contempt an Emperick, who goes by experience only,
and has no knowledge of the nature of things, yet to be an Emperick in
Christianity may have a good sense. In legendis libris non quaeramus scientiam,
sed saporem, said Bernard, In reading books let us not so much look for
science, as a savouriness of the truth upon our hearts. Now when the Apostle
commands us to prove and try our selves, it is to endeavor to feel that in
actu secundo, as they say, in actual working, which we persuade our selves is
in us actu primo, or habitually. As for example, Every man thinks he is a
believer, he is regenerated; To prove or try our selves, is to apply those
notes and marks which the Scripture makes of such, and thereby to have an
experimental feeling of the actual exercise of these things. The Scripture
Phil. 1. 9. calls this (...) sense or feeling, where the Apostle distinguishes
it from (...); knowledge and judgment, making it to be the inward savoury
sense and feeling of divine things upon their hearts.

Now that this practical experimental work of grace in our selves, whereby we
are able to discern what is true, and what is imperfect and counterfeit, is
very necessary, will be made manifest from several grounds. As

First, Our Savior did in his Sermons much press this point upon his hearers.
If Reason 1.
that be true which the Heathen said, Quando sapiens loquitur, aulaea animi
aperit, when a wise man speaks he opens the rich treasures and wardrobe as it
were of his mind; This is much more true of Christ, in whom are the treasures
of wisdom. And of all practical points in Divinity our Savior is most
frequently on this, That which is conceived his first Parable, Matthew. 13. it is
mainly to show the difference of true grace from that which is like it only,
and as being a matter of great concernment; it is said Luke 8. 8. after the
Parable was ended, Jesus cried, He that has ears to hear let him hear. Now
that crying is never attributed unto Christ's speech, but when his affections
were very earnest, and the matter of great importance. It is also to be
considered that this he speaks to a multitude that thronged after him with
great attention, yet to such he declares, That few have a good and honest
heart to receive the Word. When therefore our Savior himself shall thus
preach, that you may in the use of the Ordinances find much alteration made in
your selves, you may have joy, faith, some kind of reformation, and yet not be
the good and right soil: what a provocation should this be to us never to
leave, till we be truly qualified: Our Savior also spends another Parable to
this purpose, Matthew. 25. of the ten Virgins, where all are Virgins, that is,
such who had preserved themselves from the Idolatries and gross vices of the
world; They both had lamps, they both go with confidence to meet the
Bridegroom, and there is no differencing of one from the other, till the
Bridegroom come: so that by this Parable it should seem, that a Professor
having no more then a false imperfect or counterfeit work of grace, may live
and die with a great deal of comfort and confidence, as if his condition were
exceeding good, and not find it otherwise till it be too late.

Again Matthew. 7. 24, 25, 26, By two kind of builders, one upon the sand, the
other upon the rock; What is represented, but two kind of believers, one that
has the outward profession and way of Christianity, and he is also truly
rooted upon Christ; but there is another who builds upon the sand, who diggeth
not deep enough; and this is the greatest part of Christians: thy faith, thy
repentance, thy joy are not deep enough, now mark the consequence, The fall
thereof was great. Thy damnation will be so much the more terrible, when all
thy religious duties, all thy external profession shall fall to the ground. And
it is a fall by way of rending, as the word signifies, Oh how woeful to be
rent from God, and those duties which thou trustedst in. Therefore our Savior
at ver. 22. says, Many will call to him at that day, Have not we prophesied in
thy Name, eat and drunk in thy presence? that is, offered Sacrifices and
received Sacraments? but for all that Christ knows them not. By all this you
see, how necessary it is we be not deceived about the work of grace, and that
we ought to have both our eyes in our head, least we take an whole spiritual
estate in counterfeit coin.

This experimental knowledge is of consequence, because of the easiness and
pronenesse in us to mistake. What Austin said of the Doctrine of the Trinity,
in nihilo Reason 2.
facilius and periculosius erratur, in nothing is the error more easy and
more dangerous; the same is applicable to this matter; for the words of
examining and proving do imply the deceitfulness of our heart, that there are
many false shapes and forms upon it. Hence are those phrases of searching our
hearts and communing with our hearts; all which argue the difficulty of being
fully acquainted with what is in it. The Papists indeed press this too far,
as if therefore none could ever tell when they did truly love God, or had a
sincere heart; but the falsnesse of this is in time to be showed, only there is
much truth in this, that there is so much self-love and carnal confidence in
us, that we easily persuade our selves that we are indeed such as we ought to
be. Ask every man one after another, who is not confident that he is
regenerated, that he has an interest in Christ, that his heart is good? and
why are they so? but because they do not faithfullycompare the notes and
characters of true grace, and diligently apply them to their own selves. The
Jews and Pharisees could never be beaten out of those vain hopes and carnal
confidences. Hence the Apostle uses an emphatical word of a Jew, Romans 2. 17.
Thou restest in the law, (...), Thou art secure in the law, as in some
admirable privilege and signal testimony of Gods love; That which Christ
promised, viz. Rest to their souls, they found in the law, so that no load of
sin could burden them, because they had rest here. As it is thus of a Jew, so
we may say of a Christian, he rests in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the
outward use of Ordinances, not feeling the weight of sin. Insomuch that it
were far better to see people pray with fear, and eat their bread with
trembling and astonishment, lest they have gone no farther yet then hypocrites,
then to be so carnally and falsely persuaded of their good condition as they
are. How many are indeed but Glowworms, or white rotten trees, of base
materials, though some shining there be in their conversation! Therefore this
Text might be fastened upon the gates of the whole world, upon every door, every
post, Examine, prove your selves.

Thirdly, It is very dangerous to miscarry in this matter. Oh the confusion
that fell upon the foolish Virgins when their want of oil was discovered. How
wary Reason 3.
are you to take clipped silver, or counterfeit coin? but it is great danger to
take counterfeit Repentance for true Repentance, counterfeit Faith for true
Faith. If that praying, professing of thine, be not good and sound, thou art
undone for ever. When the Apostle, Heb. 6. had reckoned up several particulars,
which many among us do not attain unto, They were enlightened, they tasted of
the good word of God, they were partakers of the holy Ghost, yet, says he, I
hope better things of you, and things that accompany salvation. What thunder
and lightnings is here? better things then illumination, then participation of
the holy things, better things then tasting of the good word of God? what, are
not these things that do accompany salvation? May we not cry out with the
Disciples in another case, This is an hard saying, who then can be saved? Yet
so it is, we Ministers of Gods word may say, Except your righteousness exceed
that of outward profession, of repeating of Sermons, of Family Duties, of
common works of Gods Spirit, which are in temporary believers, you can never
enter into the kingdom of heaven; and therefore we hope and pray for better
things of you, even such as will surely accompany salvation.

Fourthly, This practical discerning is of consequence, because of the
difficulty to Reason 4.
find out the true differences between true grace and its counterfeit. It is
hard doctrinally to lay down the bounds, wherein they differ, insomuch that
some Divines make the work of grace in the temporary believer to differ from
that of the regenerated person, gradually only, not specifically, but that is
false. If then it be thus hard by way of Doctrine to set the bounds, how much
more is it difficult for Christians in their practice to mark out the right
way? The hypocrite feels a joy, feels a sorrow, feels a sweetness in the
Ordinances, and so does the godly, but to show how one is sure he is not
deceived, and the other is, this is hard, though indeed they do differ as much
as one in a dream, or madness, that is really persuaded of, and affected with
such great advantages, does from him that is truly awake, and knows he is not
in a dream. Therefore the words to try and prove, do suppose that a man must
have knowledge of the rule: and the characters which do describe such a grace,
he must also have skilfulness in managing by way of application these notes to
himself, and this must be done out of a temptation, with much attending and
persevering thereunto. For as in doctrinal controversies, that is the great
Question, Which is the true Church, and that which does not err? as also, What
are the essential marks that do constitute a Church? So in practicals, This is
the great doubt, What is the truth of grace? Whether I be the man that have it?
And what are the notes to decipher it? And as for the former Question, we would
fain have some visible infallible Judge to determine it that there might be no
more dispute: So here, we would desire such a peculiar revelation from heaven
that should by name say unto us, we are those Christians in whom are no guile.

Fifthly, It is of concernment, because of the manifold advantages that will
Reason 5. Advantages of this experimental knowledge of our selves. I.
come to us, when we have attained to such an experimental knowledge of our
selves. As

First, We shall account all our former knowledge of divine things, and all our
parts though never so admirable, to have been but like a tinkling cymbal. When
thou come to have this inward feeling of holy things upon thy heart, thou will bewail all thy duties, and conferences, and religious performances done by
thee, as a Parrat that had no understanding of these things. If a man read in
a book, or see in a map such and such countries, he has indeed some confused
knowledge, but if he travel himself into those countries, and see the Towns and
buildings, he will say his former apprehension of them was but lame to what he
has now, or as the Queen of Sheba, who had heard rumors of Solomon's wisdom,
when she came to have an experimental knowledge of it, then she was astonished,
and said, All that she had heard was nothing to that which she saw; So it is in
matter of grace, if God work these savoury inward experiments in thee, thou will be astonished to see the difference between thy self now and once; all
that thou have heard, read or preached, is nothing to that thou feel; But
how is it to be feared, that many have seen godliness but in the Map only, they
never had experience of the thing it self. How many are there that talk of
conversion or repentance, as men do of bringing forth a child, who never had
the experience of the throbs and pains that then are endured. Paul, what a long
time did he live in a road of religious duties, but when he came to have an
experimental work upon him, he died, whereas he was alive before, that is, he
became sensible of the damnable and dangerous estate he was in, whereas he had
great confidence of his good life and salvation before. And thus it is with
every man that has gotten experimental knowledge; Alas (says he) I was alive
once, I thought my self some body, when I could pray, write Sermons, dispute so
understandingly, but now I see I did not know what that faith was, or godliness
was, that I did argue so much about, I never knew any thing of God, or of his
gracious works till now, will that soul say.

Secondly, Where there is this experimental knowledge, that man's heart is as it
II.
were the Bibles counterpane. The Scripture is the original, and his heart is
the copy of it, he can read over the Promises, the Threatenings, and can say,
Probatum est. David in his Psalms, Paul in his Epistles, speak that man's heart,
feel that man's temptations, make that man's objections. Hence you have an
excellent expression, John 3. 33. He that receives his testimony, sets to
his seal, that God is true. The Scripture speaks of Gods sealing to us, and
our sealing to him. In this place it is a Metaphor from their civil contracts
which were confirmed and solemnly declared to be good by seals, Jer. 32. 10. So
he that does indeed receive the testimony of the Scripture, he does solemnly
declare by his life and conversation, that God is true; Therefore all those who
in the general say, they believe, yet show not a practical conversation
accordingly, they set not their seal that God is true.

Thirdly, Where this is, it will powerfully dead the heart to all humane
excellencies; III.
That as in man the Philosophers say, the vegetative and sensitive life is
swallowed up in the rational; so in a Christian his natural and animal life is
in great measure turned to his supernatural life. In the thorny ground there
did the corn and thorns come up together, but where the life of grace is in the
practical exercise of it, all such suckers will be cut off. It is not
head-notions, but heart-feelings that will exclude immoderacy of affections to
other things. A man that a long while tasted of the wine of brain-knowledge,
when he comes to taste of this experimental knowledge, he will say The new is
best. Hence Gal. 2. 20. Paul denies he lives, but Christ lives in him. Omnis
vita est propter delectationem, All life is for delight. Till therefore thou
can take delight and experimental sweetness in holy things, thy tongue indeed
may be often about good things, but thy heart can never be in them. Love of the
world may stand with the former kind of knowledge, but not with the later.
Aristotle observes, that dogs cannot hunt where the sent of sweet flowers is,
because that diverteth the smell; so neither can we run after Christ in the
sweetness of his ointments, when the smell of worldly delights and earthly
refreshments do interpose.

SERMON II.
Holding forth more advantages to Assurance.

2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves, prove your selves, etc.
THere remain more advantages, which will accrue to a Christian, that besides a
general notion-knowledge has a practical and experimental discovery of grace
in his heart.

First, He will enjoy the sweetness and benefit of the Ordinances, which men of
parts I. The knowing experienced Christian only enjoys the sweetness of the
Ordinances.
and gifts only do not. How many are there who in our Church-administrations
are like old Barzillai that had lost his taste and hearing, and so cared not
for David's feasts and music? David, Psa. 19. prefers Gods Word in
sweetness above the honey and honeycomb, Psalm. 84. is spent in admiring the
loveliness and beauty of Gods Ordinances: Now (alas) a man without the
experimental work of grace upon his soul, can no more be affected with these,
then a blind man with colors, Cant. 1. 4. Because of thy ointment poured
forth, therefore the virgins love thee; Christ in his Ordinances does as Mary,
Open a box of ointment, which diffeseth a spiritual savor in Church Assemblies
to the godly, and this only the experimental Christian feels. Chrysostom
sometimes in his Sermons speaking of the more hidden and choice principles of
the Christian Religion, uses this phrase, Sciunt initiati quid dico, Those
that are initiated or admitted into our mysteries know what I mean. Thus also
may the Ministers of God, preaching either of the bitterness of sin, the
sadness of spiritual desertions, or the fullness of Christ, the sweetness of his
fellowship and communion, say, The practiced, exercised Christian knows what
I mean; formal customary Christians are strangers unto that virtue and efficacy
which is communicated in spiritual Ordinances. Cant. 4. 12. The Church is
compared to a garden shut up, a fountain sealed, which is to be understood not
only in respect of the defense and protection God vouchsafes his Church, that
none can destroy her; but also, because strangers and wicked men are not able
to drink of her delicacies, or smell of her sweetness. A spiritual Sermon is a
Fountain sealed up, the spiritual administration of a Sacrament, is a Garden
enclosed; formal notional Christians understand not, or perceive the full
sweetness thereof. There were many people in a throng and crowd about our
Savior, but the infirm woman only, felt efficacy come from him: so many may
attend the Ordinances, frequent the Assemblies, but some few only find the
inward power of Christ derived unto their souls: As therefore Thomas, though
upon an ill ground, said, He would not believe Christ to be risen, unless he
saw his wounds, and put his fingers into them: So neither do thou believe thy
estate to be good and sound, unless thou may see and feel the efficacy of
Christ in his Ordinances upon thee. Austin speaks Austin. lib. 10. Confess. cap.
40.
experimentally of this fatness and sweetness in Gods Ordinances, Aliquando
intromittis me Domine in affectum multum inusitntum introrsus, ad nescio quam
dulcedinem, quae si perficiatur in me, nescio quid erit, quod vita ista non
erit.

Secondly, By this practical knowledge and exercise thou will be taken off from
II. Is taken off from needless and vain disputations, to look more into his own
heart.
all needless and vain disputations in matters of Religion, and wilt be more
solicitous at home in thy own heart. In former times when the people of God
were busy about the touch stone and trial of grace in themselves, they did not
launch out into such deep and unprofitable Questions, but now of late since
believers have busied themselves in disputes and controversies, and new
opinions, this practical knowledge of grace is much neglected, you shall find
men sooner disputing about faith then living by faith, talking of
heavenly-mindednesse then being so indeed. Thus the trees in Gods garden sprout
up into suckers and barren boughs, and bear ^ittle fruit upon them, 1 Timothy 6.
4. The Apostle does excellently describe such a temper, he calls it Doting about
Questions, or as it is in the Greek, Sick and languishing; Even as much
fretting and vexation consumes the flesh of the body, so do proud and vain
affectations of new opinions pine away the soul. What is this but to think that
a stone may become bread, and a serpent fish? As it is a Ministers duty to
preach only those things that are profitable, The sower went out to sow good
seed, not poison, or empty chaff; so it is also required of private Christians,
that they do think, confer of, and study those things only that may edify
and practically build up their souls. I would not hereby discourage an
endeavor in Christians to grow in knowledge. The Apostle reproves some for
being babes, and that he could not speak unto them as spiritual but as carnal,
only they must know, that faith has efficacious purifying acts as well as
knowing acts, and therefore our increase must be equal both quoad notitiam, and
efficaciam, in respect of knowledge and efficacy also. A Christian may grow
either Quoad amplitudinem scientiae or efficaciam scientiae, the enlargement of
his knowledge both in respect of the matter, he may know more things then he
did, as also in the manner, more clearly, evidently and firmly then he did, or
else in the efficacy of his knowledge, though he do not more things then he did,
yet he knows them more practically, they have a greater influence upon his
heart and affections, they move and inflame him more then ever they did; now
though the former way of increase be necessary and pleasing to God, yet this is
much more. Take heed then that we be not like Pharaohs lean Kine, that devour
many Questions, but yet are as starved and ill-favored as before. When one
came with a curious Question to our Savior, asking him, Whether many should be
saved? How pertinently does our Savior answer him, Strive to enter in at the
strait gate. This therefore discovers the necessity of importunate pressing and
urging practical knowledge upon people in these days, Ubi malunt homines
disputare quam vivere, they had rather argue then live. As little boys in
sport strive who shall strike most sparks out of their iron, not intending to
kindle thereby for their use, so do Christians strive who shall strike out the
most subtle and finest spun notions, not intending the profit of their souls
therein.

Thirdly, By this practical experience, a Christian shall attain to the end of
all III. And to attain to the end of knowledge, viz. to do.
knowledge, which is to do. If ye know these things, blessed are you if ye do
them. It was said of some people that they had money only to tell it, they made
no other use of it; it is as vain when we have knowledge in matters of religion
only to know, Tit. 1. it is called, The acknowledging of the truth after
godliness; insomuch that in the Scripture phrase, They who have not the
practical power of knowledge, are denied to have any knowledge at all. Hence
are wicked men so often called fools, and said not to know God. By this means a
private Christian may be said to know more of God, then a learned Doctor that
has nothing but orthodoxy; for you may have an orthodox learned man write and
preach admirably about justifying faith, conversion, etc. yet in regard of the
practical knowledge of these things no ways comparable to some private man or
woman, who feel the power of these things upon their own hearts: It is
disputed, Whether Divinity be speculative or practical, and it is resolved by
many upon good grounds, that it is practical, there being nothing in all
Religion but what is to be improved for for practice one way or other, (...).
It is well done that orthodoxy and true Doctrine be defended by books,
disputations and Sermons; but above all things we are to endeavor that our
life answer our Christian profession. When Christ looked upon the fig tree that
had only leaves on it, he cursed it. To him that knows how to do good, and
does it not, there is the greater sin; as if he should have said, says
Bernard, Sumenti cibum, and non digerenti, perniciosum est ei; to him that
takes meat, and does not digest it, it is very dangerous. There must be true
Doctrine, and a godly life joined together. Cyril considering Abraham's servant,
who gave to Rebecca earrings and bracelets, applies it to Christ and his
Church, who vouchsafes to her both true faith that comes by hearing, and a
godly life the practice or work of our hands.

Fourthly, By this experimental knowledge a man will be settled in the truth,
and endure all persecution rather then forsake it. He will believe no fallacies
or sophisms, IIII. And be settled in the truth to endure persecution.
he will not be frighted out of it by any dangers. Its called tasting of God
and his Word, and the rule is, Non est disputandum de gustu, there is no
disputing against taste. The sense of taste and feeling do herein differ from
the other senses, that they are joined really to the objects themselves,
whereas seeing and hearing do receive only the intentional species, and
therefore cannot make such a real and powerful impression, as is in tasting or
feeling. Paul's experimental knowing whom he did believe, made him boldly to
speak: what makes men have a monthly or yearly faith, change their opinions as
often as their garments, but because they have not felt the power of truth upon
their own soul? The Schoolmen speak of a gift of the holy Ghost, which they
call Sapience, The cause of changes in Religion.
which they define to be Quoddam lumen divinorum, sub quo videntur and
gustantur divina per experimentum, A certain light of divine things, whereby
they are seen and tasted by experience: or others describe it, A contemplation
of God out of love, with a certain experimental sweetness in the affections.
But whatsoever their conceit is about this, it is certain the Apostle Heb. 5.
14 would have us by use to have our senses exercised to discern both good and
evil. Where the Apostle attributes to the mind (...), which are properly the
Organs of sense in the body, but he applies it to the soul, because of the
intuitive and experimental knowledge the soul ought to have in good things; and
therefore he speaks of use and custom which the people of God have in this
spiritual discerning: No wonder then that faith is called Heb. 11. (...), The
real subsistence of things believed in the soul. (Aristotle calls the thick
cloud that by the repercussion of the Sun beams makes the Rainbow (...), and
the Rainbow (...),) and (...) an undeniable conviction of the mind of man,
because where this grace is operatively upon the soul, it makes a real
impression. Hence also the whole work and way of grace is compared to life,
Gal. 2. ult. because it is most real, it is not in imagination and fancy. That
is notable Heb. 13. 9. Be not carried about with diverse doctrines, for it is
good to have the heart established with grace; Where the Apostle makes grace
and godliness to stablish and settle the heart; and therefore men that are led
aside into errors, are said to be carried about with them, a Metaphor from
chaff and straw, which because of its emptiness and lightness is blown this way
and that way. Thus a man that is empty of grace, and not consolidated by the
power of it upon his heart, he runs from one opinion to another, without any
stay at all. Therefore a savoury inward knowledge of divine truths, would be an
excellent ballast in the soul. And as it would thus keep the heart firm to the
truth, so it would unite the heart to holy things as the best and sweetest,
without hypocrisy, double-mindedness and inconstancy, and this is much to be
considered, thy heart is one while for good things, another while as vehemently
for the world, thy heart is divided between the Creator and the creature, how
comes this about? for want of real and experimental knowledge of the goodness
of God, He that drinks of this water (says Christ) shall never thirst more,
that is, Siti totalis indigentiae, with a thirst of total want. Now how great a
mercy it is to be kept from that double-mindedness the Apostle speaks of, To be
like a wave that is sometimes tossed up high to the heavens, and then presently
sinks down low in the sea; or like the Grasshoppers that leap up toward heaven,
but immediately fall down to the ground: When temptations of profit and pleasure
come, how easily can they be repulsed by an heart who feels better things? So
that till you have an inward feeling and joy about the things of God, you are
not able to withstand other temptations, but you will always be striving to
make possible that which our Savior has pronounced so impossible, To serve
God and Mammon.

I shall in the next place show you what impediments and destructive principles
Impediments of an experimental proof in our selves. 1. Self-love and carnal
considence.
there are to hinder us in this experimental proof, which we are to make of our
selves. For this duty here pressed of examining and proving of our selves is
like the compound that the High Priest was to make, consisting of choice
materials; Now one dangerous principle is, when we go to prove and examine our
selves, being prepossessed with self-love and carnal confidence, and where this
foundation is laid, its impossible to make any good superstruction. Hence all
the piercing and discovering Sermons which the Prophets and Christ made upon
the Jews and Pharisees, could make no battery, give no shaking to their rotten
foundation, and all because they had carnal confidence, and vain trust in
themselves. Therefore when thou set upon this duty, thou must say, Lord, I
come not in any love of my self, I can as easily judge and condemn my self for
an hypocrite (if such I shall be found) as approve my self for an upright one:
O Lord, it shall not seem an hard thing to me, if I perceive that I have thus
long, thus many years labored in vain. O Lord, it shall be so far from being
matter of discontent, as that I shall rejoice, if now at length, I may be put
into a sound and right way of holiness. But how many go to search the grounds,
principles and ends of their actions with as much negligence, as some officers
do alehouses and unlawful meetings? they are unwilling to see the hidden works
of darkness, Prove. 28. 26. He that trusts in his own heart is a fool. It is
desperate folly to believe thy heart will deal truly with thee. Hence the
Prophet Jeremiah calls it desperately wicked, or crafty, which will beguile
and deceive thee without much caution, insomuch that this duty of examination
is but ridiculous, and a mere mockery, unless we resolve to become impartial
Judges. It is like disputing with the Church of Rome, who hold the true Church
cannot err, and then that she is the true Church, whereby she becomes
incurable and without hope of healing, Prove. 16. 2. Every man's way is clean in
his own eyes, but the Lord pondereth the hearts. This is one way to blind us,
but Temptations to unbelief.
then we may run into another extreme, by temptation of unbelief; and thus
when a godly soul set against it self, and taking every thing for hypocrisy
that he shall do, if in this case he goes to examine himself, he will also
draw false conclusions; As the carnal man fails the former way, so the tempted
Christian does the other way; The one believes every thing to be done with a
good heart, the other nothing; But as a man that would see his face in the
water, must make no commotion or trouble at all; so he that would rightly judge
his heart, must take heed of carnal confidence on one side, and unbelief on the
other side.

A second dangerous principle is, When we conclude that action to be done well,
2. An erroneous principle.
which is for the matter good, whatsoever the principles, ends, motives or
manner be. This destroys many thousands, Jehu did that which was according to
Gods will, and this made him bold to say he is zealous for God, Come see my
zeal, says he; but though his actions were very great, and of high concernment
to the Church of God, yet God would be avenged on him for these, Hos. 1. 4. Who
would think God would be avenged on Jehu for dispossessing Jeroboam, killing
Baals Priests, making so great a Reformation as he did? But because he himself
did not do these things with an upright heart, therefore he is threatened. The
Pharisees had an external righteousness, but there was a great gulf between
them and true godliness. Hence they are called Vipers, which though they have a
glorious skin, yet are full of poison; and how holy soever they appeared, yet
like the Serpent they eat of the dust of the earth, live upon earthly
advantages. A man therefore had need be Eagle-eyed, or like Ezekiels living
creatures full of eyes, that would see into the bottom of his ways: Thy
profession, thy family duties, thy religious performances are plainly visible,
every one that runs may read them; but the ends and motives are secret and
latent, the foundations and roots of things lie under ground; The first letters
in the book are garnished with many gaies, and we can hardly tell what they
are. This made Paul distinguish between a Jew outwardly, and a Jew inwardly,
circumcision of the flesh and circumcision of the heart; Especially the end,
and motive that does specify and distinguish moral actions; Two may be in a
family, both pray, both mourn for sin, yet because one is done upon a pure
motive and principle from God and to God, therefore it is right; and the other,
because its defective in one of these, is rejected: who then is sufficient and
prepared for so great a duty as this is?

A third way of misguidance is, When we try our selves by false Rules, when we
weigh with false weights; This duty of examining and proving supposes there is
3. Trying our selves by false rules.
some sure standard, which if we go by, we are sure not to be deceived, now
that rule is the word of God; but as in matter of Doctrine men have left the
Scriptures the sure rule, and taken up antiquity, universality, tradition, and
the like for their guide, and by this means have fallen into the ditch; so in
matter of godliness, when we should try our selves according to the characters
and signs that the Scripture deciphers, we take up principles in the world, the
applause of others, the conversation of most in the world; And thus it is with
us, as men in an Hospital, because every one is either wounded or lame, or some
way diseased, therefore none are offensive to each other.

The fourth and last dangerous way to miscarriage, is, When we mistake 4. A
mistaking about the object matter of our enquiry.
about the object matter which is to be discovered, when we mistake what
godliness is, and so think it to be in us, when it is not; And in this is the
grand imposture; men take a good nature, morality, civility, the common graces
of Gods Spirit for godliness, and when they see they have these, they conclude
all is well. This is as if a man digging for gold should take lead or copper
for it, and think himself rich, because he has these. He therefore that would
not be deceived in this great matter, must consider what the Scripture makes
the nature and properties of godliness, and must conclude godliness is no less
or inferior a thing then the Scripture makes it. If a man shall not reach up
to those Scripture directions, he is but a Glowworm though he seem to be the
Sun; but more of these things hereafter.

Let the Use be, to set us with all diligence, fear and trembling about this
Use.
work: How much better is it to eat and drink, to pray and hear with fear and
trembling of heart, then to sit down secure when there is no cause? Believe not
your hearts in times of danger, or fears of death, or any sudden fits; You see
Pharaoh and Ahab can cry out of sin under the judgments of God, but attend
to pure motives only; In the civil law no credit is given to a testimony that
is given by one upon the wrack, because it is supposed, the torture and pain
will make him say any thing to be eased. And thus in times of trouble and fear
even a false and unsound heart will say any thing, hoping for some relief.
Howsoever in this life we may satisfy our selves and others with a profession
and external diligence in holy duties, yet at the day of Judgment we shall be
astonished and silent before God. In the Parable, the man that was at the feast
without a wedding Garment, when expostulated with, was presently speechless,
he pretended not poverty, or difficulty to get a wedding Garment, but was
immediately speechless, even as if he had had a muzzle put on his mouth, as
the word signifies. At that day all the crooked and subtle windings, all the
false pretexts of thy own heart, will be so discovered, that thou can not but
see it, and acknowledge it.

SERMON III.
Resolving, Whether Hypocrites may not attain to some measure of practical
Knowledge in matters of Religion?

2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your own selves, prove your own selves, etc.
I Shall absolve this Doctrine, in handling of one practical Question, and that
is, Whether Hypocrites may not attain to some measure of practical Knowledge in
matters of Religion? Is that ignis, which in the godly is Calidus and lucidus,
in hypocrites Lucidus tantum? Can unregenerate men go no further then to mere
knowledge and illumination? may not this oil poured upon their heads fall down
upon the will and affections also? As they have imperfect knowledge, so may
they not have inchoate affections about good things? and if they may, wherein
shall we be able to give sound differences, or exact bounds and limits between
the practical knowledge in the one and the other? This is a point of universal
usefulness; And for the opening of this, consider there are three general sorts
of men who go under the name and title of Christians, all pretending a right
and interest to all the privileges of the Covenant of Grace,

The first is of those who have only the Name and outward Ordinances of the
Three sorts of men go under the name of Christians. 1.
Christian Religion, but have not the least influence or power from it, In
works they deny him. These are like some Apothecary boxes that may have the
inscription of some cordial, but within is deadly poison; They are in names
Christians, in actions Heathens; and the Prophet called the Rulers of the Jews
for their wickedness, though circumcised, Princes of Sodom and Gomorrah. These
are (as a Father said) Sine Christo Christiani, yea contra Christum, Christians
without Christ, yea against Christ. Howsoever in some respects they may be said
to be better then Heathens, in which sense Arnobius said, Melior invenietur
judicio Christianus fornicator, quam castissimus idololatra. A Christian even
in fornication is better then a most chaste idolater; yet in other respects he
is far worse: such as these are have no real and saving benefit by Christ, for
Non actibus, sed finibus pensantur officia; They being like dead corpses, that
have sweet fragrant flowers strewed upon them, but yet are not in the least
degree made more savoury by them; and certainly it is an aggravation of the
wickedness of such, that when moral Philosophy, and the principles of reason
have been able to cure the outside ungodliness of many men; The truths of
Christianity, which have a power to regenerate, and to work a new nature,
should not so much as change the skin of men. Yet if we cast our eye upon the
greatest number of those who yet are baptized into the name of Christ, shall we
not find them in the rank of those, who have only a name in Christianity, and
nothing else, who derive not the least efficacy or power from Christ, but are
as a dead hand, or a withered branch, whose lives are a continual blasphemy to
the Gospel of Christ?

2. Another sort is of those, who besides the name, have also some influence 2.
and operations of the Spirit of God upon them, and many of them are in such a
way as an embryo to a child, only they prove abortive, Matthew. 13. The second
and third kind of hearers were in this number; Divines as they attribute to
the former sort a mere historical faith, such as the devils have, though it may
be thought they have no faith at all in any respect or notion, unless it be an
humane assent; so they give to these later a temporary faith, which they make
to differ from historical thus, because it is carried with some kind of
affections, both in revelantem, the person revealing it, who is God, and in rem
revelatam, the matter revealed, whereas historical faith is without any
affections at all; now although these who are in this condition, be in respect
of their estate carnal and unregenerate, yet they differ from the former, as
much as copper from dung, and howsoever comparatively to the godly, they are
but counterfeit and false, yet they are as pearls and stars respectively to
profane men, for these have a practical experience of some power of divine
truths upon them (and howsoever the Spirit of Christ does not dwell in them,
because they are not members of the body of Christ, and as the soul of a man
works not as a form to any part that is not united to the body; so neither does
the Spirit of Christ operate savingly, but to the body of Christ) yet the
Spirit of God works as an outward efficient cause breathing upon them. The
Spirit of God works not in them, Ut in domicilio, but ut in organo, an
instrument, which he uses for the good of the Church; Now in this sort there
is a great latitude, some having a greater measure of these workings then
others, as the third kind of ground went beyond the second.

A third sort is of those who are indeed incorporated into Christ's body, and 3.
so do receive vivifical influence from him, that are in him, as a living
branch in the Vine, as a living member in the body, and so are animated by that
Spirit, though with an infinite disproportion, which Christ himself their head
is; these are born of God, have an immortal seed in them, shall never perish,
because Christ will not lose any of his mystical members; and these only have a
proper, clear and full experimental knowledge of Christ's sufferings and
resurrection upon their soul; and these do differ from the former not
gradually, as some thought, but specifically; a regenerate man though the
lowest in that kind, differs from the hypocrite though the highest in his
kind, as much as the heavens, which according to some Philosophers is made of
a fifth essence, from the sublunary bodies, and the works of Gods Spirit upon
hypocrites, if increased never so high, would not come up to saving grace, as
copper will never be gold. In the next place observe, That howsoever
hypocrites, or temporary believers, do not attain to that which is indeed
saving, yet great are the works of Gods Spirit upon them, and they have many
experimental motions of the truths in religion wrought on them. I will choose
out some material ones, to awaken you, and make you tremble, least you be not
in a form above them, yea happily many have not come up so far as they.

In the first place, They have an experimental knowledge of the common gifts of
How far hypocrites may attain in practical experimental knowledge. 1.
Gods Spirit; They feel what it is to have assistance from God in those
administrations. Thus Matthew. 7. Have not we prophesied and cast out devils in
thy Name? They did it by the power of Christ, and in virtue from him; and
although we told you, this was not the whole scope of the Apostle here, to
prove Christ was in them, by the miracles and wonderful works done amongst
them, yet this was included as part: Thus Saul had another spirit, not in the
way of sanctification, but political administration, whereby he had an
experimental knowledge of Gods power and assistance in his place. And thus many
a Christian may find great assistance in duties, in parts and abilities, and
may find the power of the Lord going along with him; but this be nothing to
his sanctification. And it is to be feared that in these times this is the
furthest practical experience of Gods help that most have; if it be not so, why
is it that people do so abound in opinions, disputations, and are so little in
mortification and vivification, they sprout out into suckers and leaves, not
into fruit; and we see in the Corinthians, that naturally men are more prone to
desire the gifts of Gods Spirit, which are for public administration, more
then the graces of sanctification. But (alas) to be a good preacher, a good
disputant, to be able to make good enlarged prayers, do argue only Spiritum
moventem, not inhabitantem, the Spirit of God breathing on thee, not dwelling
in thee; neither does God bestow this on thee for any love to thy soul, but
because of his Church, as nurses to Princes children feed on delicate fare, not
for their own sake, but for the childrens sake to whom they give milk: Hence it
is that they preach that Gospel, that faith, that Christ to others, which they
do not partake off, and so are like those posts in highways, with hands on
them, directing to such or such a way, but they never stir out of the place
they are in: Oh therefore that the Ministers of God could become sons of
thunder in this matter, you have had experience of God inabling, enlarging,
increasing the common gifts of his Spirit, but what have you felt of Gods
renewing, sanctifying and healing of your lusts?

Secondly, They may have some practical experience of the bitterness of sin,
and 2.
the terrors that come by it. We may not think that the terrors upon Cain and
Judas, were by a mere natural light of conscience, for such could quickly be
distinguished, but there was also the Spirit of God convincing and setting
sin home upon the conscience, Hence Romans 8. the Spirit of God is called, The
Spirit of bondage and fear, because it works such fear and trouble in the heart
of a sinner, not the sinfulness of them, but the troublesome motions and
stirrings of them in our souls: Thus we may not say, that those humiliations of
Ahab and the Israelites, when they cried out to God because of their sins, were
by the mere power of their natural free will, but by the common work of the
Spirit of God; and thus those many gripes and wounds of heart, which are
inflicted upon many in the preaching of the Word, whereby the memory of their
sins is like wormwood and gall to them, flows from the Spirit of God;
whatsoever is wrought instrumentally by the Word, is efficiently from Gods
Spirit; and this experience confirms that many men who yet are not made new
creatures, have an hell sometimes in their hearts, their consciences can tell
that it is a bitter thing to sin against God. Yea because the time has been,
when they have had such wounds and blows, they therefore conclude, that they
were in the new birth, and although they brought forth nothing but wind in all
that pain, yet they rejoice as if a man-child, a new creature were born. It
may not therefore be denied, but even one who is a wild olive, and not yet
implanted in Christ, may have the inward feeling of Gods displeasure for sin,
may be able to tell you the time has been they could not eat, or drink, or
sleep, but cried out, Oh their sins, sins, sins; but yet do not demonstrate
Christ dwelling in them.

Thirdly, They may have practical experience of desires and longing affections
after things that are good. They having sudden and confused apprehensions of
the goodness of spiritual things, may have some such general affections and
desires after them; In such a temper they cry out, Joh. 6. 34. Lord give us
evermore this bread; Christ told them, He was the manna and bread of life, and
speaks of the benefits that come to such who eat and feed on him, it is bread
not only that nourishes, but gives life (which no other bread does) Hereupon
in a confused manner with some good affections, they cry, Give us evermore this
bread; They were like Peter in a transfiguration, not knowing what they said;
Thus Balaam he is in such a transfiguration, for he foreseeing the happiness of
the people of God, Wishes to die the death of the righteous; yea is affected
with the spiritual Ordinances and worship of God among them, How beautiful are
thy tabernacles, O Israel? (says he) in those sudden flashes upon him; How
often are people deluded in this, because in some fits they have good
affections and desires.

Fourthly, They have a practical experience of some sweetness and joy in the
Ordinances 4.
of God, and some assurance of Gods favor flowing thencefrom. Thus Matthew. 13.
They received the word with joy; and John's hearers were said for a while to
rejoice in his light; Ezckiel was to his hearers, As a pleasant Song; And Hebr.
6. Those, who had not things accompanying salvation, are said, To taste of the
word of God; They did taste it as Jonathan did a little honey, but had not the
full of it. Whereas the people of God are said to eat his flesh, and drink his
blood, yea rivers of living water are said to flow out of their belly; and from
these experimental tastings arise some confidence of their condition, which is
declared in the foolish virgins, who with much boldness, and without any
suspicion of their want of oil, Go out to meet the Bridegroom; Now this is
thought a great matter, if so be their hearts have been at any time sweetened
and mollified in the Ordinances of God.

Fifthly, They have such an experimental working, as that it has influence
upon 5.
their lives and conversations, it makes some alteration and change there. 2
Pet. 2. 10. Those Apostates who returned to their own vomit, and so never had
true grace, are said to escape the pollutions of the world, through the
knowledge of Christ, and therefore they are called Virgins, Matthew. 25. though
foolish ones, because they were kept from the profaneness of others; Now, a
man would think this were all in all, what would you have more? Those that
stole steal no more, those that were drunk are so no more, those that were
filthy are so no more; but yet as the Swine are Swine for their natures, though
washed from their mire; thus are they unregenerate and filthy still, though
outwardly cleansed: By these instances you see, that even men who are not in
the faith after a sanctifying and saving manner, may yet have many seeming
works of grace on their soul.

But yet there is a difference many ways, I shall but briefly and generally
The difference between the experimental knowledge of the unsound Christian and
the regenerate. 1.
touch at the differences, because they will come in more properly in the
counterfeits.

In the first place, There is a difference in the very nature of them. That
which is in the godly differs from that in the most refined hypocrite, as much
as gold from dross, or true pearls from counterfeits; Hence Matthew. 13. the
fourth ground, or kind of hearers, are only said to have an honest and good
heart. So that the soil of one ground differs essentially from the other, and
this may be abundantly cleared, in that the promises of Justification and
eternal life are not made to any kind of faith that an hypocrite has, but
they are made to the faith of a godly man, though it be in the least degree; so
that a little infant in true grace, may by the hand of faith receive Christ,
when a Gyant-like hypocrite, cannot take him: but more of this in time.

A second difference is in clearness and evidence; That which they do know 2.
about the things of God is in a more confused manner, because that light in
them is but by way of flash, and a sudden enlightening, not as permanent and
abiding light in them; a little sip or taste of heavenly things cannot enable a
man exactly to comprehend the excellency and worth of them. Therefore they see
these things, as the man not perfectly cured of his blindeness, That saw men
walking by like trees. It is true, the holiest that are do but see in part; and
David prays, That his eyes may be opened to see the wonderful things in Gods
law. Thus Paul also prays for the Ephesians, who yet were light in the Lord,
that their eyes might be opened, and they have the spirit of wisdom and
revelation: but yet is not like the purblinde hypocrite, who does by a question
rather judge of godly things, then any way else.

A third difference is in the operation, for the experience of the godly
inclines 3.
them spiritually, makes them more holy, carries them out of themselves,
whereas all that is done upon the unsound Christian ends in carnal effects, it
makes him puffed up, vainly confident in himself. Thus the Pharisees, though
they did abound in the duties of the Law, yet their greatest corruptions did
run out there. Hence a Pharisee praying, a Pharisee giving alms, was a Pharisee
in all the power of his corruption. John 3. He that is not born of the Spirit,
is flesh; and this flesh does extend not only to his sins and corruptions, but
also to his duties; Therefore observe whether the duties that for the matter of
them be spiritual, are also spiritual in the effect, that they leave thee more
humble, outed of thy self, more depending upon Christ and his grace, more
mortified to the world, and the temptations thereof. It may fall out that a
man's religious duties be the stage upon which all a man's lusts do eminently
act, as the Pharisees who did all things to be seen of men.

We might be larger in giving you symptomatical differences, but because they
will fall in upon the several particulars, or in the next Doctrine about the
signs Use.
and characters of grace, I forbear, concluding with a Use of Exhortation, not
to be too credulous and facile in believing our selves to be good and right.
Woeful may the cosenings and supplantations of thy own heart be. What may you
not be? What may you not do, and yet be unsound? Oh how burdensome will it be
when men shall say, Lord, Have we not been enlarged in thy service? Lord, Have
we not mourned in thy presence? Have we not rejoiced in the good Word that has
been preached to us? and yet God to return this, Inasmuch as you did it not
upon sound and sincere grounds, you did it not to me, Depart ye workers of
iniquity. Draw off all your thoughts, disputes, meditations from other points,
and mind this one necessary thing. Thou disputest, Whether there be a true
Church, a true Ministry, true Ordinances, Oh consider, Whether there be true
grace in thy heart. The Pharisees kept the feast of purifications, or cleansing
of the Temple, but were foul and unclean in their own souls. As God declared
his invisible Attributes of wisdom, power and goodness by the visible works he
did in the Creation of the world, so do thou manifest that secret and hidden
efficacy of Christ in thee, by a powerful and vigorous life of godliness;
These are miracles that will confirm thee to come from God. Good is that of
Austin, when pride tickleth thee and would puff thee up, say, Ovem te putas,
hircum forte novit te Deus, Thou think thy self a sheep, but it may be God
knows thee to be a goat; and again, when despair and unbelief assaults thee,
say, Hircum te putas, ovem te forte Deus novit. Thou think thy self a Goat,
but God knows thee to be a sheep it may be. Not as if we persuaded you to
doubting, or commended uncertainty, as the Papists do, but an holy fear and
trembling to make our calling and election sure, which the Apostle Peter does.

SERMON IV.
Showing that Assurance may be had.

2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves, etc.
WE come to the second Doctrine, which though implied only, yet is of necessary
use. The Apostle pressing them to try, whether they be in Christ, and in faith
or no, does thereby suppose, that there are such signs and symptoms of this
state and condition, that a man diligently attending thereunto by the help of
Gods Spirit, may come to be assured that he is in such a state, for whereas
Becanus the Papist would argue against Assurance from the Text, That the
Corinthians were uncertain of their spiritual estate, otherwise it had been a
vain thing and absurd to exhort a man to examine himself about that of which he
is certain; The answer is easy, That although they might de facto not have
assurance, yet the Apostle his urging this upon them does evidently suppose it
possible, and not only so, but their duty to have it. Although none do hold
such a certainty in this life, as the Saints in Heaven have, which excludes
all weaknesses; Therefore the certainty Gods people do reach unto has its
degrees, and does admit of changes.

The Doctrine,

There are such characters and signs of the state of grace laid down in
Scripture, Observe. 2.
that a godly man by the faithful application of them to himself, being
thereunto guided and enabled by the Spirit of God, may be assured that he is in
such a state.

In the Doctrine there are three main particulars must be spoken unto and
opened: 1. Assurance and Certainty: 2. The Signs and Marks of Grace: 3. The
work of Gods Spirit in this; and much excellent practical matter will flow from
every one of these fountains; and marvel not if I be large ere this subject be
fully finished, for it is a subject of the greatest concernment that may be,
and if men be willing to spend so much time and cost in evidencing their Titles
and Proprieties in Land or earthly Goods, how diligent should we be about
heavenly!

I shall therefore first speak to the matter of Assurance or Certainty; and for
Twelve Propositions about Assurance. 1.
this take notice of these particulars,

First, A Certainty or Assurance may be had of a thing diverse ways, as There
is a certainty of sense, such as Thomas desired to have by putting his fingers
into Christ's wounds; and this Philosophers say is infallible about its proper
object, if there be no defect or impediment in the sensitive faculty.

Again, There is a certainty of Science or Knowledge, and that is either of
first principles which are assented unto by all, without any discourse or
debate at all, or else of such conclusions as are deduced from those principles.

Lastly, There is a certainty arising from the Authority of those who do
declare or witness such things; for the testimony of him whom I believe to be
the supreme truth and infallible about such or such things, does beget a firm
and sure persuasion that they are true; now this Authority is twofold, either
Humane; and as the men who witness are for number few or less, or for quality
more or less worthy of credit, so more or less is that Certainty; and this
breeds an humane faith, or moral certainty only (now it is much to be feared
that the greatest part of Protestants even in matters of Religion, have no more
then this humane faith, believing upon no higher a motive then humane
tradition, or the authority of man,) or else it is Divine, from Gods authority
and revelation, and this begets an undoubted assent, which cannot be
over-mastered by any contrary temptation. Hence it is that this certainty of
faith is above all certainty of sense or reason, because the ground of it is
more firm and immutable; and although the nature of things believed be far
above our understandings (as in the doctrine of the Trinity and incarnation of
Christ) yet the testimony of them is clear and evident, so that the certainty
of faith may not be called obscure, as Papists term it, but clear and evident;
for that is true which Aquinas says, No man believes that which he does not
see to be credible, and therefore in every thing believed there is evidentia
credibilitatis, a clearness and evidence of the grounds why I do believe,
though there be not always evidentia rei, a clearness of the thing assented
to; now if you ask, To what kind of certainty is that reduced, which the
people of God have about their being in Christ, and in the state of grace; I
answer it is a mixed or compounded certainty, partly a certainty of faith, and
partly of sense and in experience, which sense is spiritual, and wrought by the
Spirit of God in us, so that it does far transcend probable conjectures and
moral persuasions arising in us, because of such bodily affections or
dispositions of joy and grief, which we sometimes find in our selves, and
hypocrites also are many times made partakers thereof.

Secondly, A man may be assured that the condition he lives in is damnable,
and 2. A man may be assured he is wicked.
such a wicked man is to be assured of that as long as he continues in that
life, he is without the state of grace: So that we may truly say to many the
contrary in this Text, Examine your selves, try your selves, whether you be in
the flesh, and power of sin or no; Know ye not that the devil dwells and
reigns in you? The Apostle says, Gal. 6. The works of the flesh are
manifest, and therefore such who live in the practice and habitual custom of
gross sins, may and ought to conclude unto their own souls that they are in
the state of gall and wormwood, and that they have no portion in Christ or his
benefits; and O that such would make such practical conclusions and judgments
against their own selves, it might be an effectual preparation to awaken and
rouse them out of their security, whereas through self-flattery, and a
groundless persuasion of Gods mercy, they utterly destroy themselves.

But although a man may for the present conclude that he is in a slate of sin
None can be sure they are Reprobates.
and death, Yet none may assure themselves that they are reprobated by God, and
that they have such signs upon them that they can never be saved, because no
man can come to such a certainty out of the Scripture; and as for a particular
revelation, as God does not assure believers by any such extraordinary way,
much less may we think he will the reprobate by that way. We therefore speak
of the present estate of a wicked man, let such an one cast up his accounts,
come to a peremptory conclusion how it is between God and his soul, do not live
in vain hopes, be not as one that knows not what to do, or what will become
of him, how many are there who on their deathbeds cry out, Live they cannot,
and die they dare not, though they must? Do thou not see the plague-tokens
upon thy soul as yet? Are not thy oaths, thy lusts, thy neglect of holy duties
a full demonstration that thy heart is barren of all grace?

Thirdly, It is easier for a particular Church to know it is a true visible
Church, then for a particular Christian to know that he is a true believer. For
to a true visible 3.
Church are required only those notes and marks which are external, as the pure
preaching of the Word with an external submission unto it, or receiving of it,
and where this is, a man may conclude there is a true visible Church for the
essence of it; but to the truth of grace in a man's heart, there is required
internal and secret operations of Gods Spirit by a powerful and most effectual
change of a man's soul. Now as in the notes and marks of a true Church, some
take general marks which are common to false Churches, as the Papists, Signs of
universality, antiquity and temporal felicity, etc. And again, Others they make
the whole dispute about the marks of a Church useless and of no profit at all
(as Episcopius that Remonstrant) so for the signs of grace, some are too large,
and make those things arguments of grace which any hypocrite may attain to, as
Baptism, Morality, external conformity to Gods Law, etc. So others, as the
Antinomians, do wholly overthrow the Doctrine about signs of grace, and make it
altogether useless to preach about them: but this is to be confuted in its
time.

Estius the Papist would make this exhortation of the Apostle in the Text, to
be only for trial, Whether they were a true Church, and whether Christ dwelt in
them by true Doctrine, Miracles and his Ordinances? But that cannot be the
total meaning, partly, because every believer had not Christ dwelling in him by
Miracles, and therefore such an one could not have acknowledged Paul's
ministerial power; and if so, then Paul would not have provoked to that, partly
because this place, and that of Ephesians. 3. 17. may explain one another; now
there Christ is said, To dwell in their hearts by faith, where it must needs be
justifying faith; and certainly Christ is in us, as we are in Christ, for Joh.
14. 10. these are put together, now we are not in Christ by a faith of
Miracles, and therefore he is not in us by such a faith.

Fourthly, No man can by any natural light or evidence in him, come to be
assured 4. Assurance not a natural light.
of the grace wrought in his soul. Hence I shall show you, that it is Gods
Spirit which does seal to us what we are; and that as a man cannot see the
Sun but by the light of the Sun, so neither can he see Christ or his graces
in him but by the Spirit of Christ. Hence a man may be in the state of grace
and not know it, even as the child in the womb may be an heir to a great
inheritance, and not understand it; and therefore as it is not the power of a
man's free will to subdue and conquer sin, but that belongs to the Spirit of
God sanctifying, so it is not the light of a man's natural understanding that
can assure us of the things of God in us, but it belongs to the spirit of
Adoption in us. Hence it is that a man naturally is destitute of all comfort,
as well as grace, his heart is like an hell; as there is the unquenchable fire
of lust, which never goes out, so there are worms of doubts and fears
perpetually gnawing which never die. For the Promises being divine and
supernatural, we have no more inclination to them, or compliance with them then
the commands of God, which require holiness. Hence it is that as a man while
unconverted does resist the Spirit of God, convincing and sanctifying; so when
converted and humbled for sin he does often refuse Gods Spirit comforting and
witnessing his love to him. And hence is the spiritual combat and conflict the
people of God have, which is not only between corruption and holiness, but
also between doubting and faith. Assurance therefore does not follow the work
of grace in us by a necessary consequence, as heat does the light of the fire,
but is separable from it, as we see in many of David's Psalms, who though full
of grace and holiness, yet was in darkness, and felt not Gods presence with
him, or his love of him; and this should make us keep with all fear and
trembling any measure of Assurance that we have, seeing if we sin it away we
are no more able to call it into our souls again, then we can bid the Sun
stand still in its race.

Fifthly, There are four special privileges and mercies that a Christian even
in this 5. Four things Christian m^ be assured of.
life may be assured of, his Election, Remission of sin, Sanctification of
his nature, and Perserverance in that state, with future glory at the end
thereof. And the assurance of our Sanctification or present grace must be the
foundation for the other certainties; so that there can be no certainty of
Predestination, of Justification, of Glorification, if there be not a certainty
of Renovation in us. We therefore ought the more diligently to attend to this;
for he that has a false persuasion about his grace in him, has also a false
persuasion of his pardon of sin, and of his Salvation, and so at last all his
hopes will miserably fail him. Tell me therefore thou that have such confidence
that thy sins are forgiven, such boldness as to hope for salvation, what works
or fruit is there of sanctifying grace; there you must begin, and you build in
vain unless this foundation be laid. Not that we are to trust in our graces,
but to gather Gods love by them as so many signs and testimonies, otherwise our
certainty is in dignatione Dei, not in dignitate nostra, said Bernard; And
Ambrose, Non gloriabor quia justus sum, sed quia redemptus sum; non gloriabor
quia vacuus peccati sum, sed quia peccata mihi remissa sunt.

Therefore sixthly, It is a most sad delusion for an ungodly or unregenerated
man to 6.
be persuaded, his estate is an estate of grace, whenas indeed it is nothing
but of sin and death. We pity those that are bewitched or possessed with
devils, but this is the most terrible possession, when a man is possessed with
the devil turned into an Angel of light. Thus the Pharisees who blasphemed
sometimes, saying, Christ had a devil, they themselves were possessed with one;
you are they that justify your selves (says our Savior) now all are very
prone to this corrupt judgment, Every man's ways are right in his own eyes (its
the wise-mans Apophthegm) but the Lord pondereth the heart; and in this
bewitchery most men lie. For who is there that is not confidently persuaded of
the goodness of their spiritual estate, who is not like Laodicea persuaded of
their riches and fullness, when indeed they are naked and empty. Oh therefore
that such had the spiritual eie-salve, that such had their eyes opened to judge
righteous judgment. How great will thy confusion be when thy gold shall be
found dross, thy wine water, thy graces corruption, and thy goodness nothing
but sin! Do not therefore give credit to thy deceitful heart. Be afraid lest
thy self-love has blinded thy eyes and hardened thy heart, pray unto God that
he would make known thy self unto thy self. The better thoughts thou have of
thy self, it may be, it is the worse with thee; such a righteousness and
godliness as satisfies men like thy self, is not presently acceptable unto
God. Men may live forty or threescore years, and yet be great strangers unto
their hearts. We pity those deluded mad men, who are persuaded they are such
great persons, and have such large estates, when in the mean time they lie
miserable and naked, bound up in chains in a dark dungeon; such a spiritual
madness is upon most, who never searched to the bottom of all that filthiness
which is in them, and thereupon call themselves grapes and figs when they are
thorns and thistles.

Seventhly, Consider that the soul of man has two kinds of acts or workings.
The former are direct acts, such as go immediately to their object; as when by
faith I 7.
take Christ and adhere to him; the latter are reflex acts, which are only in
reasonable subjects, and this is when a man does perceive and discern those
direct acts in him, as when I perceive that I do thus adhere to Christ, that I
do love God. Now Certainty or Assurance is properly in this latter way, when we
know that What Assurance is.
we believe; and therefore this Assurance it is called by some Sensus fidei,
the feeling or perceiving of Faith. Now you must know that this feeling or
perceiving of Faith is from Gods Spirit as well as Faith it self; so that it is
not a mere humane sense or discerning, which is subject to falsehoods and
delusions, but is infallible, even as faith is; for as the Spirit of God cannot
externally witness any thing that is false; so neither can it inwardly in the
soul of a man persuade of that which is false, so that as a man knows by the
help of Gods Spirit, His word to be the word of God, and is never fully
confirmed till that come, so though a man may have probable hopes and
conjectures of grace in his heart, yet he never comes to be settled, till the
Spirit of God does thus corroborate him.

Eighthly, This Certainty a Believer has cannot be made known or demonstrated
unto another, but remains unexpressible in his own heart. Even as a man
cannot 8. A Believers assurance cannot be known to any other.
describe unto another, what it is to be a father or a mother, only those that
are so, and feel the bowels of such a relation, they can in themselves feel
what it is; and thus when a man becomes persuaded of the truth of grace in his
own soul, as differing from hypocrites, this cannot be discovered unto another,
only the man himself rests satisfied; Therefore its called, The white stone
which none knows but he that has it. As it is thus only known to a man's
self, so neither can others by a judgment of Certainty, but of charity only
judge who are so. For it is God only that knows the hearts, and there is
nothing visible in Christianity, which an hypocrite may not upon false grounds
do, as well as the godly upon true, and if some did in the primitive times know
what was in men's hearts, it was by a peculiar extraordinary revelation, not of
customary discerning. And that discerning of spirits which was given to some in
the Church, was in respect of Doctrines, to difference the true from the false,
not of men's hearts and affections: This is to be observed against that error
of some, that hold, A man may certainly know whether another be godly, Peter
was deceived about Simon Magus, and he calls Sylvanus a faithful brother, as he
supposes, 1 Pet. 5. 12. It is true there is a great sympathy and conformable
working of Gods Spirit in godly men, and their hearts answer one another as the
face in the glass, but yet here is no infallibility, and many whom the godly
have admired as stars, have fallen from heaven; and others whom they did not
expect have remained firm to God.

Ninthly, In all the acts of Faith, whether they be direct or reflex, the
firmness 9.
and certainty of them does more depend upon Gods Spirit confirming us, then in
the clearness of the argument. Our Assurance does consist more in that firm
adhesion of the subject, then in the evidence of the object. If you consider it
in those assertive acts of faith, whereby we believe truths revealed in
Scripture, their firmness and immovablenes does more depend upon the work of
Gods Spirit strengthening the inward man, then upon the arguments; hence it does
believe them even unto Martyrdom, though it be not able to answer all the
objections brought against it; and thus it is in these reflexive acts, the
confidence that a Believer has of the truth of grace wrought in him, comes
more from Gods Spirit removing our slavish fears and bondage disposition, as
also staying and supporting the soul, then from that excellency and beauty of
grace which is within us.

Tenthly, Consider that as a man in his animal or rational life does perceive
the 10.
motions of his sensitive and rational soul, so does a Believer in his
supernatural feel the motions of his spiritual life. 1 John 3. 14. We know we
are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren; a place much
to be insisted upon hereafter. In this Text are two things, the first is
general, Those that love the brethren are translated from death to life; The
second is more particular, we love the brethren, and therefore know we are
translated from death to life; so that as he who has fire in his bosom, he
feels that heat within him; Thus he that loves God, feels the motions of
love within him, so that as a man as sensitive does perceive the motions of
sense within him, thus does a man spiritual feel infallibility the supernatural
motions of an heavenly life within him, yet here is this difference, a man does
discern bitter from sweet, and a seeing man white from black without any
temptation or opposition at all, but it is not so in supernatural motions.

Eleventhly, It is a vain thing to distinguish between the certainty of Hope,
and a 11.
certainty of Faith, as if a man might have a certain Hope of Grace and
Godliness in him, but not a certain Faith, for the firmness of Hope does
depend only upon the certainty of faith; So that where there is no certainty of
Faith, there cannot be any firmness of Hope. It is true, a man may have a
strong desire of that which he has no certain Faith for, but that desire
cannot be called Hope, and this is more especially true in divine Hope, which
makes not ashamed, and the reason is, because it is the fruit of Faith, which
is built upon the Promise and word of God; what Certainty therefore Faith has
it does transmit to Hope; and as God has placed such a natural Affection as
Hope in a man, to bear him up against all the difficulties he meets with for
the obtaining of the good he desires, so he has placed a supernatural frame
in the heart to support the soul till it obtains those good things it
believes to have.

Twelfthly, The Scripture speaking of this Certainty has many significant
words to 12.
express it by, Romans 7. 38. (...), for although the word is common both to a
moral or conjectural persuasion, in which sense Paul uses it of the faith of
the Romans, Romans 15. 14. and of the Galatians conversion, Gal. 5. 1. yet it is
also used of a divine Faith, and that in Doctrines of Religion, Romans 14. 1. 2 Timothy 1. 12. and the context does evidently show it to be such a persuasion
(because it is not a confidence against a separation from God, but a
possibility of it, Who shall separate us?) It uses also the word Know in that
of John, 1 John 3. and in many other places. Ephesians. 3. 12. you may there see
Faith the root, (...), and from that flowing (...), Confidence, and from his
Confidence flowing (...), but the word that the Scripture does most fully
express this by is (...), Romans 4. 21. Romans 14. Col. 2. 2. Heb. 6. 11. It is
used in an ill sense, Eccles. 8. Hence there is (...) in wicked men, and (...)
in the godly.

SERMON V.
Handling the Adjuncts of Assurance, viz. The Possibility, Excellency,
Difficulty and Necessity of having it.

2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith.
THis Text (as is proved) is a sure foundation of that profitable and necessary
Doctrine, viz. The Certainty that a godly man may have of that Grace which is
wrought in him, I come to add two more Propositions, which may further declare
the nature of this Truth,

As first, There are three things when we speak of Certainty, that are
confounded by some Divines, and accurately distinguished by others; and they
are Fides, Fiducia, 13.
and Certitudo, Faith, Affiance or Confidence, and Assurance. In the writings
of many Authors these are spoken of promiscuously, as the same thing; yea Faith
is by many learned men defined to be a full persuasion of the heart, etc. which
definition though it was maintained by them out of a good intent against all
Popish doubtings, yet it is not a Truth in the thing; for many have Faith, yea
justifying Faith, who have none of this Assurance; and this definition has
plunged many tender Consciences into sad Labyrinths, as if they had no Faith at
all, because no Assurance at all: But of this more hereafter. Others therefore
speak more distinctly, and also consonantly to that place of Scripture, Ephesians.
3. 11. where Faith in Christ is said to have three effects, 1. Affiance or
Confidence. 2. Boldness or Assurance, and both these come from Faith. 3. (...),
Readiness of access to call upon God in times of adversities, so that a
believer is made Gods favorite, and it is not against Law (as Esthers was) to
go in and speak to this great King. Now whether Faith, Confidence and Assurance
differ only as so many degrees; as a Child, a Youth and a Man; or whether
they differ as several kinds, is to subtle a dispute. This is certain, That
unless our Faith go so far as in a special manner to apply Christ to us, it
cannot justify us, or do us any good: Others were in the crowd besides the
woman that had the bloody flux, but she touching of him did partake of virtue
from him. Though an Israelite had looked upon all other Objects as well as the
brazen Serpent, yet beholding that only did cure him; So though our Faith be
carried out to the whole Word of God, yet it is the applying and resting upon
Christ that does justify us: Let not then a gracious heart despair as if it
had no interest in Christ, because it has not yet attained to Assurance, God
that has begun to make thee desire Christ, that has supported thee under thy
fears and guilt, will at last give thee Assurance; for God bestows these
mercies by degrees, even as Boaz did to Ruth; he first gave her gleanings, then
her meals, and lastly his own self. God may come unto thee in mighty rushing
winds before he come in a still quiet voice, Nil tam certum, quam quod ex dubio
certum, nothing is so certain, as that which is so after doubting. The shaking
of the Trees by mighty winds, does make the root more firm, and so may these
temptations be a foundation of greater joy and boldness.

Secondly, The Assurance Gods people have of their estate of grace, is not so
high 14.
and full as that it excludes all doubting, for there is nothing Perfect in us
in this life, whether it be Duty or Consolation, but as the Flesh lusts
against the Spirit in regard of Sanctification, so it does also in respect of
Consolation; We see David subject to many Convulsion-fits, his Psalms sometimes
discover Confidence and Assurance, sometimes again Dejection and great
Diffidence, so that Samson with his Hair grown, and his Hair cut, does not more
differ from himself in strength and weakness, then David does. We do not
therefore maintain or plead for such an Assurance that excludes all Doubting,
all Conflicts and Agonies, such as the glorified Saints in Heaven have, but
such a certainty as is grievously assaulted by Satan the Prince of darkness,
and by the unbelief of our own hearts; and although we make Doubting as a
grievous sin, yet we say it cannot be avoided, because of that remainder of
corruption which is still in us, insomuch that it is a received Maxim in
Practical Divinity, grounded also upon Scripture, That he which never Doubted
never Believed; as he that will say he is never Proud, it is a sign he was
never Humble; now the ground of this Truth is from that fountain of sin that
is still in every man; so that he can neither do any Duty, or partake of any
Comfort without the dregs of corruption; there is the leaven of sin that does
sour both. There is some Gall in all our Honey; and by this means godly
Assurance (as is to be showed) does differ from all that carnal confidence and
presumption which is in wicked men; and we may justly say to them that which
Isaac did to Jacob, when he brought his counterfeit Venison, How come thou by
it so soon? This Land of Canaan is not so easily possessed, yea as the
Egyptians did most oppress the Israelites when they were getting out of their
power, so does the Devil most buffet and assault those who have escaped his
snares: And as the Trees that are fullest of fruit have their boughs most
broken; so the people of God that carry about with them the richest Treasures
of Gods Grace, have the greatest encounters from Satan. We read the Devil
tempting Christ upon this very Point, Whether he were the Son of God. It is no
wonder then if he do frequently try thy strength and comfort. Besides, the
failing in our Duties is a ground of coming short in our Comforts. Hence
commonly the most active Christian has the greatest Comfort, and he that
walks loosly and lazily, is fullest of Doubts; as the waters that run
swiftly breed no vermin, no croaking Frogs, but those that are sluggish, and
are constagnated in a Pool.

Before we come to the practical Questions about this Assurance of Grace, we
The Adjuncts of Assurance. I. The Possibility of it. 1.
will consider these Adjuncts of it. 1. The Possibility of it. 2. The
Excellency of it. 3. The Difficulty of it. 4. The Necessity of it.

First, The Possibility of it is seen, in that the people of God have enjoyed
it. When David does so often call God his God and his Portion, acknowledging
with joy and thankfulness that he had forgiven his sins, does not this suppose
a Certainty? When that man said, O Lord, I believe, Did he speak he knew not
what? And Paul, how often does he manifest such an Assurance! and lest it
should be thought he had it by some special Revelation, he does Romans 8. infer
this Assurance from those grounds, which are common to all the people of God,
do not therefore think it impossible, saying, Who will go up to Heaven and
bring a Revelation for me, that God is my God? for thou have the same ways to
obtain it, as the people of God have had heretofore.

Again secondly, The Possibility of it is seen in that a man may be assured of
his 2.
dogmatical Faith; That is, a man may be assured that he does believe such
Principles of Religion upon a divine ground; and if so, why not also that he
loves God and his children upon true Motives; as also that his Repentance has
all true Ingredients into it. And indeed if a man could not tell whether he did
believe upon supernatural grounds, he could not truly but upon a bold venture
say, he did believe in God in deed, that there is a Church of God, or a
Resurrection of our bodies.

Thirdly, The Possibility of it appears from the Institution of Sacraments,
as Signs and Seals particularly to witness Gods love to us; So that as the
appointing 3.
of Seals among men does argue an intent of making bargains and contracts sure:
Thus God appointing Sacraments in a visible particular Application, does hereby
declare his Will, that his Children should be sure; so that to overthrow
Assurance is to take away the Sacraments; As a man does prize that wax which is
made up in a seal to confirm his inheritance to him, more then all the wax in
the world; so do Christians look upon bread and wine consecrated and set apart
for that use of signification and obsignation of the benefits of Christ, more
then all other bread and wine.

Lastly, If Assurance were not possible, the defect would be either in the
Object, or in the Means to attain it, or in the Subject. In the Object there
can be no defect, 4.
as all say, for Gods Promises are in Christ Yea and Amen; and no iota or
tittle of Gods Word in the promising part of it, can any more pass away, then
in the preceptive or threatening part of it. Then there can be no defect in the
means to obtain it; for there is the Spirit of God efficiently to work it;
There are the Sacraments appointed on purpose to confirm us; There are
Ministers to instruct and inform about it. Neither is there any defect in the
subject, for although the heart of a man be naturally deceitful and full of
crafty wickedness, so that the Scripture calls him a fool who trusts in it;
yet being now renewed by Gods Spirit, that guile and hypocrisy is in a great
measure removed, and he does not see and discern by his own strength merely,
but by the Spirit of God enabling and guiding of him; So that as Gods Spirit
working by the Law, does convince a man in particular of his sins, fills him
with despair of himself and every thing he does, makes him to see he is an
undone and a lost man; so the same Spirit through the Promise of the Gospel,
does persuade us of Gods love, revealing it outwardly in the Word, and shedding
it abroad inwardly in our hearts.

Secondly, The Necessity of it appears, 1. From the Nature of Faith. It II.
The Necessity of it. 1.
is of an establishing and settling Nature. It is a Pillar and an Anchor to the
soul, and although Assurance is a separable effect from it, yet the Scripture
makes Doubting and Fear to be opposite to believing. Hence is trusting in God
compared to rolling our selves upon him, to staying the mind, to resting of
the heart, etc. So that by strong and customary Acts of believing on Christ,
and patiently waiting, we come at last to be assured.

2. There is a Necessity from Gods Glory. It is not enough that God does work
Grace in us, and sanctify us; but we are to know this, that we may praise and
2.
bless God for it: Can a man in his sleep, or in a swound, when his senses are
stupefied, praise God that he lives? no more can a Christian staggering with
uncertainties, and lying in all darkness of mind: how therefore should this
quicken us up to obtain this Mercy! How much Glory does God lose by thy fears!
As David argued, Do the dead praise thee? So do thou say, O Lord, Do they in
darkness and that have no light, glorify thee for thy goodness to them!

3. Hereby we shall have more Joy and Peace in our hearts: Oh what an Hell must
every man's heart be that has not some little light at least of this in 3.
his Soul? What Legions of tormenting Doubts must needs possess him, till he
have some support this way? How can a man be sick, be in dangers, be under the
stroke of death, who has no knowledge of any Good that God has wrought in
him? See how this supported Hezekiah in his sickness, Remember, O Lord, how I
have walked before thee with a true heart. And thus Paul is animated to look
Death in the face, because he knew He had fought a good fight: and is not this
the complaint of many languishing on their deathbeds? Oh if they had
Assurance, how willingly could they depart out of this world!

4. In the Usefulness of it, hereby we shall be enlarged and quickened up to
all 4.
holy Duties. He that has this Hope purifieth himself, even as God is pure, 1
John 3. 3. And Having these Promises, says the Apostle, viz. of God being our
God, and we his people, Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh
and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. We believe, therefore we speak; and therefore it is an
opinion against manifest Experience, that Assurance of Gods Love will beget
Presumption and carnal Security, whereas indeed this will be like fire in our
bowels, wings to our Souls: Does not the Childs Knowledge and Assurance that
his Father loves him, beget all willingness, and readiness of Obedience? And
is not the Rule, Si vis amari, ama, Love if thou would be loved? When
therefore the Soul shall be persuaded that God in great Love has wrought such
mercies for him, Will not this make him seven times more enflamed to God?

In the third place, We have the Difficulty, few do attain unto it, and that
from III. The difficulty of getting Assurance. 1.
these grounds,

First, Where the sense and feeling of the guilt of sin is, there we
presently look upon God as an Enemy, think of him as of a Man that cannot
forgive, but will certainly avenge. Thus Cain and Judas, how prone were they to
despair! And therefore the word to Assure, 1 John 3. 19. signifies Persuade,
implying that our Hearts have many froward and peevish Objections; and we are
many times as Rachel mourning, and would not be comforted.

Secondly, It arises from the desperate Hypocrisy and falsenesse of our
Hearts. 2.
This is urged by the Papists too far, as if it were such a Deep, that the
Spirit of God also could not assure us what we are; but thus far it
manifests, That Comfort or Assurance is not a Flower that grows in our
Garden, but if the Spirit of God should not both work Grace in us, and give us
eyes to discern it, we should remain in a dark Chaos.

Thirdly, It arises from our pronenesse to walk negligently and carelessly. We
3.
are beaten down with many Temptations, and therefore do quickly lose our
hopes; for this Assurance is preserved in the continual exercise of Grace.
Hence the Apostle uses two words (...), The rather give all Diligence to make
your Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Implying that if we walk not
carefully in the use of all the means of Grace, which God has appointed, we
cannot obtain it; but now, how are we in coldness, lukewarmness, earthliness,
etc. often, and so grieve that Spirit of God which would seal us?

Fourthly, It is Difficult from outward Causes, as first from Satan, who has
fiery 4.
Darts, is a Manslayer from the beginning, and endeavors to keep in doubts and
fears, that so at last we may be even wearied out, and rage against God. When
the Devil cannot hinder us in our Duties, he does it in our Comforts and
Consolations; as the Spirit of God is the Comforter, because of that special
benefit it brings to the people of God; So the Devil is the Tempter, and
watches the opportunity to throw bitter wormwood into every condition we are
in: As the Pirates do beset and wait for those ships that are fullest of gold,
and other treasures; yea therefore never are wicked men cast down with those
fears and troubles as the godly are; They know not the meaning of spiritual
Temptations, nor what it is to have the light of Gods countenance denied them.

2. On Gods part, he makes it difficult, That hereby his favor may be the more
prized. The Church that had carelessly put off her Beloved, afterward makes
great and vehement enquiry after him, and cannot find him. Though it arise not
from the Doctrine of Assurance, to make us careless and negligent; yet
sometimes this may be abused through our corruption.

Lastly, Here is the Excellency of this Privilege several ways;

First, This keeps up excellent Fellowship and Acquaintance with God. The
Church IIII. The excellency of this privilege. 1.
that could say, I am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved is mine, did abound in
spiritual Society with Christ: Hence the Church glories in this expression
four or five times; whereas fears and doubts keep us aloof off, and make us
slavishly trembling about him.

Secondly, It will work a Filial and an Evangelical frame of heart. The Spirit
2.
of Adoption enabling us to call God Father, makes us also have the humble
disposition of Sons; Hereby we are carried out to do him service for pure
intentions and motives.

Thirdly, It will support, although there be nothing but outward misery and
trouble. In those times when we cannot be assured of any thing, such as these
are, not assured 3.
of our estates, safety or lives; yet if assured of the grace of God wrought in
our souls, this will be like a wall of Marble that cannot be beaten down. Thus
Romans 8. Paul triumphs over all difficulties upon this ground.

Fourthly, It will much inflame in Prayer, when we are assured of Gods love.
This 4.
kindles Desires, increases Hopes to speed, and so makes the Soul more
importunate; and in this respect David does encourage himself in prayer many
times: If Experience breeds Hope, much more will Assurance.

Fifthly, It makes a man walk with much tenderness against sin; As being
that only evil, which would put him out of the heaven he is in, for having now
the 5.
Experience how sweet the Lord is, and how greatly his favor is to be prized,
he will take heed that he do not rob himself of so great a treasure as that is.
How do men fear to displease those who can if they will, keep all their earthly
Evidences from them? and shall we not much rather God, who can deny us our
heavenly Evidence?

Sixthly, His heart will be impatient and earnest till the coming of Christ.
When he shall have a full possession and accomplishment of all Glory, I desire
to depart, 6.
says Paul, and to be with Christ. If the beginnings be thus wonderful and
excellent, What will Heaven it self be, when all fears shall be abandoned! If
Seneca said of his wise man, Majore part illic est, unde descendit, He is more
in Heaven then in Earth; this is much more true of the godly.

Seventhly, A full acquiescency and resting in God and Christ, as sufficient
for every kind of want, so as They desire nothing in Heaven but him, and
nothing in Earth 7.
besides him, and hereby having drunk of this water they thirst no more, but
all their happiness is in him. Blessed is the man that is partaker of such a
privilege, and happy is he who in this manner has God for his God, and Christ
for his Christ.

SERMON VI.
Showing the Difference between true Assurance and Presumption.

2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves, etc.
IN the next place we are to consider, What are the Characteristical
Differences between Assurance and Presumption? You have heard it to be the
greatest delusion and madness that can be, to have a false persuasion of our
estate, as if sound and godly, when its the contrary; and yet the greatest part
of Christians are delivered up to such a carnal confidence, and are like that
mad Athenian who thought all the Ships on the Sea were his. How many are there,
who when they hear the exact Discoveries that are made of Grace, whereby they
may evidently conclude, That they are for the present shut out of this Kingdom,
do yet bless themselves, as if all were well with them! It is therefore worth
the while to ransack such false Evidences, to discover between Dross and Gold,
Honey and Gall, what is of the Flesh and what is of the Spirit.

In the first place, We may find a vast Difference in the efficient cause or
principle The difference between true Assurance and Presumption. 1. In the
cause.
that is procreant of the one and the other. And although causes are like the
root under the ground, not so visible, yet they make much to the differencing
of things. Assurance is a Fruit, whose Root is in Heaven, the Spirit of God in
a twofold act, Enlightening or Revealing, and Adopting or Corroborating the
heart with Filial Evangelical Affections; but carnal presumption is a rush
that grows in the pudled mire of our own hearts; There being these internal
causes that give life and breath to it.

First, An ignorance with an unexperienced apprehension of the depth of sin,
and Internal causes of presumption 1.
danger thereby. They have never yet with Paul found the Law alive, and
themselves dead; They have not seen the great abominations of their Nature; The
foulness of sin, the purity of the Law, the exactness of Gods justice; and
for want of these Discoveries and Apprehensions, they come quickly to be
persuaded that every thing is well with them; This was Paul's case, he was alive
before these thoughts came into him, he had great confidence in himself; and
generally this was the state of the Pharisees who justified themselves, and the
Jews who trusted in their own righteousness, not that there was any ground for
them so to do, but only they were blind and ignorant, not knowing themselves,
as those of Laodicea, who thought themselves rich and full, when they were poor
and miserable: So that the presumption of unregenerate men arises from the
stupidity and blindeness in them; whereas the godly Assurance is wrought out of
a gracious Illumination about the height, depth and breadth of sin, with a
tender affection about the weight and burden of it. Art thou then one who
presumest of the love of God, and restest in the goodness of thy heart? know,
that if thou were acquainted with all the wounds sin has made upon thee, if
thy eyes were opened to perceive the filthiness and vileness of thy nature and
ways, thou would sit like Job upon the dunghill, abhorring and loathing thy
self.

Secondly, Another internal cause is self-love; that is, the Ivy which cleaves
2.
so close unto us, till it has devoured our substance; by this means we
flatter our selves, making everything to be good within us, and to be God,
whereas it is altogether fleshly and carnal. The wiseman observes it, That
every man's ways are clean in his own eyes, but God pondereth the heart.
Quisquis se excusat sibi, accusat Deo, Whosoever does excuse and acquit himself
to himself, does accuse himself to God. This was also the epidemical disease of
the Jews, what Prophet could persuade them their hearts were not right with
God? Who could bring them out of love with themselves? Art thou therefore fully
persuaded of thy good estate? Do thou bless God for thy good heart and
affections? Whence is the ground of this? Is it not from self-flattery and a
carnal love to thy self? If thou were diligent and observing of thy self, this
would be found indeed the real ground of all thy carnal confidence; Whereas a
godly Assurance arises from an utter displicency, and loathing of our selves.

A second vast Difference is, From the Motives and Grounds. The godly Assurance
II. In the motives and grounds.
is from and through the word of God; That which is the means of our
Regeneration, is also of our Assurance, That we through the Scriptures might
have comfort, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. whereas a vain presumption comes
from base and unworthy motives, As

1. A mere natural light and judgment about the state of Regeneration and 1.
Grace; but (as you heard) Assurance comes by the light of the Spirit shining
in Gods word, and the works of Grace in our hearts can be no more discerned by
a natural light, then the sensitive part can apprehend the actings and workings
of reason, or the natural faculty of the Will have power to do that which is
supernaturally good. We see a clear instance in Nicodemus, how blockish was he
about the work of Regeneration? Now this is the Motive of most men's Assurance,
their gross mistake about the work of Grace what it is. Do not the most of men
think this Godliness consistent with frequent and constant Practices of
Impieties and daily neglect of holy Duties? How many say, They have a good
heart, notwithstanding their bad tongues and lives? But if they are not so
gross as to be deluded herein, Do not many take a fair, civil and moral
Conversation, void of scandal, to be the Scripture-godliness, and because they
are so, though they have no more, are therefore persuaded of their sanctified
condition? Nay, a man's mistake may yet go far higher, viz. when they take
those workings of Gods Spirit which are but for a season, or are in some
imperfect and short Degrees, being without root in the soul, for the peculiar
saving work of Grace, which is in the truly regenerated only. Now how easy is
to be deceived one of these ways, and with the foolish Virgins Matthew. 25. to
die confidently, and boldly go to meet the Bridegroom, when yet they want oil?
See therefore if the Motive of thy Assurance be not an absolute mistake about
the nature of sanctifying Grace.

2. The Motive of a godly Assurance is not from any Worth, Merit or Perfection
2.
we deem in our selves, but only from the Truth and Sincerity of Grace, with
many defects that are washed away by Christ's blood. Hence Paul, Though he knew
nothing by himself, yet he was not thereby justified. Therefore the Popish
description of their Hope making it to arise partly from the merits of Christ,
and partly from their own merits, is bold Presumption. We do not defend such an
Assurance as shall arise from a full and perfect Obedience unto Gods Law; (nay
we have an Assurance, such an Obedience cannot be in this life) but only a
certain persuasion of the uprightness of our hearts in the ways of God. Now
the Popish Arguments, they militate against Assurance chiefly upon this ground,
Because none can say, he has a clean heart, and that in many things we offend.
These places argue indeed strongly against a perfection in this life, but not
against a gracious Assurance.

3. A carnal Presumption arises many times from the outward comforts and
plenty 3.
they enjoy. They look upon their Riches, Children, Honors, as so many
Testimonies of Gods Love to them, and Arguments of the Reward of their
Obedience. Because the Scripture has many temporal Promises unto those that
walk in Gods ways, they finding themselves blessed with such advantages, do
thencefrom infer their Piety. But the Scripture gives many Antidotes against
this tumor and swelling, telling us that such stand in slippery places, yea
that these things may become a snare unto them, increasing both their sin and
torment. Quandoque divitae dantur ad poenam, said Augustine, as Solomon
observed, Riches, for the hurt of the owners. That place in Ecclesiastes, No
man knows love, or hatred by these things below, does not, as the Papists
would have it, prove no Assurance at all, but no Assurance by outward mercies
and favors, Dives received his good things in this life, and Lazarus evil
things; but a genuine Assurance that is most powerful and operative in all
outward distresses and miseries. You see it in David by some of his Psalms, how
confident in God, when all outward things did witness the contrary! Thus
Hezekiah when under the stroke of death, is supported with the truth of Grace
in his soul: but all carnal confidence vanishes in time of distress, they
then rage and rave, not knowing what to do; See then what it is that bears up
thy heart, that keeps up thy Spirit: Is it thy Wealth, thy Estate? Alas, how
are these things bestowed many times upon those whom God hates, if these go to
happiness then Christ was not happy, who became poor that we might be rich? It
was well observed by Augustine, That God gives Riches sometimes to wicked men,
that we may not think they are good in themselves; and sometimes he gives them
to godly men, that we may not think them evil in themselves. God may give thee
these things, and not Christ, but if he gives us Christ, how shall he not with
him give us all things else?

The third Difference is In respect of the Manner and Method the Spirit of God
III. In the manner and method of Gods working Assurance.
does usually work Assurance. For although The wind blows where it list, and
Gods ways are many times diversified unto his people, yet commonly as Face
answers face, so do the hearts of Gods people one another; Insomuch that what
is Communis sensus fidelium, though it be not like Scripture, yet is of grave
and serious Authority, now in these ways the people of God come to have
Assurance,

1. By a deep and serious Humiliation for sin, and feeling the burden of it.
Matthew. 1.
11. such only are promised to find rest in their souls; Christ did not assure
Mary Magdalen Her sins were forgiven, till she wept much for them. We do not
limit this to any time or degree of Humiliation, but unto the truth of it. Come
we then to a man who is confident of all things, as well with him; Oh, But what
travails has thy soul had before the joy of such a man-child born unto thee.
Romans 8. The Spirit of God, is a spirit of bondage, before it is a spirit of
Adoption. And this very particular is enough to shake the foundations of many
men's buildings. What deep digging was there in thy heart before this
superstruction? I know this true and safe practical Divinity is rejected by
some upstart flashie spirits, who turn Religion into Notions and Opinions. But
Paul Romans 7. and Chap. 8. does fully describe such a progress and method upon
himself; first, The discovery of sin by the Law, whereby he judged himself
miserable and out of measure sinful, and then the apprehension of Christ's
Grace upon this. This Assurance will not grow upon an heart not ploughed up.
The Needle must pierce the heart before this silk can follow.

2. Another Method whereby God works Assurance, is by conflicts of doubts,
and 2.
opposition of unbelief. For seeing that Assurance is a fruit of Gods Spirit,
and doubting a working of the flesh, it cannot be but the Apostles ru^^ must be
made good, The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh. I like not the Assurance that never doubted; it is like the temper of
that man, who said, All these have I kept from my youth. It cannot be thought
that so great and spiritual a mercy should be brought into thy soul, and thy
heart not be in many commotions. Apprehensions of Grace in us, accompanied with
sense and feeling of our imperfections are always good symptoms, as in that
man, Lord, I believe (there was his Assurance of Grace in him) help my
unbelief, There was a perceiving of his defects. As David has sometimes the
Sunshine of Gods favor, and it is clear with him; so at other times he is in
the dark, and much wavering.

3. God works Assurance out of the vehement and fiery assaults of Satan. As 3.
Christ himself escaped not his Arrows; so neither do his members. Woe to that
man whose peace the Devil does not disquiet. The strong one who is the Devil
kept all things in quiet, till Christ the stronger come. As the Basilisk hates
the very picture of a man; so does the Devil oppose the resemblance of Christ.
Think therefore that vain Presumption, and not godly Assurance, which is not
opposed by hell it self. It is an Egyptian, not an Israelite, if Pharaoh do
not oppress him.

A fourth real Difference is In the Effects of godly Assurance, whereby it does
as IIII. In the effects of godly Assurance. 1.
much out strip Presumption as light does darkness.

1. This godly Assurance is diligent in the use of the means, careful to
perform all Duties, and in the neglect of these it either perishes, or is much
weakened, Give all diligence (says the Apostle) to make your calling and
election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. So that where Diligence, and all Diligence is not
used, there is no Assurance. This is the Oil which keeps the Lamp burning; in
earnest Prayer, holy use of Sacraments, walking universally in all Gods ways,
is this godly certainty maintained; whereas carnal confidence is big, and
swelling even in the neglect, yea profane contempt of the means. A man that
does not pray, that polluteth himself with daily sins, yet he is thoroughly
persuaded of his happiness. As therefore in the ordinary passages of Gods
Providence, he is rightly judged a presumer who will persuade himself of life,
when yet he will neither eat or drink, be assured of wealth and riches, when
yet he will use no Diligence: such an arrogant sottishness is in a spiritual
presumer.

2. Godly Assurance the more it is, the more does it inflame the heart with
love to 2.
God. It is like the burning Glass that by the reflection of the Sunbeams
does cause a fire to be kindled within, as we told you of David and Paul; and
none do so highly bless God and praise him, as those that have this Assurance:
but carnal presumption works into a love of the creature, or comforts he
enjoyes, and cares the less for God. As the Adulteress the more confident
she is of her husbands love, the more bold and impudent she is to abuse it. The
Spirit of Adoption giving a filial Disposition, and Assurance of a Fathers love
does much melt a filial frame of heart; but if love be showed to a servile
slavish spirit, it makes more haughty and lofty. Consider therefore how thy
Assurance works in thee, does it put out all love to sin and the world? Does
it kill inordinate affections to things below, and raise up thy heart to God,
delighting and rejoicing in him? This is a comfortable demonstration of good
Assurance.

3. Godly Assurance is potent and able to keep up the heart under all
discouragements 3.
and desolations. Thus David in that sad exigence, Encouraged himself in the
Lord his God. This Certainty of our Propriety and Interest in God, is an Ark to
the soul in the midst of many waters; whereas take any carnal confident man,
his heart becomes like a stone within him, when all carnal hopes fail. And this
is a precious symptom, see in the midst of these confusions thou live in,
when Heaven and Earth seem to be mingled together, What makes thee rejoice and
to lift up thy head with gladness? Is it that Knowledge thou have of God to be
thy God? Is it those pledges and pawns in thy soul of his eternal love and
goodness unto thee? This is something. But alas, as the hypocrites joy, so his
confidence will quickly perish. It is not a Star fixed in the Orb made of
quintessential matter, but a blazing Star composed of slimy materials, which
will quickly consume and vanish away. True Adamant (says Origin Hom. 3. in
Jer.) is tried by this, if it can endure the hammer, if under the hammer above,
and the anvil below, it continue more obdurate, then it is true metal: So it is
with true Assurance, it abides though billows and waves come upon it. So that
troubles will discern the truth of thy Graces and Comforts, sooner then any
thing else. Hence Cameron observes, That Mercies are never called Temptations
in the Scripture, but Afflictions, because it is so difficult to be deprived of
that we desire.

Fifthly, We may find a palpable Difference in the Companions or Concomitants
of V. In the companions or concomitants of it 1.
it. As

1. It Is accompanied with holy fear and trembling, for as Gods Word does not
contradict it self, when in some places it calls upon us to make our Calling
sure, and in other places to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling; So
neither may these two Graces contradict one another, as they are in the
subject. So then, they who are assured, though they rejoice, yet they rejoice
with trembling. Those who are assured they shall stand, yet take heed lest they
fall. As a man that looks down from some place where Battlements are, though
while he holds on them, he knows he cannot fall, yet when he looks to the
ground, that is so deep below him, he cannot but fear he should fall; so that
at the same time he has both an Assurance of not falling, and a fear of
falling, though not from the same considerations. Thus it is with the people of
God, whereas carnal presumption excludes all kind of fear, obstructeth all
diligence.

2. A second Companion is Humility and lowliness of mind. For the greater
mercies 2.
God bestows upon his people, the lowlier they are in their own eyes, as the
Virgin Mary witnesses in her Song, and David in Gods kindness to him, whereas
in carnal presumption, the more confidence, the more pride in our selves, and
despising of others. How might we prove that a Pharisee had not Assurance of
Grace in him, but vain-confidence; by this, viz. that he despised other men as
sinners to him? And this may make us justly doubt, whether many that speak of
immediate Revelations and Assurances they have from Gods Spirit, be not in a
proud delusion, by contemning others as low, and not acquainted with the Spirit
of God. For if there be such a danger even in godly men, when lifted up to
great privileges, as in Paul, Wrapped up into the third Heavens, of becoming
proud, that Paul is assaulted with buffetings of Satan, to keep him low, and he
repeats it twice 2 Cor. 12. 7. Lest I should be lifted up above measure, in the
beginning of the verse; and again, Lest I should be lifted up, in the end of
the verse. Hierom compares this Temptation of Satan exercising Paul in the
midst of his Revelations, to the Boy that was a Monitor, who cried aloud to him
that rode in triumph, Mementote esse hominem, Remember thy self to be a man.
If, I say, there be such danger even in godly men, when they have the real
works of Gods Spirit, what cause is there of pride in corrupted men, who have
only puff-paste delusions of Satan? When therefore thy persuasion of Gods love
to thee, raises up lofty mountains in thy soul, thou look upon thy self in
heaven, while others grovel upon the ground, thou deemest thy self to be as
much above other Christians, as an Angel is above a Worm; then fear this,
coming from the devil transforming himself into an Angel of light.

Lastly, It differs in the contrary or opposite which will destroy it.
Assurance being VI. In respect of its opposite.
wrought by Gods Spirit, is only interrupted by sin. Grieve not the Spirit of
God, by which ye are sealed. So that even corrupt and idle communication, even
little sins (as the world judges) may greatly disturb our certainty: But
carnal presumption is not weakened through sin, only outward troubles or
horrors of conscience vanquish that. As the Casuists give a difference between
melancholy, and trouble of conscience for sin; Melancholy is removed by
bodily remedies, merry company, variety of imploiment; but trouble of
conscience can only be taken away by comforts out of the Scripture. Though
Cain travailed and builded Cities, yet that could not free him from that
trembling guilt within him. Thus it is on the contrary, Peace in the holy Ghost
wrought by Assurance, is only excluded by sin or lukewarmnesse in holy
Duties: but sinful confidence abides the same, till it be shaken, or removed
by some outward troubles.

SERMON VII.
Containing Remedies against carnal Confidence with Directions to the Godly
that mourns under the sense of Gods favor.

2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith.
THe differences between carnal Presumption and godly Assurance have been at
large declared. Let us in the next place consider what are the fit engines to
batter down those strong holds, That the carnal-confident man runs into,
what way may be taken to undeceive such a man, and to put him in a way of
Salvation.

And in the first place, This may be laid down as a most certain truth, That
there What way may be taken to undeceive the carnal confident.
are none more indisposed for Christ, none have higher mountains and hills in
the way, then the falsely persuaded Christian. Christ told the Pharisees, That
the Publicans and Harlots got to heaven before them. Ille morbus vix est
sanabilis, qui sanitatem imitatur, says one, That disease is hardly curable
that is like unto health: and the task must be great to remove such an one from
his stedfastness, because two things are to be done; the former to make known
his false righteousness he is persuaded of, and the latter the true
righteousness he is to be assured of. As the Philosopher who was to teach one
that was infected with false opinions, required a double fee, because his work
was double, dedocere, to unteach, and docere to teach. This was the great
labor the Prophets of God were put upon; and Christ who had the tongue of the
learned, preached many Parables to make the full hungry, and the rich empty in
themselves. What the Heretic is in matter of Doctrine, the same is a carnal
presumer in matter of practice and conversation. Now as the former is seldom
reduced, because there is obstinacy and contumacy in him against all
admonitions; so is the latter scarce ever truly debased and humbled, because of
the self-love that cleaves to him.

But if ever any thing be able to overrule and conquer him, these remedies
following are likely to do it.

First, A powerful and soul-searching Ministry, that will so pierce into, and
discover Remedies against carnal confidence.
the hidden things of the heart, that thereby he may come to be made known to
himself. The Ministry of the Word is like the Sun in the firmament, from
whose light nothing is hidden. Thus the Prophets, the Apostles, they were
lights. And what conviction might the Jews have had of all their self-fulness
and hypocrisies, if they had not shut their eyes against the light, 2 Cor. 10.
4, 5. The weapons of the Ministry, though they be not carnal, yet are mighty to
the pulling down of strongholds, and every thing that exalts it self, by
this is meant all kind of opposition. What the woman of Samaria said
concerning Christ, that he discovered Whatsoever she had done: So sometimes may
we say, Come and hear a Sermon that has laid open all the vileness and inward
filthiness, all the poverty and wretchedness that is within me.

A second Remedy is, A particular opening and applying of the Law in the purity
2.
and rigidity of it. Matthew. 5. What an excellent course did our Savior there
take, to make his hearers afraid of themselves, and to see more sins in
themselves then ever they thought of! He makes the Law so spiritual, reaching
so deeply into all the motions and lusts of the soul, that they must needs be
as foul as Blackmoors in Gods eyes, while they did admire their own beauty.
Thou blessest thy slf because of the innocence in thy outward conversation and
freedom from all gross sins, but no dunghill is fuller of Snakes and Worms then
thy heart is of filthy lusts. Thus Romans 7. Paul, as good as he was in his own
eyes, when he looked into the glass of Gods word, his holy Law, he found so
many blots and blemishes in himself, that he had no longer life or hope within
him. Hence it is that men to keep themselves from appearing so deformed as they
are, limit the sense of the Law, as if it were not so exact as it is, like the
Elephant bemudding the water, that it may not see its own deformity.

The third Remedy is, To discover the fullness and necessity of Christ. And
indeed 3.
if Christ be so necessary, as the Scripture says, and that in such a way, as
that his Righteousness must be all in all; Then thereby is demonstrated, that
all which we have is nothing but sin and weakness. If Christ be commended
unto us under the titles of a Savior, Physician, Redeemer, then certainly we
are sick, in bondage and utterly undone in our own selves. Why do thou then
(O vain man) boast so in thy own self! Why art thou so strongly persuaded of
thy own sufficiency? If it be so, What needs a Christ? Was not he incarnated?
Did he not suffer in vain? If a Star were able to give light to the world,
and to dispel all darkness, what need is there of a Sun? If the stream has
enough to refresh, what use is there of the Ocean? Would thou then come to be
poor and miserable in thy own eyes? Consider in what glory, riches, fullness and
absolute necessity the Scripture sets Christ forth, and then thou may
quickly abhor thy self.

A fourth Remedy are Outward and sad afflictions accompanying the Word. For 4.
when God shall thus by his Word thunder in their ears and hearts; When he
shall also outwardly scourge and afflict, then is a man many times taken off
from his lofty imaginations. That as we deal with mad men, who have false
conceits of their outward happiness, throw them into Dungeons, use them hardly,
and that is the way to bring them to the knowledge of themselves; thus God when
he would have a man reject all his carnal presumptions, abhor all high
thoughts of himself, he hangs many clogs upon him, causing many thorns to run
into his side. How much better were it for many men to be kept by God in
darkness, and sad plunges of their own spirit, then to be set always upon the
pinnacle of the Temple (as it were.) Be therefore awakened out of thy security,
fear lest thou have lived thus many years in a mere dream of thy holiness and
interest in Christ.

Fifthly, The examples of such who have made great progress (as might be 5.
thought) in the ways of Religion, and have had high thoughts of themselves,
whose ends notwithstanding have been very dreadful and terrible, is, or may be
a special help to rouse us out of false presumptions. How should that place be
like a sword in our bowels, Heb. 6. where some had illumination, yea and a
savoury tasting in some degree of the goodness of God and his Word, yet had not
things accompanying Salvation! So likewise the instance of the foolish Virgins,
who were so bold and confident in their preparation for the Bridegroom, how
woefully were they deluded! Now look over these examples, and consider again and
again, lest their cases and thine be alike. Think and tremble lest the time be
coming when thou shall cry for oil, because all thine is spent, and there is
none to help thee. Our Savior by many Parables to this purpose would teach us
how prone all are to be thus abused.

Sixthly, Let a presumptuous man consider how apt he is to mistake in other
things, and therefore fear lest he do also in this of the greatest concernment.
Every man is 6.
full of blindeness, stupidity, ignorance, how often is he deceived even in
natural and moral things? How often in truths supernatural? And is it any
wonder then, if in the workings of his own heart, wherein he is commonly
carried by self-love? If a natural man does not perceive many times natural
things, how can he perceive the things of God? As our Savior said, If you
understand not earthly things, how the things of Heaven? If a godly man, out of
whose heart guile and hypocrisy is in a great measure removed, do yet cry out,
Who can understand his errors, Cleanse me from secret sins, How much more is
this true of him who is wholly in the leaven of hypocrisy? If David has much
unknown pride and corruption in his heart, how much has a Pharisee or an
unregenerate man? It is a good speech of Amesius, Praesumentes sunt eo magis
desperati, quo minus sunt desperantes; Presumers are therefore in the more
desperate condition, by how much they are the less despairing.

The next Question shall be, What ought a man to do, who has indeed the truth
of Grace in him, but he knows it not? Though God has wrought supernatural
cures upon his soul, yet he does not believe any such mercy is done for him.
And as when a man has Assurance of the truth of grace in his soul, there is
also a complication of the Assurance of Election, Justification, Perseverance
and Glorification; so when the soul is in darkness about the former, and has
no knowledge How sad a condition it is for a truly godly man to want the sense
of Gods favor.
of that, it is also involved in ignorance about the other things. Now
howsoever carnal men know not the sadness of such an estate, yet David's Psalms
make mention of the heaviness of such a condition, expressing it by all those
similitudes which may make it to appear very horrid, He compares it to broken
bones, not one broken bone, but all his bones broken, What intolerable pain was
that? Christ who wanted the light of Gods favor in his Agony, though no
corporal bone was broken, yet was full of these broken bones.

First, Let him consider whether some sin, unreformed of, that he lives in,
knowing it to be sin, does not eclipse all his certainty. David's Adultery
drove away the 1. What a godly man should do that mourns under the sense of the
want of Gods favor.
spirit of gladness and joy from his soul. Oh that is a cursed joy and
confidence, which is not expelled by the committing of known gross sins! How
can there be Assurance and Peace, as if grace were in thee, when thou
demonstratest such works of the flesh and Satan in thee? Is it any wonder then
to see men who take upon them the profession of Religion, and yet live loosly,
tumbling now and then into foul sins, if they have often an hell upon their
consciences, and frequent terrors upon their soul? As when vapors are gathered
together in the bowels of the earth, it cannot but make an Earthquake; so sin
gathered together in the heart, will one time or other make an heartquake. That
place Ephesians. 4. Grieve not the Spirit of God, supposes sin does grieve him,
and how just is it then that Gods Spirit should grieve us?

Secondly, Suppose no grievous sin fallen into make such a great gulf between
him and Assurance, that he can neither come to that, or that to him, yet
negligent, and 2.
careless use of the means of grace, will much weaken a man's Certainty. You
heard that place, Give all diligence to make your Calling sure; So that without
constant Diligence this Assurance cannot be obtained; for although sincere and
zealous endeavors after godliness be not the cause, yet they are the sign and
testimony of Gods love; and so without these there cannot be any comfort at
all. Ferven^ and gracious performances of holy Duties are the Oil, without
which this Lamp would not shine. When the Apostle exhorted to Prayer, That we
should make our requests known, he adds, And the peace of God shall rule in
your hearts. It is therefore an unworthy thing to speak of doubting, and
complain of the loss of Gods favor, and that thou have no Assurance, when all
thy Duties and Performances are careless and withered.

Thirdly, If yet thou have no Assurance, then know that it is a free and
arbitrary 3.
Privilege, which God bestows when and where he lists. We did briefly, and
shall more at large show, that it is the Spirit of Adoption, which does work
that filial affection, and enable to cry Abba Father. It is the Spirit of God
that does seal unto us; so that Assurance does not flow from the workings of
grace in us by a natural and necessary consequence, but by the immediate
dispensation of Gods love unto us. Hence 2 Cor. 1. God is called, The God of
all consolation who comfort us; For God does not as a Christian friend or
Minister may do to one tempted about sin, outwardly propound comfort, and give
him arguments of consolation, but cannot inwardly turn and change his heart;
but God he does so outwardly command his people to be assured and comforted,
that he does inwardly fashion and form their hearts to receive it. That same
power of God in converting grace, which is called by the Father vorticordium,
is seen also in this of consolation. God therefore would by this teach us, That
Assurance is not a flower that will grow of it self in the garden of our hearts.

Fourthly, Is there the truth of Grace in thee, and thou art not aware of it?
Is it 4.
with thee, as with Hagar, who had a fountain of water by her, and she did not
see it? yet still go on in the constant exercise of thy graces. Thou art bound
to love God, trust in him, perform all Duties, though thy heart should never
feel Gods love to thee; for although the Assurance of Gods favor be like coals
of fire poured upon the soul to melt it, yet we stand obliged to the spiritual
exercise of holy Duties, though God should not give us this encouragement
thereunto, To him that overcomes, I will give the white stone, and the hidden
Manna. This privilege of Assurance is given to those who have a long time been
acquainted with God, much exercised in his ways, and enduring much for him.
Not but that God does to new Converts also many times discover the love of his
Espousals to them, because they are most tender and need it, being much
oppressed with sin. As Aristotle observes it a special instinct of nature,
whereby Parents are most tender of the youngest child, because that can least
take care for it self.

The third Question, Why does God when he has wrought Grace in us, not
presently Why God does not give Assurance presently to those that have true
grace wrought in them.
enable us to believe, and see it in our souls? David, though the Prophet told
him his sin was taken away, yet in that Psalm. 51. how importunately and
earnestly does he pray for pardon and joy. Which implies, that though God
caused this outwardly to be declared to him, yet he did not by his almighty
power effectually persuade him of it, and the Question seems the greater,
because this Assurance would be wings and legs in a man's service to God. It
would inflame him more to promote Gods glory: And besides, God loses much of
his glory and honor; for how can the soul rejoice to give God the praise for
that mercy which he knows not that he has received? so that not to know our
pardon, and not to have it, are all one, as to the matter of thankfulness: yet
for all these reasons, how frequently does God keep his own people in darkness?
How many times are they ready (with Zion) to say, God has forsaken us!

But for all this there are diverse good reasons, why God, though he has put
grace in our souls, may yet not publish it in our consciences.

First, That hereby we may taste and see how bitter sin is. The longer that
guilt 1.
with the consequents of it is upon our soul, the greater cause have we to
bewail it and abominate it. If grace or the Assurance of it were in our power
to have it when and as soon as we would, how sleighty and perfunctory would our
thoughts be about sin? David's length of time under the guilt of murder and
adultery, wrought in him greater hatred and dislike of those sins. And
howsoever it may seem to be a servile low spirit to awe sin, because of the
bitterness of it, and not only because of love of God, and delight in him; yet
no better ^is the frame of the most refined and reformed godly man that is. Be
therefore content under those black desertions, though thou know not how it
is with thee, yet Gods end is good, to keep thee low and weary of sin.

Secondly, Hereby God would keep us low and humble in our selves. We many times
upon the discoveries of Gods works on our hearts are apt to grow high and 2.
contemn others; we are apt to think God has raised us up above others, that
we know and feel more of God then other men do. Now that all such worms of
pride may be killed in us, God hides his face from us, and thereby we see
nothing but sin and weaknesses in us; all our whole life appears to us
nothing, but as Anselms did to him, Aut peccatum, aut sterilitas, either sin or
barrenness. When thy heart sees nothing but sin round about thee, then thou
can lie before the throne of God who is rich in grace, like Lazarus before
the rich man's gate full of sores; and as Chrysologus said of him, that he had
Tot clamantia ora, quot vulnera, as many mouths crying for help, as he had
sores, so will thou have as many mouths begging for pardon, as thou have sins
and infirmities. It is said of Moses his face, that it did shine so, as the
people of Israel were not able to behold it, and yet he knew not of it. How
excellent is it when others can behold and admire the graces of God in thee,
yet thou apprehend none of these in thy own self! It was Gregory's expression,
That a man ought Nesciendo scire, and sciendo nescire, by not knowing to know,
and by knowing not to know the graces of God in him.

Thirdly, God may therefore keep Assurance from our knowledge, that so when we
have it, we may the more esteem it, and the more prize it, taking the greater
heed how 3.
we lose it. We see the Church in the Canticles, when she had despised her
Spouses love, how earnest she was to get it again, but it cost her much ere she
could have it. Sol nisi cum deficit spectatorem non habet, said Seneca, No body
admires the Sun unless when eclipsed, so neither do any highly esteem the
favor and love of God, unless when in the loss of it. As it is in temporal
mercies, so in spiritual, they are prized Carendo magis, quam habendo, by the
wanting of them, more then the having of them: Do thou therefore pray, and
again pray for Assurance, yet can^t not obtain it? then think this delay may be
to increase my appetite the more after it, the more to bless God when my soul
shall enjoy it.

Fourthly, God does it that thou may demonstrate thy obedience unto him, and
give the greater honor to him. For to rely upon God by faith, when thou have
4.
no sensible testimonies of his love to thee, is the purest and meerest act of
obedience that can be. Such faith of adherence did Christ put forth in his
agonies. A man may desire Assurance, as it breeds peace and ease to his soul,
but to depend upon God in spiritual desertions, is wholly to give all to God
and nothing to himself; such a faith is a kind of a spiritual Martyrdom. The
way of Assurance brings more comfort to thy self, but the way of believing
gives more glory to God. When Abraham did not stagger in his Faith, though
Sarahs womb was a dead womb, this was giving glory to God No less is thy
action, when thou overlookest all thy own sense, feeling and sad temptations,
trusting in God for acceptance. To walk by Assurance is a kind of walking by
sense, and it supposes us children, if we cannot be quiet unless in the
mothers bosom.

Fifthly, God withholdeth the sense of pardon, that thou may be an
experienced Christian able to comfort others in their distress. This is true
of Christ himself, that 5.
he was tempted about the wrath of God, that so he might have a sympathy and
fellow-feeling with those who are in the like manner exercised. Paul makes this
end of Gods comforts in his tribulations, that they might comfort others in the
like case. He that is not tempted about the pardon of sin, wonders at those who
are so afflicted, and therefore is altogether unskilful to apply fit remedies.
We see carnal and natural people judge such mad and distracted, they bid them
go to merry company, feast and recreate themselves, thinking this carnal
plaster will heal their spiritual sore. Job 33. 23. Elihu describing the
condition of a man chastened for sin, so that he utterly refuses all comforts,
makes it a great mercy to have a messenger that can show to such a man his
uprightness. This messenger he calls one of a thousand: make therefore this good
use of such temptations, God hereby would raise me up to be a Joseph to my
brethren in their need.

Let the Use be to raze up the foundations of all carnal presumers. This is a
Use.
common sin and damneth thousands, insomuch that presumption is made a more
grievous sin then despair, for in despair a man is weary of himself, abhors
his own estate, would if he could admit better counsel; but a presumer pleases
himself, and so will not hearken to any good admonitions; Oh how sadly art thou
deluded, how frustrated will thy expectations be, when thou shall see nothing
but hell and confusion in stead of all that joy and comfort thou did promise
to thy own self! The foolish Virgins saw their undone condition, when it was
too late to help themselves: do thou fear least thou be plunged into such
horrid extremities. The nearer the haven thou art, if thou suffer shipwreck,
the more lamentable it is. The Church made this an aggravation of misery, We
looked for peace, but behold trouble.

SERMON VIII.
Holding forth diverse Propositions and Distinctions about Marks and Assurance.

2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith, etc.
WE come now to the second general part of the second Doctrine, which is, That
there are such Characters and Signs of Grace, whereby a man may know whether he
be in the state of Grace or no. It is a point worth discussion, and I know not
any thing more necessary at this time, seeing there are many who wholly cry
down Ministers that preach signs of Grace, and discourage Christians that use
such a method for a trial. It is also necessary, because there is much prudence
required in the Minister, while he preaches about signs; and it is an art of
arts for a Christian, to manage that way, so as not to split himself upon some
rock or other. Therefore that this whole Doctrine may be more exactly
discovered, consider these introductory particulars.

First, That by the inherent Grace of Sanctification in us, we come to have a
supernatural Introductory Propositions, and distinctions about Assurance. 1. By
inherent grace we come to have a supernatural being.
being. So that as natural things have a natural being by that natural form
which is in them: Thus also the godly have a spiritual and supernatural by that
infused principle of an holy life in them, 2 Pet. 1. 4. we are hereby said to
be Partakers of the divine nature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Such a regenerated man is
called a new creature, and indeed the very word of regeneration, or new birth,
supposes a new being not essentially, but in respect of those gracious habits
and qualities which the Spirit of God works in him; This also is called the
inward man, 2 Cor. 4. 16. Nerimbergius the Jesuit thinks Paul fetches that
distinction of an inward and outward man from Plato, who makes such a
difference; This work of Grace is that image of God in us, whereby we resemble
him, so that godliness is not a notion, a mere fiction, but a supernatural,
power full reality, whereby a man has a new denomination, of ungodly he is
become godly, even as in natural things by a physical motion there is a real
transmutation, as of cold to become hot; or in moral things, as of a fool to
become wise. Let not therefore any dream of holiness in themselves, unless
there be such a powerful alteration from the state of sin. Hence it is
compared to the Resurrection, and indeed Regeneration makes no less glorious
change of the soul, then that does of the body, as by the latter Our vile
bodies are made like his glorious body; so our vile and corrupted souls are
become like his gracious and holy soul. Tully said, in regard of our souls,
which he thought a divine spark from the glorious Essence of God, Scito te esse
Deum, Know thy self to be God: This was upon a dangerous foundation; but we may
truly say, because of those supernatural principles, even the image of God
within thee, what God once did ironically, Behold, man is become like one of us.

Secondly, Inherent Grace being thus in us as a supernatural permanent
principle 2. Inherent grace has something internal and constitutive of it, and
something that is flowing from it.
of holy actions, it has therefore as all other things have, something that is
internal and constitutive of it, and something that is consecutive or flowing
from it. That which is constitutive of godliness, is the nature of the habits
of graces with all their particular differences, as animal rationale is that
which intrinsecally makes a man. 2. There are properties which do flow and
issue from these, and these are properly the marks and signs, whereby we come
to know that grace in us: for as in Philosophy, Formae nos latent, we do not
know the forms or internal constitutive differences of things, Vitrum lambimus,
pultem non attingimus, as Scaliger said, only we come to know the nature of
things by their properties and effects; hence we have few definitions, but many
descriptions of things from their properties and effects, all our knowledge
being for the most part a posteriori, rather then a priori, as a man that
cannot see the Sun it self, because of it is glorious luster, can behold it in a
basin of water. Hence some have denied that we have a demonstrative knowledge
of things, which is from the causes to the effects. To apply this to our
purpose, the inward principles and immediate nature of grace, is not evidenced
unto us, but by the effects and proper motions, even as in a natural life there
is no discerning of it, but by the motions of life; hence by inherent grace we
are said to live, Gal. 2. 19, 20. Romans 1. 17. So that as natural motions
discern natural life, thus do supernatural a supernatural life; with this
difference, that to this latter there is required also a peculiar illumination
of Gods Spirit, Romans 8.

Thirdly, There are differences about the signs of Grace, even as Grace it self
is distinguished. The Scripture calls those several gifts of extraordinary
Office, Apostleship, 3. There are differences about the signs of grace. 1. Gift
of miracles.
etc. (...), Graces; so that all who have an immediate call from God to any
Duty, they have a grace from God; now howsoever all extraordinary Prophets have
not wrought miracles to confirm their Doctrine, as John wrought no miracles,
yet many times they were furnished with such a power; hence Christ and his
Apostles by virtue derived from him, wrought diverse miracles, insomuch as Gal.
3. this is made an argument of the presence of Gods Spirit among them.

2. There are common Graces of Gods Spirit, and to this there are common
effects 2. Common gracesevidence an outward Call.
and signs sufficient, such are, an historical belief, a visible profession, an
outward acceptance of Christ and his Laws, when there may be no inward change
of the heart at all: for as God does call many by an outward call, whom he does
not inwardly call; so many do outwardly accept of, and prosesse the faith of
Christ, which do it not inwardly; and by this means they have a visible
holiness as opposite to the unconverted world, 1 Cor. 7. 14. There is holiness
and believing opposed to Heathenism and Paganism; hence Heb. 10. 29. that
Apostate who never had true sanctifying grace, is yet said to be sanctified by
the blood of Christ. Hence also because of the outward Sacraments men are said
to be in Christ, and to have put on Christ Jesus; and upon this ground the
Apostle writes to the Churches as a company of Saints, regarding the term from
which they are called, viz. the world, and the term to which, viz. Communion
and fellowship with Christ. Now the notes and marks of this common grace are
easy and plain, and it may fall out that a visible number of people may have
these, so that they are to be accounted a visible Church, and the Ordinances
not denied to them, yet be without those signs that do indeed accompany
Salvation. But we intend not to speak of such notes and characters that are
enough to make one a visible member of the Church, and so to qualify us that
we may not have the Ordinances denied us, in which sense the Apostle, verse. 7.
of this present 13th Chapter prays to God, that the Corinthians may do no
evil, which is not meant of evil absolutely, but restrictedly, viz. such an
evil for which the Apostle should punish with Church Censures, as the context
does abundantly witness. It is true, the greatest sort of Christians satisfy
themselves with common characters and signs, such as Baptism, external
profession, and outward abstinence from sin; hencefrom arguing for their
Sanctification and Acceptance with God: But more of this hereafter. As we must
not make the signs of grace higher then the Scripture makes them, so neither
ought we to draw them down lower.

Fourthly, The Scripture speaks of such marks of grace, whereby others may know
that we belong to God, and of such as we may in our own hearts be evidenced
thereof. 4. Marks whereby others may know we believe.
Of the first see Joh. 13. 35. By this shall all men know ye are my Disciples,
if ye love one another; He does not say, If ye work miracles, if ye raise up
the dead, but if ye love one another; now what a kind of love this ought to
be, the Scripture in other places describes, viz. not a love in word, but in
deed and in truth; now the knowledge we have of other men's graces is but
charitative and conjectural; The Apostle expresses it by a supposing and a
persuasion that faith is truly in such; Though men may give clear and undoubted
signs of their wickedness and naughtiness, yet they cannot of their godliness
and piety; because there is not any thing in Religion which may be expressed to
another, which may not flow from an hypocritical heart, as well as a sound; yet
the Scripture 1 Cor. 11. speaks of the end of heresies, That the approved may
be made manifest, viz. to others: So 2 Cor. 3. 3. the Signs whereby we our
selves may know we are of God.
Corinthians are said to be manifestly declared To be the Epistle of Christ;
but this in respect only of a moral certainty, so far as men can perceive,
otherwise it is made Gods prerogative to know who are his: Therefore the
Apostle calls the inwards of a man, (...), The hidden things of the heart. In
the second place, The Scripture makes such signs, whereby we may know in our
selves that we are of God, and his Spirit dwells in us, 1 John 2. 3. Hereby
we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments; and John is very
frequent in describing grace by way of signs, in his Epistles, as is more
largely to be showed; now this knowledge and evidence which the godly have in
themselves of their own grace, is far more clear and certain, then what they
have of another; Insomuch that it is made by some to be a certainty of faith,
or at least the sense and experiment of faith, howsoever such a knowledge it is
that it cannot deceive us, or be deceived.

Fifthly, Those signs which the Scripture gives of grace are proper and
peculiar to 5. Signs of grace proper to the godly only.
the godly man only. So that whosoever has these has grace, and he that is
without them must also be without grace. Thus Matthew. 13. the good ground, which
is also the good and honest heart, is described by such a temper and
constitution, that it differs specifically from those works which are upon
hypocrites: So that howsoever that be true of Calvin, Reprobates (simili firm
sensu afficiuntur ac electi) are affected almost in like manner with the elect,
yet it is but almost, and the difference between them is not gradual, but
specifically, as is more largely to be showed against Antinomians on the one
side, and Arminians on the other; so that the sorrow, the faith which the godly
have differ from that tanquam, as it were, sorrow and faith, which the
hypocrites have, as the Philosophers say, The matter of the heavenly bodies,
which they make quintessential, distereth from that of the sublunary; so that
no extension of parts, intension of degrees, protension of time, could ever
make temporary faith saving faith, for Species non fit ex specie, as the maxim
in Philosophy is, One distinct kind is not compounded of another, but this
matter is of larger debate.

Sixthly, The Scripture describing the Marks of a godly man makes them 6.
Positive marks signify more evidently then the negative.
of different sorts, some Negative, some Positive, and the Positive do signify
more evidently then the Negative. James 1. 27. Pure Religion is described by
many Positives, and by one Negative: to be unspotted from the world. Psalm. 15.
is a professed description of a godly man, wherein are six Positives and six
Negatives; Now it is true, neither Negatives or Positives, as they are
outwardly and visibly expressed, can be a sure testimony of godliness; for a
man may do that which is good, and abstain from that which is evil upon
several corrupt grounds, every one of which is a dead Fly in a box of
Ointment. In the first Psalm, a godly man is described by his Negatives; first,
That he does not sit in the counsel of the wicked, nor walks with the
ungodly, only Negative signs do not come up to so full a manifestation of
grace, as Positive; and the reason is, because grace lies most in the things
we ought to do, and good is more good then evil is evil, and therefore our
love to the one is more to be exercised then our hatred of the other; Therefore
it is a deceitful and vain way, to argue our grace from Negatives only, as
the Pharisee did, I am no extortioner, no adulterer. For God at the day of
Judgment will proceed in this form, according to the good things we have done;
yet the generality of people have no other claim or plea, but what is upon
Negatives, they are no such wicked or profane persons; But godliness does not
denote a mere absence of evil, but a Positive concurrence of good.

Seventhly, The Properties and Effects of Grace, may be considered Absolutely,
7. The properties and effects of grace considered absolutely and relatively.
as they are Properties, or Relatively, as they are Signs. Now the Scripture
speaks of these both ways, Gal. 6. 25. He that is Christ's, has mortified the
flesh with the affections and lusts thereof. So 2 Cor. 5. 17. He that is in
Christ is a new creature; Old things are past away, and all things are become
new. Thus also Romans 8. 1. Those that are in Christ Jesus are said to walk after
the spirit, not after the flesh. All these Texts and the like, are only
indicative, and descriptive of those subjects who are godly in their
Properties; but John in his Epistles does speak of these as they are signs,
whereby we know we are of God; as more largely is to be showed. There is a
great difference between these two, for a Christian may have all the adjuncts
and fruit of grace, and yet they not be signs to him, for he may be ignorant
that they are in him, yea he may be strongly persuaded through temptation that
he has them not; and how often are the people of God in this sad darkness,
concluding themselves hypocrites, A barren wilderness, unsavory salt, when
yet they are the pleasant Garden of Christ! Now if these Effects were in them
by way of signs, it is impossible but they should conclude themselves in a
state of grace and peace: So that to be a sign is a Relative Being, by which
we are brought into remembrance of something else. Thus the Sacraments are
signs. Thus Rahabs red thread was a sign to remember the Israelites for her
preservation. Then are the Effects of Grace by way of Marks and Signs, when in
the beholding of them, we see the causes that wrought them, we see Election,
Justification, Adoption and Regeneration from whence these flow, concluding
thus, All these great and heavenly things could not be in my soul, were not
Christ and his Spirit there; this rich and glorious furniture could not be in
my soul, were not the King of Glory there. The flowers of this garden would not
smell so sweetly, did not the wind blow upon them.

Eighthly, Signs (as to our purpose) may be divided into two ranks. Natural, 8.
which by a necessary consequence signify; Thus smoke does signify there is a
fire; or Voluntary by will and appointment, such as the Sacraments are; for
howsoever there be some natural Analogy and fitness in the Sacraments between
the signs, and the things signified, yet the determinate appointing of such a
signification, is merely by the appointment of God; now concerning the
Properties and Effects of Grace, as they are signs, we cannot say, they are
merely Natural, nor merely Voluntary, but of a mixed Nature; They are not merely
Natural, because then whosoever has grace working in him, would perceive and
know he has so, but experience confuteth that; therefore the Spirit of God
witnessing and assuring is required, besides the presence of grace in us. It is
true, that saying of Augustines is much celebrated and used against Popish
doubting, Quisquis credit, sentit se habere fidem in cord, Whosoever does
believe, perceives in himself that he does believe. Hence it is that our
Divines say, As he that has fire in his bosom feels fire is there; He that
tastes of a sweet object, perceives the sweetness of it, and he that is
awake, knows he is awake; so he that has the operations of Gods Spirit,
knows that these are wrought by God in him, and that he is not deceived. But
howsoever these are true in respect of the genuine and proper work of that
supernatural life in us, yet there may be several impediments from within
through sin, especially unbelief intervening, or obstructions without, by
Gods desertion and forsaking of us, that we cannot perceive the good things God
has done for us, Thus they are not Signs in a mere Natural way. Nor yet can
we say they are merely Voluntary signs, for the Effects of grace are the
proper and genuine fruit of grace; and wheresoever Sanctification is, there is
supposed Justification inseparably. They are therefore evidences of our
interest in Christ, yet so as they manifest this, Only by the light of the
Spirit; as some Philosophers say of the Stars, that they have an innate light
of their own, but yet they are not conspicuous and visible without the light of
the Sun. The gracious fruit of those supernatural principles in us, have an
aptitude and fitness to make us know that we are in Christ, but they cannot
actually remove all darkness without the Spirit of God, even as the light of
the Sun only, not that of the Stars, can dispell the darkness of the
night.

Hence in the ninth place, We must take heed that we do not so gaze upon our
selves 9.
to find graces in our own hearts, as thereby we forget those Acts of Faith,
whereby we close with Christ immediately, and rely upon him only for our
Justification. The fear of this has made some cry down totally the use of
signs, to evidence our Justification. And the truth is, it cannot be denied
but many of the children of God, while they are studying and examining, Whether
grace be in their souls, that upon the discovery thereof, they may have
comfortable persuasions of their Justification, are very much neglective of
those choice and principal Acts of Faith, whereby we have an acquiescency or
recumbency upon Christ for our Acceptance with God. This is as if old Jacob
should so rejoice in the Chariot Joseph sent, whereby he knew that he was
alive, that he should not desire to see Joseph himself. Thus while thou art so
full of joy, to perceive grace in thee, thou forgettest to joy in Christ
himself, who is more excellent then all thy graces: But of this more afterward.

Tenthly, The Scripture attributes Blessedness and Salvation to several Signs
10.
thereof. Sometimes Fear of God is a sign, sometimes Poverty of Spirit,
sometimes Hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, sometimes Repentance,
sometimes Love, and sometimes Patience: So that if a godly man can find any
one of these in himself, he may conclude of his Salvation and Justification,
though he cannot see all those in him; and many times the people of God
perceive one sign in them, when they cannot another. So that it is not here in
the signs of our Justification, as the Learned speak about the marks and
signs of Christ and Antichrist, it may fall out that some other have some of
the signs which did belong to the Messiah, but none could have them all, but he
that was truly Christ indeed: So there are many descriptions of Antichrist, and
it may fall out that some other besides him may have some of those marks, but
none have them all cumulatively and collectively, but the true Antichrist. It
is not so with the marks of grace, for if a man upon good grounds can be
persuaded but of one, he may undoubtedly conclude he has all the rest, though
he do not yet feel them in himself.

Eleventhly, The Signs and Marks which the Scripture makes of true grace, are
11.
to be insisted upon or used, although it may fall out that Hypocrites may be
strongly confident they have them, when indeed they have them not. It is
therefore no argument against signs of grace, because an hypocrite is
confident he has them, and yet is deceived. The wise Virgins who had prepared
oil, knew their Bridegroom, and went out to meet him; although the foolish who
wanted oil, went out at first to meet the Bridegroom as confidently as the
wise; do not therefore despair of discerning the true marks of grace in thy
self, because many have falsely persuaded themselves thereof. Many a dreamer
has pleased himself that he enjoyed such riches or delicacies in his dream;
yet that hinders not, but that the man awake knows when he has riches, and
is not deceived. An hypocrite then, he may be bold, he is secure of Gods
favor, he dies with confidence, calling God his God, and Christ his Christ,
it cannot be denied; but this hinders not, that the true believer knows he
is in the right, and not deceived. As in matter of Religion, the Turk is
confident of his, the Jew of his, the Papist as he, yet it follows not that
the Protestant therefore may not confidently know, he is in the truth, and all
other deceived.

Twelfthly, Signs or Notes of any thing must be according to the Nature of
that 12.
which they notify: So that if the Essence be imperfect, then the marks
thereof have also imperfection. This is a rule of grand comfort in practice,
for the godly they look for perfect signs of grace in themselves, and if they
find hypocrisy, carnal ends, lukewarmnesse, or any such distempers, they
begin to doubt of their whole estate, but they must consider, that as their
graces themselves are not perfect; so neither can the signs thereof be
perfect. Hence it is, that although we grant that the godly may, as Hezekiah
and Paul did, take comfort from the truth of grace in themselves, yet it was
not from it as a cause, or merit of their Justification, for even at the same
time they did also epsy much imperfection in themselves.

SERMON IX.
Showing the Lawfulness and Duty of proceeding by way of Signs, and proving
that inherent gracious Qualifications within a man evidence his Justification.

2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves, prove your own selves, etc.
WE have laid down several Propositions tending to the clearer Discovery of
this truth about Signs or Marks of Grace. I now come to show The Lawfulness,
yea the Duty both of Ministers and People to proceed by this method. For
although my proper work is only to speak of the fruits of Grace, as they
evidence a principle of Sanctification within, yet I shall in this grasp also
that other Question Of evidencing our Justification by inherent gracious
Inherent gracious Qualifications within us evidence our Justification.
Qualifications within us, this latter being expressly written and preached
against; so that by this means godly Christians are plunged into several
intanglements of conscience, and know not how to come out. I shall therefore
(God assisting) bring Arguments to confirm us in this Duty: only let us first
understand, What the true practical Case and Question is. And first the
Question is not, Whether a The Question stated.
Christian in his first act of Faith, whereby he closes with Christ, applies
him, and is engraffed in him, ought to see inherent Qualifications in him, by
way of Signs and Evidences? for this is not possible: we must first by faith be
implanted in Christ, before there can be any fruits demonstrating this our
insition in him. The Apostle John, 1 John 2. 5. makes the observation of Gods
Commandments a sign that we are in Christ, therefore we are in Christ before by
faith; and thus in all the Promises, where a Christian laden with sin is
invited to Christ, there is not required a Knowledge or Certainty of what
condition he is in, Whether his graces be true or no, but only out of the sense
and feeling of his own unworthiness to apprehend Christ It is therefore a
falsehood to preach thus, Thou may not rely upon Christ for Justification,
till thou have certainty and evidence in thy heart, whether grace be truly in
thee or no? for the Scripture makes them blessed that hunger and thirst, that
mourn, and calls those that are burdened, and they shall have ease, although
they may not have certainty of the work of grace at that time. This therefore
is diligently to be attended unto, because it cannot be denied but at this
Rock many a tender Christian splits himself.

Nor secondly is the Question, Whether a godly man in sad temptations, having
no light at all, should then make search for the motions and workings of grace
in his soul? for that would breed further fears and uncertainties. The soul in
temptations being like the muddied water, where nothing can be clearly
represented, and as in the night the imagination is prone to represent nothing
but objects of fear and terrors; so is the heart apt to do in those
desolations: Hence David in such exigences calls upon his soul to trust in God,
and to wait on him as the only remedy. And indeed in such cases, the proper
duty of a godly man is to throw himself boldly upon the promise, and as Peter
ventured to go upon the waters, when Christ called him; so because of the
Promise and gracious invitations, to go unto God, and rely upon him, in which
sense Job said, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him.

Thirdly, The Doubt is not, Whether a godly man should look for perfect Signs,
such as will fully rise up to the obligation and perfection of the Law? for it
is plain such Signs can never be found. Therefore it is but an odious mistake,
when an Antinomian Dr Crispe in his Sermon of inherent Qualifications.
argues against universal Obedience as a sign, because no man can perform
such, or if it should be limited to purpose of heart, yet none has such a
constant purpose, because of many corrupt suggestions and concussions within by
lusts; for none do urge such Signs, and therefore the least grace discovered in
the soul, that is sincere and upright, though it be not grace to satisfy the
desire of a Christian, yet it ought to be a sign sure enough to confirm his
judgment of his interest in Christ.

Fourthly, The case is not, Whether inherent Qualifications of grace, be
evidences of themselves without the luster of Gods Spirit? For all say, this
certainty arises efficiently from the Spirit of God; Therefore Ephesians. 1.
sealing is attributed to the Spirit of God; so that we must not oppose a godly
life, or graces to the Spirit of God, but conjoyn them together; even as in the
certainty we have about the Scripture, we do not oppose those Argumenta insita,
imbred arguments that prove the Divinity of the Scripture, such as the style,
majesty, purity, etc. to the Spirit of God: but we say, Gods Spirit does
persuade in, and by those Arguments; so it is here, Gods Spirit does seal unto
us our interest in Christ by those graces which are wrought in us.

Fifthly, The scruple is not, Whether these works of Gods Spirit in us, be to
be rested on as causes or merits of our Justification? This is such Pharisaical
Popery as is justly to be detested, we say not that a Christian finding such
graces in him, should build the comfort of his Justification upon them, or rest
on them in stead of Christ, but he is to make use of these, as Signs of Christ's
dwelling in him, whereby as from an effect of Gods love he may rejoice in, and
be thankful unto God.

Sixthly, I will not draw in that dispute neither, Whether this certainty Gods
Spirit works in the godly, in and through the graces of Sanctification, be the
only witnessing and sealing that is? or, Whether there be not an immediate
testimony of Gods Spirit to the soul, either before or without those gracious
fruits of holiness? For my part, I think the former kind of witnessing, viz.
by fruits of holiness, the only safe and sure way, and which the Scripture does
for the most part commend. These things promised, I bring the grounds of this
Duty, to proceed to certainty of Justification and regeneration, by the fruits
of holiness issuing therefrom.

The first sort of Arguments shall be from those places of Scripture, which are
descriptive Argum. 1.
and characteristical of true grace from counterfeit; For therefore are those
differences so diligently pressed, that every man may take heed, and discern
the one from the other: Matthew. 13. how copious is our Savior in that Parable
to give exact differences between the several grounds that received the seed,
that is, the several workings upon men's hearts by the preaching of the Word,
wherein some go very far beyond others, yet only the good and honest heart
was indeed accepted. Now upon this our Savior says, He that has ears to hear
let him hear, as if he should say, This matter does deeply concern you, Examine
your selves in what rank you are, how far the word of God has prevailed over
you. If therefore the auditor could not have told when he was good ground, and
when thorny, such descriptions had been to no purpose; so John 10. 4, 5. there
you have a description of Christ's sheep, They hear his voice, a stranger they
will not follow, but flee from him; where it is good to observe, that as in
other places it is made a mark of grace to take heed of sin, and to love
holiness; so here it is made a sign of Christ's sheep, to take heed of errors
and false teachers; They are afraid of false doctrines, as well as wicked
ways: Oh how necessary is this sign of grace to be pressed in these times, to
a people afraid of being led aside from the true faith by any deceitful
pretexts whatsoever. Col. 3. 12. there you have a catalogue of several graces,
which flow from Election; Put on (as the elect of God) bowels of mercies, etc.
and generally wheresoever you find descriptions of the properties of
godliness, there ought we to parallel our lives with those precedents, and see
whether we express them or no.

A second sort is From exhortatory places, where we are commanded to make
Argum. 2.
this search, Whether grace be truly in us or no? Now if such a trial were not
lawful and useful, who dare say, the holy Spirit would prescribe it? The Text
I am upon, how clear is it, Examine, prove your selves, whether ye be in the
Faith? Now if any one should reply against the Apostle, This is such a duty it
cannot be done, its derogatory to Christ, it will make us rest in our selves:
how unsufferable had such gainsaying been, Gal. 6. 4. But let every man prove
his own work, etc. where you have the duty of examining and searching the works
we do, in the nature, ground, and intentions of them; and this is commanded as
a remedy against arrogance and pride, as appears verse. 3. and this is also
commended from the profitable effect thereof; he shall have rejoicing in
himself alone, that is, his excellency shall not be apprehended by comparing
himself with others that are worse, or because he is reputed godly in the
judgment of others, but his comfort will be from within: and observe, in some
sense a rejoicing in a man's self is lawful, viz. as it is accompanied with a
thankful acknowledgment of the grace of God bestowed on a man. But if we speak
in respect of Justification, then all matter of rejoicing or boasting is
excluded. In 1 Pet. 1. 10. you have a text that puts this duty out of all
question, Wherefore the rather brethren, give all diligence to make your
calling and election sure; You will all grant election cannot be made more sure
in respect of God or it self, but only in respect of us, that we may be more
persuaded of it. And how is that? he showed in the verses before, by adding
grace to grace, and causing those things to abound in them. This was the way to
make all sure, so that to proceed by way of Signs and Marks, is plainly
enjoined out of Scripture.

A third rank is From those places of Scripture which by way of example and
instance, Argum. 3.
do prove, that the godly took their graces for signs and testimonies of Gods
love, and thereby received much comfort; Yea, urged these, as an argument in
prayer for mercy, not by way of merit or causality, but as the effects of Gods
grace, and so a further engagement for God to perfect his own work, 2 King. 20.
3. Hezekiah after he had labored in a further Reformation, then any ever did
before him, being the true Hercules that purged the Augaean stable, is stricken
with a mortal disease from God, and now in what exigencies is he plunged! a
great Army against him, no visible successor in his Throne, all his
Reformation is like to go backwards! In the midst of all this darkness see
with what he supports himself, Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee
with an upright and perfect heart, etc. Thus he used his graces for a sign to
confirm. The like did Nehemiah, Chap. 13. several times, especially see his
expression verse. 14. Remember me, O my God, and wipe not out my good deeds that
I have done for the house of my God. This place proves no Popery, as if
Nehemiah thought his good deeds perfect, and so a cause of mercy, for mark his
expression verse. 22. Remember me, O my God, and spare me according to the
greatness of thy mercy. Those good deeds needed mercy and pardon, yea
greatness of mercy; As it goes not so high to establish perfection or merit of
works, yet it does fully confirm this truth, That a godly man may take comfort
from his graces as signs and testimonies of Gods love to him. And whereas
Grotius upon that passage of Hezekiahs makes such a narration of graces by the
godly, peculiar only to the Old Testament; it is like many other of his
notions, false and rotten; for Paul who was a continual Trumpet of the grace
of God, who counted all his own righteousness dung and dross to set up
Christ, yet he proceeds also by way of signs, 2 Timothy 4. 5. I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, hence forth is laid up for me a crown of
glory; 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience,
that in godly sincerity, we have had our conversation in the world, etc. So
that by this of Paul, you may see, that a Christian may at the same time exalt
Christ and his grace, going out of his own righteousness for Justification,
yet take comfort also from it. The History of Job does also abundantly confirm
this truth, for when in the opinion of others God had cast him off as an
hypocrite, yet he would not part with the comfort of his integrity till death.
In this case Job had no immediate consolations from God, The arrows of the
Almighty stuck deep in him, he possessed the sins of his youth, and there was
nothing which did stay him, but the comfort of his upright heart; so that a
godly man's sense and feeling of Gods grace within him, is a great bulwark in
time of temptations: Neither is that of the Papists able to weaken this
Assertion, when they say, These experimental suavities which are felt in
religious duties, do only beget a conjectural knowledge not an assurance of
faith, because the object thereof is not revealed in Scripture; for it may well
be granted that this sense of believing is not an act of faith, and that a man
does not properly believe he does believe, but inwardly perceives and feels
he does believe, and so love God, etc. Yet this sense is not fallacious,
because it is from a supernatural principle within.

A fourth rank shall be From those comparative expressions the Scripture uses,
when it speaks of Grace. Thus they are called fruits, Luke 3. 8. Gal. 6. 2 Cor.
9. 10. Argum. 4.
Now our Savior lays down an undeniable Maxim, Matthew. 12. 33. The tree is
known by its fruit, a good tree by its good fruit: Hence a good heart is also
called a good treasury from whence good things flow; now although trees because
without reason and sense, know not themselves by their fruit, but others only
do: yet the children of God are by their good fruit both known to themselves
and others, yea more to themselves then others, Because no man knows the
things of a man, save the spirit of a man: Grace also in the workings thereof
is often compared to life, Gal. 2. 22. Now as a natural life is discerned by
the actions thereof, as by so many signs, so also is supernatural life: but as
in some diseases the party affected perceives not any life; so neither do the
godly in some sad temptations.

The fifth rank of Arguments may be From all those promissory places of
Scripture, which speak comfort and encouragement to those that have such and
such exercises of Argum. 5.
grace: now these Promises would afford no comfort at all, if a Christian could
not by way of signs gather when he had them. The Scripture in several places
attributes Blessedness to him that fears always, To him that keeps the Law
of God, To him that is undefiled therein, To him that endures persecution for
a good cause, To him that is pure and me^k in spirit. Now what encouragement
could any godly man have, if he could not have this practical syllogism, The
Scripture makes him that fears, believes, etc. Blessed: but I am such an one
that does fear, believe, etc. therefore I am blessed; now although the major of
this Proposition be Scripture, yet the Assumption is from experience, a godly
man being assisted therein by the holy Ghost, and therefore the conclusion is
undeniable.

Sixthly, Another rank of Arguments may be From all those places of Scripture
that are indicative, or estensive of this truth; And for this, let us take John
in his Argum. 6.
first Epistle, who is most express in this way, as if he would on purpose
destroy the contrary error, 1 John 2. 3, 4, 5, Hereby we know that we know
him, if we keep his commandments, etc. The Apostle compares our imperfect or
hypocritical knowledge with a true knowledge of Christ. The true knowledge is
operative, and brings obedience: The hypocrites knowledge is light only, and
no heat at all. Now the Apostle lays down two Propositions, first, That where
there is a true knowledge of Christ, there is an observation of his
Commandments; Secondly, That by this observation of his Law, we may know that
our knowledge is good. To the same purpose also he speaks in the two
following verses; first, For our faith, that it must not only be carried to
Christ as a propitiation for sin, but also to him as an example whom we are
to imitate, he ought to walk as Christ walked, and by this imitation of Christ
(says the Apostle) we know we are in him, where observe two things; First,
That by says we come to be implanted in Christ. Secondly, That we discover
this our being in him by an holy walking; None therefore that plead for
Sanctification as an evidence of Justification, make our graces to be those
things that put us into Christ, and by which we are justified; but these are
testimonies and witnesses to declare the truth of our real being in Christ.
Proceed we to the third Chapter, verse. 10. In this the children of God, and the
children of the devil are manifest, (...) in this, that relates to the axioms
going before, He that is born of God sins not, which is thus to be
understood, viz. He sins not, from such a full and habitual purpose of will,
so as that his sin extinguisheth the seed of grace within him; now howsoever
this manifestation of the children of God and of the devil to others be but
conjectural, yet to the godly man, whose heart by regeneration is cured in part
of that innate guile which cleaves to it, it is clear without any deceit. At
v. 13. the Apostle exhorts the godly not to wonder, if the world hate them;
and to amplify their consolation herein he adds v. 14. We know we are
translated from death to life, because we love the brethren. This is the great
sign of godliness, to love another godly man, because he is godly, and the more
any is godly, the more to love him: as on the other side, to hate another
because his ways are good, and thine evil (which is too ordinary) is a
demonstration thou art of the devil; now this love of our brethren is not a
cause of our translation from death to life, for the very word [translated]
supposes it a grace of God from without us, but it is a sign only. Now
although a Papist loves a Papist, a Jew a Jew, thinking them more godly, when
they are deceived therein, yet that does not hinder a true godly man from
loving another that is godly, and he have solid comfort therein: but more of
this hereafter. The Apostle having made love of the brethren a sign, he further
explicates what this love is, not a complemental feigned love, but real and
operative, for love is like fire, Si non operatur, non est, if it do not work
it is an argument it is not at all, whereupon he makes this again a sign, by
that expression peculiar to the Apostle, hereby we know that we are of the
truth, and shall assure our hearts before him, persuade our hearts, as it is in
the Greek, which implies, That though the heart be full of doubts and
unbelief, yet the discovery of such grace within us, is able to satisfy our
hearts, hereupon verse. 10. he says, If our hearts condemn us not, we have
confidence toward God: Now here are two doubts; first, Whose heart does not
condemn him of much pride, vanity, neglect, etc. therefore none can have
confidence: But the Apostle speaks of such a condemning, as is for total and
reigning hypocrisy, not for partial corruption which is in the most godly. A
second doubt may be of those who persecute the truth and the people of God, as
the Jews and Paul did, whose hearts did not condemn them, but rather they
thought they did God good service; but the Apostle speaks of Christians
endued with the true Doctrine and Knowledge of Christ out of his Word, and as
for such, if their hearts reprove them not for hypocrisy, they have boldness
with God. This Apostle is very frequent in urging the fruits of godliness by
way of signs; but these may suffice to confirm the Doctrine.

The last Argument to prove this method by way of signs, may be thus urged, If
Argum. 7.
a Christian may not gather the grace of Justification and Sanctification, by
the fruits thereof, it would be for one of these grounds, either first the
impossibility of it, as the Papists urge, it would not be possible for a man to
know when grace is in him: but that is false, for howsoever a man's heart is
naturally deceitful, yet when regenerated, God takes away that guile in it,
and so far as it is spiritual it is sincere and cannot lie; Or secondly, This
would be useless, having Assurance by Gods Spirit, what needs evidences by
inherent graces; This is to light a candle when the Sun shines; but the
testimony of the Spirit, and the evidence of graces make up one complete
witness, and therefore are not to be dis-joyned, much less opposed, as is
further to be cleared. Thirdly, It may be thought prejudicial, and that two
ways, either to Christ and his righteousness, as if the comfort from these
would take us from relying wholly upon Christ; but we told you Paul, who did so
omnifie and exalt Christ and his righteousness, yet took comfort from his
graces wrought in him; or else it may be thought the discovery of grace in us
may make us proud and secure; but neither will this follow, because hereby the
gracious heart is stirred up to more thankfulness, watchfulness, least we lose
such a treasure, and to fruitfulness.

Let the Use be to try our selves by this way of marks and signs which the
Scripture gives, and certainly there was never a time, wherein marks of grace
may be more urged then now: how many place Religion in Opinions, in
Disputations, in Revelations! and the true power of Godliness and
Mortification is altogether neglected; This made the Apostle James in his
Epistle, and Paul frequently in his to speak against the Gnostics, a sect
risen up in their time, that planted Religion in Knowledge, and arrogated that
to themselves only, for which reason the Apostles so much pressed a godly and
holy life: Therefore that thou may not deceive thy own self, study the
Scripture-characters of grace, it may be all those signs by which thou
comfortest thy self, such as abilities in duties, great enlargements,
maintaining a different Church Government from others, are not in Scripture any
marks of holiness, especially consider it is the property of Christ's sheep, not
to hear strangers, to fly from errors. Certainly our Savior Joh. 15.
describing the branches that are in him, takes no notice of their leaves, their
blossoms, but their fruit: Oh be afraid lest Christ's coming to thee be like
that of his to the fig tree, he saw leaves on it, but no fruit; whereupon he
pronounced that curse, Never fruit grow on thee more: So Christ find opinions,
disputations, many abilities and outward duties, but no true holiness, and
therefore he curse thee, saying, Never fruit grow on thee, Shoot forth into
leaves and branches, but never bear fruit. It is to be feared many live with
such a visible curse upon them; Holiness of life must bejoined to the abilities
of the head, Quae bona opera Christianus facit, tot aureos annulos in digitos
miserit, As many good and holy actions thou do, so many rings thou have upon
thy hand; These adorn thee more then gold or silver.

SERMON X.
Further proving the Lawfulness and Obligation of proceeding by way of Signs,
and Answering many Doubts about them.

2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves, prove your own selves, etc.
THere remain more places of Scripture to prove the lawfulness and obligation
also of proceeding by way of signs, but because there are different Expositions
of them, I shall rank them in the order of controverted places, which probably
at least confirm this truth.

And the first is Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our
spirit, that Romans 8. 16.
we are the sons of God. In which words we may observe the Author of the
testimony, the manner, and the object of it. The Author is said to be The
Spirit it self, where the Apostle makes it no Presumption or Arrogancy for the
people of God, to call God Father, because they are encouraged and emboldened
hereunto by the Spirit of God. It is not a delusion from the Devil, but an
Assurance from Gods Spirit. In the next place there is the Manner of the
Testimony, it is a conjoined Testimony, not a single Witness; Therefore it is
said (...), it witnesses with. It is true, Grotius takes the word, though
compounded, for a simple, (...) for (...), alleging two places for a parallel,
1 Cor. 2. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 2. where the Apostle speaks of the Conscience bearing
witness, but these Texts are not cogent, for the conscience in testifying does
witness with another, which is God, and therefore it is called (...), so that
the witness of the conscience is not a single Testimony. It being therefore to
be understood of a Joint-witnesse, the Question is, What is the other partner
that is joined with Gods Spirit in this action? Some understand the spirit of a
man not to be the cowitnesser, but the subject only receiving the Testimony,
and they render it thus, The Spirit bears witness to our spirit, not with
our spirit, and then, some make the joint-witnesse to be Christ, that as verse.
10. the Apostle had affirmed, Christ dwells in us, then his Spirit, and that
the Spirit made us to cry Abba Father; so here, the Spirit, with Christ, and
the Father also supposed, as if it were the same with that 1 John 5. 7. There
are three that bear witness in heaven. But others refer it to that Voice
caused in us by Gods Spirit, and that is to be understood of the gift of
Regeneration. Thus Chrysostom, The Spirit of God, by or in that gift, which he
bestows on us; and in this sense it will be all one whether we translate it,
to or with our spirit. So then the meaning is, The Spirit of God bears
witness unto us, with those gifts and graces that are the fruit of the same
Spirit. So that he speaks not of such an immediate Testimony, as the Prophets
had in their visions, when they heard God speak immediately to them, but
mediately by and with our spirits, being enlightened and sanctified: So that
although the Spirit of God be the alone Author of this Assurance, yet it is in
an ordinary way by the fruits of the Spirit. Now the Spirit of God may be
conceived witnessing this infallibly and surely, or else conjecturally, and by
way of probability. Popish Commentators expound it the latter way, but it is
very unworthy and derogatory, to make the Spirit of God Author of a conjectural
Certainty only, for it being a divine Testimony it cannot but have
infallibility: and certainly if he said of the conscience, which yet has much
error and falsehood in it, that it was mill testes a thousand witnesses, how
much rather may this be said of the Spirit of God? but more of this place
hereafter.

The second place is Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after ye believed, ye were sealed
with Ephesians. 1. 13.
the holy Spirit of Promise. Where you have this Witnessing or Assurance
expressed metaphorically by sealing, which is used to ratify and confirm
things; now God does thus seal us, not for his sake, but ours, that we may be
persuaded of his love; God does not seal as a Merchant his wares, that he may
know them, but as a Father does his Testament, or deeds of Gift, to assure his
Child of such favor toward him. But you will say, What is this sealing? The
Metaphor will declare it: As in sealing, the Seal makes an impression of its
own likeness in the wax; so God in sealing unto us makes an impression of his
own holy image in us, and by this we are assured. They therefore who understand
this sealing of the extraordinary and miraculous gifts of Gods Spirit, hit not
the mark, because these were not necessary signs of Adoption, and also they
were not bestowed upon every particular believer; we must therefore understand
it of the sanctifying graces of Gods Spirit: And here you may also observe that
faith whereby we receive Christ first, is not the evidence, as some plead,
because it is after their believing, for the word is in the time past: that it
is meant of holiness, does appear also by the words following, Sealed by the
holy Spirit of Promise, where the Spirit of God is called the Spirit of the
Promise, either because he does confirm the Promises, or else because he is the
fruit of the Promise; and holy, because of the holiness he works in his
children, which is their sealing; so that as God the Father is said to seal
Christ, when he gave him those abilities which were required to a Mediator,
anointing him with all grace, and witnessing by miracles he was his Son; Thus
does God the Father seal his children to him by furnishing them with all the
graces of his holy Spirit, and by these they know they are of God.

The third Text and last is, 1 John 5. 8. There are three that bear witness on
earth, 1 John 5. 8.
water, and blood, and the Spirit. I should quickly tire you out, to speak all
that is said by Expositors on this place, I shall therefore briefly assert this
Exposition, as most suitable to other places of Scripture; By Water is meant
that purifying and cleansing from the filth of sin, which we receive by
Christ, signified in the outward seal of Baptism: By Blood is meant that
expiation of the guilt of sin, and satisfying of Gods wrath, which is also
sealed in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: And by Spirit is meant Gods
Spirit, not immediately testifying, for so it is a Witness in heaven, but by
the fruits thereof, stirring up faith to a vigorous and powerful way of
holiness, by which means we perceive the fruit of water and blood accomplished
in our souls. But I must not stay longer on these places, I shall propound some
Doubts only to make this duty of going by signs more clear and easy to you.

As in the first place, Does it not argue weakness and unbelief in a Christian
to walk by signs? Is not this to derogate from the glorious promise of grace,
as if that Obj.
were not enough?

But to answer, First, Signs do not argue an absolute weakness, but
comparative only. In heaven, all Sacraments, which are signs and seals, shall
cease. Whether Ans. 1.
Adam had any Sacrament in the state of perfection, is disputed. The Tree of
life is judged so by some, but it could not be a Sacrament in that particular
sense as ours are, which seal Remission of sin and Mortification of it, but in
a more general way, for Sacraments have two things in them, 1. That which is
general, to continue God to be our God, and we his children, its also our
communion with others. And in this sense Christ was baptized, and was made
partaker of other Sacraments (for we may not say, Christ therefore used the
Sacraments, that he might sanctify them, for they were sanctified by their
institution.) 2. There is that which is special in the Sacraments, viz.
Remission of sin, increase of grace, etc. and thus only the members of the
militant Church do partake of them.

Secondly, It cannot be denied but that it is a more noble and excellent way to
believe 2.
in the Promise, by a faith of dependency and adherence, then to believe upon
the sense and evidence of Graces in us, yet this latter also is lawful and
encouraged by God; For therefore it was that God gave the gift of miracles,
that by such wonderful things appearing to sense, they might be persuaded to
believe in God. We have a clear instance in Thomas John 20. where he is
reproved for his unbelief: but upon his seeing and feeling the wounds of
Christ, he makes a clear confession, My God, and my Lord. This was laudable in
him, but yet says our Savior, Blessed are they that believe and see not.
Where Thomas is not excluded from blessedness, though he did believe and see,
but only the former show forth a more blessed work of grace upon themselves. We
may therefore believe because of Gods Word; and we may believe because of
sense: this may be an help to our faith, and therefore God has appointed
Sacraments for this end, not that the things we see are properly the object of
our faith, for Ubi vides, non fides, Faith is the evidence of things not seen.
Thus Thomas had one thing for the object of his sight and feeling, which was
the wounds of Christ's body, and another thing for the object of his faith,
which was, That Christ was God. Thus in the Sacrament, That which is the object
of our sense, is not the object of our faith, only we are helped by these, as
motives to believe. Although therefore to have any help from sense to believe,
be a comparative weakness, yet supposing this condition we are in, it is a
duty to be encouraged thereby. Hence he that did believe because of miracles,
did his duty, and sinned not therein: yea Ahaz is severely rebuked, because he
would not take a sign to confirm his faith in the promise God made for the
Kingdoms deliverance.

A second Doubt, When we receive evidence from our graces, do we not receive an
Doubt 2.
humane testimony, to witness the things of God, and how incongruous is that?
Such as the object is, such the testimony ought to be, but the object witnessed
is Divine, viz. that we are the children of God, and therefore the Witness
also ought to be Divine. This some have pressed against evidences by
sanctification.

But first, An humane testimony may be an introductory preparation, to believe
that Answ. 1.
which is Divine. And in this sense, there is an humane Witness to the things
of God. Thus the woman of Samaria witnessed of Christ, and they were moved by
her testimony, although afterward they did believe, because of Christ himself.
Thus also John Baptist bare Witness of Christ; and in this sense our Divines
acknowledge the Authority of the Church, and so explain that of Augustine, who
said, He would not have believed the Scriptures, had not the Authority of the
Church moved him.

Secondly, We say not the Graces of Gods Spirit, can or do witness of
themselves, 2.
The sealing and witnessing is efficiently from the Spirit of God, they are
only the means by which Gods Spirit makes known it self. And therefore as
colors, though they be the object of sight, yet they cannot actually be seen
without light shining upon them: so neither are we able to behold the good
things God has wrought for us without the Spirit of God.

Thirdly, The Graces of God thus collustrated, are not an humane testimony, but
divine 3.
and infallible. For its a supernatural testimony, both in the efficient cause,
and in the means by which; so that as the godly actions we do are not humane,
or by the power of free will, but divine arising from a supernatural principle
of grace within us; so neither is this testimony or consolation flowing from
it, to be attributed to our reason and understanding, but unto God only. The
Papist indeed makes these experimental works of grace within us to be only
moral conjectures, and probable indications of Gods Spirit dwelling in us:
only they say, it is such a certainty as may morally exclude all doubting, for
they instance, that we may be as sure that we are in the state of grace, as
that there is such a City as Rome or Constantinople (if we have not seen those
places) but this is not enough, because they deny them to be the infallible
witness of Gods Spirit.

A third Doubt, Are not evidences of Grace by signs useless, seeing the Spirit
of God does immediately work in our hearts a strong Assurance of faith? and
having Doubt 3.
this Assurance, what need we any other? If we have the Sun, what need is there
of a candle? Hence some have reduced the whole Doctrine of evidences to two
heads; 1. The revealing evidence, and that they make an immediate Revelation
made by Gods Spirit to the soul. Even as when the Sunbeams are immediately
darted into a dark room. And the second is a receiving evidence, and that they
make faith, and you know it has formerly been generally received, That Faith
is a full persuasion of Gods love to a man's self in particular; which if so,
the whole business of evidence seems to be accomplished before we come to
any signs.

But to answer first, It may justly be questioned, Whether out of the Scripture
there can be proved any such immediate voice spoken by Goas Spirit to a man,
that his Ans. 1.
sins are forgiven him, and he is in the state of grace? So that although they
take this for granted, that God does immediately come into the soul, and
witness unto it, yet we see by the Texts opened before, that its more
consonant to Scripture, to make the Scriptures testimony active in respect of
the effects and fruits thereof: Some Divines do not indeed deny the possibility
of such an immediate Testimony, but yet they conclude the ordinary and safe
way, is, to look for that Testimony, which is by the effects, and fruits of
Gods Spirit. Therefore when we speak of the Spirit of God revealing, which is
often mentioned in the Scripture, we may either conceive of it, as it did
reveal in an Enthusiastical manner by an immediate influence, or else that the
Spirit of God does enlighten the understanding to see grounds and reasons, why
it should be persuaded so. And here is a vast difference between these two; we
may explain this about the Scripture, A believer is fully persuaded of the
Divine Authority of the Scripture, through the Spirit of God revealing this to
him; now this may be understood two ways, either by immediate Dictates of the
Spirit, telling the soul it is so, or else by enlightening the understanding to
see those implanted arguments in it, and by them to persuade of the Authority
thereof. As it is thus for the Word, so for the work of Gods Spirit in us, we
come to be persuaded of Gods love to us, and assured of it, not because of an
Authority testifying this immediately, but because Gods Spirit does so
efficiently enlighten the heart, that seeing such gracious operations there, we
come confidently persuaded of Gods love to us: Thus the Sun manifests it
self to be the Sun by the light that comes from it. A learned man proves
himself to be learned by the learning he discovers, and thus the Spirit of God
by and with the holy operations thereof, manifests it self to be the Spirit of
God dwelling in us, Argumento insito, non extrinsecus assumpto; but of this
more in time.

Secondly, It ought to be denied, that faith is such a full persuasion. The
Scripture words which express faith, speak of it as Affiance and Adherence,
rather 2. Faith not a full persuasion.
then a Persuasion, for that is a reflex Act in the soul, whereby we know that
we do know (as the Apostle John expresses it) and that we do truly repent and
believe.

Thirdly, Suppose such evidences were granted, yet this by way of signs were
not in vain, for it has pleased God to multiply those things which may confirm
our faith. 3.
Thus although every word of God has immutable verity in it, Yet he confirmed
it also with an oath, after the manner of men, to end all those controversies
which diffidence and distrust may raise between God and us. The Apostle
aggravateth this Heb. 6. 16. That by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolations. Again, although
God has given us his Promise, and nothing can be surer then that, yet he
adds Sacraments to seal and confirm his Promise unto us; Therefore though
such Assurances were granted, yet there is great usefulness of the evidences
we have by signs.

A fourth Doubt may be from that universal received Maxim, None may be at the
Doubt 4.
same time Reus and Judex, the Person questioned and the Judge: but this
absurdity would follow, if we proceed by evidences, for the heart of a man is
questioned, whether it has true grace in it, and the heart also must be Judge
of this at the same time.

We answer, This would not follow, for although the heart be in supposed guilt,
and Answ.
so questioned, yet the judging of this, is by the Spirit of God, and our
hearts not as guilty, but as sanctified; and all this according to the rules of
Scripture. Indeed this absurdity follows in a pharisaical or formal man, who
is altogether carnal, and has not the Spirit of God, or any supernatural
principles; when he acquitteth himself, he is both the guilty Person, and the
Judge too; and by this means they give false judgment, calling evil good, and
darkness light, but it is not thus with believers.

A fifth Doubt may be from the difficulty, if not impossibility of any
certainty by Doubt 5.
signs: for take we any sign, suppose love of the brethren, that must be
explained of such love as is because they are brethren, and of such a love as
proceeds from upright principles, and pure motives, and with many other
qualifications, which will be as hard to know, as the inward root of grace it
self.

Now to this we answer these things: First, That the Scripture gives many Ans.
1.
Signs and Symptoms of grace; So that if a man cannot find all, yet if he
discover some, yea, if but one, he may assuredly gather all the rest are there,
for the whole harmony and connection of grace is compared to the image of God,
which does consist of all its due lineaments; so that it is hard if a Christian
doubt of all, so that he can find nothing of Gods Spirit in him.

Secondly, There is a twofold Knowledge, one Distinct and Demonstrative, which
2.
is a priori, from the cause to the effect, and that is, when we know the
principles and root of grace within us, and so proceed to the effects of it.
The other is more General, and that is from the effect to the cause, and this
is a knowledge a posteriori, we proceed from the streams to the fountain, and
this kind of knowledge as it is most easy, so we are prone to, and the Spirit
of God guides us in this way, as being most suitable to our natures.

Thirdly, Although a man may doubt of some Signs, yet it does not follow he
will 3.
doubt of all, because his temptation may be stronger about one Sign then
another, and one Sign may be more easily perceived then another; And so a godly
man may argue from that which is less known, to the other that is more known;
even as in the matter of the Canon of the Scripture, some have doubted whether
such books were Canonical or no, because the Arguments of Divine Authority were
more irradiant in the other then in them, yet from those Books concerning the
Authority of which they were not tempted, they were at last induced to believe
the Authority of those that were controverted. In this manner it may be about
the signs of grace. It is more difficult to find some of them in our selves
then others, yet we are to proceed from those that are more facile, to those
that are more difficult.

The sixth Doubt, A man may be easily deceived in these ways of Signs, for
this Doubt 6.
Knowledge consists of a practical Syllogism thus, Every one that loves the
brethren is translated from death to life, But I love the brethren, Therefore I
am translated from death to life. Therefore a late Author (Cornwell in his
Treatise of Justification, page 17.) denies, The faith wrought in such a
practical Syllogism, to be by the power of the Lord Almighty, but only in the
strength of humane reason, and therefore is only an humane faith. But this is a
very dangerous Assertion, and like that which the Jesuits would impose upon
the Protestants concerning a doctrinal Faith thus, There is Veroniana Methodus,
by which the Jesuits would conclude the Protestants have no faith, because
(say they) the object of faith must be according to the Protestants, Purum
putum verbum Dei, the mere word of God, but now there is nothing, which the
Protestants believe, but they conclude it by way of a Syllogism, and in this
Syllogism, the Assumption or the mere inference is not in Scripture, or they
may err in making the inference, and so they have no conclusion de fide. But
all this is sophistry, for a proxim and immediate conclusion is in the
principle, and so believed with the same faith that the principle is, and when
a man by reason makes a conclusion, his reason is only the Instrument, not the
Argument of his faith, his reason is not the ground of his faith, nor does it
suggest the matter to be believed, but is the instrument to discover it. As he
that diggeth in a mine of gold, his instruments he uses in removing the earth
that covered it, do not make the gold, but discover it. And as for this
practical Syllogism, it is not made by mere humane reason, for when the soul
makes the assumption, it does it, being sanctified and enlightened by the Spirit
of God, and so is an instrument in his hand, for there is the same proportion
between the Spirit of God in spiritual things, and reason in philosophical
things; so that as in Philosophy, reason makes the major and minor in any
Syllogism; so in spiritual things, the Spirit of God enableth a man to make a
whole Syllogism for a believers comfort and establishment.

Use of Instruction, How much they are deceived, who visibly express the power
of sin and Satan in their lives, yet acquit themselves as the children of Use.
God! Oh say to thy self, Whose Image and Superscription is this pride, is this
earthlinesse, is this malice and hatred of what is good? Though our Savior
told the Pharisees, They were the children of the Devil, and his works they
did, yet they would flatter themselves that they were the Children of Abraham.
Does not the Apostle say, The works of the flesh are manifest, envyings,
railings, drunkenness, etc. Yet how bold are men that live in these impieties?
Do the Sacraments seal these things to be done? Does the Word command these?
Did Christ die to make us such a people? Oh what a mad delusion is that, that
thou should live in lying, swearing, uncleanness, any gross wickedness, and
yet persuade thy self to be in a good estate!

SERMON XI.
Showing how many ways men may miscarry in the work of Self-examination by
Signs.

2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves, prove your own selves, etc.
I Shall now close up this Text, finishing also that Discourse about the signs
of Grace. The work that remains at this time, is to advertise you against
those many rocks you may split at, while you proceed by signs; for although
this method (as you have heard) be lawful, and a duty, yet there is required
much art and skill to manage this work, insomuch that herein he ought to have
his senses exercised to discern between good and evil.

Now the miscarriages about Signs may be diverse ways: As

First, About the Signs themselves; and that either on the right hand, or left;
1. Dangers on the right hand.
on the right hand, By prescribing to our selves such Signs as are impossible
to be attained in this life. Thus there is an Anabaptistical and a Popish
perfection, whereby men are taught to find such a perfect mark of grace, a^
that no sin shall be in them, at least for some space of time: but it is no
marvel if the soul be perpetually tormented that seeks for such a ground of
comfort within it own self. John who 1 John 3. makes the keeping of Gods
Commandments a sign whereby we are of the truth, does yet Chap. 1. 8. say,
That if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves; yet herein Gods
children make many sad wounds for themselves, not distinguishing between the
truth and essence of grace, and the degrees of it. Whereas the Scripture makes
them blessed that hunger and thirst, yea it does often describe the godly by
their desires, and seeking of his face; now this error is the more fastened
upon them, because when they read in books, or hear Ministers preach about the
nature and properties of any grace, they are not able to find it in such a
vigorous and powerful manner in themselves, whereas they ought to know, it is
one thing to speak of grace in Idea in se, in its own nature and definition,
another thing to speak of it, as in subjecto, as the Subject partakes of it.
When the Ministers of God press any grace upon you, they commonly do it in the
abstracted nature of it, as it has its perfectest lineaments and shape, but as
this grace is received in the subject, so it is much debilitated.

But as some torture themselves by seeking that in themselves which cannot be
found, So there are more that turn to the left side, making many things signs
of grace, Danger on the left hand.
which are not proper characters. Thus the Sacraments, outward Ordinances,
matter of Opinion and Judgment, great Abilities in religious Duties, but all
these may be in an heart unregenerated, as appears in those, who said, Have
not we prophesied in thy name? Hence the Apostle says, That neither
circumcision, or uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new creature. They
therefore that describe godliness by these common Marks, do as Socrates (if I
mistake not) that defined a man to be animal bipes implume; and Diogenes
brought a Cock plucked of his feathers, to show this was Socrates his man. As a
man is to be defined by that only which is essential, so must a godly man be
notified by that only which notifieth godliness. Therefore those many
Symptoms, by which many impropriate grace and godliness to themselves, as
outward Ordinances, a different way of Church Government, great inward
enlargements of it, are no infallible tokens; Therefore to drive people out of
their holds, I shall in time select the choicest false signs, and make distinct
Sermons upon them; for as the false Prophets and Antichrist shall come with
false signs, which shall be so specious that the very elect will be in danger
to be deceived; so the hypocrisy and guile of our own hearts is so exceeding
great that we many times take our copper graces for gold. Know then that
whatsoever signs are taken up by thee, if they be not such as are essential,
from which there is a necessary inference of the state of grace, thou venturest
thy soul upon uncertain reeds.

Secondly, There is a danger about marks of grace, when we try not our graces
by 2. There is danger when we try not our graces by a true touchstone.
a true touchstone. When the Apostle commands us to examine and prove our
selves, it supposes there is a sure Canon and Rule to go by, which is to
measure and regulate those things we doubt of. And that is the word of God,
which David calls the light and lanthorn to his feet; and Paul commends them as
those that are able to make us wise to Salvation; So that as when we are
commanded to try the Spirits, and Doctrines of men, there is implied a recourse
to the Scriptures, which is the only Star to lead us, insomuch that the whole
building of our faith must be cut out of this Mountain, and from this brook are
all David's to fetch their stones, which they shall sling in the head of every
Goliath (I mean every heretic) insomuch that in matters of Doctrine, a man does
truly say, Non credo, quia non lego, I do not believe it, because I do not read
it. Thus it is also in those injunctions, which are to search and try our
hearts, for those do suppose the Scripture to be the true Standard, and
whatsoever is too light or faulty, must be discovered by this; for as God is
the Principium essendi, the beginning or cause of the being of grace; so Gods
word is the Principium cognoscendi, the principle by which we know what is true
grace; now from this it is that most men do so easily persuade themselves of
their being in a good estate, because they judge of godliness, by the
principles of the world and humane grounds, not by Scripture-directions;
Scripture-godlinesse is as different from the moral man's godliness as the
Sun is from a Glowworm. Though this has a little luster in a dark night,
yet indeed it is nothing but a slimy, earthy worm, insomuch that we may truly
say of all the civil, moral and refined lives of men in Christianity, who have
not the power of Regeneration in them. What Erasmus said of Seneca, Si
i^spicias illum ut Paganus, Christian scripsit, si ut Christianus, Paganice.
If you look as an Heathen upon him, then he seems to you to write as if he
were a Christian; but if you look upon him as a Christian, then he seems to
write as an Heathen. Thus it is here, look upon many men's lives, they are so
full of ingenuity, righteousness and justice in their dealings, so much
sweetness and candor in their spirits, that if as an Heathen you would look
upon them, you would call them divine and holy men, but then look upon them as
a Christian instructed out of the Scripture, and observe how unacquainted they
are with a broken and contrite heart, how ignorant of Faith and the inward work
of Regeneration, then you will say, they are only baptized Heathens, for even
among them we can show such men. If therefore you would not precipitate your
soul into a gulf, take up the right rule, before you go to measure your selves.
Thou may be admired and much applauded by others for thy goodness and piety
(as the Pharisees were) and yet be abominable before God.

Thirdly, Then do we miscarry about Signs, when we make use of them in a
prejudicial way to those direct and immediate acts of Faith, whereby we receive
and apply 3. Or when we make use of signs in a prejudicial way to the immediate
acts of faith.
Christ to our souls. For the great work of a Christian is out of the sense and
feeling of its own want and spiritual poverty, to roll himself, and rest only
upon Christ for Atonement and Reconciliation, that is that faith (...), (a
phrase not known to humane Authors, which the Scripture so often requires and
commands: This is that whereby we are justified; this is that whereby we set up
Christ, and give glory unto God. Now it many times falls out, that while a godly
man is poring and digging into his own heart to find grace there, he forgets
to exercise applicative acts of Faith, so as thereby to close with Christ.
Alas, though the sight of thy graces be comfortable, yet that of Christ ought
to be much more. These graces are but the handmaids and servants that wait upon
Christ, they are but tokens from him, they are not himself: A man is not only
to go out of his sins, but also out of his graces unto Christ. See Paul, Phil.
3. how excellently does he debase all his own graces to be found in Christ. Let
not therefore the desire after inherent righteousness make thee forget imputed
righteousness; This is to take the friend of the Bridegroom for the Bridegroom
it self; and for this end (without doubt) it is that the people of God are so
often in darkness and have no light, see no comfortable sign or token of Gods
love unto them, that so they may stay themselves upon God. This trusting in God
and in Christ, when we feel nothing but guilt and destruction in our selves, is
the greatest honor we can give God, and therefore though the living by signs
be more comfortable to us, yet the living by faith is greater honor to God.
Hence it is that the life of a godly man, is called a life of faith, because
though God may many times encourage him with those sensible evidences, yet he
does morefrequently call them to combat and conflict with sense and reason. Do
not therefore be unacquainted with this way of relying on Christ in the midst
of all darkness, for God many times will cause an eclipse of thy signs, thou
shall many times look into thy heart, and find no comfort at all, see nothing
but barrennes, hypocrisy, and every thing that may make thee tremble and be
astonished at thy self, and then the immediate depending upon, and adhering
unto a promise, will be thy only refuge.

4. We miscarry about Signs, when we make them more then Signs, even grounds
and 4. Or when we make them more then signs.
causes of our comfort and hope, thus making them in Christ's stead. The fear of
this has made many so hot against signs; but these things may well be
composed; comfort by signs and recumbency only upon Christ, and when we go
further to take pride in them, or put carnal confidence in them, this is woeful
wronging our souls. It is worthy our observation, when Peter in the name of the
Apostles Mat. 8. 24. had professed they had left all and followed Christ, with
some kind of pride and carnal confidence, thereupon asking, what should they
have? our Savior to humble them, and to keep them low in theirown eyes, speaks
a Parable to infer this truth, That many which are first shall be last, and
many that are last shall be first, which whether you expound in this sens (as
some do) many that were first, both in order of time and zeal of affection to
do God service, yet wanting the truth of grace and inward humility; Shall be
last, that is none at all in the Kingdom of heaven, or if you explain it (as
others) Many that are first, that is, who have been exceeding forward and
active for God, and that with truth of grace, yet being puffed up with pride, and
trusting in themselves, as the Apostles at that present were; Shall be last,
that is, shall have less glory and honor in heaven. Whether (I say) of these
Expositions you take, they are both terrible, and sufficient to take us from
pride and security. when we discover Gods graces in us, the discovery of grace
in thee, is to make thee walk more comfortably and thankfully unto God, not to
cause any tumors or swellings in thy own self.

5. When we try our selves by Signs, we shall deceive our own selves, if we
cast not 5. And when we cast not away self-love and self-flattery.
out two cursed corrupt principles out of us; the former is Self-love, and
Self-flattery, whereby we persuade our selves of grace, when there is no such
matter. Hence the Scripture bids us, Commune with our own hearts, and search
and try our ways, which supposes that without diligent scrutiny, we shall
always be strangers to what is in our own souls. Thus many deceive their own
souls, saying, They do repent, they do believe, they do love God with all their
heart, when (alas) they know not the power of these things upon their own
souls, thy heart is naturally a liar, and therefore believe it not. Thus the
Pharisees did not know their own hearts, when they prayed, fasted and gave
alms: Thus the Jews did not know their own hearts, when they cried The Temple
of the Lord, and abounded in Sacrifices. This knowing of our own hearts is a
supernatural lesson, taught only by the Spirit of God. Oh this self-flattery,
how does it damn its thousands, men making it no question, but they do repent
and love God, when yet Christ has said, Many are called, but few are chosen,
that is, of those many that are called by God to the enjoyment of
Church-Ordinances and Privileges, few have those true works of grace, which
are proper to the elect only! O how should this terrible sentence spoken by
Christ himself, make thee question again and again, yea a thousand times again,
whether thou art called only, and no more, not chosen at all! for they are few.

The other sinful principle to be ejected, is unbelief and suspicious
jealousy over our selves, not giving credit to what we see and feel in our own
souls, but argue and cavil against it. For as while a man is in the state of
unregeneration, he is always in love with himself, and cannot be brought to
loath and dislike himself, as you see in Paul while unconverted; so when the
Spirit of God has thoroughly humbled us, made us see our beastliness and
filthiness, then we run into another extreme, not taking notice of, but even
denying the work of God upon our hearts; Their hearts did once so deceive them,
that now they know not how to trust them any more. Hence the people of God are
subject to no temptation so much as this, Whether they be sincere and upright,
they look only to the evil they find in themselves, not the good God has
wrought in them; whereas it is their duty to take notice of all the good God
has vouchsafed to them: for how shall they be thankful unto God, and
acknowledge him, if they be ignorant herein?

Sixthly, When they do not take the fit season, then they also are in danger of
miscarriage. Now then it is unseasonable, when they are full of dark, and black
temptations, 6. And when men take not the fit season to examine themselves in.
for then are they in a mist, and not able to see things aright, while Heman is
distracted with Gods terrors upon him, that does eclipse his judgment; How
often does David in sad exigents think God has forsaken him? When the
looking-glass is broke in several pieces, it does represent the face of a man
much deformed; The muddied water is not fit to give the true shape of the face,
and thus it is here, the heart full of temptations within, and solicited with
Satan's injections from without, puts the soul upon an amazement. The
incestuous person, though truly repenting of his sin, yet takes no comfort, but
is even swallowed up by Satan, Signs thereof from within do not at such times
affect, and no marvel when Gods signs without, the Sacraments that are seals of
his love, do not persuade him.

Seventhly, When they apprehend no Sign sufficient, unless they have had an
actual perseverance to the end. Now although it be true, that the good ground
differed 7. Also when no sign will suffice till they have an actual
perseverance to the end.
from the bad, in that it held out to the end, yet that was not the only, nor
the principal difference, but this perseverance was an effect flowing from the
nature of the good soul. Although therefore afflictions and persecutions do
detect the falseness of many, as appears Matthew. 13. yet it does not follow,
that therefore none can have Assurance, but such who are come to their journies
end. The Arminians indeed much press this, and therefore they hold, There is
no absolute and peremptory Election, but upon perseverance in faith and
obedience. Hence they join with that of the Poet, Ante obitum, No man is happy
before his death, because they may decline and apostatize from what they had.
It cannot be denied but the revolt and degeneration of those who have seemed
pillars in the Church of God, has much affrighted the godly, making them also
fear, as if one day or other, in one temptation or other they should fall away:
but they are to consider, That wheresoever grace is already truly wrought in a
man's heart, there God has made a promise to keep us till the end, so that we
may be assured of perseverance as well as of our present righteousness, for
God who begins a good work in us, will also make an end; and we have a
gracious promise of Gods care to us in (...) Prophet Isaiah, That as he gave us
being at first, and bore us in his arms, so he wi^ ^lso carry us on to old age
it self; as Gods grace has planted, so he will water it, (...) give increase
to it. Isa. 46. 3, 4. 8. And when in searching for evidence by signs, we do not
abo^e all pray for the Spirit to enlighten us.


Eighthly, When in the searching for evidence by Signs, we do not above all
pray to God for his Spirit, so to enlighten our eyes, that in and through these
Marks we may come to be persuaded. For the Spirit of God is the efficient cause
of all this Certainty; Even as its in matter of Doctrine, though a man read
the Scripture again and again, though (...) diligently peruse all Authors that
are diligent in writing of Arguments for the truth, yet all these do not move
him, till the Spirit of God set it home upon him; So likewise about sin, though
a man read the threatenings over and over, though he know himself guilty of
those sins the word of God condemns, yet all this does not touch his heart,
to make it bleed, till Gods Spirit does convince him: After this manner ^t is
in matter of evidence. Although those godly exercises of grace be plentiful
and copious in thee, yet thy heart is not persuaded of this, till Gods Spirit
establish and confirm thy heart. Do not therefore think that by the strength of
thy natural light, thou can attain to this certainty.

Ninthly, When we think it a duty not to lay hold on Christ at all, till we
have this 9. Or when we think it a duty not to lay hold on Christ till we have
this certainty by Signs.
Certainty by Signs. Believers are very prone to think, that the first work
they have to do, when called to God, is to see whether they have true
qualifications in them; and upon the Certainty of this, then to apply Christ
for Justification. But this is not the Scripture method, for that calls the
hungry, the thirsty, the loaded and burdened; and where this need and desire of
Christ is, such are called to come unto him; Therefore certainly that we have
truth of grace is not an antecedent to justifying faith, but a consequent fruit
of it. Hence that received opinion, That faith is a fiducial or strong
persuasion that my sins are pardoned, has justly caused many doubts, for this
is not justifying faith, but a fruit of it. Hence Ephesians. 3. we are said To have
boldness and access to him through faith. And when the Apostle, Gal. 2.
says, The life he lives is by faith in Christ, who gave himself for me, and
loved me; he was not justified by this believing, but this did rather suppose
him justified before, and united to Christ by a precedent act of faith.

If therefore a Christian should not come into Gods presence, or lay hold on a
promise, till he have this Assurance of his inward qualifications, he may be
debarred all his life; and the truth is, the soul in time of straights, is like
Esther to go into the Kings presence though it perceive not the Scepter held
out. We must not be assured and then lay hold upon Christ, but by laying hold
on Christ we come to be assured: Christ many times does that for a godly man,
which in another case he said to Peter, Thou know not yet what I do to thee,
but thou shall know.

Lastly, We miscarry about Signs, when we compose not our selves, and put our
10. And lastly, when we compose not our selves, etc.
selves in a disposed and prepared way to receive this evidence of Grace; For
we must not expect that God will assure us, whether we will or no. We by our
unbelief and peevishness may refuse those good consolations the Spirit does
offer; So that although this sealing of Gods Spirit be efficiently from him, as
conversion also is, yet we may in the former as well as in the later resist the
Spirit of God: And it is a great sin to rebel against Gods Spirit, whether
convincing of sin and duty, or comforting against doubts and distrusts: yea
this is a greater sin, for though the Spirit of God do convince, reprove, yet
it has a denomination from this operation especially, that it is a Spirit of
Adoption enabling us to call Abba Father: Therefore when we do peevishly refuse
the Spirits work herein, we do in a most eminent manner oppose it in that
wherein its greatest glory is.

SECT. II. Containing many true Signs of Grace.
SERMON XII.
Handling Obedience as a Sign of Grace.

1 JOHN 2. 3. And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments.
I Have at large discussed the Doctrine and Usefulness of Signs, I shall now
propound in so many distinct Sermons, several choice and select Signs, by which
you may know how it is with you in reference to God. For if the Heathens did so
much admire that saying as an Oracle, Nosce teipsum, Know and be acquainted
with thy own self, when yet they had neither true eyes, nor light to discover
themselves by, how much rather does this duty lie upon us, when by Gods grace
we may have the seeing eye, and a sure light of Gods Word to guide us therein?
And the first Sign shall be, An universal respect unto, and observation of Gods
Commandments, out of the words read unto you, whereof the coherence is as
follows, The Apostle in the verses before, having comforted the children of
God against their daily sins of infirmity, which cannot be avoided, he
returns again to his scope, which is to press holiness of life; and
certainly our faith ought to be as busy in embracing the precepts for
holiness, as the promises for comfort. The Argument for sanctity pressed by
the Apostle, is from the profitable effect thereof, it will be a sure and
comfortable sign to confirm us that we are in Christ: for to know God, to love
him, to be in him, to dwell in him, to have Communion with him, are all one
with this Apostle.

So that in the words you have two Propositions,

First, That the knowledge of God makes us to keep Gods Commandments. Secondly,
That this observation of Gods Commandments is a sign by way of an effect, to
assure us that we know God, which is the cause.
In the first Proposition you have the Antecedent and the Consequent. The
Antecedent is knowing of God; howsoever according to the Hebrew rule this word
Knowing signifies Affectus and effectus consequentes: the affections and
effects flowing from it, and so includes love of God, and the like; yet it
does more properly signify faith, according to that, This is eternal life, to
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; for faith
having several acts, knowledge, assent, fiducial application, the Scripture
does by a Synecdocke express the whole nature of faith by one act of it. Now
because there is a threefold knowledge, A threefold Knowledge.
The first perfect, which is only in Heaven; The second imperfect, but true and
saving, which the godly only have; Hence Regeneration, Jer. 31. is expressed by
this, They shall all know God, and be mught of God: A third knowledge which is
imperfect and insincere, is that common gift of Gods Spirit upon temporary
believers, whereby though they know the sense and meaning of divine truths, yet
have not the saving effect and power of them upon their hearts, in which sense
our Savior making that open confession, and celebrating Gods power and
sovereignty, says, The things of God were hidden from the wise and prudent,
Matthew. 11. 25, 26. That is, the Scribes, Priests and Pharisees, who though very
intelligent of the meaning of the Scripture, yet having not their eyes in a
gracious manner enlightened, therefore had those divine things hid from them. A
notable thing it is, and worthy all your consideration, and trembling at it,
that the very things you know in Religion by parts and abilities, may yet be
hid from you, in respect of any saving knowledge; Therefore to declare what
kind of Knowledge this is, observe the consequent, it is that which is
operative and quickens us up to the Commandments of God; for that proper and
specifical difference, whereby saving faith is distinguished from the
hypocrites, is in the cleansing and purifying nature of it, whereby it works by
love; so that love is not the form of true faith, but to be operative and
effective of love. Now according to the threefold knowledge spoken of, Zanchy
does well observe, there is a threefold keeping of the Commandments; A
threefold keeping the Commandments.
for as our knowledge is, so is our holiness. The first is, Perfect and
complete, as Christ did, and the Saints in heaven do perfectly love God. The
second is imperfect, but sincere, though the Scripture calls it perfect, because
of the essential perfection, though it has not a gradual. The third is
external, with some internal affections, but altogether unsound. The Apostle as
he means the second kind of knowledge, so the second kind of observance of
the Commandments, and howsoever the translation be in the present tense, We
know that we know him, yet in the original it is, We have known him, whereby
it is plain, That good works do not go before Faith or Justification, but
follow it. The second Proposition is, that the keeping of Gods Commandments is
a sign that we do know him, (...), by which he does not mean a conjectural
knowledge, as the Papists would put it off, but a sure and certain knowledge.
Now although the Apostle speaks indefinitely, when he says, Keeping the
Commandments of God, yet because it is in a necessary matter, the Assertion is
equivalent to an universal.

Hence the Doctrine is,

That an universal respect to, and keeping of Gods Commandments, is a sure
sign Observe. Obedience to God a sign of Grace.
and infallible of our being in the state of Grace.

Thus Chap. 3. 22. he makes this to assure us in our prayer, because we keep
his Commandment, and do that which is well-pleasing in his sight.

The Doctrine is to be opened in many particulars:

First, There are some considerations in which it is impossible to keep the
Commandments Wherein it is impossible to keep Gods Commandments.
of God, not absolutely and inse, as it is for a man to fly, for so it would
be blasphemy to say, He commands impossible things, to do so cannot stand with
his Justice, Wisdom and holiness: but only it is impossible by accident through
our corruption, who as the Saints in heaven have Felix necessitas, as Augustine
called it an happy necessity of obeying God always, so have we infelix
necessitas an unhappy necessity of disobedience continually. Now this
impossibility is two ways.

First, In respect of every unregenerate man, who is dead in sin, not sick or
diseased, but dead in sin, and God justly does require of us under pain of
condemnation to obey his Law, though we have lost the power. Neither is this as
the Arminians say, as if a Judge should sentence a man's eyes to be put out for
a former fault, and then afterward hang him, because he cannot see, for it
lies not as a mortal duty upon a man to see; nor has any Magistrate such
supreme power over a man, as God has over us. And by these commands of God is
demonstrated our duty only, not our ability: hence God makes it his Promise, To
give us a new heart, and to make us to walk in all his statutes; and although
Arminians think it an absurdity to make the same thing Requisitum and
Promissum, a condition required and yet a gift promised; there is nothing more
ordinary in Scripture.

A second impossibility of keeping the Commandments is, In respect of the
Regenerate, 2.
to whom God gives not such a measure of grace, as that they are able to keep
them according to the perfect obligation of it. Romans 8. 3, 4. We keep Gods
Commandments in truth, not in perfection, not but that God is able to give us
perfect grace, but he has thought good to exalt imputed righteousness, rather
then inherent in this life.

A third impossibility of keeping the Commandments of God, is not only
Collectively, 3.
that we are not able to keep them all, but fail in some, but distributively,
there being not one Commandment we are at any time able to keep in any duty
perfectly. And although it be easier to bring Arguments to prove we sin
sometimes, and do not keep all the Commandments we should, then to prove we sin
in every good duty, yet Romans 7. 19. Gal. 5. 17. do strongly confirm, that
because of the innate corruption still abiding in us, we are not able to do any
thing so perfectly as the Law requires: in the most holy men there are both
Defectus privantes, and Affectus obstantes, defects depriving us of the inward
purity that ought to be in us, and affections contrarily withstanding the
obligation of the Law.

In the next place we will show the possibility of it, and that is, first, By a
sincere How it is possible to keep the Law. 1.
inchoate Obedience, whereby we know God in part, love him in part, though not
to such a full degree. This is affirmed of the godly, therefore it is possible,
Luke 1. 6. Thus Zachary and Elizabeth are said to be Righteous before God,
walking in all his Commandments. David says, Psalm. 119. He shall not be
confounded when he has respect to all his Commandments. As the people of God
have done this, so God has promised this, I will circumcise their hearts to
love me with all their heart and min^^. So Jer. 31. and this is the universal
keeping of Gods Commandments spoken of in the Text, and much pressed in several
places; for there is the truth of all Obedience, though not the gradual
perfection. It is no wonder that the people of God are said to keep the Law of
God, seeing they endeavor after it, and it is usual in Philosophy to call
motions from the terminus to which they tend: Regeneration is the writing of
the Law in their inward parts, whereby the Law is not a burden, but pleasing
and matter of delight to them, as Paul professes it was to him, Romans 7. And by
this means the Apostle says, We do not abolish the Law, but establish it,
because the grace of God gives such ability and strength, that in some measure
we are able to obey it: So that the act of Faith ad intra, which is receiving
of Christ, must not be opposed to, but conjoined with that act of faith ad
extra, whereby we walk in all the Commandments of God.

Secondly, The Possibility of keeping them is in an evangelical sense, that is,
when 2.
whatsoever we fail in, is pardoned unto us, for so it is through the Covenant
of grace, that when we have sincerely applied our selves to the obedience of
the whole Law, and falling short of our duty in many respects. God through
Christ does forgive us, and so our righteousness consists more in the
remission of what is imperfect, then in doing what is perfect. In this sense
Romans 8. 3, 4. Christ is said to come in the flesh, that the righteousness of
the Law may be fulfilled in us: and Romans 10. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to the believer, not to the worker, so that in all exercises of
sanctification we are to have a greater respect to what God does forgive, then
what we do, which has made some say, Our perfection is to acknowledge our
imperfection.

Thirdly, We may be said to fulfill the Law, when although through daily
infirmities we fail of the strict obligation, yet we do not by any gross sin
break it. In this sense 3.
we keep it sine crimine, though not sine vitio, as Augustine sometimes, that
is, without a crime, though not without sin. And although they are but few that
do so, yet sometimes God gives some of his children to walk in such harmless
and spotless lives. Thus Luke 1. 6. Zachary and Elizabeth are said to be
blameless. Phil. 2. 15. That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of
God in the midst of a crooked generatiou: So it is required in a Bishop that he
be blameless, that is, not without sin, but without crime, for which he may
justly be censured, in which sense the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. prays, that the
Corinthians may do no evil, that is, no such crime, for which the Apostle
should inflict a Church-censure, as formerly we asserted. Thus you have heard
in what sense we are said to keep the Commandments, the former and the later
being pertinent to our scope.

In the next place, let us consider how it is a sign, for even when signs are
agreed on, yet there may be much deceit about the explication of the sign,
cutting it too short, or stretching it out too long.

Therefore in the first place, This universal observance is seen, when our
Obedience How obedience to Gods Commandments is a sign of grace. 1.
is internal and spiritual as well as external. Could a man answer all the
affirmative and negative precepts in the outward conversation, yet if not
spiritual in all these, they were as a body without a soul. And herein the
Pharisees hypocrisy was discovered, they rested wholly upon the outward
obedience of the Law, when their hearts were Dens of thievish lusts; Hence our
Savior did so often press them to make clean and wash the inward man: The Law
is spiritual, says Paul, and God is a Spirit, says our Savior, seeking them
that worship in spirit and truth. Hence Matthew. 5. our Savior spends many words
to convince the Pharisees that they were horrible violaters of Gods Law,
wretched Adulterers and Murderers, though guilty of no such outward crimes. Oh
what a piercing and discovering sign must this be. This makes the moral, yea
and religious man, whose piety is only in the outward exercises of grace, to be
without any hope. Alas all these externals are nothing if there be not an
inward spiritual rectitude of the whole man. Hence Paul excellently, Romans 7. I
delight in the Law of God, in the inward man.

The Antinomian pleads, That this universal Obedience cannot be a sign of
grace, because Paul while unregenerated performed it, as appears Act. 13. 1.
Act. 24. 16. Object.
where Paul says, He lived with a good conscience void of offense both toward
God and man; Here (say they) Paul lived in an universal Obedience unblameably,
and kept entirely to his conscience, yet was not in Christ.

But to answer this, A good conscience may be called good in a twofold
respect, Answ. A distinction about a good conscience.
either when a man lives not against the dictates of his conscience, or does
any thing against that as those Christians did, whom Paul compelled through
fear of death to blaspheme: and thus Paul had a good conscience, because he
verily thought he was bound to do as he did: in this sense a Papist, a Jew, any
Heretic may be said to have a good conscience. Or else a conscience is said
good, when renewed by Gods Spirit, and rightly informed and regulated by Gods
word; and thus Paul had a very evil conscience, in which respect he called
himself a Persecutor, and the greatest of all sinners, and so by the way you
may see it is no argument of comfort for those who broach any damnable heresies,
to excuse the matter, saying, Are they not conscientious men? Are they not to
be pitied rather then punished? Is it not according to their light? All this
might have been said for Paul, yet for all this his conscience was a very evil
and wicked conscience, partly because it was not renewed, partly because it was
not informed out of Gods word.

Secondly, Though Paul walked with a good Conscience, and that toward God as
well as man, yet that was for externals only, he was not acquainted with all
the sinful motions of his heart, how much diffidence, ignorance,
lukewarmnesse, love to the world, his credit and glory was in him more then of
God, he did not perceive. Now Gods Law requires that internal good frame above
all. That Paul was thus at that time, appears evidently Romans 7. where the
Apostle mentioning that former time of his life, said, He knew not lust to be
sin till the Law said thus against it, and that he was alive till then, had
good confidence and persuasion in himself, but afterward he died, he was quite
out of love with himself, and loathed all that was in him: so that by this you
see, how unblameable soever his lise appeared, yet it was far from being in a
right way. Oh therefore be persuaded to consider your selves you that live
unblameable lives, diligent in the duties that relate to God and man, though
thy outside be thus painted, thy inwards may be a noisome sepulcher! how
uncomely is it for a man to have his porch and out-rooms very clean, but his
chambers and in-rooms full of noisome filth? This is thy case, look in thy
life, no irreligion or impiety to God, no injustice or oppression to men, yet
thou art destitute of the Spirit, and void of all supernatural life.

2. As our obedience must be thus internal, as well as external; so it must be
external 2.
as well as internal; We must not please our selves with contemplative
Meditations or pretended Revelations, neglecting an active industrious life for
God in our places and relations. In Popery there is the contemplative life, and
the active life; the one they compare to Mary, the other to Martha; and they
say, that contemplative life, like Mary has chosen the better part, but this
is to hide our talents in a napkin; and as Tacitus speaks of some men, That
they were Sola socordia innocents, because of their sloathfulnesse, they did
not come in harmsway, as others did. It was not wisdom or justice, but mere
sluggishnesse kept them from meddling in dangerous matters; so we may say these
are Sola socordia pii, godly only by sloathfulnesse; To these we may add some
that pretend now adays to live upon immediate Revelation, crying down all the
Ordinances, Ministry, Sacraments and Sabbath, as empty forms: But how does this
stand with that universal Obedience unto all the injunctions of God made to
his Church?

3. Universal Obedience is a sign when it does carry us out equally to the
duties of 3.
the first table concerning God, and the second our neighbor. To pretend much
devotion in matters of God, and to show no conscience or equity in matters with
man, is horrible hypocrisy. The Pharisees were notorious in this, who had
their long prayers, and yet devoured widows houses, who taught that neither
father or mother might be relieved by their children of any thing they had, if
it were Corban, that is, a gift consecrated to God. Those that are skillful in
the Jewish customs tell us, That the Pharisees taught any man might vow the
goods he has to God, absolutely, or only in respect of this or that singular
person, so that he shall have no benefit by it, and then when this vow was made
they thought they might relieve no body, no though their Parents, and that in
extreme necessity; but notwithstanding all this seeming Religion to God, how
corrupt and carnal in their carriages to men? Fides est copulativa, and so must
our Obedience be copulative. Thy Religion to God is no sign of grace, if there
be unconscionable dealing toward men. Again, if thou be careful in duties
to men, and negligent in the religious service of God, hence thy rottenness of
heart is manifested, thou do with all thy heart love a civil, just and
righteous man, but thou can not abide a forward religious man, thou love
not strict keeping of the Sabbath, diligent and powerful Family Duties, Oh,
what little hope is here of true grace in such a man's heart! It is ordinary
with Scripture to describe all Religion and Piety by one duty sometimes, and
sometimes by another, sometimes by praying to God, sometimes by keeping his
Sabbaths, sometimes by fearing of an oath, because where one duty is graciously
performed, there all the others will be also.

3. Universal Obedience is a sign, when we are carried thereby to receive the
Credenda, 3.
as well as the Agenda, the things to be believed, as well as to be practiced.
Hence it is called, The obedience of faith; and this Apostle, 1 John 3. 23.
divides the Commandments of God in two parts, 1. Those things that concern
faith in Christ. 2. Those things that relate to our love of others; therefore
Gods Commandments must not only be limited to the prohibition of wicked lives,
but must also be extended to false doctrines; therefore observe the Apostles in
all their Epistles, they are as vehement and zealous against false teachers, as
wicked livers, and therefore press with an equal necessity true faith, and a
good conscience; Therefore thy heart is then sincere, when its set against
heresies, as well as profaneness, and profaneness as well as heresies: If you
have a man hot and vehement against ungodliness, but indifferent about false
doctrines, that man may justly suspect his heart. Again, if a man cry out of
heresies and the tolleration of them, yet can abide profaneness, can tolerate
that in his family, or else where, this man also ought to fear himself.
Whatsoever the Scripture speaks of impiety as destructive to salvation, the
same it also applies to false doctrine. Is that the fruit or work of the
flesh? so are heresies: Is that damnable? so are heresies: Is that to be cast
out of the Church? so is false doctrine: Are wicked men prepared of old to
destruction? so are false doctors: Are the sheep of Christ meek and innocent in
their conversation? so they will flee from a stranger, and not hear the voice
of a stranger. So that if thou would try thy sincerity, mark whether thou
desire more liberty in matters of faith, then in matters of life. No doctrine
revealed in Scripture to be believed, may be any more dispensed with, then the
precepts declared in Gods word for practice.

4. Universal Obedience is a sign, when it comprehends not only general Duties,
but 4.
particulars of relation, not as a Christian absolutely only, but as a
Magistrate, Minister, Husband, Wife, Child or Servant; if a man discharge not
the commands of these Relations, though his general conversation as a Christian
be never so admirable, yet he has cause to suspect himself; relative and
domestical graces do more demonstrate piety and true godliness then public,
general duties; for a man's pride, self ends, may put him upon these, as we see
in the Pharisees, according to that rule, Ambitio scenam desiderat, but it
argues truth of grace, to be diligent in fulfilling of those relations we are
engaged in. Hence it is observable, how diligent the Apostle is in the close of
his Epistles to declare the duties of relations, and to be large in the motives
for them.

The Use is of Exhortation, to judge your selves by this sign. Art thou
universal in thy Obedience, for all the ways and duties required by God, then
thou Use.
may take comfort; otherwise know, if thou have not respect to all these,
thou will be confounded, though with Ahab, Herod, ye do many things, yet if not
all things, confusion will be upon thee. Oh then how few are they, who may
claim a right to grace! Many men have an external Obedience only, and no
internal, but most have a partial and not entire complete Obedience, therefore
it is, That many are called and few are chosen. Consider that terrible
expression of James, Jam. 2. 10, 11. where the Apostle informs believers,
that if they be guilty but of that one sin, viz. Accepting of persons, they are
transgressors of the Law in the general, which he further urges by this
Assertion, He that keeps all, and offends in one, is guilty of all, not
distributively with a guilt of every particular sin, but in respect of the
authority of the Lawgiver, and the obligation of the Law, according to that,
Cursed is every one that continues not in every thing commanded by the Law;
seeing therefore God in regeneration does write his Law in our hearts, which
does seminally contain the exercise of all holy actions; so that there cannot
be an instance of any godly duty, of which God does not infuse a principle in
us; and seeing that glorification will be universal of soul and body, in all
parts and faculties, how necessary is it that Sanctification should be
universal. Take heed therefore that the works of grace in thee be not abortive,
or monstrous, wanting essential and necessary parts. Let not thy ship be
drowned by any one leak, dwell upon this, universality is a sure rule of
sincerity.

SERMON XIII.
Handling Sincerity as a Sign of Grace.

2 COR. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in godly simplicity and sincerity, etc.
AT the eighth verse in this Chapter, the Apostle begins a Narrative of his
troubles, which he describes from the place where (in Asia:) Some think this
relates to the tumult raised by Demetrius against him, Act. 19. but it may
refer to the many troubles he had severally in Asia. In the next place, these
are amplified by the quality of them, it was a pressure above measure, above
strength, it was not (...), an humane temptation; It was above the strength of
nature, though not of grace. The heaviness of it is expressed in that it made
despair of life, to be altogether anxious not knowing any way to escape,
insomuch that he had received the sentence of death in himself (...), Though
some understand it of some answer to be given immediately by God, yet Beza does
most probably understand it as an expression from Malefactors who are sentenced
to die: Further the Apostle illustrateth this from the final cause, which was
twofold, first, not to trust in our selves; secondly, but in God which raises
the dead. This is a comfortable consideration in all times of calamities, God
who raises the dead. In the next place he declares his deliverance amplified
partly by their prayers for him, and partly by his sincerity toward them, so
that in the words you have a twofold proposition: the first expresses Paul's
carriage in the world, especially in respect of his ministry, and that
positively, then negatively; Positively in two emphaticall words, 1. (...),
simplicity, an heart that is not guileful, double, opposed to (...), and (...);
2. (...), sincerity, a word they say from the Eagle that tries her genuine
young ones by the sunbeams, or rather in the sunbeams, there being both
(...), lux, or light, and by the light thereof we see the least motes, and thus
it signifies a man whose heart being inligh^ened finds out all the secret
and hidden motions of sin, or else in the sunbeams there is (...), heat,
which does separate those heterogeneal things that cold had congregated, and
thus it does signify an heart purged from dross, unmixed with corrupt and
sinful ends, for as Aquinas observes well, the soul may be joined to things
more noble then it self (as when silver is mingled with gold) and this does not
debase but ennoble the soul, for when it loves God or is joined to Christ,
herein the soul is advanced: or secondly, it may be joined to things inferior
to it, as when gold is mingled with lead, and this does much debase and
corrupt: now such a kind of mixture is here denied. The Apostle expresses his
carriage negatively, when he says it was not in fleshly wisdom; wisdom may
be called carnal or fleshly, either originally in respect of the fountain
whence it flows, or efficiently because it enclineth to, and produces the
works of the flesh, or finally, because it rules only for fleshly motives, and
carnal ends. The second proposition in the Text is, that this sincere
deportment of Paul in the work of his ministry, was a sign unto him, a (...),
a testimony and witness of that goodness and grace which was in him, and so
by consequent the object of much joy and comfort to his soul.

Doct. That sincerity and uprightness of heart in our motives and ends, is a
sure Observe.
and infallible sign of our being in the state of grace. To this purpose John
also speaks, 1 John 3. 21, 22. If our hearts condemn us not, we have boldness
with God. Sincerity an infallible sign of grace.


For the opening of this point, let us consider how unsafely it may be pressed
for a sign in some particulars, and then wherein the nature of it lies.

First, It is unwarrantably pressed when uprightness is urged to the exclusion
of all 1. How Sincerity may be unsafely pressed as a sign by an ill managing it
on the right hand.
respect unto any reward. For thus some do teach, Unless thou love God for
himself, so that thou look neither at heaven or hell, unless in thy
humiliation for sin thou art so far debased as to be willing to be damned,
thy heart is not right. Hence I have read of one who passionately wished, there
were neither heaven or hell, that so the party might know whether there was
love to God purely, because of God. Whereupon many godly people are much
troubled, and think the serving of God with eye to our salvation, is nothing
but unlawful self-love. But the pressing of uprightness to such a strain and
measure is unlawful and uncomfortable.

1. Because the Scripture propounds heaven and salvation as a motive to obey We
may eye the recompense of reward as a motive to Holiness.
him, now no Scripture-motive can draw out any unlawful affection, and
whatsoever Gods Word requires, the Spirit of God works in the heart of
believers, which could not be if this desire of salvation be a sin: therefore
we read of Moses, yea, and Christ himself, that they had an eye (yea, a sixed,
constant eye, and firm, as the word signifies) upon the reward: yet these
cannot be denied to have upright hearts, all amor mercedis is not amor
mercenarius: let not therefore the people of God condemn themselves for
hypocrites, because of such affections. It is true there is in the people of
God an ingenuous and supernatural principle, whereby they love God, and holy
things, because of the excellency of them: Even as a carnal man loves sin,
because of the suteablenesse of it with his own heart, but yet this is not
exclusive of the love of our own happiness: some make Gods glory and our
happiness, to differ as the supreme and subordinate ends, some as coordinate
end^ only; but to be sure, God has so infallibly conjoined them together, that
one cannot be without the other.

2. It Is uncomfortable, because it puts a man upon the searching and finding
out that which is impossible, for how can thou ever come to know whether thou
could be content to love God and serve him, if there were no heaven? Thou
may make metaphysicall abstractions about these things, but there can never
be any real separation of one from the other, and therefore it is impossible
to know what thy heart would do in such cases. It is true, Paul Romans 9. uses
an hyperbolicall expression, I could wish to be an Anathema for my brethrens
sake, that is, to be separated from Christ, and all communion with his
privileges, that so the Jews might be saved, for the saving of all them might
seem to make more for Gods glory then the salvation of one man; but the Apostle
speaks not absolutely I do wish, but I could wish, viz. if it were possible, or
if it were lawful; and in this he does declare the vehemence of his love
toward them. It is therefore good both for Ministers and people to be wary,
that they lay no snares upon others or themselves in this point.

Secondly, This sign of uprightness may be pressed unsafely when it is
understood of such a perfect uprightness that has no deceit or falsehood at
all joined with it: but 2.
as other graces are but in part, we know in part, we love in part, so we are
sincere and upright in part. David though noted for sincerity, and a man after
Gods own heart, yet cries out, Psalm 19. Who can understand his error? There is
more hypocrisy, self ends in thee, then thou do perceive, although there is
so much discovered in thee as to make thee humble, and to trust in Christ only;
and David's failing in sincerity made him so cry out Psalm. 51. for truth in the
inward parts, expect not therefore to find thy heart freed from all guile and
carnal respects thrusting of thee, and stirring in thee, more then from the
relics of other sins that still cleave close to thee. This is to manage the
sign of integrity ill on the right hand. Then on the left; We may abuse this
sign by going too low, and that may be these ways.

First, When we take sincerity for quietness of conscience, that it does not
accuse. 1. How Sincerity may be unsafely used as a sign by the ill managing of
it on the left hand.
Thus civil and formal men not being enlightened out of Gods Word, clear
themselves, think their hearts and intentions good, when if they did thoroughly
know themselves, they would be amazed. Thus Paul also, who said he walked with
a good conscience, his conscience was good in that it was quiet, it did not
check him, whenas if truly informed out of Gods Word, it would have given him
as sad buffetings as those of Satan's: In this sense some of late have excused
an heretic, that is willing to lose all temporal advantages for his
conscience sake, yea, to die in the most exquisite way of ^^^ments rather then
to forsake their judgment: how can these be judged any other (say they) then
sincere upright men? But it is good to observe that then only may our hearts be
said to be upright in a g(...) manner, when they are according to Gods Word,
which is the rule of uprightness. Therefore if a man be now so fully persuaded
of an heresy, that it is the truth of God, and take up his cross and follow
this error, yet his heart cannot be called upright, for that is right which is
according to the rule, to the measure which is the Scriptures. We grant
therefore, that a Papist, a Socinian, or Arminian, may for his conscience sake
endure joyfully the spoiling of his goods, refuse all earthly advantages that
would thrust him against this, and thereupon find incredible joy and peace in
his soul, yet for all this, this man cannot be said to have an upright heart,
because there wants true light within, and if the eye be dark, the whole body
is dark also. In these times therefore it is good to have it pressed again and
again, that in matters of opinions and doctrines a man may have a great deal of
ease and comfort, and yet be in a very false way, and though such a man be not
an hypocrite in a gross sense, he does not walk against the checks of his
conscience, yet he is an hypocrite in a more refined sense, as hypocrisy is
opposite to that which is true, and unfeigned: As we say a man does many times
lie, mendacium dicere, tell that which is false (a sin prohibited) when yet he
does not mentiri, go against his mind, or the light thereof. Therefore the
conscience of every heretic, while under the saddest calamities for his
opinion, is polluted and unclean.

Secondly, We abuse this in going too low, when we limit sincerity to one
particular 2.
fact, or to some particular passages only: For now even a natural man, though
not regenerated, may do some things in a natural integrity and uprightness of
his heart. Thus Abimelech Genesis 20. 5. said concerning Sarah, In the integrity
of my heart, and innocence of my hands have I done this. Thus some take that
U^iah whom the Prophet Esaias called to be a faithful witness unto him, to be
the same with that Uriah the gross idolater, who brought in the Altar of
Damascus: If so, then as to that particular respect he was an entire man;
Indeed no man is so to judge of himself by any particular time, but the
constant course of his life is to be regarded. Hence a godly man is said to
walk in the ways of uprightness; It is walking, and it is a way.

Thirdly, We then also go too low when we judge of sincerity by the proxime and
3.
immediate ends of actions, not at all attending to the principal and main;
Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Every gracious action comes from
God originally, and tends to him finally, now a man may do many glorious and
good actions, and that with reference unfeignedly to the immediate ends, yet
shoot not so far as the utmost white and mark of all, which is Gods glory:
Take many Heathens for example, Aristides, Caio, Themistocl^s, and diverse
others, who did many good things unfeignedly for the commonwealth; they sought
not wealth, neither did they enrich themselves, but the public good was their
end, they went no higher; now as a natural conscience may much di^qu^et and
accuse a man, witness many heathens, so it may also if obeyed give great
comfort and content, as some of the Heathens also had, but it is not enough to
make an action supernaturally good, to refer it to its proxime end, but it
must be to the chiefest.

In the next place, let us consider what this uprightness is, and so wherein
it is a sign.

And 1. There is no sincerity, but where there is a full and powerful change
of the whose man by the grace of God. For every man's heart is naturally full of
1. What uprightness is, and wherein it is a sign. There must be a change of
the whole man where there is Sincerity.
guile, and does uti not frui Deo, refer God to humane ends and himself, but
not himself and all his ends to God, Omnes homines sunt latrones and quotidie
latrocinantur gloriam Dei: It was a saying of one which Cassianus does much
approve: The heart of a man naturally is said to be deceitful above all
things, who can know it? There is no truth, no integrity, till God has changed
it. It is as Tertullian said of the Peacock, versicolor, multicolor, semper
idem and nunquam idem. If therefore thou would have a plain and even heart,
desire it may be polished by grace, for till this be, a man makes himself the
center, and all lines to meet in him, but this is inward, and so cannot be
perceived but by the motions and actions which flow therefrom; As Lazarus
perceived he had life, not by the principle of life put in to him, but by the
effects thereof: and Saul perceived he had another spirit by the operations
that did flow from it: so in conversion a man does not perceive the immediate
habits and principles of grace, but by the effects and fruits of them he comes
to know he has such.

2. Uprightness is a sign and then acknowledged to be sincerity, when we do
any good duty because God commands. As in matters of faith, then we properly
produce 2. Uprightness is a sign when we do any good duty because God commands.
a divine act, when we believe quia ipse dixit, because God has commanded it:
so then is it properly upright obedience when it is quia ipse voluit, because
he wills and commands it. A man may obey a command because those actions may
consist with some carnal ends, but to do it because of Gods sovereignty, this
is acceptable. Hence Saul for that act of disobedience, though he pleaded
carnal pretenses, yet was judged to commit a sin as heinous as witchcraft.
Adams sin was to be aggravated from this, in that it was expressly disobedience;
for there being no other ground of the command, then Gods will to command, it
was bonum quia mandatum, not mandatum quia bonum; hence his sin was in a high
manner disobedience. Do not therefore this or that, because this will agree
with thy ends, this will stand with thy lust, but do it because God has
required it.

3. Uprightness is seen in the universality of obedience; We do not pick or
choose, but because God commands all, therefore we obey all: do that which
crosses us, 3. Sincerity is seen in the universality of obedience.
which is troublesome unto our flesh, which is self-denying, as well as those
things that do not so much offend us. The Apostle Jam. 2. urges this argument,
He that said Thou shall not stea^, said also Thou shall not commit adult^ry.
Aquatenus ad omne valet consequentia, to obey any commandment because it is
Gods will, does incline a man to obey every commandment, because it has the
same superscription; Herod did many things, but not all things, therefore not
any thing upon a right ground: Aristotle uses the first word (...) frequently
for that which is opposite to (...) secundum quid. Thus says he, a blackamore
though he has white teeth, yet cannot be called white (...), because it is in
some respect only, so neither may a man be called sincere that has only
partial obedience.

4. Then is uprightness a true sign when the motives of all our actions are
pure and 4. And when the motives of all our actions are pure and heavenly.
heavenly; when all is done because of the glory of God, or for such motives
that Gods word does require: The Pharisees how glorious in prayers, fastings
and alms, yet all they did was (...) to be on a Theater and admired by others
applause: This is penetrating and discovers thousands of hypocrites: Jehu, who
more zealous then he? who more active in reformation? yet it was not Gods glory
he a^med at, but his own greatness. Mundus cadaver est, and petentes eum sunt
canes, says the Arabic Proverb, The world is a carcass, and those that hunt
after it are dogs; Oh how few then are Christ's sheep, who are guided by direct
and sincere motives, following Christ because of his precious ointment. All
glorious actions without pure ends, are like sweet herbs upon a noisome
dunghill.

5. Uprightness is when a man is very diligent and conscientious in internal
duties 5. Sincerity shows it self by being conscientious etc.
or secret, to perform them, and in spiritual or heart, sins and secret lusts
to avoid them; God is a spirit, and Ioh. 4. he seeks such that worship him in
truth and spirit; and Paul expresses himself thus, whom I serve in my spirit:
The Pharisees (who were so often upbraided with their hypocrisy) were diligent
in external obedience, when their inward vitals were wholly corrupt and rotten:
Our Savior directs us to private duties in a most secret manner, with this
encouragement, He that sees in secret will reward openly: observe then how
careful thou art about the frame of thy heart, whether that be prepared and
fitted with the graces of Gods Spirit; see how thou art in those things which
none but God knows, and this will be a true touchstone: Joseph made a
notable discovery of his integrity when he said, how can I do this and sin
against God? no secrecy or privacy could entice him. Therefore consider, that
howsoever men know thee not, yet God knows thee; walk before me and be
perfect, says God to Abraham; eying of God shows sincerity.

6. Uprightness is a sign when a man does zealously set against those sins that
he most 6. And when a man zealously sets himself against those sins he is most
inclined unto.
inclines to, either through outward or inward temptations, and hates sin
most in himself, and in those that are nearest to him; as a man hates a toad
most in his own bosom. David professed he kept himself from his iniquity:
Hypocrisy has commonly some Dalilah, some wolf or other in its breast, to
whose sheaf (as it were) all other sins must make their sheaves to bow. This is
the good old mark that godly Divines in former ages did so much press, and you
shall see when all false doctrines and corrupt notions go out in a stink, such
truths as these will be precious with the godly; Our Savior in nothing more
discovered the hypocrisy of the Pharisees, then that they were not sensible of
their own sinfulness, they judged others, but understood not how noisome they
themselves were: You are they which justify your selves, but what is highly
esteemed before men, is abomination before God; see therefore how loathsome and
abominable thy own sins, thy family sins are unto thee.

7. Uprightness is seen in taking those ways and using those means only God
has 7. And in taking those ways and using those means only which God appoints.
appointed for the obtaining of lawful ends: Many times lawful means are not
so visibly advantageous, as shifts and carnal projects are, we see how Jacob
got the blessing by fraud; David often became guilty of that deceitfulness and
guil, which he so much in his Psalms complains of in others, and so far as
they engaged in unlawful ways, so far hypocrisy acted in them; They did
not trust in God, neither believe in him for the accomplishment of his own
promise. But this is a gross mistake of flesh and blood, for Gods means only
brings about Gods ends in a mercy. When by unlawful or unwarrantable ways we
get any thing, it is as the Eagle got a coal from the sacrifice, she carries
it to her nest, and sets all on fire, Jonah 3. They that seek to lying
vanities forsake their own mercy. Hence it is that so many promises are made to
the upright man, especially in the Proverbs, that his integrity shall preserve
him, because in outward probabilities he is most likely to be undone.

8. Uprightnes is seen not only when we have respect to all Gods Commandments,
but 8. Uprightness is seen when we respect all Gods Commandments in that due
order as he commands.
when we have it in that due order and respect, as God commands. The duties
of the first table before the second, the Commandments of greater duties above
those of less duties: As in faith there are fundamentals absolutely necessary
to salvation, and praeter or circa fundamentals, so in obedience there is that
which is wholly necessary for every one to have, and those things which in some
respect come only to be so. The Pharisees hypocrisy was made manifest in that
they tythed mint and cummin, but neglected righteousness and judgment. Many
times it falls out, that where men are diligent where they ought not to be,
there they are negligent where they should not be. As Melancthon sharply
reproved the Italians, Vos Itali Deum vultis esse in p^ne, quando non creditis
eum esse in coelis; Ye Italians will believe God to be in the bread, when ye do
not believe there is a God in heaven. Therefore observe the graduall difference
God appointed concerning duties.

Use, To discover the p^^city of those that are in the state of grace. If
uprightness Use;
and sincerity thus in all our ends and means be an inseparable sign of grace,
may we not cry out with the Psalmist, help Lord for the upright man is perished
out of the earth: And in what age may the absence of it be more deplored then
now, when Parties, Factions, Interests, have devoured and eaten up sincerity?
But as the body is a carcass without the soul, so is all religion without
integrity. It is a blazing Star though it make a great luster for the time,
yet it ends at last in noisome vapors. This was a comfort to Hezekiah in his
sad distress, That he had walked before God, with an upright and perfect
heart. He that walks uprightly walks safely. He that lives uprightly, and
dies uprightly, lives and dies safely. This is acceptable even where many
failings are, and where this is absent, the most perfect Sacrifices are
rejected.

SERMON XIIII.
That Opposition against and Abstinence from sin is a Sign of Grace.

1 JOHN 3. 9, 10. Whosoever is born of God sins not, because the seed
abides in him, neither can he sin, because he is born of God. In this the
children of God are manifested.
THe Apostle at the first verse having declared the glorious privilege of
being the sons of God, he does verse. 3. mention also their Duty: for external
grace and inherent are inseparably joined together. Their Duty is to avoid sin,
which is pressed from several Arguments;

1. From the native filthiness of it, It is a transgression of the Law.

2. From the end of Christ's coming, which was To destroy the works of the devil.

3. From a collation or comparison between the two Fountains or Fathers of him
that does sin, or him that does righteousness; the one is of the Devil, the
other is born of God; and this difference my Text amplifieth: So that in the
words you read, you may observe five Propositions; first, He that is born of
God sins not; what it is to be born of God is easily known, viz. to have the
image and holiness of God stamped upon us by his Spirit quickening of us; we must
not imagine any communicating of the Divine Essence to us; in which sense the
second Person is born of the Father, and so called, The Son of God; but by
participation of those supernatural graces which make us resemble him; The
greater doubt is about the predicate, He sins not; which has much exercised
the thoughts of men: some understand it of a perfection attained to in this
life, not to sin at all. Thus Papists, Pelagians, some Anabaptists and diverse
of late; but if this were the meaning, the Apostle within a very little space
would expressly contradict himself, for Chap. 1. 8, 10. he says expressly, If we
say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and make God a liar. Not to sin
therefore is not wholly to be without sin. Others limit it to a certain kind
of sin, in this sense, He sins not, viz. unto death, so that he shall be
damned; and without question to this purpose the Apostle speaks Chap. 5. 16,
17, 18. But this seems to straiten it too much. Others, as Arminians, he
sins not, viz. in this respect, and so far as he is born of God; but what
an absurd sense would this be, and who knows not that a godly man does not
sin in that he is godly, or because he is born of God. The most genuine and
unforced interpretation therefore is, to understand it not universally, but
according to the subject matter, he sins not, as one who is of the Devil his
father, he sins not as Cain, all within him is not corrupted; so that he
makes sin his trade, his custom and delight. The very opposition makes this
the meaning, I do not ground this opposition upon the phrase (...), as if that
did always signify more then (...), for I grant that that phrase sometimes
signifies no more then barely to sin, not de noting custom or delight, as Romans
7.

But my foundation is upon the context, the opposition Paul makes between a
righteous and unrighteous man, in respect of the roots whence they are, and
then from the second Proposition, which is the reason why he sins not,
because the seed abides in him, by which metaphorically is meant the principle
of grace wrought in him by the Spirit of God, and that not only so, for Adam
had the seed of grace, yet sinned it away, but because its preserved by the
Covenant of grace. This place is brought to prove perseverance in grace, and no
strength of wit has yet been able to overcome it. The third Proposition is
higher then the former, for it does not only deny the act of sin, but the power
of it. Neither can he sin, viz. in the sense before explained; and the fourth
Proposition is a ground of the third, because he is born of God. Some make this
reason the same with the former, but there seems to be this difference, the
one signifies that inward permanent principle of grace: The other that divine
resemblance of God which is in us by this regeneration. The first Proposition
is, That this difference between the righteous and unrighteous about sin is a
sure sign, whereby the godly man is manifested both to himself and others that
he is godly.

That an opposition against and abstinence from sin is a sure sign, by which a
man may Observe.
be persuaded that he is in the state of Grace.

For there can be no better sign to discover principles by, then their proper
incommunicable actions; thus we discover fire by burning, a rational life by
speaking, now of all actions, this is most connatural to the permanent habit of
grace to incline us to loath and abhor those things that are destructive to
the nature of it, which is only sin: but because we may easily be deceived
about this sign, for every one that is afraid of sin, yea bitterly cries out
of it, and leaves it, is not yet regenerated. Therefore let us diligently
consider how it is a sign. And

First, It is a sign, When we perceive a settled fixed frame of heart against
sin. As How it is a sign. 1.
the reason in the Text implies; The seed of grace abides in a man, he is
born of God, now these expressions do denote something in us by way of a new
nature, whereby we have an enmity and hostility, yea and irreconcilableness
with sin; As some creatures have an antipathy against others; As on the
contrary, he that is of the Devil, and so has a fixed root of ungodliness in
him, he has a constant enmity and hatred against godliness, and those that are
godly, Why so? Because their works are good, and his are evil, as John
expresses it; on the contrary the godly cannot agree and delight in evil, or
evil men, because their works are evil, and his good; The Apostle Romans 12. calls
it (...), hating sin as hell it self, and the exhortation is to cast away their
transgressions, abj^icere not deponere, because of the loathsomeness they see
in sin; So then, let Pharaoh, let the Israclites in several calamities bewail
their Idolatries, and sins against God, yet here is no sign of grace, because
their hearts were not steadfast within them. These were sudden transient motions
not permanent principles, if thou would take comfort from this sign, do not
judge of thy self by some fits or seasons, but by the habitual inclination of
thy soul. God in regeneration does first change our natures, new mould us; and
from this supernatural principle issue gracious actions.

Secondly, Then is this a sign, When there is an universal repugnancy in every
part 2.
of a man against sin, not only in his reason and conscience, but in his will,
affections and whole man. For this seed of grace is nothing, but Regeneration
diffusing it self into the understanding, will and affections of the whole
soul; so that in every part there is that which is regenerate and purified, as
well as that which is corrupt and defiled. Paul, Romans 7. gives you a large
instance of this in himself, He delighted in the Law of God in the inward man,
There was the Law of his mind in him (which was the seed of grace diffused
through his whole soul) that did incline him to every good thing commanded in
the Law; so that although there was at the same time a law of the members, and
the body of sin captivating of him, yet he had also a settled life of grace
opposing all those motions of sin; and this particular is diligently to be
marked; There is many a man comforts himself in this, my heart is set against
sin, and if I be overtaken at any time, my conscience checks me for it, and I
condemn my self, so that I say with Paul, The good I would not do that I do. Oh
take heed thou do not deceive thy self! for there is a vast difference between
the check or resistance of conscience against thy corrupt affections and lusts,
and between the opposition of the regenerate part in a man against the
unregenerate; for the former is only between two particular faculties, the
conscience against the affections, but the later is universal, there is the
regenerate part of the will and affections against the unregenerate part. So
that in such a case a Christian does not only say, my conscience bids me do
otherwise, I know better things, as Aristotle speaks of his incontinent person,
but he also says, I will better things, I love and delight in better things.
Oh therefore consider this sign aright! when thy heart cries out of sin, Oh
thou will meddle with it no more! Is this opposition only from conscience
enlightened? Is it from that faculty only? Alas if so (as commonly it is no
more) thou have no more sign of grace in thee, then many Heathens have had.
When a man is regenerated, not only his conscience is made spiritual to
discover the loathsomeness of sin, but his heart also, his love, his delight,
whereby he is carried out in all the power of his soul against sin; and if
this be so, may we not cry out with the Psalmist, Help Lord, for they are few
that do truly hate sin.

Thirdly, This is a sign, As hereby it works in a man a difficulty, yea a kind
of an impossibility to sin with wilfulness and purposed continuance. He does
not sin, 3.
neither can he sin, says the Text. There being a root of grace in him, it is
impossible he should sin with such an universal content of soul, as wicked
men do. There is a twofold cannot, one moral, and is no more then that which
difficultly is not so. Thus 2 Cor. 13. 8 We cannot do any thing against the
truth but for the truth. Act. 4. 10. We cannot but speak the things we have
heard and seen. And in this sense, the children of God may be said, They cannot
sin, because they have an averseness of heart to it. Secondly, There is a
cannot, absolutely, so that the thing can never be, whether easily or
difficultly, and in this sense the godly man cannot sin totally and finally,
so as to be wholly deserted of God. As for the instance of Peter, David, and
others, and whether the sins of the godly may be called reigning sins, I have
already spoken to that matter. This is certain, it is impossible for a godly man
so to delight and live in sin, as that the seed of grace should be quite
extinct. Although the grace that is in Gods children may for a time make no
actual resistance, yet the principle of it by reason of Gods promise will never
be fully removed out of the heart. The Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 1. makes that new
nature opposite to all earthly glory and greatness, because that is
corruptible and fading, but this abides for ever. If therefore thou would
have any comfort from this sign, see how the seed of grace within thee, does so
affect and overpower thy heart, that thou can not sin with willingness,
content, no nor commit the acts of gross sins, How can I do this and sin
against God? How can I? and by this means you have a palpable discovery of many
amongst us, not yet to be in the state of grace; How can I lie, swear, deal
unjustly, neglect Family Duties? Thou would find such a constraining and
overruling power of grace, that thou could not do it: and mark if this
impossibility to sin arises wholly from a kindly work of grace within,
otherwise a wicked man cannot sin sometimes, because God puts a terrible
restraint upon his conscience; Balaam he could not sin in that wherein he was
solicited, If thou would give me (says he to Balaak) this house full of
gold, I cannot curse them, but must bless those whom God blesses. God many
times puts a bridle upon the conscience of a wicked man, that he dares not,
nor cannot commit such a sin, as his heart would carry him to, but this
cannot sin, is far different from the godlies cannot sin; The one is a
violent motion, the principle is from without, the other is a natural motion,
and has its ground from within it.

Fourthly, This is a sign, in that hereby a godly man in some measure, and by
degrees, 4.
does not only leave outward gross sins, but even conquer and crucify the
inward body of sin. Gal. 5. He has crucified the flesh with the affections
and lusts thereof; and he is said to crucify the body of sin, and the deeds
of the flesh; and herein this sign is most eminently significant; for a man
cannot simply take comfort from this, he has indeed once been such and such an
ungodly sinner, he has wallowed in such mire, but now he has given over all
those courses; a man (I say) cannot barely take comfort from this leaving of
actual gross sins, unless there be a mortifying of them in the root, in the
affections and motions thereunto; for Peter speaks of some, who had escaped the
pollution of the world, and that through the knowledge of Christ, yet were
Swines and Dogs in their nature. Wherein does Paul Romans 7. so passionately
bewail his captivity to sin, but only in respect of the inward motions
thereof? Thus David, Psalm. 51. staieth not upon his murder and adultery, but
goes to that foul fountain, He was conceived in sins, and entreats God to
create in him a clean heart. If therefore thou would fain know whether thou art
borne of God or no; See how pure and clean thou desire to make thy self
within, how does the fountain of blood within thee dry up?

Fifthly, This is a sign, When a man's opposition to sin, and leaving of it,
is because 5.
of the foul nature of sin. It is contrary to God, it is a transgression of
his Law, and upon this spiritual motive he is bent against it. The Apostle (as
you heard) gives this as a reason, why the sons of God should not sin,
because sin is a transgression of the Law; and David Psalm. 51. bewails his
sin, though pardoned, because God was offended thereby; so that though a man
pour out floods of tears for sins, though his conversation outwardly become
white as snow, yet this is no symptom of grace, a man can take no comfort from
hence, unless it be upon this ground, because God is displeased, and his law
broken: look over the Scriptures, you may see wonderful examples of men's
remorse and sorrow about sin, yet those very tears were so foul that they
needed washing; Take Ahab, observe the Jews, consider Judas, how were they cast
down about their sin? with what horror of conscience did Judas cast away his
thirty pieces? Oh men may go very far in sorrow for sin, and in reforming
of their lives about sin, and yet this be no sign to them of the truth of
grace. Why (you may say) what should work upon them, if it be not grace? Oh
there are many other motives that work upon them, terrors of conscience, fear
of Gods judgments, and the pressing calamities that lie upon them! Insomuch
that true unfeigned hatred of sin is very rare; I deny not but the judgments
of God upon a man ought to work in him a sense and feeling of his sins, a
severe judging and condemning of himself under Gods hand. But to have this the
only ground argues not the presence of grace in them. They are tied up from
sin as Masti^^s and Wolves are, their natures are not changed.

Sixthly, This is a sign, When the inclination and bent of the heart against
sin, is universal 6.
in respect of all sin: For a man highly in love with some sins, may yet
extremely set against other sins. Therefore as sins run out in several streams,
so do their affections proportionably: as there are sins of the heart, and sins
of the outward man visible to others. The Pharisees who were free from outward
wickedness, yet abounded with heart-defilements, as our Savior charge them.
But Paul does deeply bemoan the evil motions of his heart, and Hezekiah humbled
himself for the pride of his heart; That pride, unbelief, earthlinesse, and
several lusts of soul are discovered by him, and crucified, and we read of no
hypocrite that went so far. Again, There are sins done in secret, which none,
or few know, such as theft, uncleanness, unlawful trading, crafty policies: or
public, that are as it were upon the Theater in the eyes of all: now the godly
man abhors the former as well as the later, he dares not commit a sin in
the eye of Almighty God, which is every where, he fears Gods knowledge of it
more then all the world.

Again, Sins are either of commission, by a positive disobedience unto the Law
of God, or of omission, by defect or neglect, such are omission of holy
religious duties, neglect, lukewarmnesse and distraction therein; now a
gracious heart abhors not only gross sins, but defects in holy Ordinances.
As God is angry, When we fall from our first love, when we strengthen not the
things that are ready to dye, when we are not fervent in Spirit, serving the
Lord. So also is a godly man much troubled and grieved herein.

Further, There are sins against the moral Commandments of God, which are of
good things intrinsecally so; and against positive commands, which are only
good, because commanded. A sanctified person fears the sin against the one,
as well as against the other; thus he fears to profane the Sabbath, to use
any false worship, to come to the Sacrament in an unprepared manner, as well as
to be unjust and oppressive.

Lastly, There are sins that become endeared by custom, education, complexion,
by profit or pleasures. Now notwithstanding all these temptations, the godly
man throws them away like menstruous cloth, yea the sins they have been most
enticed with, they manifest the greatest zeal against, and desire in all things
to show themselves approved. Oh (Beloved) if these marks and signs be in you,
then may your joy abound. Do not henceforth argue thus, He must needs be a
godly man, for he has such revelations, such enlargements in duties; he has
had such experimental workings upon him, he is of such opinions, for such a
Church Government. These are nothing, Is he a man that dares not sin? Is he a
man that is afraid to offend God in any of those ways mentioned? This man is
godly by Scripture-judgement, whereas the other may be only in the sight of
themselves and others. And Oh that the good old Scripture-way of bringing men
more into the sight of sin, the loathing of it, were more preached and urged
amongst us. If Jehu be not afraid to sin, if Judas be not afraid to sin,
let them have all the glorious appearances of godliness that can be, they
carry not a true badge of holiness upon them.

Seventhly, This frame of heart against sin, is so real and operative, that
although it cannot wholly dry up the fountain of corruption within them, yet it
does all 7.
the foggy and miery puddles of gross and enormous courses. The Apostle says,
The fruits of the flesh are uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, wrath,
envyings, drunkenness, revelling, with such like; and that they which do these
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven. Therefore an habitual,
constant profane person, cannot say, He is born of God. Oh do thou tremble,
who live and wallowest in thy gore blood! Thy profane Oaths, thy malicious
hatred of the things that are good, do they not discover thou art in the gall
of bitterness and wormwood? Be not deceived, there are but two sorts of men,
Either the children of light or of darkness, of God, or of the devil. There is
not any hearer this day, but is either in the state of grace, one of Christ's
sheep, or in the state of sin, one of Christ's goats; Now in which number art
thou? Do not actions betray some? Do not words betray others? Do not
commissions some? Do not omissions others? Oh that the word of God might fall
like fire into your breasts! why sit you still? Why are not your consciences
reflecting upon you? What am I, Lord, and what is my way?

Eighthly, This is a sign, as it does not only oppose it in our selves, but set
against 8.
it in others. For being born of God, we now (though with great disproportion)
resemble him; and therefore as God is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity;
and he is angry with the wicked all the day long; such is a godly man in
respect of his zeal against sin where he lives. Thus David, I hate them that
hate thee, with a perfect hatred: And Lot, His just soul was tormented with
seeing and hearing the wicked actions of the Sodomites. If therefore thou art
born of God, thou will not bear ungodliness in thy family, the zeal of Gods
house will make An item (...) great men.
thee see it be not a den of thieves; Oh that men in great place and power
would put forth such a divine Indoles against sin. What a shame is it to show
animosities, and an high spirit in a carnal way, and not able to demonstrate an
heroic spirit against sin, and the works of Satan every where!

Ninthly, It is a sign, as it puts a man upon the choosing of any outward
affliction 9.
rather then to sin against God. Job was charged to choose sin rather then
affliction, but herein he was wronged. It is a true touchstone of the powerful
work of grace, that it makes a man fear the evil of sin, because it depriveth
us of an infinite good, rather then the evil of punishment, which takes away a
finite good; Hence where this work of grace is, though storms and tempests
arise, yet they are built upon a rock; They fear not miseries, death, they fear
only to sin against God.

The Use is of Exhortation, To lay this sign close upon your hearts. Are you
Use.
such that cannot, that dare not, that have an habitual averseness from sin,
that are of God, hating evil as he hates? behold what a sure evidence here is
of thy eternal Salvation. But alas, where are the men? how few are they of whom
this Text is true, They sin not, neither can they sin? The contrary is
true, They love not that which is holy, neither can they, because they are of
the wicked one. Naturae sequitur semina quisque suae. Fortes creantur fortibus;
See an excellent Antithesis, John 8. 38, 39, 40, 41, 44, 45. How did the
Pharisees see the devil do that which they did? They thought not so, for they
said, They were of Abraham, but because they expressed in their lives such
wickedness as was in the devil. No doubt but many will take it ill to be said,
They are of the devil, but their actions demonstrate it.

SERMON XV.
That for a man to be willing to have his Soul searched by God, is a sign of
Grace.

PSALM. 26. 2. Examine me (O Lord) and prove me; try my reins and heart.
DAvid in the first verse of this Psalm, Prays for Gods preservation and
defense of him in the midst of all his adversaries, which he presses from a
twofold consideration,

First, His Integrity and Sincerity, which is not to be limited unto the
righteousness of his cause only, but the innoceny also of his whole life, as
the Psalm evidenceth. Secondly, His confidence and trust in God; for this is an
engaging argument with God, as it is with men.
Now as verse 3. He makes Gods Loving kindness the ground of his trust, so he
manifests his sincerity,

First, By appealing unto God in my text. Examine me, and try me. And Secondly,
By the several effects of it, verse 4, 5, 6.
I shall consider that sign of his sincerity, wherein he desires God would Try
him, and search him: So that if there were any Hypocrisy, any false way, any
unsound or imperfect principles he walked in, it was his hearty desire to have
all discovered. And certainly there cannot be a greater argument of the truth
of Grace, then a willingness to come to the light, and a readiness to be
weighed in the balance; as on the other side you have not a surer character of
an hypocrite, and an unsound Christian, then fear of the light, and
unwillingness to be ransaked and searched into the very bowls by the word of
God: But David's hearty willingness in this particular appears, 1. In the
several words he heaps up together in his Petition, Examine me; as Artificers
do, whether their gold be weight or no: try me by discovering whether I am
inwardly sound or no: Prove me, (as the word signifies) as when the Artificer
melts his silver in the fire, that separateth the dross. 2. This does appear
in the object matter which he would have thus proved, and that is, His heart,
his reins, which are the most inward and secret motions of his soul, he would
have a deeper searching into, and winnowing of him then the world can do.
Certainly David in this Petition does discover great honesty, and faithfulness
of Spirit. Now, here may be two doubts. 1. How God can be said to tempt, or try
any man, seeing James 1. 13. God is said to tempt no man; and the devil is
called (...), as if it were his work only. There is a double temptation.
The Answer is obvious, That there is a double Temptation: one evil, which is
defective either in the principle, or means, or end of the Temptation. And thus
the Devil and our own flesh Tempt. The other is a good Temptation, arising from
a good principle, in a lawful way, to a good end; and thus God does Tempt, that
is, does make a discovery what is in man; not as if he were ignorant of it, but
that hereby the person trusted may be better known to himself, and to others.

In the second place, we may doubt how David could lawfully pray to be Tempted,
seeing our Saviors rule is to pray, That God would not lead us (or cast us,
for ne infer as, does better Answer (...) then ne inducas) into temptation; But
that is to be understood of the evil of temptation: so as God should withdraw
his grace either, internal, subduing our corruptions, or external, repressing
Satan and all outward power against us.

These things thus explained, observe, That it is a sure and comfortable sign
of grace, when a man is willing to have his soul and all within searched by
God. That which here David prays for, Psalm. 17. 3. he there acknowledges
what God had done, Thou have proved my heart, thou have tried me, and have
found nothing; which is not to be understood as if David had no Dross in him,
(for those words are taken from the Artificers that melt their gold and silver)
seeing Psalm. 19. He cries out, Who can understand his errors: cleanse me from
secret sins. But of total and universal hypocrisy; neither does David speak
this arrogantly, as presuming of himself, but takes comfort from this in his
grievous troubles, as a testimony that he belongs to God.

Job also in his cala mities has his face and heart answering David's, Job 23.
10. When he has tried me, I shall come out like Gold; so that from hence we
may see, that a love and willingness to have our hearts searched by God, is
such a testimony of the truth of Grace, that it is a great bulwark in times of
sad afflictions: It is therefore worth the enquiry into the nature of this
sign; for if the wiseman said even of these petty outward things, False weights
are an abomination unto the Lord, how much more abominable must those false
balances be wherein men through blindness and self flatterry weigh themselves.

In the first place. Let us consider how God does try, that so we may perceive
How many ways God tries men.
our willingness therein. And the first way is by his word, Ephesians. 5. 13.
Whatsoever does manifest, and so reprove evil, is light. Now the Scriptures are
like the Sun, into which God put all light, and other things shine with light
borrowed from thence. David commends Gods word for a light and lanthorn to his
feet; and that by which he was forewarned from sin; and for this profit coming
by them, he commends them for preciousness and sweetness above fine Gold, and
the honey comb: See here a true touchstone of Grace; thou love the word of
God above any treasures in the world, not only for the promissary part of it,
but the discovering part of it: It acquainteth thee with all the evil of thy
heart, and thy ways: It speaks bitter things against pride, lusts, lasiness,
immoderate love of the world: It makes me an undone man; it will give me no
comfort in any evil way, and therefore I can read it, and meditate on it with
hearty delight, Heb. 4. The word of God is quick, and powerful, discerning the
Intima, and the Minima, most deep things of man, and the least sins in him.

As by the light of the Sun beams we see the little motes, and flies in the
air, so by Gods word shining into our hearts, we come to see many things sinful
and unlawful, which we did not perceive before: Oh then consider your selves
herein; do you love the word of God because it finds out thy sins, never speaks
any good to thy corrupt ways? do thou pray, O Lord, let thy word still enter
with more light and power upon me? this is a comfortable sign; but on the other
side, if thou art in a continual fear of the light, dare not look into the
Bible because it speaks against such and such sins thou art guilty of, be
afraid thou art not right. Tertullian called Heretics Lucifugae Scripturarum,
they were like Bats and Owls, they could not endure the light of the Sun: And
our Savior says, The theif hates the light, because his deeds are evil. Oh
then take heed you who have a leprosy of sin plainly appearing upon you: does
not the word of God meet thy drunkenness, thy lusts, thy oaths, thy pride, as a
Bear robbed of her whelps: Oh thy soul must needs hate the word of God, because
it is so contrary to thee.

A second Way whereby God proves, (and the sincere rejoice therein) is a 2.
powerful and soul searching Ministry, which like thunder and lightening,
makes the mountains to melt like wax, and the Hindes to calve in the fields, I
mean the stoutest and obstinatest sinner, to find his soul thereby in a
spiritual travel and agony longing to be delivered. A gracious heart loves
that Ministry which like the word of God is a two edged sword in his heart, of
which he can say as the woman, of Christ, It has told me all that ever I did.
That shaking of heaven and earth which the Prophet Haggai speaks of, is the
Ministry of the Apostles, and in the Hebrew is the word, from whence Bonarges
comes. Then are ye like the Eagles young ones, (...), when ye can look upon
the sun beams: when light is not offensive to your sore eyes. It was a speech
infallible betraying Ahabs rotten heart, when he said of the Prophet Michaiah,
I hate him, because he always speaks evil to me. You have just cause to
suspect the soundness of your hearts, when you delight only in a lazy, formal,
general, and dull ministry: when you would have Prophets that should sing only
Pleasant songs, daub with untempered mortar; encourage you, notwithstanding
your sins you are in. And if this be a symptom of an unsound heart, may we not
say Hypocrisy has fallen upon the hearts of most in England, who rejoice not
in those Ministers and Prophets that rouse their consciencies, that trouble
them for their sins, that would reform them from their superstitions and
prophanies? do not the faithful Ministers of God meet with the same hatred and
opposition as the prophets did by Jerusalem? and why is all this? That of our
Savior will answer it, The thief hates the light, because his deeds are evil.
Therefore is thy heart afraid, and unwilling to have a Ministry that shall
discover thy sins, because thy Conscience is full of Ulcers and sores: whereas
now if thou did love to be reformed, how would thou rejoice in the light
of the Ministry. The more spiritual, powerful, operative, thou did find it
in thy heart, thou would bless God the more: thou would cry out with
thankfulness, O Lord I bless thee that light shines in every dark corner of my
heart: Oh let it still be a ministry, as if to me only, to mind me of my sins,
to bring my iniquites to remembrance. O Lord, my heart does not rage, nor rise
against this light; it does not hate, or rebel against it, but I set open the
Gates of my soul to receive more in.

3. The work of Conscience within us, that also does prove us. God has set up
a light within us, and when this is enlightened by the word, then it makes a
man's 3.
breast full of light. Now a faithful godly man, he loves this should be
tender, active, speaking out of Gods word for every duty, and against every
sin. You see the quickness of it in David, when it is said, His heart smote him:
and 1 John 3. If thy heart condemn thee, God is greater then thy heart. Alas,
if thou within thy own self judge thy self to sin thus and thus, God does
much more. Try thy integrity: art thou willing to have a tender conscience, and
an informed conscience? Do thou love to hear what that speaks out of Gods
word? whether peace or Duty, this is comfortable. But on the other side, if
thou art a man that rebelest against the light of it; would sain put out the
sting of it; would be glad to feel no such living thing in thy breast, then
thou have cause to suspect thy self: Oh it is to be feared that there are many
that give themselves to lusts, and carnal pleasures, that so they may put a
foggy mist between this sin and them. Others digg into the world, laboring to
become senceless, that so there may be an eclipse of this light by the
interposition of the earth. Others run to damnable Heresies, denying
Scriptures, God, Heaven, Hell; pleading for an universal salvation of all: What
are these but refuges of guilty consciences. It is true, we must distinguish
between our carnal concupisence, and conscience; between deluded imaginations,
and conscience; between an erroneous, and scrupulous conscience, and a well
grounded, and truly informed conscience; and when we have done so, we must
follow conscience as far as that follows the word.

4. God tries us by the illuminations of his Spirit, and strong convictions
thereby. Thus God proves us, and makes us to know what we are, and wherein we
fail. John 16. The spirit of God convinces of sin, and of righteousness; and
we are forbidden to quench the spirit: a metaphor (as some say) from the fire
in the Temple that was not to be put out. And again it is the character of the
stiffnecked Jews, as fitted for destruction, that they always resisted the
spirit of God. If therefore thou would have comfort from this sign, consider
how the illuminations and motions of Gods Spirit are cherished, and nourished
by thee. As soon as the cock croweth, do thou go out and weep bitterly? Is
not the Spirit of God grieved, and imbittered by thee? Oh, though they be dear,
and pleasant, or profitable sins, yet the Spirit of God convinces thee of
them, makes thee forsake them: and do thou rejoice under this work of Gods
Spirit upon thee? Do not thou resist and rise up against it? Oh, (beloved)
deeply weigh this. Though it may be there are some so swinish and beastly, that
the spirit of God never moves or works in them: Yet there are others who are
not yet forsaken by God, but in the ministry he stands at the door, and
knocks; he beckens unto thee to come unto him. Oh, now is God proving thee,
examining thee. Now is he trying thee, if truth be in thee thou will be glad in
this work of God upon thee, and desire still more and more burning, and shining
light within thee.

5. God tries, when by his Providence we are put upon many duties and
commands, which it may be at other times did not concern us. Thus God examined
Abraham by a command to offer up his only son Isaak. Thus God tried the young
man, who had great confidence in himself, by that personal command, to go and
sell all he had and to follow him. Now times of persecution, are commonly such
times of trial: Whether then we love Father or mother, houses or children, or
lives themselves, better then him? Thus the second kind of Ground, that had an
hopeful sprouting, was quickly discerned to have no root when the sun arose.

The vessels soundness is tried in the fire: The Mariners skill in a storm: The
trees in a windy tempest. In winnowing all the chaff flies a way. There is a
comfortable place to the Godly, Zach. 13. 9. God promises he will refine them
as Gold by their afflictions, they shall only lose their dross.

6. And this is the sixth way of Trial, viz. When God brings us under his
chastisements. This manifests what metal we are of. 1 Pet. 1. 7. The trial
of the Godly by those troubles, is said to be more excellent then that of the
gold in the fire, because that is perishing, and this abides for ever. Hence
afflictions are only called Temptations, and not Mercies, though they many
times discover what we are. Now indeed, we are not to pray to God that God
would afflict us, that he would bring us into the fire; but when he does it, we
are to make this advantage, The Lord does it to humble us, and try us, to see
what is in our hearts; whether we will remain constant and faithful unto him:
Therefore we do not despise the affliction, or murmur against God; but rejoice
that this purging of us, makes us to bring forth more fruit.

As God uses these several ways to prove us, and the soul of a Godly man is
ready A godly man gives up him self to be examined, proved, Especially, 1.
herein, so in these three cases especially does a Godly man give up himself to
be examined.

First, In matters of Doctrine: Although Heresy may be merely in matter of
Conscience and Opinion, yet for the most part, carnal principles and motives
are interwoven therewith: now a Godly man having a right understanding how
obnoxious he is to E^rors, and subject to blindness in every thing; and how
deceiptfull his heart also is, pretending for God, when indeed it is for
nothing but self, is therefore more ready to hearken to all light and reproof:
As the spirit of God does lead into Truth, so it does also at the same time
affect with much modesty and humility. It is good to observe the excellent
temperament of Paul, 1 Cor. 7. in determining that case of conscience about
marriage to the Corinthians: His expressions are, Yet not I, but the Lord; and
I think I have the spirit of God. The same candor and ingenuity does he work in
his children: If therefore a Godly man does err any dangerous error, it is with
him as in other sins; he does not flatter himself; his heart is apt to smite
him. Errare possum Haereticus esse nolo, he will not be obstinate; he is
earnest to have all things searched and tried; whereas it is the nature of
Hypocrisy to maintain those positions which are for profit, and self-interest,
against all light. Are not the Pharisees a sad instance for this, who though
they had no just ground to oppose our Savior, yet because Christ's way was
destructive to their applause and credit; when they could not fairly answer,
they would foully blaspheme: Whereupon our Savior charge them with blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost.

2. In matter of received worship, and traditional service of God. Although it
be worship that can plead custom from prescription many years, commendation of
the universality of learned men; yet an heart truly sincere, desires to have
all things examined and proved out of Gods word: Christ said he was truth, not
custom, as the Father observed well; and Christ dyed not only to deliver us
from our sinful ways, but the Tradition of our Fathers, John 4. You may
observe the carnal disposition of all men about an accustomed way in serving of
God, in that woman of Samaria; she presses the argument that all silly and
ignorant people do now for any Superstition, Our fathers worshipped, etc. but
our Savior instructs her of a Worshipping God in spirit and truth, which she
before was wholly ignorant of. Therefore in this matter a man may discover much
integrity of his heart, whereas if any be thus affected, I care not what
Scriptures you bring, I hearken not to what Arguments are fetched out of Gods
word, it is plain this man carnally adhereth to his own imagination, and is not
willing to be searched: As that Papist, Cornelius Massus said, If a thousand
Austins and Chrysostomes said thus and thus, he cared not, he would believe
what the Pope said.

3. This is eminently discovered in matter of practice. Although a man has
been addicted to sinful ways of pleasure, profit, or any advantage whatsoever,
yet all those things that he accounted gain, afterward he will judge loss for
Christ's sake. Paul though much engaged in a way against Christianity, yet when
once wrought upon, He consulteth not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1. He considers
not any carnal reasoning, but applies immediately, and that without any
limitation, to Gods commands, Lord what will thou have me to do? (says he:) He
gives up his heart as a blank, let God write down what he pleases. Thus
Elihu, supposing upon a false ground Job to be an Hypocrite, does give him
excellent counsel, Job 34. 31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I
have born chastisement, I will offend no more. That which I see not, teach thou
me; and if I have done iniquity, I will do so no more. Therefore herein may
thou see the truth of thine heart: can thou heartily say, that which I see
not, teach thou me, Neither profit, pleasure, or any consultation with flesh
and blood shall hinder me from my duty. Whereas if you observe the
half-conversions of any to God, the Israelites, Jehu, many in the New
Testament, you shall find they all flew back upon this ground, They consulted
with flesh and blood.

In the next place let us consider what are the effects of such a gracious
temper in the heart. And

1. Where this is, it does not excuse or mitigate sin, but takes in with God
against its own self. The Apostle speaking of the Corinthians repentance,
acknowledges their zeal, fear, and indignation, and revenge against them
selves. See 1 Cor. 11. If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of
the Lord.

2. Not resting upon generals, but particularly applying matters of Duty. The
Prophet Jeremiah complains, no man says? What have I done? The young man
comforted himself well enough in the general, till our Savior in particular
tried him, and then he went away sorrowful: particular applications and
discharge of duty, will try, as the jealousy water did the suspected woman. A
man may speak and preach for godliness in the general, but when it comes to
particulars, he cannot abide it. The Pharisees, they commended the Prophets
that lived before them; but Christ, and those that lived at that time who
reproved them for their sins, they could not abide. Therefore it is a good rule
of the Ancient, When, says he, you hear a man commending those ancient doctors
that went before: see how he is affected to his present Teachers. That
opposition which wicked men show to those present men alive that discover God
to them, they would do to Peter and Paul; to Austin and Chrysostom, if they
were alive. But when a thing is general, or afar off, it does not move at all:
particular present things, do discover what men are, and a sincere heart loves
those best.

3. A sincere heart loves a Godly reproof, and those that give it. See it in
David; Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be better then oil: Whereas a
man of a false and Hypocritical heart, he rages and flies in the face of
those that reprove him, though it be done with all prudence and compassion.
Therefore try how thou can bear a reproof. Does it work Humility, Love,
Reformation in thee? this is good.

To all this which has been delivered, this caution must be remembered, which
holds also in all other signs. We must not expect a punctual perfection
herein, for even those who are truly sanctified, have yet discovered much
falsehood and hypocrisy. Take David for an instance in that gross guilfull way
of the Murder of Uriah: could he then say, Examine me, prove me? Was not
there dross enough to be found in him? Therefore though David desired such an
inward searching of him, yet that he had no confidence in himself, appears by
that universal principle he lays down in another place: If thou (O Lord) be
strict to mark what is done amiss, no flesh shall be justified in thy sight.
Thus Asa, though he was a godly man, yet when reproved by the Prophet for his
sin, how did corruption stir within him, in so much that he threw the good
Prophet into prison for doing his duty!

Use of Examination: Here is a touchstone and trial for your selves. Is there
love of the Light, or fear of the Light: are you afraid of the word of God, a
soul-searching Ministry, close and particular applications? then suspect all
is not sound within thee. But if thou rejoicest in that thy sores are
discovered, thou art glad when thy Hypocrisy is made known to thy self, and
thou criest out, More Light, Lord, more searching of my inward man, here is a
good comfortable sign. Hence David, Psalm. 19. when he had said, Who can
understand his Errors? he prays, Cleanse me from secret sins. Do thou so?
Lord I fear much secret, and unknown corruption in me: I know not how bad I am;
a great deal of filthiness lies undiscovered in me; Oh let me be tried and
proved by thee.

SERMON XVI.
Growth in Grace a Sign of Grace.

JOHN 15. 2. And every branch that bears fruit he purges, that it may bring
forth more fruit.
A Fifth sign of the state of grace, shall be growth and further progress in
sanctification, out of these words, which are a part of that valedictory or
farewell Parable our Savior spoke to his Disciples, encouraging them in their
duty and consolation: For in the former Chapter our Savior having informed
them of two particulars, which might justly trouble their hearts, whereof one
was his departure from them, and the other the sad calamities which would fall
upon them: By this Parable he gives a twofold remedy to that twofold grief.
For the first, though he be corporally absent, yet he is spiritually present,
and that with a very near union, for he is the Vine and they the branches, so
that spiritual efficacy shall always be communicated to them. 2. For the
latter, he exhorts them to persevere and abide in him, notwithstanding all
persecutions, from arguments ab effectu utili and pernicioso: This is the scope.

In the Parable you have first the similitude laid down generally, I am the
true Vine, and my Father the Husbandman. The true Vine (...), because the
properties of a natural Vine to its natural branch, are nothing in respect of
what Christ is to his spiritual branches.

In the second verse you have a distinction of two kind of branches in Christ,
which also does insinuate exhortation to look to our selves. The first kind of
branch is, that which is in him not bearing fruit. He does not by this mean an
heathen or a flagitious wicked man, but an hypocrite that has the visibility
of a branch but not the reality: he does not say, Every briar or nettle that
brings not forth fruit, but every branch; But how is an hypocrite in Christ?
not by any internal union, but outward profession, by the Sacraments, and in
the judgment of others, he is in Christ, as a sciens newly grafted on a tree,
which yet has no coalition with it, or receives any juice or nourishment from
it, and see that terrible judgment that impendeth this unprofitable branch: A
nettle in the garden, weeds among corn, ill branches in a vine, are in the
greater danger, and so is a Christian in the Church, not inwardly participating
of efficacy from Christ. In the first place he does (...), take him away, which
is more particularly amplified ver. 6. he is cast forth of the vineyard, Christ
bids them depart, then he withers, for though he had no fruit, yet he had
leaves, and all this decaies; and lastly, he is cast into the fire to be burnt.
The other kind of branch is that which being in Christ brings forth fruit, and
concerning this observe the care and love of the vine-dresser, (...), he
purges it, for that is necessary for vine-branches: Therefore the Hebrew word
for a branch or vine is called (...) Zamorah a resecando, Numb. 3. 24. Ezekiel.
15. 2. because it must be often pruned. Now although this purging be commonly
understood of afflictions and persecutions, which like dung, though noisome in
it self, yet makes this ground fruitful; yet we are to understand it more
generally of all those means which God has appointed for our progress and
increase in grace, especially the word of God, as appears ver. 3. Now ye are
(...) (the same word in the original with the former) through the word I have
spoken unto you. In the next place our Savior describes this purging from the
end, that ye may bring forth more fruit: now that they may be partakers of this
growth, he uses several arguments worthy observation, Verse 4. Abide in me,
and I in you, because the branch cannot bear fruit, separated from the vine, no
more can ye (says Christ:) (...), without or rather separated from me: he does
not say, says Austin, that ye can do no greater thing without me, but no
thing, and he does not say ye cannot perficere perfect, but facere, ye cannot
do; which our Savior does not apply unto that general aid of God that is
needful in all natural and moral actions, but of the special assistance of
grace, whereby as branches we bring forth spiritual fruit, and observe that
there is our abiding in Christ, and Christ's abiding in us, and Christ's
immanency or indwelling in us, is properly the cause of spiritual fruit, not
our dwelling in him; as the branch bears fruit, not so much because it is in
the vine, as because the vine is in it communicating juice to it. Lastly, This
growth and fruitfulness is spoken of as an absolute property, in my Text: And
verse. 8. If ye bring forth fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples; that is, this is
a necessary property to demonstrate that ye are indeed my Disciples, and then
our Savior speaks of it as a sign, v. 11. These things have I spoken, that my
joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full; now they could have
no joy in these things, unless they could know they did bring forth fruit, and
therefore were Christ's Disciples.

That growth and increase in grace is a necessary property and an infallible
sign of our Observe. Growth in grace a sign of grace.
being in the state of grace. Our Savior says not, Every branch in me, that
is green and flourishes with leaves and blossoms, but that bears fruit, he
makes it to bring forth more fruit. It is not every Christian that has the
flourishing greenness and leaves of common abilities, and parts in religion,
that is regarded by God, but that man whose talent of grace, as five, has
gained ten: Therefore in that Parable our Savior bid them all negotiate, play
the merchants, and trade in the ways of grace, and one man has his portion
among hypocrites, though he had not idly spent his talent, but because he had
not improved, propter lucrum cessans, though not propter damnum emergens; so
that the opening of this mark will be of great use, because increase of grace
is so rare: and whereas all men endeavor to have their health, wealth and
estates better, they are not careful to have better graces, to pray better, to
hear better, to be more strong in believing and heavenly-mindednesse. To affect
you therefore herein, consider first,

That as there is a necessity of being converted and translated from sin to a
state of grace, so there is also a necessity when we are put therein, to grow
and increase to a further stature in holiness. Thus in the Text, Every branch
he purges to bring more fruit, Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 2. 19. In which places every
godly man is said to be knitted to Christ, and thereby partaketh of his spirit
and nourishment, wherein he increases with the increase of God, that is, with
a divine and spiritual increase, in opposition to the natural growth of the
body: so that whosoever finds himself settled upon his lees, continuing still
in the same formal, empty, barren way, he may justly suspect whether he be of
the body of Christ; but as the glass eye and artificial leg receives no
nourishment from the body, but have still the same dimensions, is no longer or
broader, so is every unregenerate man destitute of the vivificall influence of
Christ's spirit, and therefore is the same without any change, he was many years
ago. Yea, that the necessity of the growth of grace may appear, the Apostle
Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. makes it the great end of the Ministry, the end why God has
given Pastors and Teachers to his Church, not only for conversion, but further
edification, till we all come unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ: which is not to be understood in the life to come, but in this life,
as appears by the verse following, that we be not hence forth like children
carried with every wind of doctrine; so that God has appointed a Ministry
not only for laying the foundation of godliness in the peoples hearts, but for
superstruction; and oh that the Ministers of God could see this glorious
effect. What have thou been more instructed in? wherein have thou been more
quickened up to godliness since thou have enjoyed the Ministry? Oh (beloved)
if Christ should come and look upon our persons, families, may he not curse us
with the figtrees curse, never fruit grow on you? Know God is not only angry
with thee in the state of sin and love thereof, but also with the coldness,
lukewarmnesse, that thou have not thriven and increased more in every grace.
Hence are those manifold exhortations to this duty, 2 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
so that the blessing which God gave at first to the creatures, increase and
multiply, is especially to be seen in the new creature.

2. As growth is thus necessary, so it can only be, where there is an inward
principle of life pre-existent. Nothing grows but what has either a
vegetative, sensitive, or rational life in it. Roll a snow-ball up and down,
though you make it much bigger, yet it does not grow, because it is by
extra-addition, not by intra-reception. An house made larger and bigger, yet
does not grow, because here is no vital principle within. By this means a
civil man, a formal man, a temporary believer, he cannot grow spiritually,
because he does not live spiritually. There may be indeed a growth in
knowledge, parts, inlargements, and duties, but this does not prove a true
growth. These sproutings are not from internal union with Christ, but are
outwardly in a common way bestowed by Christ upon them. As in a field of corn,
the weeds have a better flourishing then in a barren wilderness, yet the
husbandman was not at all that cost and charges to have weeds come up, but
corn; so Christ died not, or set his Officers in the Church to furnish the
wicked with any abilities, but yet living in his Church, they partake of
several privileges by him, which yet were not the chief intent of his death:
so then, there only is a supernatural growth, where there is a supernatural
life, and as you see the picture of a child, it will never come up to be a
man, because it is a picture only, there is no life; so in any man, that has
only a form of godliness, not feeling the power of it; he is still upon the
same hinges where he was, he goes on in the circle of duties, prays as he
did, comes to Church as he; but if you enquire for increase, Have thou more
faith? more communion and fellowship with God? do thou partake of more virtue
and efficacy from him? herein they are wholly ignorant. Oh that we who desire
better times, better trading, better settling, did also desire, better
believing, better mortification; but this cannot be unless there be some great
work of God within first. As he said to his picture which he would fain have
had stood, and it would not, (...), there wants something within, life within;
so may we say, thou praiest, thou hear, thou profes^est, but there wants
something within; till grace be infused, it cannot in thy conversation be
diffused, It must be shed in thy heart before it can be shed abroad in thy life.

3. As growth is always upon a supposed principle within, so it is uniform and
aptly proportionable: as the Apostle implies in that comparison, every part
has its proportionable nourishment, so that in true growth of grace, every
particular grace has its suitable increase, and herein the people of God are
very negligent; if they grow in believing, they do not the same time grow in
repentance and humiliation, if they grow in joy, they do not increase in fear
and trembling. This is their weakness and corruption, for all true increase of
grace is uniform. As in natural bodies, every part grows, one as well as the
other, the little finger as well as the great, whereas now if one part prove
bigger then in proportion it should to the other parts, we call it not growth
but a disease: a tympany, a wen, are not growth in the body, but tumors,
neither do they come from a natural life, but from some accidental defect:
so then, if thou growest in knowledge, in abilities, and not in a practical
conformity to them, this is not properly growth, but swellings. And is not this
the sad calamity of this age, men growing out into suckers not into fruit, into
opinions, parts, not holiness, how many monsters (...) there to be seen, whose
heads are bigger then all their bodies? and so the hypocrite with his partial
obedience, Jehu with his several acts of reformation, Herod with his many
things he did, yet increased not in grace, because here was not an uniform
proportion in all.

3. In growth though every part do grow as well as the other, yet not equal to
the other; aeque but not aequaliter. This is that uniformiter difformiter, as
the Philosophers speak of so much, and Ephesians. 4. The Apostle speaks of the
particular measure of grace suitable to every part, so that the eye grows
with the nourishment peculiar to the eye; the hand with nourishment peculiar to
the hand, and so one part needs not so much nourishment as another, because
it is not to grow so big as another: and this is diligently to be noted, for
where there is true grace, there is a peculiar increase of grace, according to
the relation thou art in: If a Magistrate, in the graces of a Magistrate, if a
Minister, in the graces of a Minister, If a husband, a child, a servant, in
the graces suitable to those relations: and again, this is also for comfort,
because many of Gods servants are troubled, as if they had no grace, because
they have not so much as others; They have not such an excellent temper as Paul
and David had, they cannot find themselves able to do such things as they
did, and therefore they doubt of their grace, but this is as if the little
finger should think it does not grow, because it is not as big as the arm or
leg. Every member in Christ's body has not the same occasions, is not under so
many obligations, stands not in such particular relations as others do: and
therefore the personal graces of the one do far transcend the other,
insomuch that some are dwarfs, and others giants, some are babes and others are
strong men.

4. Whereas in natural growth there is a terminus prefixed both for the time,
and dimensions, insomuch that when there is an arrival to such a stature and
age, they grow no more; there is nutrition always but not augmentation; Nature
has her maximum quod sic, beyond which she moves not: but now it is not so in
the way of grace; For there we cannot attain to any such degree of grace, but
still there is a large room for more; and it is our sin if we press not
forward to attain it, Phil. 3. Paul did forget all that was behind, and did
(...), and (...) earnestly pursue and endeavor after that before him. It is
true indeed, God has appointed to every man that measure of grace he shall
receive in this life; yet not so, but that it is his duty to do more, even as
much as the perfect Law of God requires, so that here is no time to stand
still. Thy faith ought to be greater and stronger, there is no grace in thee
but it might be better: Thou can never say of thy spiritual good things, as
Dives of his temporal; Soul, take thy ease, thou have enough laid up in store
for thee.

5. In natural growth, the progress is carried on by natural strength, with
the general concourse of Gods providence. But in this spiritual progress,
the increase is of God. At our first conversion we being wholly dead in sin,
God puts into us supernatural principles of grace, wherein man is not
cooperant, but merely a subject recipient, but afterward the heart of man
being enlivened and healed thus by grace, he does cooperate with the grace of
God, yet so as that a further degree of any grace is wrought by God: Hence he
is said in those that are already converted to work the will and the deed, and
that good man prayed to God to increase his grace, and Gods promises are also
frequent in the Scripture, to complete and perfect that grace already begun in
us. God does not believe or repent in us, these flow immediately and formally
from a man regenerated, but Gods grace does efficiently excite and stir up the
will to do these good actions: hence it is that when the people of God have
through negligence or any corruption grieved the spirit, that does forsake him,
and so his Sun goes many degrees backward; for that assertion is no ways
justifiable, that a godly man cannot fall from any degree of his grace; for its
plain David did, who therefore prays to have a new heart created in him; and
the Church is blamed for falling from her first love, and so is commanded to
repent, and to do her first things, to strengthen the things that are ready to
die. The ordinary comparisons are, that a godly man may be like the tree in
winter, that has life in the root, but yet the branches and outside discover
none, or as the fire that lies buried up in ashes.

6. As in natural growth, there are many pull-backs, sometimes a progress and
then a regresse. Thus it is with corn, trees, and man himself before he comes
to his term prefixed, and therefore we must not say Such corn does not grow,
because for such a season it may wither and go back: it is enough that in the
end it comes to its full growth and ripeness: so it is with a godly man, he
is not to pass sentence of himself according to some seasons and temptations,
for how often is he in a withered and barren condition? but he is to compare
one season with another. Yea, godly men's slumblings do many times make them go
the faster: as sometimes after sickness children grow the faster, so true is
that of Luther, that to the godly not only their mala passiva, but also mala
activa, through the goodness of God further their growth in holiness.

These principles are laid down to explain the nature of increase in grace. In
the next place consider how many ways we may improve grace.

1. We bring forth more fruit, when the habits of our graces are more intense
and enlarged: for in this supernatural habits agree with moral, that they are
capable of intension, whereby faith may be made stronger, love more active,
patience more refined. Their natures do not consist in indivisibili, neither do
any attain to the utmost of any grace, Christ only had fulness, and the
spirit of God was given unto him without measure; but in us it is otherwise:
hence the Disciples fallen into some ambition, our Savior tells them, except ye
be converted, that is, further converted and carried on in sanct fication, ye
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven; so it is said of the disciples upon
some remarkable passage which Christ did, that they believed on him, which is
not to be understood, as if they did not before believe on him, but they were
confirmed more. Oh therefore look upon it as a necessary testimony of grace, to
thrive more in godliness, to have many cubits added to thy stature, say with
thy self, oh if the life of grace were in me, should I always be at such a
stay, would it be no more active and operative; do wicked men grow worse and
worse, and shall not I better and better? We complain of our children if sent
to school, and they are still the same, stand at a stay; and may not the
Ministers of God complain of their people, if they be still the same? how
severely and terribly does Paul speak to the Hebrews, because they were babes
still, when they might have been strong men? he threatens them with the sin
against the holy Ghost, and total apostasy, for not to go forward is to go
backward, as it is with the boats in the river, if they cannot go on, they are
driven backward: Now these habits of grace may be made more intense, partly by
more fervency, when our graces arise to a greater heat, our faith and love more
burning within us; partly by more easiness, the ways of godliness are not so
difficult, corruption is more subdued, for habits are like a second nature,
which does facilitate and make all actions welcome, so that his Commandments
are not grievous; partly by more delight and joy, for this flows from the
former: hence when the people of Israel offered so willingly, they rejoiced in
that they had such hearts. Now see if thou may not in all thy graces be more
fervent, more delighting, how often art thou languishing, dull, and unwilling?
how often are good things even irksome and tedious to thee? Oh do thou not
need purging to bring forth more fruit.

2. Our graces may increase by a deeper rooting of them in our hearts; The more
they root downwards, the more they bear fruit upward. The Schoolmen dispute
whether habits do increase by addition of new degrees, or deeper radication in
the subject: But I take it for granted, that in supernatural habits both these
are different; If therefore thou would take any comfort from thy grace, see
whether holy things ^e now ingrafted in thee, do cleave closer to thy heart;
for certainly true grace brings such sweetness with it, that it makes the soul
have more plenty and fulness of it, 1 Pet. 2. 3. and would be transformed
into it, I no longer live, says Paul, but Christ in me. As therefore original
corruption is seated in thee and soaked into thy very bones, so do thou desire
grace may be incorporated into thee: you see meat while it is in the mouth, it
may be taken away, but when it is once turned to nourishment, turned into our
flesh and blood, then it is impossible to take it out of our body. The unhappy
builder therefore suffered that loss, because he did not dig deep enough.

3. Graces grow by the actual exercise of them, by actual loving and
believing the habits of faith and love are more firm and strong. Hence the
commands of God are for the acts of grace. Thou shall love, and this is his
commandment to believe. The habits are commanded obliquely as the fountain, the
acts as the stream. In moral Philosophy acts make the habits more intense. In
Christ's Parable of the talents, he only is said to have, that does exercise and
actually improve his graces; and as our graces increase by the exercise of
them, so by the cooperation of them all together: Add to your faith
temperance, to temperance brotherly kindness: which is not to be understood
of the habits of grace, for they are all infused together; and a man may as
well be happy with one particular act of glory, as regenerate with one habit of
grace: but we are to interpret it of adding the acts to one another.

4. The growth of grace is by meliorating or making better the means and
instruments of grace. The Word and Ordinances are appointed by God as the means
to grow, and to cleanse us more and more. Now if thou would have thy graces
flourish, thou must be more diligent and careful in the prepared use of them;
hear better, pray better, make a better improvement of the Ministry. The
Disciples were mending their nets because they were instruments to get their
fish. The Artificer must sharpen his tools, if he would live by his trade. Now
these external Ordinances are the spiritual tools and instruments by which the
soul is promoted in the way of godliness, and if thou languishest and art
careless here, it will quickly appear in thy whole conversation.

5. Where growth is, there is a special care, of all graces to look to that
which helps to nourishment, and that is Faith. Faith is the mouth to suck the
milk of the promises, it is the bunch of hysop that sprinkles Christ's blood
upon us to puri^ie us, it is the feeding upon Christ: Now then if a man would
be nourished and increase in grace, he must be sure this grace has no
obstructions. As a man is justified only by faith, so in some sense, we may say
a man is sanctified, that is, increases in new obedience, by faith: By faith
the branch is preserved in the olive tree, and partaketh of the fatness
thereof. Christ prayed for Peter, that his faith might not fail, as if that
grace were kept up, then his courage, zeal, self-denial, and all other graces
would be kept up: Non per opera venitur ad fidem, sed per fidem ad opera.

6. There is a growth objectively, and that is, when the glorious fulness of
God is manifested to us more and more. Though the Sun cannot in it self
increase or be glorious, yet it may to us more and more: therefore it has its
dawning, and its noon; so though God and Christ cannot be better or more lovely
objects then they are, yet they may be so to thy affections and desires, Christ
a new Christ, grace new grace, because there are further apprehensions and
applications of their sweetness and efficacy.

Now to prevent mistakes, there is a twofold disposition like growth, that is
not.

1. An increase in knowledge, parts, and abilities. This is not growth of
grace: There is an increase (as you heard) quoad amplitudinem scientia, and
quoad efficaciam, the latter is the crown and the perfection of the former.

2. There is a growth in temporary faith, and love, and such affections, Which
hypocrites may have, but temporary faith will never grow to be justifying; no
more then an Ape would grow to be a man, or copper to be gold, for these differ
specifically.

3. There is a growth in externals merely, men are grown more civil and
reformed in their lives. We may behold a wonderful alteration and change in
them, but yet because there is no inward juice of grace, therefore it is not
growth of godliness; and such Peter speaks of, Who had escaped the pollutions
of the flesh, yet were dogs and swines in their inward disposition.

4. There is a growth in additionals of worship and service. When men judge not
the prescribed way by God enough, but institute of their own. This is a
monstrous growth, as if a man should have two heads or six fingers. Thus
superstition is an excess in worship, not in the quality of worship; for a man
can never worship God too purely, too fervently, but in the quantity, by
instituting new means. Hence growth of grace does not lie in multiplication of
duties more then God requires, but the intention of qualities therein.

Use of Exhortation, Judge your selves by this touchstone. Let this Sermon be
Use.
to you what Elisha's body was to the dead body that fell on it, make life to
come into you. Do you increase in grace? Are you not at a stand? the same ve
were many years ago? consider God is provoked not only against gross sins, but
lazy, decaying duties. Do you grow in light but not in heat; in enlargements,
but not mortifications? Oh let thy soul be afraid and tremble under this truth!
Entreat God, as he did about his withered hand, Oh Lord, restore this withered
hand, this withered soul of mine! I doubt me, in these times many have broke in
their Religion, as well as in their states, as Paul said to Timothy, Let your
profiting appear to all.

SERMON XVII.
Spiritual Performance of Duties a Sign of Grace.

1 JOHN 4. 13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he
has given us of his Spirit.
THe Apostle John, as he was the beloved Disciple, so does he frequently and
vehemently press the duty of love to the Church of God, for that being a
spiritual body, love is as necessary to preserve them, as nerves and ligaments
are in a natural body.

The Arguments used in this Chapter for love are many: As

First, That love is a stream issuing from no less glorious fountain then God
himself is.

Secondly, That it is a demonstration of our spiritual Nativity, That we are
born of God.

Thirdly, From the Nature of God, He is love, viz. Originally and Causally,
which he proves by a clear and unparalled manifestation of it, He gave us
his only begotten Son; which love he also amplifieth by the removal of any
impulsive cause on our part, it was not because we loved him first; and withal
he gives a reason, why a natural man loves not God, because he sees him not.
The disputes about the Vision of the Essence of God, and that by corporal eyes,
is wholly impertinent to this place, for the Greek word is (...), and
signifies a contemplation and constant beholding of the beauty and luster of
Gods Attributes, his Wisdom, Holiness, but especially his Love to us in
Christ, all which does kindle love in us again. And from this beholding of God
does arise that near union with God, which is Gods dwelling in us, and we in
him. All which the Apostle makes manifest to us by the effect, viz. by the
Spirit, of which he has given us. It is needless to trouble you with the
several acceptions of the word Spirit; It is enough to know, That by Spirit is
not meant the essence of the Spirit, for that is impartible; nor of any
immediate testimony of the Spirit, as the phrase will imply, He has given us
of his Spirit, which denotes some effects of the Spirit, and of effects, not
the common effects, for they are not a sure Argument of Gods dwelling in us,
and we in him; it remains therefore that it be understood of the gracious
works of Gods Spirit, whereby in all our duties we are lifted up by Gods Spirit
to do them in an higher manner, then natural strength could enable us unto: so
that the Observation is,

The spiritual performing of holy duties, is a sure sign and demonstration of
our being Observe.
in God. and God in us.

Thus the same Apostle 1 John 3. 24. for as miracles did truly demonstrate
those that did them, to be endued with the power of Gods Spirit from above, and
they wrought miracles to confirm men in this belief, that they were sent of
God; Thus the spiritual doing of those things required of thee, are a kind of
miracles to confirm thy soul, that thou art of God. And as actual discourse and
laughter do infallibly prove a rational life, because these actions transcend a
sensitive life; so do spiritual praying, hearing, etc. evidence a spiritual
life, because of their transcendency.

For the opening of this point, which is necessary (and the want of which Paul
did so greatly bewail in the Corinthians, I could not speak unto you as unto
spiritual, but as carnal) take notice of these things by way of a foundation.

First, As in natural things there is a sensitive soul above the vegetative,
and a rational above the sensitive, so (with more disproportion) there is a
spiritual life vouchsafed by the holy Ghost above a rational. Insomuch that
take the most rational man, that is endued with all intellectual abilities and
moral perfections; so that he be Ultimus conatus naturae, as one said of
Aristotle, yet he is no more able to do any thing spiritually, or to apprehend
what are those spiritual operations, then a worm can comprehend the reason of
the most wise men. Thus Paul says, The natural man perceives not the things
of God, (...), that is, one who does excolere animam, mind the polishing and
dressing of his soul, such as Plato and Seneca. Now howsoever profane men mock
at the word Spirit, and the works thereof, yet that there is such an immediate
participation of the holy Ghost in the operations thereof, the Scripture does
abundantly testify, John 3. 6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and
that which is born of the spirit is spirit, where our Savior makes such a
spiritual birth absolutely necessary to salvation, and shows two contrary
kinds of sin, one carnal, abiding in the condition they were born in, the
other spiritual, made so by God; and the Apostle in both places uses the
abstract for the concrete, for more efficacy. This afterward he calls, Being
born of the Spirit. So that as a man born of a man, has indolem humanam, is
and does more then a beast: so he that is born of the Spirit, has indolem
divinam, and does more then a man. Indeed our Savior makes the original of
this spiritual being unknown to us, which he expresses by a comparison from
the wind, or as Maldonat will have it from the soul of a man, which we do not
perceive infused into us, or how we come by it; so in this great work of Gods
Spirit, Motum sentimus, modum nescimus; God breathed into Adam a natural life,
and a soul, but this is a great mercy which God does for his people. And
because the spiritual being and working is of such important consequence, you
may observe the Scripture in other places diligently inculcating of it.
Therefore observe them diligently, whether you find such things in you or no,
for notwithstanding all parts and religious duties, if the Spirit of God dwell
not and work in you, you are no more a true member of Christ, then an Ape is a
man. Romans 8. 1, 5, 6, 9, 13, 14. where the Apostle speaking of the glorious
benefit of Justification, See to whom he appropriateth it, To those who walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, whereupon he is industrious to make
a difference between the one and the other; and he uses several descriptions,
(...), Who are after the Spirit, which he explaineth by being spiritually
minded: (...) denotes not only acts of the understanding, but chiefly of the
will and affections; it seems to answer the Hebrew word Jetzer, The
imaginations or frame of the heart. So that as the imagination and frame of a
carnal heart is wholly upon things of the flesh: Thus the affections,
imaginations, designs and purposes of a spiritual man, are upon spiritual
things. As the Apostle calls them (...), so verse. 9. (...), Those that are in
the Spirit, that is, Possessed of the Spirit, as if the holy Ghost were as
wonderful in gracious operations upon the heart of man; as in those
prophetical and extatical Afflatusses, for they were said at those times, To be
in the Spirit, and the Grecians call such (...); it is a similitude, says
Grotius, taken from those who are guarded on every side by keepers, and are
wholly under their power; so mighty and efficacious is Gods Spirit in
believers; and (by the way observe) this is called promiscuously, The Spirit of
God, The Spirit of Christ, The Spirit of the Father, and that dwelling in us,
which does prove the holy Ghost to be a person, not a mere virtue and force, or
power from God, as some heretics of old would have it; and a person that is
one in the Trinity, not the chiefest of the created Angels, as one of late
would blasphemously maintain. In Adam, the holy Ghost wrought his holiness, as
the third Person in the Godhead; but now he works grace in us by another
economy or dispensation, as the Spirit of the Father, and of Christ. And that
all this operation of Gods Spirit may not be rejected as a fancy, he says, He
dwells in us as in his Temple, which denotes a fixed permanency, and abiding in
us; It is true, the godly dispute, Whether a godly man be made partaker of the
graces of Gods Spirit only, or besides these of the Spirit it self? The learned
differ herein, but certainly these expressions do infer, That the godly do
not only receive the graces of Gods Spirit, but the Spirit also it self, only
how to explain this, seems to me very difficult, if not impossible.

Secondly, As the Spirit of God does thus dwell in his children, and thereby
they The godly led by the Spirit.
have an habitual, supernatural, spiritual being, so is the same Spirit acting,
leading and moving of them unto those things that are holy. Hence the godly are
said to be led by the Spirit, Romans 8. Gal. 5. which does not denote the first
enlivening of us; in which sense the poet said, Men's agitat molem, but a
powerful continual inclination of our hearts unto those things that are
spiritual; and this denotes that even in the progress of Sanctification, we
need a continual help and influence from Gods Spirit, according to that of
Augustine, Et agis and ageris, and tunc been agis, si a bono agaris, and when
we obey these conducts of Gods Spirit, We are said to walk in the Spirit. Thus
Gal. 5. 24. Living in the Spirit, and walking in the Spirit, are distinguished
as the cause and the effect; we therefore walk in the Spirit, because we live
in it, and the Greek word (...) does import a careful, orderly, methodical
walking; A spiritual walking is a methodical walking; so then, as original
sin by the Scripture is described to be in us, not as a sluggish idle
quality, but as always working, as a fountain always streaming, insomuch that
though it be not peccatum actuale, yet it is actuosum; Thus the Spirit of God
does powerfully send forth virtue and strength unto those in whom he Two
Corollaries. To have the Spirit is more then to be an honest civil man.
dwells.

Now from these two laid together, two Corollaries issue,

First, That to have the Spirit of God in the Scripture sense, is more then to
be a moral, honest, civil man. This is no more a testimony that we are of God,
then any baser metal can plead it self to be gold, because of some common
accidents therewith, and therefore their morality, intellectual perfections are
altogether fleshly; for so it is good to know that as Spirit differs from
Spirit, one spiritual man from another, as one Star differs from another in
glory, insomuch that one would wonder how the same heaven should at last
receive men so different: so one carnal man differs from another carnal man,
as much as a garden from a dunghill, and one would wonder that the same hell
should be at last the same receptacle of so different conversations. Corruption
is not only in gross actions, but in the mind and understanding of a man, yea
the more glorious it appears to be many times, it is the more carnal; As you
see the Devils are called unclean spirits, who yet are not guilty of gross
bodily sins. Oh therefore that you would consider, there is an higher and
more glorious way of living then that which most attain unto: Christianity
stamped upon a mere civil man, destitute of Gods Spirit, is but like the Kings
Picture upon a brass shilling, as long as the materials are counterfeit, the
superscription will not advantage. Baptism, Christianity, and all other
glorious superscriptions put upon thee abiding in a moral estate, is no
advantage for heaven; there must be power from Gods Spirit in thee.

A second Corollary is, That the gracious and sanctifying works of Gods Spirit,
2. Gracious and sanctifying works of the Spirit only a^e a sign of our being
godly (...) common gifts.
are only a testimony of being in God, not those common gifts of his Spirit,
such as parts, abilities, assistance and enlargements in Duties, no nor
Prophecies and Revelations, if such were to be had. These indeed men most covet
after, as accompanied with more applause and admiration; but it is better to
speak one word with the grace of Gods Spirit, then ten thousand with the mere
gift of his Spirit. One would wonder indeed, why God should distribute such
glorious gifts to those, whom he does not love to eternal life; but his ways
are always just, though sometimes unknown to us; yea there are other workings
of Gods Spirit that come nearer to sanctification, and yet are not it. Such
are, some sorrow about sin, some illumination in judgment, some joy and
delight in the Ordinances, yet these argue only Gods Spirit working in us, not
dwelling in us. And these operations are only transient not permanent; and it
is a good rule of Bonaventures, Illa tantum dicuntur esse in anima, quae sunt
in ea per modum quietis, caetera sunt magis ab anima, quam in anima. Those
things are properly in the soul which are in it by way of rest, and center in
it. Yea hence it is (which is much to be observed) that all those operations of
Gods Spirit in an unregenerate man, whether of the former or latter sort, they
are provocative or excitative of the flesh only in a man. Thus Judas by all
those gifts of Gods Spirit to him, was made more fleshly. A temporary believer
by all his faith and joy is made more fleshly; for hereby he grows more
confident in himself, less poor in his Spirit, and so less perceiving the
need of Christ, and his grace, by which he is more settled in a carnal way.
Therefore observe, whether all thy assistance, enlargements, transient motions
of Gods Spirit, have not this event in thee, to make thee carnal and corrupt in
a refined manner.

In the next place, Let us consider in what way this spirituality is
manifested. Wherein spirituality in duty is manifested, and how it is a sign. 1.
And

First, The nature of them is different from all mere humane actions. The acts
of faith, love, and other graces, are above the whole sphere and power of
nature; Jannes and Jambres were able to do some wonderful things, as well as
Moses, but there were others again, in which they had no power at all. Thus
there are many humane actions of prudence and justice, that make men very
lovely and admirable in the eyes of others; but then there are other actions,
such as the operations of habitual graces, and to this they can no more reach,
then a dwarf can touch the heavens. Hence the Scripture sometimes adds the
word Spirit, when it would difference grace from humane actions, 2 Cor. 4. 13.
Having the same Spirit of faith, Ephesians. 6. 18. Supplication in the Spirit.
Phil. 3. 3. Which worship God in the Spirit. Col. 1. 18. Your love in the
Spirit. Now this addition [in the Spirit] imlieth that there are many actions
that are done by us, but unless they be performed in the Spirit, they come
short of that divine and excellent nature, which God looks at. Gratia non
tollit, sed attollit naturam, Grace does not destroy the natural faculties and
actions of the soul, but it elevateth or sublimateth them to a more noble
consideration; and this is the reason why a natural man can do nothing that is
truly and theologically good, because of the transcendent excellency of it is
nature, but this is hardly discerned; and if there be many, yea most things in
nature, whose essence we perceive not, it is no wonder if we be so dull in
supernatural.

Secondly, Spiritual actions are discovered by the fountain from whence they
flow, 2.
A spiritual principle, which the Scripture calls a divine nature, yea the life
of God. As Isaac is called A child of the promise, because he was born by the
mere word and power of God, Sarahs womb being a dead womb; Thus also all godly
actions, are actions of the promise, having their existence merely by that,
man's natural power being altogether a dead womb. And this also can little help
as a sign, because the root of our actions, like those of trees, lies under
ground, and is so undiscerned.

Therefore thirdly, In spiritual actions, those motives and ends that are
attractive 3.
are spiritual. Every action is specified by the formality of the object, and
so religious actions they are spiritual, when the reason or motive of doing
them is spiritual. Hence they are called Virgins, and they follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes. This is that godly simplicity Paul speaks of in
himself, whereby, as of God, and to God he did all things. For want of this,
God by the Prophet rejects the humiliations and fastings the Jews did, which
yet were specious enough, because they did it not to him, even to him; and this
is a sign that may by the help of Gods Spirit be discerned in us. For as the
voluptuous man is carried out to sinful pleasures, because of the sweetness in
them; or as a rational man is desirous to find out truth, because truth is a
pleasing connatural object to his understanding; so is a spiritual man
inclining to all spiritual objects, because of those spiritual considerations
that are therein. Delicata anima quasi abominatur, per modum commodi vel
praemii diligere Deum. Now in all religious duties there are many spiritual
attractives, such as the command of God, enjoying of, and communion with him,
the light of Gods countenance and increase of grace. Go therefore and examine
thy own self, What is the loadstone in all holy Duties? What is the mark thou
aimest at? It is the intention that is the pulse to feel how thy heart is.

Fourthly, Spirituality is discerned by the manner. Where the Spirit of God is 4
there is zeal, fervency, activity. So that a formal, customary, superficial
performing of holy duties is extremely opposite to a spiritual deportment in
them. Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus sanctus. Hence it was that it appeared in
fire, and in a mighty rushing wind. Thus Stephen and others are said to be
full of the holy Ghost, when there was strong and powerful workings of grace in
them. Elias was a man of fire and zeal for God, and God gave him a suitable
reward, He was carried to heaven in a fiery chariot, as a conqueror triumphing
over all enemies. This the Apostle speaks of, when Romans 7. 6. he speaks of
the oldnesse of the letter, and the newness of Spirit. It is an excellent
expression, and an happy frame of heart, though some of late have abused that
phrase to dangerous errors. Hence the Scripture in an Hebraism calls the
excellency and efficacy of a thing, The Spirit of it; As the Spirit of wisdom,
The Spirit of understanding, The Spirit of meekness. As the body without the
soul is dead, so is a man's spirit without Gods Spirit in any duty. Oh think of
this, you who spend your days in an empty formal way of Religion; call as God
by the Prophet does, Come, O wind, and cause these dry bones to gather
together and live. Cry as the Church does, Arise, O North, and blow, O South,
upon our Gardens, that our spices may smell; How few spiritual Christians? How
few spiritual Duties, public or private are there? The ship of thy soul brings
home no rich traffic, because it wants this wind. Not that a man who finds
himself dead and cold, without the effectual power of Gods Spirit, should
neglect Prayer and other Duties, till the Spirit breathe on him, as some have
perniciously taught. For our Savior Matthew. 7. supposes that we are to pray
for the Spirit; and David, how often does he pray, That God would quicken him?
But truly such is the coldness, emptiness, that now all Religion is fallen
into, that if ever one might desire a Sermon to be clothed with as much dread
and terror as the promulgation of the Law was, it might be desired in this
point. Till therefore thou eject those spirits that are so contrary to Gods
Spirit, as the Spirit of the world especially, never look to take any comfort
by thy Religion.

Fifthly, Lest this Spirit should be a delusion, therefore in the next place,
The 5.
workings of Gods Spirit are orderly, not inordinate, but exactly to the Rule.
I build this particular on the Greek word, Gal. 5. 25. If we live in the
Spirit, let us walk by the Spirit, that is as the word implies, orderly,
methodically, as when it is said, As many as shall walk by this canon or rule,
Peace be on them. The Spirit of God puts a man upon nothing that is against
the principles of nature and sound reason, nor against the word of God; but
verbum est vehiculum spiritus, the word is that fiery chariot in which the
Spirit of God comes. When the Apostle in the Chapter before, verse. ult. had
given us this as a sign of our being in God, that we have of his Spirit,
presently he adds, Believe not every Spirit. Whosoever pretends operations,
instincts and revelations from the Spirit for duties not justifiable by the
Word, sets up a false and unholy spirit, for the pure and holy Spirit of God:
But of this more largely in the false signs. All the motions and operations of
Gods Spirit are soft, quiet, ordered and consonant to Gods word.

Sixthly, Where spiritual operations are, there is a free and spontaneous
inclination 6.
unto the duties God requires. As there is in an hungry man to eat, and a
thirsty man to drink. Gal. 5. 18. If ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under
the Law. The Apostle means not the Antinomian sense, as if they needed not
the Law to direct, guide and excite them, for he presses with commands in the
same Chapter to mortify sin; and they may as well deny the use of the whole
Scripture, as the Law in that sense, for all the word of God is a rule and a
guide; but he speaks of the terrifying threatening and extorting power of the
Law, whereby a man does that which is good with the same Spirit, as the
Israelites made brick under Pharoahs oppression; of this the Apostle speaks,
and that so far as they are regenerate, for the unregenerate part finds the
Law a Pharaoh to it, commanding brick and giving no straw, injoining work and
giving no strength. Therefore where the Spirit of God is, there they are a
willing people, yea willingnesses, as Psa. 110. in the plural number, and
abstract it self. And so again, Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty.

Lastly, Where the Spirit of God thus works, there are strong oppositions and
combats 7.
by the flesh and unregenerate part. Gal. 5. And this opposition is not of the
inferior appetite to the understanding, but of every sanctified part to the
unsanctified part in the same faculty, an holy regenerate will against the
unholy unregenerate will; Therefore it is a great falsehood of the Hemisnites,
that say, Its impossible for the same will to be at the same time good and bad
in part, therefore they say, It is successively good or bad, and so by this
consequence a man may have a regenerate and unregenerate will successively a
thousand times in a day. But of this combat we have spoken already.

Use of Exhortation, Not to rest in any Naturals, Morals or Intellectuals, but
Use.
to breathe after Spirituals. As the body of a man is first Natural, and then
by the resurrection it will be made glorious; so it is with the soul. If
therefore you take all your ingenuous and lovely perfections, which you have by
education or restraining grace for true saving grace, you take John Baptist (as
it were) for Christ. Be therefore in the number of spiritual ones; Moral
Philosophy, the Lectures of Socrates and other Heathens, have put a man upon an
external Reformation, but Gods word only is the instrument to convey his Spirit
into our hearts.

SERMON XVIII.
Love to the Godly is a Sign of Grace.

1 JOHN 3. 18. (...) We know that we have passed from death to life, because we
love the Brethren.
THe Apostle John in this Epistle does much press the Grace and Duty of Love,
as the fire that ought to be on the Altar of our hearts, for every Sacrifice
toward God or man; not only the Holy of Holies, and the most inward parts of
the Temple were covered with gold, but the Pavements and Outworks also. Thus
all our actions whether toward God or man ought to be done in love.

At the 11th verse of this Chapter, he commends this duty from the Antiquity of
it, it is the Commandment they heard from the beginning; which is illustrated
from a contrary example of Cain, described from his original, He was of that
wicked one; and from his actuals, He slew his brother; and this is amplified
from the impulsive cause or motive of this his horrid wickedness, He slew him,
because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous. Semper aliena
virtus formidolosa est, said Tacitus. In Genesis 4. we have the occasion of Cains
envy, God had respect to Abel and not to Cain, which as most judge, was by some
extraordinary testimony that God gave to Abels Sacrifice, as the Apostle
emphatically expresses it with an Article Heb. 11. 4. (...), it is generally
judged by fire suddenly falling from heaven (as God did at other times)
therefore the word to have respect is translated by Theodotion, (...),
Inflammavit Deus super Abel; but why Abels Sacrifice was better then Cains is
also questioned; Paul Heb. 11. says, Abel offered by faith, (...) a better
Sacrifice, which some refer to the Quantity, as if Cain took the refuse, and
Abel offered the best. Some to the Quality, He offered in faith, and the other
not. A learned man Clop. de Sacrific. thinks that Cain offered only an
Eucharistical Sacrifice of fruit of the ground, and so did not beg for pardon
of sin; but Abel offered an Hilastical Sacrifice by way of expiation, whereby
through Christ he prayed for pardon, and therefore was accepted, so that he
resembles Cain to the Pharisee, that only gave thanks to God, and Abel to the
Publican, who humbled himself, supplicating for pardon, And so went away
justified rather then the other.

Hereupon because every Abel will have a Cain (as the Fathers proverbial speech
is) verse. 13. he comforts the godly against their afflicted condition. It is no
wonder if the world hate that which is of heaven; and ver. 14. he returns to
another argument for this gracious Love, and that is from the profitable
effect, it is a sign we have passed from death to life.

In the words, you have two Propositions;

First, That the godly even in this life are already passed from death to life.
Some render the Greek word translated, and thereupon Estius observes, because
we are passive in this privilege, that it is not to be attributed to our
merits, but to the grace of God: Now the Apostle uses the Preterperfect tense,
and not the Present, because of the certainty of it, and his right to it, Qui
jus ad rem habet, rem ipsam habere videtur, says the Lawyer; you have the like
expression John 5. 24. By this life some understand the life of grace, and by
death, the death of sin, as if the love of the Brethren were a sign of our
being in the state of grace, and then there is good reason for using the
Preterperfect tense. But although this may be part, yet it does not comprehend
all, for eternal life, and glory is also included herein.

The second Proposition is, That Love of the Brethren is that sign and mark
whereby we know assuredly, that we are in this happy estate; so that our love
is no merit or cause, but a sign only; hence it is good to observe, that this
very self-same privilege of passing from death to life, is attributed to
faith, Joh. 5. 24. but in a different sense to faith, as that instrumental
cause, which puts us into such a condition, to love as an effect or sign only;
for though love uniteth us to Christ as well as faith, yet faith does it Intus
recipiendo, by inward receiving of Christ to us, love extra agendo, by going
out in our works for him; Hence the union by love is posterior to that of
faith; Hence also it is that if love should justify, the dignity of it would
arise from the act of love, because it is union consists in doing something out
of us, but in faiths union, the dignity is wholly from the object, viz. Christ
embraced, because this union is by inward reception and application.

That love of the brethren is a sign of true grace. Observe.


As the Apostle makes it here a sign to our selves, so in other places to
others, Hereby shall all men know ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another;
he does not say, If ye work miracles, if ye cast out devils, but if ye love.
Hence the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 7. bids them add to Godliness, brotherly
kindness. As if we could not have any true comfort from all our religious
duties toward God, unless this also be added to it, or with it, for so (...)
is used for cum, as the Hebrew (...) is sometimes.

To open this duty of love to the Brethren three things are considerable, which
we shall speak to, 1. The Act it self, Love. 2. The Object, Our Brethren. And
3. The Effects.

First therefore, This love we speak of, is not a flower growing in Natures
garden, 1. Of love.
we naturally love our parents, our children, but not so the godly, hence love
is made the fruit of the Spirit; To love a man, because of the image of God in
him, because he is holy, is wrought only by Gods Spirit. Naturally we hate 1.
To love a godly man because of the Image of God in him.
God, because he is an holy God, his Law, because it is an holy Law, and his
children, because they are an holy people. Hence the Schoolmen say, That love
to God and to our neighbor, because of God, are not two acts of love, no more
then the will of the end by means, is a twofold act of the will; and this
appears by the command Matthew. 19. 37. where we are commanded to love God with
all our might, all we have and can do, and yet our neighbor also, which could
not be if our love to another in subordination to God be not considered, as the
same with the act of loving God; and this is much more true in loving of a
godly man, whom we do love, not only because of Gods command, and for God (as
we ought to do all men) but because of God in him, his image there, in which
sense Hierom said, he did Diligere Christum habitantem in Augustino. There is a
rule out of Aristotle, Idemest motus animae in imaginem and rem. It is the same
motion whereby the soul is carried to the image or species of a thing, and the
thing it self, as we see it in the acts of the understanding and of the senses,
which rule Aquinas, and other Papists wretchedly abuse, to prove the same
religious worship both in kind and degree, to be given unto the image of God,
and God himself but in our instance it is true, when we love God himself, and a
godly man, because of Gods image in him, this is the same act or motion of the
soul, and arises from the same habit of grace, and therefore does this Apostle
argue necessarily from the position of the one to the position of the other,
and the negation of one to the negation of the other, he that does not love his
brother, loves not God, according to the rule of the Hebrews, Qui amat supra
amat infra. We are not then speaking of a love, which comes by the power of
free will, but of a grace infused into us by Gods Spirit, which as it is
supernatural in it is original, so also in it is operations and motives; The
effects are supernatural, busying and emptying themselves in industry about
their souls; and their ends also, because they see Gods likeness in them.

Secondly, This love is not verbal or complemental, such as that of the world,
2. It is not verbal but an inward deep affectionate grace.
which has great veins, but little blood in them, but it is a most inward deep
affectionate grace, moving all the bowels within. Thus Romans 12. Be kindly
affectionated to one another in love, (...), does imply an inward rooted
inclination, such as is in mothers to their tender infants. There are those who
seem to love godly men, but it is when the times favor them, if there be any
benign constellations for such, then they respect them, otherwise in their
heart and inclinations they can no ways endure those that are godly. When
therefore we speak of loving godly men, we mean not a fair loving carriage, a
kind behavior toward them, which makes thee far from all railing or
opposing of them, but such an affection as is rooted in thy heart.

Secondly, In respect of the object, Brethren, this is included,

1. That this love be to them, because they are brethren. We may love godly men
II. The object of our love the Brethren. 1. Because they are Brethren.
for other respects then their godliness, because they may be wise men,
learned men, potent men in the Kingdom, or men that have loved us, and showed
us much kindness, but this is nothing of grace, here is only nature all the
while. Hence the Apostle Peter says, Love the brotherhood in the Abstract,
because it is the brotherhood. The Wasps fly about the Tradesmans shop, not
out of love to him, but the honey and fruit that is there. The Crows and
Vultures sit by the dying beast, not because they love it, but for themselves.
Thus godly men may be loved for carnal ends and advantages, and no wonder at
this, seeing such a mercenary and hypocritical love may be proffered to God
himself, as we see in the hypocrites of Israel.

2. As to the brethren, because godly, so the more godly the more we love them;
For as the covetous man, the more wealth increases the more he loves it; And
2. The more godly the more we love them.
the voluptuous man, the more sweetness and delight in lusts, the more greedy
is he of them; thus it is here, he loves all the godly, but those that most
excel in the purity, power and practice of it, he loves them most, Sicut se
habet simpliciter ad simpliciter, ita magis ad magis, if godliness be the
reason why we love, then the more godliness, the more love. And this is much
to be observed, because it discovers much hypocrisy in many men, who fancy to
themselves that they love godliness in the Idea, in the notion, but when it
comes to be practiced by wife, children or neighbors, then they cannot endure
it. As also those, who love godly men in low principles, not walking so exactly
and accurately as they ought, better then the godly with high principles, that
are always putting on to more godliness.

3. It implies we love all godly men, for so that phrase in the Abstract, Love
the 3. We must love all godly men.
Brotherhood, supposes, that is, Take every godly man, rich as well as poor,
despised as well as honored, low and base as well as high and esteemed, thou
do love all of them. It may be thy love is restrained to love godly men
only, that are of thy constitution, condition or opinion; but then there are
others upon whom thou castest no favorable aspect at all. The Apostle James
does much condemn that practice of differencing the poor godly from the rich,
Jam. 2. 1, 2. where the Apostle does not absolutely prohibit a civil
differencing of men in place from others, but when it is done with an humane
respect, immoderately regarding wealth more then godliness, and when it is done
to the contempt and disgrace, or discouragement of the godly poor; hence he
bids them consider that though they be poor, yet God has chosen them rich in
faith: Now this carnal respect of persons the Apostle makes a great sin, both
because hereby he says, They become judges of evil thoughts, that is, these
thoughts of theirs in judging thus are wicked and sinful, and partly because
hereby the name of God is blasphemed; hence verse. 1. he calls Christ, The Lord
of glory, implying, that those things which are godly and gracious should be
glorious to us. So then as hatred of sin is totius speciei, we hate every kind
of sin; so is love of the Brethren, of all Brethren, making no difference in
this respect. Indeed there is a love of familiarity which we may show more to
one godly man then another; thus Christ loved John more then the other
Disciples; but we speak of a gracious love; and in this we ought not to attend
to humane respects but evangelical merely; Therefore the Apostle calls it (...),
that is, when we in judging look to something else then the merits of the
person, or the cause. This we are all apt and very prone unto; See we therefore
that in Gospel-love we attend only to Gospelconsiderations.

In the next place, Consider the effects by which this love to the godly
discovers it self. III. The Effect, of this love. 1. Not to be ashamed to own
them as Brethren in persecution.


And 1. By not being ashamed to own them as Brethren, and join with them in the
times of persecution. The Church of God has had many Swallow-friends that will
stay with her no longer then Summer; our Savior foreseeing this proneness to
Apostasy, antidoteth against it, He that is ashamed of me in the midst of a
crooked generation, of him my Father also will be ashamed before the Angels.
The world that is full of scorns and reproaches, The holy Brethren, The holy
Sisters, now men are through their pride and corruption ashamed of such ways.
This argues thou have no love to them. It was observed by the Heathens how the
Primitive Christians loved one another, Ecce quam se mutuo diligunt and fratres
se vocant! Now then as it is noted of God, Heb. 11. that he was not ashamed to
be the God of believers; thus also may we observe of thee, thou art not ashamed
to be called one of the believers; Thy speech, conversation, whole deportment
shall betray thee to be one that follows Christ. It Is observed by some, That
there were but few hypocrites comparatively in the first Plantation of the
Churches by Christ and his Apostles, because there was such certain and present
danger to all those that embraced their way, and no advantage at all to carnal
considerations, yet for all that some hypocrites there were. It was a weakness
in Nicodemus, who came to Jesus by night, he dared not publicly own him,
because of the Jews. Examine therefore thy self, if thou love the godly, then
this will appear when godliness is the only scorned, reproached and
persecuted way that is. It is strange to observe how godliness in the power of
it does diminish respect in the world, Bonus vir Caius and prudens, nisi quod
Christianus, A learned man, a wise man, a good man, but only too precise, too
puritanical, enclining too much to strictness. If it were an Heathen that
derideth all Christianity that says thus, it would be no wonder; but for a
Christian, who by his profession is engaged to all this practice of holiness,
it is unsufferable; if we may have too much godliness, then too much of heaven
and happiness.

Secondly, By rejoicing and delighting in other men's godliness and abilities
whereby 2. By rejoicing in other men's godliness, though thou art despised.
the Kingdom of God is advanced, though it be an umbrage and over shadowing of
all our glory, though we be laid aside and accounted as no body. As in the
sweetest fruit sometimes worms do grow; so in the choicest Christians there
will be envies, emulations and repinings at one another excellencies. Thus the
Disciples of Christ did twice strive about greatness, John's Disciples muttered
because all run after Christ; but how graciously does John deal with them, I
must decrease and he increase. So that this love of the Brethren is a more
spiritual and difficult work then we are aware off. Thou love a godly man
that lives remote from thee, but how art thou to one that is thy neighbor of
the same profession and calling? now it may be the eminency of his graces and
worth carries away the esteem and repute from thee, Can thou for all this
rejoice in his graces and abilities, praise God for him, and so that his glory
be advanced, thou carest not though God lay thee aside, as a broken vessel?
This is a good symptom of grace. Oh (Beloved) if we consider the jealousies,
heart-burnings, contentions, envyings, strifes that are among the godly, Does
not this demonstrate that they are in a great measure carnal? Are not most of
these contentions from the flesh, who shall have most power, whose way shall
have most followers and admirers? Whereas true love to godliness manifests
it self in this, that it rejoices in the graces of others, praises God for
them. It is an high sin to make godliness a faction, a party, as that
whereby I will have carnal advantages. The Apostle contradicts this, when he
says, We know no man, no not Christ himself after the flesh. By reason of this
self-pleasing it is that at last we enclose godliness, and monopolize it to
our own selves, that none shall be godly but those in our way. Thus the
Donatists would call no men Christians but themselves. Thus Tertullian, when he
turned Montanist, pretending to Revelations of the Spirit, wrote a book against
the Orthodox, which he called Adversus Psychicos, as if they all were but
carnal, and natural men. Thus many rigid Lutherans dispute the Question,
Whether Calvinists may be reckoned as Brethren, and they determine negatively.
Take we heed therefore, how we envy the graces of others that overtop us.
Augustine thought this to be the sin against the holy Ghost, or very near.
But it cannot be so, because we have instances even of some godly men who have
been tainted this way. It is an hard thing not to look upon godliness and the
truths of God, as ours, more then as Gods, which does breed carnal and humane
dispositions in us. Know therefore that so far as thou enviest and grudgest
at the excellency of another godliness overtopping thee so far, thou have no
love to the Brethren.

Thirdly, This love to the Brethren is manifested by the contrary, viz. A zeal
3. This love to the godly is manifested by a zeal against sinners.
against sinners, an impatiency and holy grief at the wickedness of others.
That as the Apostle says Cain hated Abel, because his own works were evil, and
Abels good, so a godly Abel is grieved at the conversation of the wicked,
because his own are good, and the others evil. Thus a godly man is described by
this Character, Psalm. 35. 4. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he
honors those that fear the Lord. You have a notable instance of this in Lot,
2 Pet. 2. 8. where righteous Lot is said to vex his soul by hearing and seeing
the wicked Sodomites. The Greek word signifies to torment his soul, and it is
used of the damned in hell. There is also an emphasis in the phrase, his soul,
he does not say himself, but his soul, as if a sword had pierced. Thus God
says, His soul shall have no pleasure in the backeslider, when he would
express his great abhorring of such an one. Further this torment is amplified
in the instruments by which, both in seeing and hearing. Lot was among the
Sodomites as the Dove among Hawks, a Sheep among Wolves, a rose among thorns, a
bright Star in a dark night; and this did so much afflict him, that August.
in praef. Psalm. 69 calls this a persecution, and says, The evil deeds of the
Sodomites were a persecution of Lot. Hereupon the same Father proves, That the
persecutions of godly men's souls by wicked scandals, is worse then that of
Tyrants killing the bodies. And Bernard speaks excellently to this purpose of
the Churches bitterness, Amara prius fuit in nece Martyrum, amarior postea in
conflictu haereticorum, sed amarissima in moribus domesticorum. Try thy love to
the godly, by thy grief and trouble that comes to thee, through the
wickedness of others; for seeing by their evil deeds, God is so much
dishonored, how can it be but that with David, Rivers of water should run
down thy eyes, because men keep not Gods Law? and David said, He hated those
who hated God with a perfect hatred, that is, a full, absolute, irreconcilable
hatred, which is to be understood of their will not their persons.

Fourthly, This emptieth it self in doing and procuring all spiritual good to
them. 4. In doing and procuring all spiritual good to them.
To love is to will good to another, that is, their proper, convenient good.
Thus to love the Brethren is to pray much for them, to be diligent in the
exhorting and provoking of one another to good; for of such a love and hatred
which regards spiritual things, the Apostle speaks, as by his instance in
Cains hatred appears, which was from a spiritual consideration, Prove. 27. 17.
As iron sharpneth iron, etc. so a man sharpneth the countenance of his friend,
that is, as the instrument which is rusty, or edge dulled, is made serviceable
by the file; so is one godly man quickened up by another. The Church is compared
to a flock of sheep, whereof every one brought twins, that is, their
fruitfulness, and verse. 9. in the same Chapter, Christian love is compared to
Ointment and Perfume, which has much sweetness and strengthening in it; yea
reproof is sometimes necessary, as David witnesses, when he said, Let the
righteous smite me, and it shall be better then oil: yea this love is so far
commanded that sometimes it is our duty to lay down our lives for the Brethren.

Lastly, This is seen in bearing their burdens, and forbearing their
infirmities; 5. In bearing their burdens and forbearing their infirmities.
Bearing their burdens; hence as members of the same body they are to weep with
those that weep, and rejoice with those that rejoice. They are to be like the
strings of an instrument, touch one, and they all sound; And forbearing
infirmities, Gal. 6. 1. Ye that are spiritual restore such an one; The word
signifies, Set him in joint again, as if a godly man overtaken by sin should
cause as much grief to the whole body, as a dis-jointed member uses to do; So
that to love the Brethren (if all things be considered) is a choice and
difficult sign of grace; it is not every one that is thus affected. Now here is
a proper Question, Whether if Brethren be fallen into heresies and wicked
errors, it be not against the love of brethren, to set against them, to
endeavor the suppression of them? And certainly the matter may be so carried,
as thou may discover not only an hatred of their errors, but their
godliness also; again it may be so, that thou may most of all discover thy
love to their godliness, only hatred to their false doctrines: but this is a
large field, and many things are to be said to it, else we cannot give full
satisfaction to the Point.

Now to all this there is an Objection made, Love of the Brethren, say they,
Object.
cannot be a sign of grace, because if it be true love it must have all those
properties described, 1 Cor. 13. Charity suffers long, envieth not, etc. Now
who does not find some envyings, some impatiencies?

The Answer is easy. We are not seeking for perfect signs, but true signs; and
if Answ.
we find true signs we may gather much comfort, though several defects cleave
to us. Will thou think there is no honey or milk in Canaan, because Jebusites
and wild beasts are left there?

But again they object, Every sect thinks their sect the true Brethren. Hence
the Papist loves a Papist, thinking him a true Brother, and so men may comfort
themselves with false signs.

The Answer is, True signs are indeed so, though men blinded and deceived are
seduced by counterfeit. A true Pearl is judged to be true by a skillful
Artificer, and he knows he is not deceived; though the unskilful takes much
counterfeit pearl for true; so a man awake is sure he is awake, although men in
a dream think themselves also awake, but are indeed deceived.

Lastly, They say, The Apostle speaks this love as it is a sign to others, not
to our selves.

Thus the Antinomian, and Estius to this purpose, The Apostle speaks (says
he) of the whole Church as it is a Society, not of every particular person. But
as the Apostle intends that every particular man should love the Brethren, so
he also makes this as an Argument, because hereby every man in particular may
be assured he is translated from death to life.

If love to the Brethren demonstrate our spiritual life, then hatred,
opposition, Use.
scoffs and reproaches of such, demonstrate the actors therein to be of the
devil. Oh how many Cains are there, that therefore hate and stomach others,
because their courses are contrary to their sins! There cannot be a surer
symptom of thy rotten, yea devilish heart, then to say, I could love such an
one, honor such an one, but I cannot abide his strictness. Like delights in
like. David's delight is in the Saints of the earth; if thine be in Swine and
Dogs who wallow in their vomit and mire, tremble at thy disposition; Can thou
say thou love God and hate his Image? that which resembles him here upon
the earth? The saying is, Noscitur ex socio, etc. You may know a man by those
he delights and rejoices in, and converseth with.

Use 2. To bewail the neglect of this even among the godly, How does this Use 2.
manifest that we have the faith of Christ in respect of persons? Do not abuse
godliness to make it an occasion of thy carnal pride, envy, or earthly
advantage? The Apostle therefore makes heresies and schisms the fruit of the
flesh, because these arise from carnal motives one way or other. Yet this is
not so to be urged, as if a prudent and godly Zeal were not to be urged against
the false doctrines of godly men; it is one thing to set against a man because
of his godliness, that is devilish; and another thing because of his
corruption, whether in practice or opinion. But love like Eliyah has left the
Church, and is carried up to heaven in a fiery Chariot.

SECT. III. A Discovery of many false or unsufficient Signs of Grace, which
carnal men support themselves with.
SERMON XIX.
Church Priviledges no Sign of Grace.

ROMANS 2. 28, 29. For he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, etc.
THe Apostle his scope is in this latter part of the Chapter to convince the
Jews that they are equally in a sinful and wretched condition with the
Gentiles, and therefore need Christ and Justification by his grace, as well as
they. And that he may the better awaken them herein, who were apt to dote upon
empty and vain privileges, he takes this method to cure them.

First, By way of concession, he reckons up the privileges they enjoyed, which
are diverse.

1. Thou art called a Jew; Whereas the people of Israel formerly were called
Israelites, after the captivity into Babylon they were called Jews, and in this
they gloried, as among us some do in the name Christian.

2. He is said to rest in the Law, viz. as given by God to that Nation, which
he had not done unto any other people, and he uses an emphaticall word; They
made the Law that to them which Christ should have been, a rest to their
wearied souls.

3. Thou make thy boast in God: The Prophet speaks of glorying in God as a
duty: but here it is a sin, for they boasted of him in a carnal, factious
way, as their God; Even as the Heathen boasted of their God, (or as the Turks
of Mahomet,) or as the Apostle of some Corinthians, who when others were for
Paul, others for Apollo, these were for Christ, that is, they set up Christ in
a way of party and faction against others.

4. The Jew did know Gods will, for to him it was revealed.

5. He discerned the things that were excellent, or profitable, or differentt,
or convenient, for all this the word will bear, if he was instructed out of the
Law, as it were catechized.

6. He was confident of being a guide to the blind, a light, an instructor, a
teacher, and that he had a form of the truth and knowledge of the law. The
Apostle does not take (...) in an ill sense, as in Timothy; for the Jew was not
confident that he had but a form only, but (...) is here as much as (...) in
another place, a method and way to inform others about the truth. Thus far is
the concession of their Privileges.

In the second place is the aggravation of their sin from these very
prerogatives, partly because they sin against knowledge and conviction,
partly because their circumcision and the like visible signs of Gods favor did
not at all profit without holiness, yea, an Heathen and a Jew without this
became both alike.

Hence in the third place he amplifieth this assertion by a distinction of a
Jew, and of circumcision, for it was the hardest Paradox and most offensive to
a Jewish ear, that could be, to say, circumcision did not profit: for they so
glo(...) in it, that they were wont to say, it was equal to all the
Commandments, and that heaven and earth could not stand if there were not
circumcision. The Apostles distinction is like an Axe laid to the root of the
tree, it takes away the foundation of all their glory. There is (says he) a
Jew outwardly, that has only circumcision of the flesh, and this is not really
and properly a Jew, he is not a Jew, nor is this circumcision says the
Apostle. 2. There is a Jew inwardly, a circumcision in the heart, in the
spirit, and this is a Jew, this is a circumcision, and his praise is of God,
not of man; God regards such only. Now this is also very applicable to the
times of the Gospel, he is not a Christian, that is one outwardly, nor is that
Baptism which is of the flesh but that which is inwardly and of the spirit. No
visible signs or duties in Christianity profit, if a man walk not according to
Gods Word.

Although men are very prone to rest upon Church Priviledges, and visible signs
or Doct. Church Priviledges no sign of grace. It Is a sin to trust in them as
signs.
duties therein, yet they are no testimonies or signs of the truth of grace.

This point deserves a lively discovery, because it is the only prop and
evidence of most Christians for heaven; And whereas in other things they would
judge a title without reality to be a miserable comfort, to be titularly rich,
and really poor. To have the name of health, and to be indeed diseased and
pained, herein they would judge it mockery; yet in religion they are strongly
contented to have the name and repute of Christians, baptized persons,
professors of Christ's doctrine, and yet know not the power of th^se things,
being like dead corpse with sweet flowers strewed upon them. Therefore to
explicate this necessary point consider some things by way of foundation.

As first, We find it such a sin that generally the people of Israel were
guilty of. The Jews generally guilty of this sin.
Insomuch that the great contestation between the Prophets in the Old Testament
and the Israelites living then, between Christ and his Apostles and the Jews
living then, to have been upon this very particular. No Minister, no Sermon,
could take them of^ from this, that because they had the external privileges,
therefore they did belong to God, and were the children of Abraham, Jer. 9. 25,
26. see how the Prophet reckons the Jews because uncircumcised in heart, among
the Moabites and Egyptians uncircumcised in flesh, and God would punish them
both alike: Now compare this with Ier. 7. 4. see how Paradoxall this was to the
Jews, they cried, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord are these.
They thought such visible symbols of Gods presence would preserve them, though
their lives were unreformed. Thus Isa. 1. The Prophets whole scope is to let
them know, that all their sacrifices and religious worship were but so much
detestable abomination unto God. Thus it was also in the New Testament, how
excellently does our Savior discover this point twice, Mat. 3. 9. Joh. 8 33.
where the Pharisees whole support was in their carnal privilege, and our
Savior shows notwithstanding all this, they were of their Father the devil.
Thus Gal. 5. Circumcision and uncircumcision, that is, the Jewish dispensation,
and the Gospel dispensation of Ordinances is made nothing, but a new creature;
and certainly if Christ himself be no more to be born after the flesh, much
less may any visible Ordinances which are not equal to Christ. Thus you see
it was the Jews sin.

But secondly, If you look over all Chrstianity, you shall find this the
Catholic and This is the Catholic sin.
universal sin: whereby Christ and regeneration with powerful godliness is
wholly neglected, and a fleshly carnal confidence in the titles and Ordinances
of Christianity established; so that all those expostulations which the
Prophets and Apostles had in those days may be justly revived again, seeing
those sins are revived: What circumcision, and sacrifices, and the Temple
were to the Jews; the same are baptism, the Lords Supper, and frequenting our
religious Assemblies: and as the Jews in the midst of all their duties, had
wholly laid aside Christ and sanctification, ^o have generally Christians now.
Thus as the Apostle argued severely, you that rest in circumcision, that rest
in the Law, you are fallen from Christ, you are ignorant of the spirit, the
same may be said to formal protestants, you have turned all
Gospel-dispensations into externals merely; and so are Christians of the flesh
and not of the spirit: Ye are of Agar and not of Sarah, ye are not children of
the Promise; Your being is not by the mere word and power of God, all power in
nature, being in this respect but a dead womb, but only by carnal and
external badges, Romans 9. 6, 7. see how admirably the Apostle discourses of
this in the Jews case, and applies it to Christians. Oh therefore take heed of
this epidemicall disease, be not dammed or trodden down in this crowd.

3. To demonstrate the connaturality of this sin, observe how ingenious the
fleshly How this sin has been encouraged by Arguments and erronecus opinions.
minds of men have been by arguments and opinions to encourage a carnal
confidence in these externals: for what other practical use can be made of
those Popish doctrines that the Sacraments do confer grace ex op^re operato,
from the very work done and application of them to the soul; and this made
Melancthon wish the very Word Sacrament were removed out of the Church, because
as people then were informed, they thought in the elements of a Sacrament, some
inward supernatural force lay couched to save them, and therefore they took
these Sacraments as men would medicinal potions, that by an inward physical
power produce their effects: by this means all visible Ordinances were turned
into mere idols. They attributed that to baptism which belonged only to Christ's
blood, they would give that glory to a Sacrament which belonged only to Christ,
and made as much of the linen wherein Christ's body lay, as the body it self.

In the next place, while we give this explication, you must by way of caution
A caution to take heed of two other extremes. The crying down of Ordinances as
being but forms.
take heed of two other extremes, And that is,

1. To cry down the very being and use of these external Ordinances, as being
but forms, and the spiritual frame of the heart is made all in all. Thus there
are blasphemous Heretics that cry down the Sacraments, the Ministry, yea, the
Scripture it self, yea Christ himself, as being but forms, and we ought to
have communion with God immediately. But it is elsewhere to be showed, that
Christ has appointed an external form of communion in his Church, which
consists in reading, and preaching of the Word, Administration and receiving
of Sacraments, Prayer, and Church Government, and Censures, with a Ministry
from him, all which are of a perpetual institution for the substantials of
them, and to cry down these forms, which God has appointed as means to beget
and increase grace, which are in the gracious use of them a solemn
acknowledging and owning of God, is a Beelzebub error as I may so say, and a
false doctrine in the first magnitude: we are therefore to sail between these
extremes neither resting upon Externals in religion, as enough without Christ,
and regeneration, or on the contrary abolishing and neglecting the use of them.

2. We are also deficient when although we do not cry down forms wholly, yet
we 2. In giving too little to Christ's Institutions.
give too little to these institutions of Christ. As we may give too much to
baptism and the Lords Supper, ^o also we may give too little; in former times
of superstition the first sin was common: In these latter times, I fear the
latter does overflow. The Remonstrants, they say, that the doctrine which the
Protestants deliver about the Sacraments is valde suspecta greatly suspected by
them of falsehood. And the Socinians they make them only commemorative of some
former mercy: they deny any real exhibition or increase in grace thereby.
Hence it is their expression, As, say they, when the Israelites in eating of
the Paschall lamb, made thereby a commemoration of their deliverance out of
Egypt God did then bestow no new mercy on them, only there was a remembrance
of the old; so in the Lords Supper there is no new conveyance of any grace, but
a remembrance of an old former mercy, but this comes too short: for those
Scripture-expressions 1 Cor. 10. The bread that we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ etc. and in the very words of the institution,
Take, eat, this is my body, do evidently prove more then (...) mere
commemoration. The Scripture when men are apt to rest upon Sacraments, speaks
contemptibly of them; Your Fathers ate Manna and died, Circumcision profits
nothing, he that eats unworthily eats damnation to himself: but when it
regards the institution and proper use of them, and not the subject receiving
them, then it speaks gloriously. These things are premised by way of
explication and caution.

In the third place let us consider why people are so apt to rest upon these as
comfortable testimonies, and there are several reasons. Why people are so apt
to rest upon Church Priviledges. 1. They give ease to a natural conscience.


1. Because they being duties commanded, when performed, that gives some ease
and comfort to a natural conscience. To be circumcised was Gods command, To be
baptized, to hear his Word, to receive Sacraments are duties enjoined by God,
so that the very neglect of them is threatened with condemnation; now then when
we are diligent to discharge all these, a man's conscience has not so much to
accuse him and condemn him, and we are apt to take any partial ease and
comfort of conscience for a general acquittance.

2. We are apt to rest in these things because they are easy to be done:
Whereas the way of mortification is troublesome and tedious to flesh and blood:
Hence it is called 2. Because they are easy to be done.
crucifying the flesh and cutting off the right hand, and pulling out the right
eye. The Jews would bring multitude of sacrifices, They would kill many
bullocks and rams rather then any lusts. They would not sacrifice themselves or
their lusts, yea, they proffered their firstborn, when yet they would not
leave their sins. Oh beloved, the duty of mortification and powerful
godliness is an hell to flesh and blood: Christianus est perpetua naturae
violentia, and therefore few, set on that; whereas to come to Church, to hear,
to pray, these are done without much trouble. Every natural man had rather
perform a thousand religious duties, then crucify one pleasant or profitable
sin: Oh then see upon what sandy foundations you build all your hope, whose
lives are not sanctified, ^ho are strangers to the power of godliness, yet
stay your souls with external religious duties.

3. Therefore men rest upon these because they are ignorant of the work and
necessity of regeneration: You see Nicodemus an old man, much versed in the
religious 3. Because ignorant of the work of regeneration.
worship of God, yet though a master in Israel, knew not this thing. Oh it is to
be feared there are many great Scholars, there are many ancient, noble, rich
Christians, that yet are strangers to the whole inward work of Gods Spirit by
way of change upon them. The Apostle calls circumcision of the heart,
circumcision made without hands; and so baptism and the Sacraments in the
heart, which are not visible in the eyes of the world, make us esteemed before
God. Be not then idol Christians that have eyes and see no^, hearts and
understand not the inward virtue and spiritual efficacy of Christ in his
Ordinances. It was Chrysostomes complaint in his ^aies, (...) etc. Alas, how
are all the grave and holy Ordinances in the Church of God turned into mere
outsides and formalities! Thus in Popery when real holiness began to be
persecuted, then they set up a deal of superstitious holiness, holy Images,
holy Altars, holy Temples, holy vestments, and in the mean while, true, real
holiness was scorned: and here is too much of this Pope in the belly of many
formal Protestants.

4. They put confidence in them because they are ignorant of the righteousness
by 4. And of the righteousness by faith.
faith in Christ. There is no man but the godly that looks for any
justification, but by the works he does, and so they turn the Gospel into the
Law, and make the duties and administrations under the Gospel, what the Jews
did the legal administrations in the Law: You cannot have a clearer instance
of this then in Paul, Phil. 3. he gives in a catalogue of many privileges,
and he says, he thought them great gain to him once, but after he came to the
knowledge of the righteousness by faith in Christ, he counted them dung and
dross, and desired to be found in Christ only. The Apostle uses an excellent
expression, Heb. 4. 18. speaking of the godly and their consolation in the
Covenant of grace, he says, they have fled for a refuge to lay hold on this
hope. Every godly man is in as much fear of his sin, whose guilt by virtue of
the Law pursues him, as among the Jews the man was that had slain another: Now
with what haste, trembling and desire he fled to the City of refuge, the same
does a godly man use in laying hold on Christ's righteousness: Alas, his
duties, his religious worship, it is not a City of refuge: If therefore thou
knew the necessity of Christ, and what righteousness by faith means, thou
could not rest in these external duties.

5. Therefore men rest on them because they look on these duties as
satisfactory and 5. Because they look at du^ies as satisfactory.
compensatory to God. We think by these ordinances we have made amends to God.
It is Bellarmines doctrine, that prayer as it is laboriosa and poenalis,
undergone as a laborious penance, is compensatory to God. Now though the
doctrine of Popery be renounced, yet unregenerate persons abound in the
practice of it.

Lastly, Therefore do carnal people rely on these, because they mistake the
nature of 6. Because they mistake the nature of them
them. They look upon them as those things which will of themselves make them
acceptable to God, notwithstanding any preparation or spiritual managing of
them: whereas setting aside the Word of God that works the first grace in us,
all other duties they are but as clothes or garments to the body, which cannot
warm or heat a dead body; but if there be life in the body to heat them first,
then they will increase the heat. And thus it is here, if there be spiritual
life in thee, and thou put it forth in these duties, then these duties will
corroborate and strengthen it more.

We come to the second general part of the Doctrine, to show, That the having
That they are no signs of grace.
and enjoying such seals is not sign sure enough for our being in the state of
grace.

And first That they are not, may appear, in that the Scripture makes it not
only possible for such to be damned, but does foretell even actual damnation;
and that to Arg. 1. The Scripture foretells damnation to the greatest part of
such persons.
the greater part of such persons. Thus Mat. 7. some condemned at that great
day are brought in thus pleading, Have we not eat in thy presence? The Jews
will say so in respect of their sacrifices, the Christians in regard of the
Lords Supper, so that it is a wonder to them that they are cast out of Gods
presence, and howsoever in the parable of the great Feast the Master of the
Feast spieth out but one that came in without a Wedding garment, for which he
is apprehended and cast into utter darkness, yet that does not imply few only
will be without a Wedding garment, though at the Feast; for in that one is
represented an universal or multitude; Therefore our Savior makes this
inference, for many are called but few are chosen, which would be a conclusion
wholly repugnant to the premise^, had not a generality been intended in that
one; so our Savior in another place, The children of the Kingdom shall be cast
out; who are those children of the Kingdom, but such that were partakers of all
the Ordinances of the Church called the kingdom of heaven? Oh then it is in
vain to plead that, which many damned in hell have been partakers of. And
whereas if true grace be in any man, though in the least degree, he can never
be excluded; none can say, Lord did we not truly fear thy Name, reform our
lives, walk spiritually? and yet God bid them Depart, he knows them not. And
that this sad portion will be to the greatest part of those that have enjoyed
those pridiledges, appears by that forementioned, Many are called, but few are
chosen, which are not so much words, as thunder and lightning. Oh then think
not these an Ark sure enough to keep thee in the deluge of many waters.

2. The Scripture reckons the condition of a man with these privileges, and
one without 2. And reckons those that have them and that want them in the same
condition without holiness.
them in the same condition if there be not holiness. Thus as you heard the
Prophet Jeremiah makes the uncircumcised in heart, though circumcised in flesh,
all one with the worst of Heathens, the Moabites and the Ammonites. And to this
purpose also the Apostle in the verses before, Shall not thy circumcision be
accounted uncircumcision, if thou keep not the Law. So that as long as
wickedness is in thy life, thy Baptism does no more advantage thee then the
Heathens no-Baptism. It shall not avail thee, thou have called upon Christ,
thou have so many times received the Sacrament. Hence it is, that the Prophet
calls the wicked Princes and Governors, though of Israel, yet Princes of Sodom
and Gomorrah, and so may the Ministers of the Gospel call profane and wicked
men, ye men of Scythia or America, for this badge and mark of Christianity is
not regarded by God, if not accompanied with true godliness; so the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 11. This is not to eat the Lords Supper, it was as if they had
not received at all.

3. The Scripture goes higher, and does not only make them equal with Pagans,
3. And that God abominates them.
but God professes his abomination of all their religious service, and thy
wickedness is more noisome then all thy Religion is well-pleasing; See Isa. 1.
how God expresses himself concerning the Sacrifices and new Moons of the
sinful Israelites, He hated them, they were an abomination to him, it was like
cutting off a dogs head; Oh how contrary are Gods thoughts, and thy thoughts
about the same religious duties! The Prophet Haggai also Hag. 2. does by an
excellent instance show, That if a man be unclean and sinful, his holy services
do not take off from his uncleanness, but his uncleanness defiles them. Oh
therefore consider, that thou have many dead flies fallen into this box of
ointment, and therefore cannot be savoury unto God! Thy swearing tongue does
more offend God then thy praying tongue does please him; Thy sins will cry
louder then thy prayers, yea God will answer thee according unto the
abomination of thy Idols; he will answer thee not according to the duties thou
art doing, but thy sins thou have committed; he does not look upon thee as one
praying or hearing now, but as one unclean, dumb or vicious in some weekday.
Oh why do your consciences lie in such a deep sleep in your bosoms! Why does
not that Serpent in thy breast begin to hiss and sting thee at the hearing of
these things?

Lastly, These are so far from being signs without grace, that they will be
aggravations 4. They will be aggravations of thy torment if thou have not grace.
of thy condemnation. As in some Countries when their malefactors were to be
burnt at the fire, they poured oil and pitch to increase their torment the
more, so will every Sacrament, every prayer, every Church-priviledge, make hell
the hotter for thee. Woe be to thee Corazin and Bethsaida, Tire and Sidon,
Sodom and Gomorrah, Heathenish persons, and that in the highest way of
wickedness shall have lesser torment then they; and so mark the Apostle here
speaking of the Jew, he says, that by the letter and circumcision he did
transgress the Law, How was that? Even by those Privileges and Ordinances he
was made the greater transgressour.

Now the Reason why these are not sure signs, is, Because no promise of
Justification or Salvation is made merely to the use of them. Our Savior says
not, He that is Reason. Why not signs.
baptized shall be saved, but he that believes and is baptized. Thus as God
commanded the Jews to circumcise their foreskin; So God promises as the mercy
of all mercies, he would circumcise their hearts to love him. Look then over
the Scripture, thou can not find any one promise of pardon, or eternal glory
to thee, because baptized only, because a Christian only, because receiving a
Sacrament only, unless there be also renovation in thy life and conversation.
I grant that because of the very external profession of Christ, and his ways,
though there be no internal change, many Church Priviledges belong to them, and
Ministers are bound to dispense them to them, if they be without scandal: I
grant also, as may be fully proved out of this Text, that there is an external
and internal Covenant, a man may have a Church-holinesse, a visible sanctity,
whereby he and his children are entitled to Ordinances, although all this
while there be no true grace in that man. But now we are speaking of the
promises of Justification and salvation, and these are made to none but to the
truly godly. Therefore till this be, thou art only in the outward Temple, not
in the Holy of Holies. Oh therefore that these things were more considered by
you: Suppose you hear God speaking from Heaven to you; Why are you weeds in my
garden? Why are you Tares in my Wheat? Why are ye Chafe in my Floor? Yea,
think thou see an handwriting on every wall of thy House, and post of thy
doors, like that of Belshazzars: Thou art numbered and weighed, and found too
light: All thy religious profession, Ordinances, are found too light.

Use of Exhortation, Let this truth be to you what the Jealousie-water Use.
was to the suspected person, let it not be said to you as to that Church, Thou
have a name that thou art alive but art dead, or as to another Church of some
that said they were Jews but were not. Thou say thou art a Christian, thou
art baptized, thou have Ordinances, but whose works are those which thou do?
who is the Father of that wickedness, barrenness, neglect and contempt of
true holiness? Can the same Fountain send forth bitter streams and sweet?
Shall that tongue that has here prayed to God afterward blaspheme? and
consider the Apostles Argument in this Chapter; The Jews wicked carriage caused
the name of God to be blasphemed among the Gentiles; Pagans, Papists, Heretics
blaspheme the truth, because of your evil deeds. How necessary is it that where
we are orthodox we should (...) also? Salvian a zealous Father against the
wickedness of Christians, attributing all the grievous Judgments of God then
upon the Church to their impious manners, he brings in the Heathen also
blaspheming Christ, and laying all the fault here, that Christians were no
better: Si Christus sancta docuisset, Christiani sancte vixissent; If Christ
(say they) had taught holy and godly things, then certainly the Christians
would have lived holy lives. Take heed, for the condition of all Heathens and
Pagans will be more tolerable at the day of judgment then yours.

SERMON XX.
Gifts and Parts in matters of Religion, no sign of Grace.

MAT. 7. 22. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, etc.
OUr Savior in this verse, and that going before, removes two foundations
that believers are apt to build their hopes upon,

The First is a bare name, and profession of Christianity, without the real
power of it, whose insufficiency we have already discovered. Nomen sine actu
and officio, nihil est, said Salvian, speaking to this purpose, Christianity in
a profane life, is ornamentum in luto, a jews in a dunghill.

The Second weak and rotten foundation is in my Text, and that is, Gifts, and
eminent abilities bestowed upon Christians: and these seem to be a very strong
Pillar, and Prop. But our Saviors assertion about the unsoundness of it, is
very terrible, and yet very necessary to these times: wherein men are like
trees that spread out into many branches, but have little or no root.

1. In the words you have the description of their confidence, in that phrase,
Lord, Lord: which argues not only vehemence, but boldness, and as if
accustomed familiarly to call on God as their God.

2. There is the ground of their confidence, Have not we Prophesied in thy
name, and in thy name cast out Devils, and in thy name done many wonderful
works? Those Expositors that think they lied in saying thus, as if no wicked
men were made partakers of such wonderful gifts of the Holy Ghost as here are
specified, attend not to other places of Scripture: neither is that dispute
necessary, whether they were true miracles that they wrought? or did indeed
cast out Devils? For seeing these Gifts were given for the good of the Church,
and not of those that enjoyed them, there is no ground to deny the truth of
their miracles. Only observe how they lay much upon this, That all they did was
in Gods name, which they thrice repeat: That is, at the command of God, having
authority from him, and by his power administered unto them.

3. This is aggravated by the number of those who shall be in this frustrated
condition: Many, not One or Two, but Many shall say. Lastly, Here is the time
when the weakness of these foundations will be discovered, In that day, viz. at
the great day of judgment, when all hidden things shall be discovered:
Implying, that they lived and died with great confidence that God was theirs,
but never were convinced of their deceit therein till it was too late. In the
next place you have Gods answer to them beyond all their expectation,
illustrated by the free and open declaration of it.

First, Then will I pro^ess unto them: The word has several significations:
here it denotes a public and solemn declaration. Secondly, The matter
declared, I never knew you. That is, approved of you, and loved you: no, not
all that while I gave you those abilities, and spiritual Gifts. Thirdly, There
is the effect of this declaration: Depart from me, with the cause, Ye workers
of iniquity: because they wrought iniquity in the Devils name, as well as
miracles in Christ's name; therefore they must depart.
Doct. Although Christians are very apt to rest upon Parts, Gifts, and great
abilities in Religion, as a sign of their interest in Heaven, yet without a
godly life they Doct. Gifts and parts in matters of Religion, no sign of Grace.
will prove broken reeds.

At the day of judgment when the fiery trial shall be, all this painting will
melt away. For the opening of this point, let some things be considered by way
of Explication.

First, There are parts and abilities of two sorts: The one Humane and Natural,
Explicatory considerations. 1.
the other Divine and Spiritual. Natural parts, are all those excellent
abilities acquired by industry, and through the discipline of others, though
even those Natural gifts come from God also. In this kind the Heathens have
wonderfully excelled, and many of the Fathers converted to Christianity, were
before their conversion, admirable in humane learning. Qui dedit Petrum
Piscatorem, dedit and Cyprianum Rhetorem. He that called Peter an illiterate
Fisherman, called Cyprian also a great Rhetorician. Thus Tertullian, Origin,
Austin, Hierom, and others, came into Canaan, the Church of God, loaded with
Egyptian gold, I mean filled with humane learning: so that, that foolish
assertion by some in these days, that God never sanctifies humane learning,
expungeth at once all those glorious Lights out of the heavenly Firmament. It
is true indeed, take these natural endowments in the heart, while carnal, they
work a sinful pride, and tumor, against the simplicity of Gods ways. Hence
Austin spoke of himself, Dedignabar esse PARVULUS, I scorned to become like a
little Child, and to admire the Scriptures. Thus also Bradwardine, called the
profound Doctor, usque ad stuporem, even to amazement, professes of himself,
That when he heard Paul's Epistles read, he was much disspleased, because Paul
had not Metaphysicum ingenium, a Metaphisical wit. And certainly when Natural
parts come like Hagar, to quarrel with Sarah, Gods Truth, then throw her out of
doors; otherwise if subordinated, they are great helps. But secondly, there are
spiritual Gifts, such as the Spirit of God does more immediately work in his
Church, of which the Apostle speaks largely, 1 Cor. 12. Now the Spirit of God
is the Author of two kind of gifts; the one Sanctificantia, Sanctifying and
saving, such as Faith, Hope, Love, Repentance: The other Ministrantia, or Gifts
of Ministration, because they are wholly for the service of the Church: The
former are called (...), the latter (...), though the Scripture does not
always fully distinguish these two words: the Schoolmen by Division call the
former Graces, Gratos nos facientes, making us acceptable to God; and the other
Graces, Gratis datae, freely given. But this distinction is first absurd,
because coincident; for those graces which (they say) make us acceptable to
God, are also freely given: And secondly its false; for true Grace is called
Grace, not because it makes us gracious and acceptable to God, but because it
flows from the grace of God. Now these gifts of servcie in the Apostles time,
were more immediately vouchsafed by the Spirit, and more universally, insomuch
that its made a promise, Mark 16. 16. 17. Even to every believer, that great
signs and wonders should follow him: Thus the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. by
reason of her eminent and various Gifts, seems to be like the Queens
daughter, all in gold and curious needle work. In these latter days God also
does bestow upon men, not immediately, but mediately in the way of study and
use of means, many spiritual Gifts, such as the gift of Prayer, the gift of
Preaching, great assistance in the exercise of these, with enlargement of
affections therein: and these are much admired as arguments of their holiness
and piety: but the Apostle told the Corinthians, he had a more excellent way to
show them then that of Gifts, which was the way of Grace.

Secondly, The end of all these spiritual abilities, is to profit the Church
with them. 2.
They are not for vain ostentation, disputes, and applause in the world, but
merely to edify others. 1 Cor. 12. 7. The gift is given to every one, (...),
to profit with. So then these gifts must not be put under a bushel; these
Talents must not be Hid in the earth, or wrapped up in a napkin, as if it were a
dead thing. It is ingeniously observed by Theophylact, That when men were dead,
they covered their faces with a napkin, and laid them in the grave: Thus they
did to Christ, and to Lazarus: and thus the unprofitable servant did to his
Talent, as if it were a dead thing and buried, he would make no improvement of
it at all. And well did Austin call idleness, the burial of a man while alive:
Paul, even then when he foretells his death shortly, That he must be a Sacrifice
for the truth, he yet sends for his Parchments, employing that little time he
has in study. Now when I say gifts must be improved, I mean the gifts of
private men in a private way out of charity; of public men, by office in a
public way out of Authority: for that gifts are not enough to entitle to a
public office, appears by the examples and commands in the Epistles, and in
the Acts of the Apostles, where all that publicly employed their gifts,
besides their own qualification, had also authority, and office given them by
Superiors, whereby they were sent to do their work: And as they are not to be
negligent, so neither to use them for applause, or to get esteem, or make
parties. It is a sad corruption in us that we affect gifts more then graces, as
you see the Corinthians did, for which Paul reproves them, because by their
gifts they were more admired and applauded: Hereupon they also had many
followers, and truly this City of London is become much like Corinth: as she
gloried in light and knowledge, as she abounded in schisms, and parties, one
for one, and another for another: as her public meetings were come to great
confusions and disorders, and as they minded disputes, but neglected the true
power of Grace, thus is it with London at this day.

In the next place let us consider, Why Believers are so ready to lean upon
these? To take Gifts for Graces, Enlargements and Assistances for
Sanctification.

First, Because these do exceed the common way, and ordinary course of
Christians. Men so qualified and furnished, seem to be as much above ordinary
Christians, as Why Christians are apt to rest upon parts. 1.
the call Cedars above the low shrubs: The Pharisees, how scornfully did they
speak, This people which know not the Law, are cursed. How apt is a man,
because he can pray excellently, discourse upon many controversies in religion,
to undervalue those that cannot: Seeing therefore that these are in an higher
form of Christ's school, and to the name and Title in knowledge of Christianity,
they have superadded many other Talents, is it any wonder they are confident of
their good estate? We may read that in Austines time, it was a general received
opinion, That every Christian, though he lived wickedly, should at last be
saved. This Doctrine was so universal, that Austin was forced to oppose it with
a great deal of fear and modesty. They did not hold with Origin, That the very
Devils themselves should be restored, nor with others mollifying Origens
opinion, That all men whether Christians or Infidels; nor as a third, That all
Christians, how damnably soever erring in matter of Faith, shall be saved; but
thought it most reasonable, That all right believing Christians should find
mercy whatsoever their wickedness was. Austin, Enchir. ad Sanc. says, those
that hold so, Humana quadam benevolentia sibi falli videri. And if the name and
profession of Christianity may sway so much, what then may these more excellent
and unusual workings of Gods Spirit upon men? wonder not therefore if you see a
man that has better gifts then another, more knowledge then another, have also
more confidence in God then another. Not that indeed he has grounds, for its
better to speak one word with Grace, then five hundred with mere Parts and
abilities; but only self-love does blind our Eyes, and deceive our Hearts, so
that we do not judge Scripture-judgement.

Secondly, A second reason of carnal confidence herein, is, because it is, very
difficult to know when our duties are performed by assistance merely, and when
by Sanctification also. In prayer it is hard to discern when its the Gift of
prayer only, and when its the Grace of prayer also; for these things are
judged by the Spiritual man only; he is said to judge all things. But now an
unregenerate man, though abounding in these gifts of Gods Spirit, yet because
he is altogether carnal, he cannot make any spiritual discerning of these
things: but as sensual brutish men, they argue God loves them, and that they
are in the favor of God because he blesses them with wealth, and outward
prosperity. Thus men of parts and abilities in religious things argue; if God
did not love them, if he intended to damn them, he would never give them such
knowledge, he would never give such assistance, but this is a mere delusion. Oh
there is as vast a difference between thy Duties performed through assistance
merely, and through Sanctification, as is between sweet Grapes and wild Grapes.

Thirdly, Therefore we do take these for sure signs, because hereby is
demonstrated Gods power in us, and we are ready to take his presence by power,
for his presence of Grace. 3.
When we perceive in our selves a greater strength then our own, we argue that
God is with us, not only providentially, but graciously, whereas these two are
separable one from another: God was with Saul by way of assistance and power,
when he gave him another spirit, but not by way of gracious inhabitation. There
is no question but Christ's power was with Judas in his miracles, as well as
with the other Apostles; but with Judas was only a presence of power, with the
other Apostles, a presence of power and gracious Sanctification: so then, God
may be much seen by his assistance in thy Duties, in thy Prayers, in thy
Preaching: but his presence in mortification of sin, and vivification to
righteousness is far more admirable. It is true, the times of the Gospel, and
of its Truth is in Scripture, proved by this argument, because many wonders and
signs were done amongst them; for so it was promised, That Miracles should
abound in the time of the Messiah: but these are no sure demonstrations of the
Spirit dwelling graciously among us. So then diligently consider thus, Thou
find God much with thee: thou feel thou could not do such things as
thou do; but here is no solid ground of comfort, unless thou discoverest a
further powerful work of his Spirit, which is in giving thee an holy, humble,
believing, and self-denying spirit. Oh its far more comfortable to find Gods
power melting thy heart for sin, quickening thee up to holiness, then to find
ten thousand enlargements in holy performances: It is better to see and feel
God in thy conversation in the ways of mortification, then in any solemn
Religious duty.

Fourthly, Therefore we rest on these, because we distinguish not between that
4.
which is Spiritual in the object, or matter we do, and that which is Spiritual
in the manner how we do it. As for Example, The Pharisees, many things they did
were Spiritual for the object matter: Thus their prayers, their reading and
expounding the Scriptures, were spiritual imploiments, but take them for the
manner how they did it, which was to be seen of men, to advantage worldly
interests; and no Publicans, or Harlots were more carnal then they, so that the
proper stream and channel, wherein all their spiritual defilement did empty it
self, was in their religious duties, so that they were most carnal, when they
seemed most Spiritual. Jehu also is a clear instance, if you respect the
outward matter; his reformation from I dolatry, his establishing the worship of
God, all this was wonderful Spiritual; but withal consider, that his aims were
mere State Policy in all he did, and so he was very carnal: consider therefore
of this more then thou have done: it may be thou wast never more sinful;
corruption did never more discover it self then in thy Spiritual abilities and
employments. Paul says of some, That they preached Christ out of envy, and
others may do it out of worldly ends: now because the Duties are Spiritual,
shall we say these men are Spiritual men: No, they are sensual, corrupt, and
worldly: and this is certain, when the Devil cannot persuade men to corruptions
in vicious and profane courses, then he becomes like an Angel of light, and
seduceth them to carnal distempers in spiritual duties.

Fifthly, Therefore are we prone to rely on these, because they breed esteem in
the hearts 5
of others. Many times Disciples that are followers, they set up a Doctor or
Teacher as if he were an Angel: they place him among the Cherubims and
Seraphims: they say by his gifts and abilities, their souls have got a world of
good: they have cause to bless God that ever they saw him, or heard him: Now
these solemn acclamations from others, do work great confidence in such a man's
heart. I make no question but a man of abilities may do good by them, although
he himself be naught; otherwise the Apostle would not have rejoiced that some
preached Christ out of envy: neither would Christ have remitted his Disciples
to the Scribes and Pharisees Ministry as he did, when he bid them hear them as
long as they sat in Moses his chair, deliver true Doctrine from the
Scriptures. Now this being so, it is hard to persuade our selves that when we
have been a means to bring in some Elect ones, we our selves should be as
Reprobates: hence it is that the Apostle, Gal. 4. presses men so to walk, That
they may have approbation from God and their own consciences, rather then from
others, when it is said, That those who convert others to righteousness, shall
shine like the stars in heaven, that is to be understood taking in other places
of Scripture, viz. If they be Godly, and walk in all the ways of God
themselves, as well as teach others so to do.

Thus you see the reasons why people are apt to take all their evidences for
Heaven from these uncertain grounds; now let us demonstrate the insufficiency
of these to give any sollid support: and this will appear several ways.

1. In that all these glorious abilities are, and may be consistent in the same
subject at the same time, with profane and ungodly ways of iniquity. Now can
you call that light which agrees with darkness? Can that be righteousness,
which may consist with unrighteousness? You heard, He that is born of God
sins not, because of that seed in him. Then certainly this is not that
Spiritual seed, if we have, or may have at the same time an habitual
inclination to evil. It is true indeed, sanctifying grace is in the same
subject with the relics of co rruption; and a Godly man has darkness in him
as well as light: and we know in Philosophy, that Contraria possunt simulesse
in gradu remisso, ac dum sunt in pugna, contraries may be together in a remiss
degree, and while they are in conflict: But in these spiritual abilities and
gifts, sin may be in its dominion and prevalencie with full quietness and case.
Hence our Savior calls these Prophets, these wonder-workers, Workers of
iniquity. They were so at that very time while they did all these: alas, it was
no advantage to cast the Devil out of other men's bodies, while he had full
possession in their own hearts. Know then if these abilities were Grace, they
would expel at least in some degree, all those lusts and exorbitances that are
in thy life. Experience tells us, that it is no new thing for men to pray
zealously, to perform duties admirably, and yet to go from these duties to the
committing of sin against the light of nature, as well as of the Scriptures.
Did not Judas practice secret the every and injustice, notwithstanding his
public ministry? It is true, many times God in a just judgment, when men live
profanely, does at last take away their Talents: they cannot pray, they cannot
preach as they have done; but they become very sots: even as in the black
Coal-mine there sometimes arise such damp vapors that put out all the light,
yea, and the breath of those men that are in it; but for a great while they may
keep their Talent, and it not be taken away.

2. These cannot be a sure testimony for our comfort, because they are not
proper and immediate effects of election, which is the first round in that
ladder of all spiritual mercies. If I have justifying faith, I may have sure
confidence, because this is a fruit of our ordination and appointment to
eternal life. But we cannot say thus of these parts and abilities; for the Text
says, Many shall say, have not we prophesied in thy name, yet Christ shall
reply, I never know you: but there shall not one godly man say at the day of
judgment, Lord, was not I elected? was not I converted? Did not I repent,
believe, mortify sin, etc? And Christ say again, Depart, I know you not. If
therefore our calling and election might be made sure by these gifts and
abilities, there might be some hope, but that cannot be; therefore how fully
does our Savior speak to this purpose, when the Disciples came rejoicing to
Christ, telling him, That the Devils were subject to them, and they could work
all kind of wonders, he replyeth, Rejoice not in this, but that your names are
written in heaven: where you see how prone we are to rejoice in that which
affords no good ground of comfort, and withal, That if we had the parts and
abilities of men and Angels, yet if we had not our names written in heaven, we
were in a miserable condition. Oh then say, This is but the fruit of the Common
Love of God: the sons of the Concubine may have this, as well as the sons of
the true wife: Abraham gave Ishmael some gifts, but they were not such as Isaak
had; therefore pray that God would give thee tokens of such a love which is
vouchsafed unto his own people in a peculiar manner.

Thirdly, These cannot demonstrate certainly The faith of the Elect Paul calls
it, our good estate, because God in the bestowing of these gifts, does not at
all look to the good of him that has them, but to the good of the Church.
There is this difference between saving Gifts, and Gifts of service: saving
Gifts, such as Faith, Repentance, etc. are intentionally given to the good of
him that has them; and although a man by these may edify others, yet that is
not looked at primarily; but now in these gifts of service, ability to pray,
preach, and confer or dispute, these are given not primarily for the good of
him that has them, but of the Church in general. As a nurse to a great man's
child lives upon dainty fare, not for her own sake, but the child's sake: Now
then thou should thus argue, Is God much in assisting of thee in prayer, in
any duties with others? say, Surely the Lord did thus assist me, not out of any
respect to me, but he had some child of his there to be refreshed, to be
enflamed, or quickened by me: Hence for want of a godly life, many that have
helped others to Heaven, they themselves are thrown into Hell; they are
Torches, which while they give light to others, they themselves are consumed.

Fourthly, That cannot be the true and proper good which may be turned into
evil. Bonum est, quo nemo male uti potest, Grace and godliness cannot be used
to an evil end, because its part of Godliness to rectify the end, the show of
Godliness indeed may. But now all these abilities are so indifferent in their
nature, that they may be used well or ill: As Austin said of riches, That God
does sometimes bestow them upon wicked men, to show they are not good in their
own nature; again sometimes on good men, to declare they are not bad in their
nature. Thus it is of all parts and abilities, they sometimes are bestowed upon
good men, sometimes upon bad men, to teach us, That as the subjects are in whom
these be, so may they be employed: But we cannot say so of Grace: no wicked man
has any true saving Grace in him: Why then do you encourage your selves with
that which a Judas may have? one roaring in hell may have? And certainly these
abilities and Gifts are in more persons made a snare to evil, then an occasion
to good. Satan is more busy to Tempt such: when the Devil first assaulted Eve,
it was by the Serpent, as an instrument that was more subtle then all the
beasts of the field: Thus afterward he worked, when Satan seduced others by
Tertullian, and Origin, he was a Devil in the Serpent. When thy Liquor boyleth,
then look to take off the Scumme: and so when thy Abilities and Enlargements
are efficacious and fervent, then take heed of froth and vanity. Ornari abs te
Diabolus quaerit, said Austin to a great scholar yet unconverted to Christ. The
Apostle in 1 Cor. 13. and 14. speaks of other carnal effects of spiritual
abilities, as to puff up and inflate, to make divisions and several parties
in Gods Church, to bring all into confusion and disorder, therefore these
cannot be grace.

Lastly, The Apostle makes a man that has all these abilities, yet if without
grace, to be no more then a tinkling Cymball, that may make a pleasant noise
for the while to the ear, but presently passes away, 1 Cor. 13. 1. And thus
are all men of parts and gifts, they may be like a pleasant Song to others, but
they themselves have no benefit: Men may preach well, expound Scriptures, write
excellent Comments, yet for all this, be but like Harps or Viols, that give a
melodious sound to others, but perceive none of it themselves; Whereas true
grace is profitable to him that has it, it waters his heart in whom it is,
and makes it fruitful: It begins an heaven in this life, yea, strangers and
others, are not able to enter into his joy.

Use of Exhortation, Not any longer to look upon these gifts and abilities, as
the most excellent things, but be persuaded there is a better way, and desire
that. This assistance is like the rain that God vouchsafes to the bad, as well
as to the good: Only thy condemnation will be the more terrible, by how much
thou were the moresecure of heaven, and yet did miss it: those men urged they
had prophesied and wrought miracles in Christ's name: but alas, the profane and
ungodly man, what will he say? We have been drunk in thy Name, unclean in thy
Name: how absurd and blaspheming would this be? Therefore mind the things of
mortification more then of parts and assistance; say now, I know God will and
does love me indeed, when he makes me fruitful in all holiness.

SERMON XXI.
Fully clearing that there may be affections and sweet motions of Heart in holy
things, which yet evidence not Grace, nor accompany Salvation.

HEB. 6. 9. But (beloved) we hope better things of you, and things that
accompany Salvation.
THe Text has an adversative respect to the verses precedent, as the first
word (But) plainly denotes: For it is put in by way of mollifying and
softening, after those severe and terrible expressions the Apostle had used
before. At the 4. verse there is an Hypothetical Proposition, containing
Beneficium Dei, The goodness and mercy of God: and Maleficium hominis, The
ingratitude of man, with the sentence or judgment upon him. I shall not now
speak to that controversal matter, which is usually debated by the learned upon
these words: you may briefly observe the mercies of God bestowed upon this
supposed Apostate reduced to two heads

First, That which concerns his intellectuals, in that expression,
Enlightened.

Secondly, Those that relate to his Affectionate part: and herein are most
particulars, viz. tasting of the heavenly Gift, partakers of the Holy Ghost,
tasting of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come. These
things (God willing) shall be more distinctly handled when we shall discourse
of the Grace of Conversion, and the counterfeit of it, (and then we shall
vindicate the Orthodox interpretation from all corrupt oppositions) In the
Second place, you have the Ingratitude, or wickedness of the man abusing these
mercies, and that is, (...), which may be proved of an universal Apostasy, not
a fall in some particular gross sin, Toti, in totum, de toto, as Junius: which
mistake made the Novatians deny any Church-reconciliation to lapsed sinners,
and which made the Roman Church delay the receiving of this Epistle into the
number of Canonical. In the Third place, there is the heavy doom of such, It
is impossible to renew them again, (...), the word is in the Active sense, and
signifies there are no Teachers, no Doctors, no Ministry, no Sermons can ever
instrumentaly reduce them to godliness: and the Apostle says, it is
impossible, not absolutely to God, nor in that sense, as it is impossible for
every man by nature of himself to recover out of his sins, seeing that it is
common to every natural man: but here he speaks of a special impossibility.
Therefore its impossible from a special decree of God, whereby he does threaten
to such abusers, and contemners of his Grace and mercy, a total substraction of
all his favors, and goodness from them: even as a branch once grafted in, and
afterward disjointed is hardly capable of a second coalition. Now this the
Apostle

1. Aggravateth from the cause, because they crucify the Son of God afresh,
viz. as much as lies in them: if they be restored, there must be a new Christ,
or a new oblation of Christ, Those that fall in Adam Christ repaireth, but if a
man fall off from Christ, and reject him, there is no further remedy appointed
by God, but such are in as hopeless a condition as the Apostate Angels.

2. He illustrateth by the earth, drinking in rain, yet bringing forth
thistles, which is near to cursing. Now having thus wounded them, and powered
salt in their wounds, at last he powers oil to supple them, telling them that
he does not think they are these Apostates, partly because his judgment is
they have better things then these, partly because God is just and faithful,
and will therefore perfect the good work begun in them: My Text is the first
mollifying expression, wherein you have,

1. The Apostle his charitable judgment expressed by (...), which according to
the subject matter is sometimes to be understood of such a divine faith and
hope that cannot be deceived, sometimes of such a certainty as we have by
charitable construction and moral prudence, and in this sense it is taken here.

2. There is the object of this charitable judgment, better things, that is,
better things then those forementioned benefits (though seemingly very
glorious) which hypocrites may have, and at last fall away; better then to be
merely enlightened, better then to have a taste only, and some sweet affections
in holy things, and for better explication sake, he adds, and things that
accompany salvation, (...), harentia saluti, says Austin, that cleave to
salvation, that cannot be disjoined from it: such things as whosoever has,
cannot but be saved; implying that those Doct. Sweet motions of heart in holy
things not infallible evidences of grace. 1. What motions in Scripture
declares to be consistent with unregeneratenesse.
benefits though they were good things and gifts of Gods Spirit, yet were not
necessarily accompanying salvation.

That although affections and sweet motions of heart in holy things are much
relied upon as evidences of grace and salvation, yet they are not indeed any
true signs or infallible testimonies.

This Point needs a powerful and a wary discovery: Therefore for explication
sake, let us consider what religious affections and motions the Scripture
declares to be in some, who yet are not truly regenerated. The known and
famous instance is Mat. 13. 20. where the third kind of hearers is said to
receive the word with joy. This is tasting the good Word of God, finding some
sweetness and power in the Ordinances, yet that this hearer was not hereby
regenerate is plain, partly because he is said to have no root, partly because
he is opposed to the good ground, that is, the good and honest heart (what is
said by Arminians to these things, hereafter shall be discussed) so Joh. 5. 35.
you have a plain instance of some that had light and heat in them, yet not
godly. Ye did for a season rejoice in John's light and Ministry, so that men
who shall at last be thrown in utter darkness, may yet for a while rejoice in
the light of Gods word: Thus Herod puts it also out of all question, Mar. 6.
20. for he heard John gladly, and the motive was religion, for it is said he
feared or reverenced him, because he was a just man. I look upon this point as
fundamental in practice; and which if true, may strike like an arrow into our
hearts, and therefore have brought undeniable places of Scripture to assert
this truth; Affections in holy administrations with delight and joy, may be in
those who yet have no true grace: I will instance only in another affection,
and that is sorrow and grief about sin, even this may be in a man unseasoned
with grace, Mat. 27. 3. it is expressly said of Judas, he repented himself and
confessed I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood, (...), the word is
properly used of that sorrow, grief and care, which is in the affectionate part
of a man: Ahabs humiliation, 1 King. 21. is so great, that God takes notice of
it; See thou how Ahab humbles himself? The Israelites how often were they in
their humiliations and mournings for sin? though these laud floods were dried
up again, insomuch that Gregory did well compare them to the grasshoppers which
make sudden leaps from the earth, as if they would fly to heaven, but presently
fall down upon the ground again. Take one place for many, Psalm. 78. 34. They
sought him and they teturned, and they enquired early after God: Great
expressions! Do you not think God like that Father in the Parable will
presently kiss them, put robes upon them, prepare a fatted calf for them? No,
verse. 36. marreth all. Nevertheless their hearts were not steadfast within him.
Now it is remarkable, as the Scripture calls these actions, repentance,
humiliation, returning and seeking after God, giving the name of grace to them,
because they have the outward lineaments of grace, so also the Scripture
attributes pardon of sin and forgiveness unto them, verse. 38. he being full
of compassion forgave their iniquities, Numb. 14. 20. God upon Moses his
prayer, says he had pardoued their iniquity: now this cannot be a true and
proper pardon of sin. for Heb. 3. it is plain, All these perished because of
their unbelief. Therefore when the Scripture says, that upon such humiliation
and repentance God does pardon sin, especially speaking of an whole body of
people, it is to be understood in a particular sense thus, for not punishing
them at that time, but either quite taking away, or at least differring the
temporal affliction, but is still abiding them, for no unconverted man, truly
and properly ever has any sin pardoned him: so that as to a godly man
repenting, God takes away eternal punishment, but lets a temporal
chastisement sometime abide, so to the unconverted repenting, God does
sometimes take away the temporal, but causes the eternal punishment to
continue. By all this you see the Scripture speaking of some, as rejoicing in
that which is good, and mourning for that which is evil, whereupon their sins
are said to be forgiven, that yet all this while are men whose hearts are not
right within them: and this is no wonder, seeing they are said to believe, Mat.
12. they believe for a season, yea, Joh. 2. 23. unconverted men are said (...),
to believe in the name (which some make the highest expression of believing)
now according to the collustration of their understandings by faith, suitable
are the motions of their affections in their heart. As they believe, so they
rejoice, mourn, desire, and delight in things believed.

2. These affections we may for distinction sake call temporary affections in
holy 2. Such mo^ions may be called temporary affections.
things. As our Savior calls it a temporary faith, so may we a temporary joy, a
temporary mourning, a temporary (...)ht in good things; Not as it were of the
essence of these affections to apostatize at ^ast. It is true, faith is called
temporary, because when hot persecutions arose it presently withered, but had
no such storms or tempests come, an house that is built upon the sand only,
will not fall. It is the opinion of a learned man, Conradus Bergius, praxis
Cathol. page 105. that it is not likely that any one dies a mere temporary
believer, but that at least when he comes to die, seeing he must part with
worldly comforts, which he always loved more then God, he then fretteth and
murmureth against God, and so extinguisheth that temporary faith and affections
to God; or else resigneth himself up unto God, and of a temporary faith there
is suddenly by the grace of God a saving faith; let the Author see to the
making of this good: We call it not temporary, as if it were necessary there
should be Apostasy from these. Certainly the foolish Virgins were such
Christians as did live and die with temporary faith and affections to God, that
had a lamp and shining, and so some oil, else their lamp could not shine, but
not such store as would hold out: so then, these affections and motions of thy
heart, may be all the pillar thou leanest upon, when yet many damned in hell
have gone as far.

3. Christians with these temporary affections do not constitute a third kind
of believers 3. Temporary believers are unregenerate persons.
between converted and unconverted, but are in the state of unregenerate
persons. And the work upon the godly and those temporaries differ not only
gradually or in duration, but essentially and specifically. They are then
foolish Virgins, They are those that build upon the sand; They are the thorny
ground: notwithstanding these great promising hopes: So we say, that we can
neither call them regenerate nor unregenerate, nor yet make them a third kind,
but that they are like the Embrio, proving abortive, which we cannot call
either a man or a beast, nor yet make it a third kind, for it is only an
inchoate, imperfect being: but by the Scripture we may surely enough place them
in the rank of those who are not members of Christ, and not being united to him
cannot be said to partake of the divine nature, and therefore must be in a
carnal, sinsull temper, and are not like a tree rooted that sprouteth and
flourishes, but like some branch of a tree put into the ground, that may
sprout for a season.

4. The affections and motions that such may have in holy duties, may be upon
several 4. There are sevarall grounds of temporary holy motions. 1. Novelty of
doctrine.
grounds;

As in the first place, The novelty and the strangeness of the doctrine may
much affect and delight: And this may be the reason why they rejoiced in John
Baptists Ministry: What went you out for to see (says our Savior) (...):
some strange, new sight; and thus while the doctrine of the Gospel is new, it
has many admirers. Commonly in the work of the Ministry, a new Minister is
much delighted in, while his parts, his abilities are new, men hear with joy:
but through custom, their affections do abate: and such kind of hearers I
fear London has many: We may say unto many, What go ye out to see rather then
to hear. Therefore by the way take notice of what a frail ground many go upon;
who say, since they left our Congregations, our Ministers; have gone into new
ways of doctrine, they say, they have found more comfort, more sweet
affections then ever; What argument is this? All novell things will affect
thus, and after use and custom in those ways they are in, and they go further
into more new ways, upon new changes, they will find new affections.

2, Men may be affected with the doctrine and truths of Christ, as it is
comfortable 2. Comfortablenesse or sadness of the matter.
or sad matter; without any respect to a spiritual operation. The Gospel is
called (...), glad tidings, or good news, now a man may be affected in hearing
this gracious counsel of God to save sinners discovered, as he would be about
any State or Commonwealth good news wherein he is much concerned, and all this
is but knowing Christ after the flesh; or else the sadness of the matter, the
very History of Christ recorded by the Evangelists, may abundantly make a man
mourn to see how the innocent and righteous one was put to death, merely to
satisfy the lusts of proud and carnal men; and thus as Austin says of
himself, when he read the story of Dido, he could weep over her dead, when he
could not weep for himself dead in sin; so thou may be affected about Christ's
death, as it was a sad passion, and never be affected with those
Scripture-Arguments that are propounded. In this sense, Christ forbad those
women, weep not for me ye daughters of Jerusalem, but weep for your selves.

3. The hearers affections may be much moved, or stirred at the Ministers
abilities, 3. Ministers abilities.
because of his parts, cloquence, elocution, affectionate utterance. These
things may much delight you, and you think this is a sign of grace. The Prophet
Ezekiel was like a pleasant and sweet tuned instrument unto his hearers,
whereupon God says, they come in Troops, and sat as his people, but yet were
not reformed. Austin while a Manichee was wonderfully affected with Ambrose his
preaching, because of his eloquence: and certainly Rhetorical elocution,
especially that which is about the (...) the affections of men may much
prevail: Insomuch that one Country made Hercules who was so famous for
strength, the god of eloquence, implying thereby how strong that is, to turn
and change man; Therefore examine your hearts in the ground of your affections;
The learning of the man may please your intellectuals; The powerful utterance
may satisfy your affections, but all this while you are no more wrought upon
in a spiritual way, then the Roman auditors were, when they heard Tullies
Orations, veritas Christiano-rum pulchrior est Helena Groecorum. The truth of
Christianity is fairer then the Graecians Helena: we may love a choice truth,
as a man may be enamoured with a fair face; fine head notions may produce some
affectionate heart-motions: but what symptom of grace is in all this?

4. Even corrupt lusts in men, such as pride, ambition, self seeking, may
produce 4. Men's corrupt lusts.
great affections in holy duties, especially in public administrations, where
others may admire and applaud; Thus the Pharisees in their public Expositions
of the Law, and teachings in the Synagogue, as also in their prayers, might be
much affected from those carnal motives provoking of them; many times the more
excellent a Sermon is, the more carnal the heart of a Preacher may be: Thus a
private Christian in prayers with others, the stronger his invention may be,
the weaker his grace may be, and those expressions which seem excellent to
others come from a root very bitter to God; Even as in a Meadow full of grass
and pleasant flowers, if you dig to the bottom of them, there is nothing but
noisome earth; so if you go to the Fountain from whence all these expressions,
vehement expostulations, that are used in prayer, do flow, you may see it is a
poisoned fountain. As on the other side, an heart contrite, and full of grace
before God may not be so admirable in expressions: As they say, the ground full
of mines of gold is very barren for grass. Do not then go away rejoicing from
a duty, because of thy affections merely in an holy duty. Let not this comfort
thee, that thy soul was heated within, but consider whether the ground upon
which all these are built, be solid and enduring.

Lastly, A man's affections may be inflamed not only from such base and unworthy
considerations, but even from the goodness and excellency of spiritual
things; 5. Sometimes even from the excellency of spiritual things.
yet because not radicated, not thoroughly changed in the bottom of the soul,
all these affections be insufficient: and this was the cause of that joy and
delight in those we instanced in, viz. The sweetness and excellency of holy
things; They tasted the good Word of God, not the good worldly aims and
respects by the Word of God, yet all this is in a vanishing unsettled way. They
are affected with the world as well as with God, and thereby it is they
miscarry: so that all affections in holy things, and that because of their
excellency, is not presently a certain Grounds of ap(...) to rely on these. 1.
A seeming attainment of the end of all knowledge hereby.
note of one who shall ioherit glory unless deeply rooted.

The grounds why Christians are apt to rely upon these are,

First, Because hereby we seem to have attained the end of all knowledge and
abilities in religion. For seeing all supernatural revelation of heavenly
truths is for practice and operation: if we find some love and joy and
affection both to the revealer who is God, and the matter revealed, we are
prone to think we are now arrived as far as we ought to be. Indeed it will be
easily granted, for a man to hear, pray, or believe the Word of God without
some inward affections thereupon, that he may be judged a cloud without water,
a tree without fruit: but when this oil runs from the head to the inferior
parts, then may we not say All is well. But Balaams consideration of the good
estate of the righteous, wrought in him affections to have such an end as they
have.

2. We are prone to make these all in all, because affections are sensible and
we feel them moving of us: Now we are affected and confirmed most by things of
2. Because of the sensible motion of Affections.
sense. The reason why a godly man finds it so hard to live by faith, is
because we have so much of sense in us, and it is no mean work not to judge
according to what we feel. Therefore that man who is in a false way, whether of
doctrine, worship, or life, and yet finds comfort and consolation therein, is
in a very sad and dangerous condition. The devil transforming himself into an
Angel of light, of joy and comfort, does the most incurably destroy. It is no
good Argument I have comfort in this way, therefore it is of God, but let it be
first discovered to be of God, and this will breed sound comfort.

Lastly, Therefore are we apt to rely on this most, because this does look most
like grace; Of all false signs these do come nearest. Temporaries are affected
almost with the same feeling as the truly godly are, insomuch that some have
thought (though falsely) the difference is only in degrees: so that it is easier
to convince men of the unsoundnesse and weakness of all signs rather then of
this, although men have therefore the greater cause to fear herein, rather then
any where else.

Therefore in the next place consider, Why these affections are not to be
looked upon as such an Ark that will save, when the deluge shall overflow.

And first, These motions argue only Gods spirit, working in thee, not dwelling
in thee. Now the godly they are the temples of the holy Ghost, and being
members of Christ they are animated with the spirit of Christ not only
assisting but informing. The Spirit of God in a temporary is like an Angel
appearing in some outward shape or body; there was an eating, a drinking, but
the Angel was only a form assisting not informing that body: therefore the
bodies they assumed did not live, neither were they nourished, or could grow by
all the food they took, but the Spirit of God is in a godly man like the soul
in the body. I do not speak of a personal union, as if they made up one, as
the soul and body do one man, but of a moral union, or a union mystical by
faith, with a constant inhabitation. A woman may have many expressions of love
from a man, but yet not presently such as give a conjugall affection, Therefore
thou can draw comfort from those things only which argue the spirits
inhabitation, not the Spirits motion or operation.

Secondly, A second ground is in the Text, There are better things in the way
of Heaven then these. Now we can take comfort in nothing but that which is the
best work for its kind, of Christ in us. There are better things then praying,
hearing, with some affections; and that is a renovation of the heart, a deep
radication of grace in thy soul: Whereas now if we speak of the saving graces
in the godly, it would be absurd to say we hope better things, then truly to
believe in Christ, really to mortify sin. It is true, there may be a
graduall bettering of them, but not a specificall.

Lastly, (because more of this in another place) They are not things that
accompany salvation: If a man had the highest degree of temporary faith,
temporary joy, yet no promise of justification or salvation is made to such a
person: There are great promises made to the believer, to him that rejoices in
the Word of God, but they are not to be understood of a temporary faith, or a
temporary joy: he that goes no further then these, has no promise in all the
Scripture to comfort himself by: whereas the least degree of true faith and
sincere joy, may with all boldness apply the promise.

Use 1. of Instruction, How remote they are from all hopes of salvation, who go
on in a rode, or round of the duties of religion, without the least savoury,
affection in them! You whose hearts never thought of sin, and were troubled,
of whom God cannot say at any time as he did of Ahab, See thou how this man
humbles himself? You, who pray, hear, and find no more relish in these
things then in the white of an Egg, as Job speaks, Oh what a gulf is there
between mercy and you, that neither mercy can come to you, or you to mercy! We
have removed our Idols out of our glass windows, but there are still too many
Christian Idols, in our Pews and Congregations, who have eyes and see not,
hearts and understand not, nor rejoice in any thing that is good. Oh how
unexcusable is it, that thy soul has found a sweetness, a savourinesse in the
world, in lusts, and none in God! what is it because God is a wilderness, and
the creature a pleasant fountain?

Use of Exhortation, To take more diligent heed to thy self th^^ ever: It may
be thou have no better evidences for heaven, then what the third kind of
hearers, then what the foolish Virgins have had: Oh how terrible will it be,
when God shall say to you, I looked for better things, then that joy, that
sorrow, that faith. I know not how alate we are all become frozen and very
barren; many inchoate and imperfect workings there are upon men's hearts, but
few have a solid, and through change wrought upon them. It Is the opinion of
Bergius before-cited, that the greater part of Christians are but temporaries,
and it is to be feared that this opinion is too true: for if you do regard what
little rooting grace has in men's hearts, how weak their pulse beats that way,
how strong their affections are to the world, and the things thereof; we
Ministers may fear, that the greatest part of our seed is sown upon thorny
ground. Oh therefore that this Sermon might be blessed by God to make some
Embryo to become a perfect man, some that are almost, true believers, true
rejoycers in good things, even altogether such: Oh this sluggishnesse and
laziness, whereby people rest contented with some flashes of joy and sorrow,
in the matters of God, will devour like a roaring Lion.

SERMON XXII.
Showing that from Judgments, Opinions and Disputes, arguments of the truth of
Grace cannot be drawn.

ROMANS 14. 17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but Righteousness,
Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost.
THe Apostle is a Casuist in this Chapter, and handles that case of
Conscience, which did much trouble the Church at that time with much prudence
and moderation. The dispute was about the observation of some legal rites,
Whether this was abrogated by evangelical liberty, some were for the
affirmative, some for the negative, and the contest grows so high, that they
make the sum and substance of Religion to lie in these things. Now the
Apostle his scope is to rectify them by several excellent rules, some whereof
are to use our liberty always with respect to our weak brother, To judge
charitably of one another in these differences, not unseasonably to trouble the
Church with our particular opinions, but to keep our faith to our selves; in
which respect Cyprian said, God would have us confiteri fidem, rather then
profiteri, He confesses it that is demanded and called thereunto, he
professes that does it ultroneously, without any invitation at all. And in my
Text the Apostle gives an excellent rule. The marrow and essence of godliness
lies not in these things, though ye are apt to make these the pillars and
foundations of Religion, yet they be not.

So that in the words you have a Proposition expressed; first Negatively, and
then Positively.

In the Proposition you have,

First, The Subject, The Kingdom of God. This is in other places called The
Kingdom of Heaven, not respectu loci, in respect of the place where it is, for
it is exercised on the earth, but respectu modi, because it is administered
after an heavenly manner. It does in the general signify that Regiment and
Government which God exercises, either of glory in the Heavens, or of Grace in
the hearts of his people; and by a Metonymy of the Adjunct for the Subject, it
signifies the Church, Mat. 13. 41. and by a Metonymy of the Effect for the
efficient Cause instrumental, it signifies the preaching of the Gospel, Mat.
13. 33. and by a Synecdoche of the genus for the more excellent species, it
signifies that peculiar time of renovation and restoration which was made in
the Church by Christ and the Apostles, Matthew. 3. 2. Mark 1. 14. The Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. Hence the Kingdom of Heaven is never used in the Old
Testament, but in the times of the Messiah only.

Secondly, There is the attribute, 1. Exclusively, It is not meat or drink,
that is, it consists not in the doctrinal opinions, in the different practice
about these things. 2. Affirmatively and Positively, but this Kingdom of grace
is in righteousness, an universal conformity to Gods will, in peace, viz. with
others, and in joy in the holy Ghost, viz. a godly joy in the exercise of all
grace, accompanied with the sense of Gods favor and love in the Gospel, which
is wrought in us by the holy Ghost, for Joy is reckoned among others the fruit
of the Spirit.

That doctrinal disputations and difference of judgments in matters of
Religion cannot Observe.
be relied upon as symptoms and evidences of Grace.

Even the strong Christian who had the truth of his side, could not prove his
godliness from his opinion or practice in this controversy, because the
Kingdom of God consisted not in these things. The Apostle speaks the like in
another disputation, that did much exercise the godly, 1 Cor. 8. 8. about
eating things offered to Idols. But meat commends us not to God, for neither
if we eat are we better, neither if we eat not, are we the worse. The Greek
words are emphatical, (...), we do not abound, we have done no such great
matter, neither (...) do we fall short of others, as if we were not so
excellent. Thus also the Apostle, Heb. 14. 9. It is good (that is better) to
have the heart established with grace, rather then meats, rather then Doctrines
and Disputations about them; where you see Disputations and Opinions do not
establish, are not the staff of a man's heart; Grace only is so. Yea the Apostle
in that grand controversy which did so much exercise the Church at first, viz.
the Disputation about Circumcision, and the observation of it, speaks
manifestly, Gal. 6. 15. In Jesus Christ neither Circumcision or uncircumcision
avails any thing, but a new creature. Let not therefore men for a particular
opinion which they conceive truer then others, boast themselves, appropriate
godliness only unto that way. Although we are very prone to do so, yet the
Scripture discovers such arguments to be only broken reeds.

For the Explication of this, consider these things; Explicatory
considerations. 1. Sound Doctrine is the foundation of godliness.


First, That true and sound Doctrine is the foundation of godliness. There
cannot be a godly life where there is not a true faith; hence the Scripture
makes Regeneration to consist in Illumination in the first place, Ephesians. 4. 23,
24. There must be knowing before there can be doing; you must not therefore
extend this to all Doctrines even fundamental in Religion, as if the believing
of Jesus Christ to be God, believing the Scriptures to be the word of God, were
nothing, no without faith it is impossible to please God. Therefore to suppose
a man godly, and to be saved in any Religion or Opinion, is to deny that there
are damnable heresies, which yet the Apostle asserteth. Some have coined a
threefold piety, Judaica, Jewish, Pagana, Heathenish, Christiana, Christian;
but as the gold within the Temple was only holy, so is godliness only within
the true Church. This therefore is to be observed especially in these times,
where men are thought to have godly regenerated hearts, although they
pertinaciously hold fundamental errors; whereas the Apostle Gal. 5. reckoning
up heresies, as the manifest works of the flesh, with other gross sins,
concludes, He that does these shall never inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.
Although therefore orthodoxy be not presently a sign of the state of grace, yet
wilful perseverance in heresy even as in adultery and drunkenness, may make
us conclude these are the fruits of the flesh. Be therefore informed, that
although sound Doctrine be not necessarily godliness, yet it is a necessary
foundation to it. Ubi male creditur, nec been vivitur, A good Faith, and a good
Conscience, the Apostle couples together. And as the Spirit of God is called an
holy Spirit, because it works holiness in his children, so it is also the
Spirit of truth, because it guides them into truth; and first the Spirit of
truth to them, before the Spirit of holiness to them; hence the Scripture does
so often commend a sound mind unto the godly.

Secondly, There is a lawful disputation in matters of Religion, yea it is a
duty 2. Disputations in matters of Religion lawful, and sometimes needful.
sometimes, when the Church is unsatisfied to have points of Religion thoroughly
discussed. Thus our Savior did use many arguments to prove he was the Messiah,
yea tentative did once argue against the truth, that the Messiah was not the
Son of David, because he called him Lord, which was only to draw out his
adversaries the more. In like manner Act. 15. there was a famous Council
gathered together, when Doubts in Religion troubled the Church, and in this
Council there was (...) much disputing; so at another time we read of Paul,
that he was (...), proving out of the Scripture some truth; the word signifies
by a strict comparing and knitting of one place to another. And for this reason
it is that God does suffer heresies and false doctrines to be vented, that the
truth may be more resplendent, by having all rust filed off; As in times of
persecutions God does exercise patientiam Ecclesiae, the patience of the
Church; so in time of heresies he does exercise sapientiam, the wisdom and
skill of the Church.

But now when we say, Disputations in Religion are necessary, and sometimes
Lunitations.
a duty, you must bound this several ways. As

First, In the Object matter, if it be in matters useful and profitable. The
Apostle I. As to the matter.
condemns disputations merely upon this, because they profit not, though they
do not so visibly hurt and destroy, yet that is enough, if they do not profit.
Disputare is as much as to cut off superfluous branches; Now if the disputation
it self be a luxuriant branch, that must be cut off. The Scripture speaks of
the It ought to be useful.
acknowledgement of truth after godliness. All light in the understanding
ought to produce heat and warmth in the affections.

2. It must be in matters revealed in Gods word. We must not pry beyond those
Revealed in the word of God.
things that are written. The Apostle condemns some that did (...), Go a
tip-toe, like a man acting in a Tragedy, and arrogantly intruding into those
things he has not seen. The Papists make a wicked Allegory of the beast that
might not touch the mountain, when the Law was delivered, if it did, it was to
die. This they apply to a Lay-mans reading of the Scripture; but we may better
refer it to their Schoolmen, who though they were never wrapped up into the
third Heavens, yet write of Angels, as if they had been there.

Secondly, For the Manner, Disputations ought to be wholly in reference to
practice, II. As to the manner. Wholly in reference to practice.
not in parties, to raise new sects, to get victory, but wholly to increase in
the power of godliness, otherwise disputations are but like much fretting,
that eat away the flesh of godliness, and bring it into consumption; and truly
it is much to be lamented, to see how godliness is decayed, mortification
languisheth, since so much quarrelling and wrangling in matters of Doctrine. It
is reported of Bellarmine by Fuligattus in his life, Quod a studiis
Scholasticae Theologiae averteretur fere nauseabundus, quoniam succo carebant
liquidae pictatis. He did with loathing turn from the study of School Divinity,
because it wanted the juice of sweet piety. All Religion is practical, it is
food not to be looked upon, but eaten and digested.

Thirdly, The Subject ought also to be qualified, one who is able and wise,
understanding III. As to the subject. One that understands the state of the
Doctrine.
what the true state of the Doctrine is, not a David in Saul's Armor. It Is a
miserable thing to see how many dispute about Universal Redemption, Free Grace,
Justification, Predestination, etc. who yet are no more able to wield those
Doctrines, then a Pigmy could Goliah's Armor; we must not attempt things above
our strength. With these and many the like Qualifications, Disputations in
matters of Religion are lawful; so that in all these we do not manifest a
skeptical doubtful heart; as if nothing were certain (which I am afraid is the
temper of too many in these days) as if faith were not (...) and (...), a
substance, evidence, persuasion and full assurance and confidence.

Thirdly, It will always fall out, that even in the Church of God, there will
be different 3. There will always be different judgments in the Church.
judgments and opinions, because we know but in part, and are spiritual in
affections, but in part. So that howsoever God has promised to lead his
children in to all truth, yet they are no more freed from all error, then from
all sin; and as the Spirit of God sanctifying is more powerful in some then
in others; So also the Spirit of God enlightening and directing into truth, is
more effectual in some then in others; some are Babes, others are Men; some
are strong, others are weak. And as we know in part, so being also sanctified
but in part; hence by different opinions we make several factions, One is of
Paul, another of Cephas. And we are apt to monopolize piety, to enclose it in
such a way. None godly, but those that are of such a judgment; and indeed if
we speak of fundamental Doctrines, this were lawful, but in other matters that
are superstructions only, it is unlawful. Thus the Papist, he makes it, De
necessitate salutis, subesse Romano Pontifici. The very refusing his
superiority, is made a sign sure enough of damnation.

Fourthly, There is great difference between Doctrines that are fundamental,
and 4. There is great diffe(...)ce between Fundamental Doctrines and others.
others that are not so. In that they are called fundamental, it is evident
there can be no salvation, if they be denied. The Scripture calls such truths
(...) and (...) foundations and elements; In which sense because the Jews
accounted the legal observations (...) foundations, necessary to salvation, the
Apostle calls them beggarly, and elements of the world, because of their pride
and ambition in maintaining of them; now there are Doctrines that are
fundamental to faith, such is the Trinity, Incarnation of Christ: Others that
are fundamental to holiness, and others that are fundamental to the worship;
and it is a damnable thing obstinately to deny any of these. Of such opinions
as these the Apostle does not speak in this 14th Chapter, as Chrysostom well
observes; no of such the Apostle speaks, If an Angel from Heaven bring any
other Doctrine, let him be an Anathema. But there are opinions that are
accessaries not principles, that are not articuli or main parts of the body,
and of such properly we may say, The kingdom of God does not consist.

Fifthly, Although it be not a necessary demonstration of godliness, yet it is
a great 5. It is a great mercy to be kept orthodox.
mercy of God to be orthodox, and to be kept in the right faith. Hence all
error and ignorance is described by the name darkness, as truth is by light,
to show how dreadful the one is, and comfortable the other is; The truth of
God is so great that we ought to lose our lives for it. Yea Christ's death,
though as it did respect Gods justice, it was (...) a Propitiatory, yet as it
did respect men, and the good confession of faith he made, it was (...) a
Martyrdom. Hence are those expressions, To contend earnestly for the faith,
Jud. 3. Not so much as to bid God speed, to him that brings false Doctrines,
2 John 10. Hence also as a glorious gift, is the Spirit of God promised to
teach us the truth, John 16. 13. Yea it is made the comfortable privilege of
the Elect, that though false Prophets shall prevail much, yet they shall not
deceive the Elect, that is, totally and finally; and when the Apostle spoke of
the Apostasy of Hymenaeus and Philetus, he adds by way of comfort to the
godly, Nevertheless the foundation of the Lord stands sure, knowing who is
his. Blessed therefore is that man whose heart is kept in a continual fear and
trembling at errors and false ways, as well as at iniquities and ungodly
practices.

Sixthly, Take this Caution in the last place, That although the life of
Religion and 6. The least truth ought not to be contemned or denied.
godliness lies not in every truth, yet we ought not to despise or contemn
the least truth or deny it. Paul withstood Peter to the face, in an error that
did not seem so great; in Paul you have an example of zeal, and in Peter of
patience to bear it; for Genus quoddam non ignobile est Martyrii,
reprehensionem patienter far, It is a kind of glorious Martyrdom to receive a
reproof patiently. Even the least truth is so precious, that Christ says,
Heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, then one iota or tittle of his word.
Though truth for the matter of it may seem little, yet because it is the truth
of the great God, therefore it ought not to be neglected; some have called
every truth so far forth as it comes to be made known fundamental, as if a man
would necessarily be damned if he did not receive it. But certainly truth is
called fundamental, not from the manner of revelation, or means of knowledge,
but from the nature and use of it. Why Doctrins though never so true, etc.


In the next place, Consider why Doctrines, though never so excellent and true
are not an infallible sign of grace. And, First, Because enlightening the mind
to receive truth, is but an introduction or antecedent, and that not a
necessary one to godliness, 1. Because enlightening the mind is no
constitutive part of godliness.
it is not a constitutive part of it. Hence it is that a man may be very
orthodox and knowing of the truth, yea zealous for it, yet hating the power of
godliness in others, and refusing to reform in his own life. The Scripture
makes a difference between those that know Gods will, and those that do it.
Boast not then of this that thou art among the orthodox, thou have not forsaken
the truth, running after these new errors; Thou hold the truth in
Justification, about the Law of God; thou art no Arminian, Socinian or
Antinomian, all this is well. But this is not plea enough for salvation, and
the judgment of discussion at that great day, will not be, How much good
knowledge thou have had? What a good faith only, but what a good life also?
Therefore if thou art gone no further then to the doctrinal part of Religion,
thou have no sure arguments of comfort within thy self.

Secondly, Seeing that corruption is in every part, not only blindness in the
mind, 2. The cure is not perfect, by removing blindenes from the intellectual
without change of the affectionate part.
but contumacy and rebellion in will and affections, thou have no full cure
upon thee, unless grace has healed thy affectionate part as well as thy
intellectual. If thy spiritual eyes be open, yet have no legs to walk in Gods
Commandments, thou can never attain to the end of the way which is eternal
happiness; so then think with thy self, if I would ever have any true comfort
about my spiritual estate, I must have a plaster as broad as my sore, now not
only my understanding was darkened with ignorance, errors, foolishness, etc.
but my heart also with sinful and corrupt affections. Therefore if the grace
of God do not give me a good heart, as well as a good head, I am still undone.
Hence the promise of Regeneration is not only expressed in words relating to
the understanding, They shall all know God, and be taught of God, but in
phrases concerning the affectionate part, I will take away the heart of stone
and give an heart of flesh, and I will write my Law in their inward parts.
Examine then thy self, whether the grace of God converting, is as universal and
extensive as sin infecting? For as an hand of a man, or an head of a man, is
not a man; so neither is any particular revelation or illumination of the mind
with faith, the whole image of God.

Thirdly, Know that orthodoxy or a right judgment is easier obtained then the
renovation 3. A right judgment is more easily obtained then a through
renovation.
of the other faculties of the soul. We are easier persuaded to believe the
truth, then to love the truth; How many times were the Pharisees convinced of
the truth, and of the light, yet they could not love it, or delight in it? And
as moral Philosophy tells us, The understanding draws the object to it, but in
the will and affections the object draws them to it; so that if a man loves
the earth, he is earthy; if he loves the lusts of the flesh, he is fleshly: but
if a man understand or know that which is spiritual, he is not presently
spiritual; and this is the reason, why God and Angels do Scire malum, know
evil, but they cannot velle malum, will that which is evil, because the
understanding abstracts from all the imperfections of the object, as it is in
its self, but the object of the will draws down the faculty to it, as it is
in its self. There is also another reason, why it is easier to know the truth
then to love it, Because the understanding is a mere passive faculty, and
cannot refuse the object of truth, when laid before it. But the will and
affections are active and rebellious, not necessarily carried out to their
objects: and this is the reason why many a man believes many a truth, which
yet he hates, and wishes it were false, because the object works on the
understanding irresistably. And therefore till grace come and work so
insuperably and irresistably upon the will also, it never boweth or yields to
God. Oh therefore say, that besides that general knowledge of the truth, and
the zealous maintaining of it, there is necessary a further, more peculiar,
particular, and operative way of grace upon thy heart. What is the reason that
you may have many an orthodox man write many learned books against errors, yet
know not the meaning of those truths upon his heart? But only because true
Doctrine is not enough without a gracious alteration of the whole man, A man may
learnedly dispute for the grace of Conversion against Arminians and others, yet
not feel the power of conversion upon his own soul. He may learnedly maintain
the true Doctrine of Justification, and yet not at all be acquainted with the
sweet benefit of it in himself, and so be no better then those spouts and
water-pots that refresh the garden, and cause sweet flowers to grow, but they
have no sweetness themselves.

Fourthly, That cannot be rested upon as grace, which may breed pride,
ambition, 4. Disputations Good judgment, etc. may breed pride, vainglory, etc.
vainglory, and such wretched worms in thee, but so many times do doctrinal
disputations and great abilities in learning. The Apostle speaks of some busy
disputants, 1 Timothy 4. 6. That they turn aside to vain-jangling. Now the Apostle
gives a contrary end and use of the Gospel. The end of the Commandment is
charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and faith unfeigned; So
1 Timothy 6. 3. If a man consent not to the Doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is proud, or puffed up. As sick corrupt bodies swell with
humors. Therefore says the Apostle, From such withdraw thy self.

Fifthly, The Devils that are damned in hell have admirable knowledge. They
know and believe the things of Religion. James says, The Devils believe and
tremble, not with any faith infused by Gods Spirit into them, but from the
evident conviction upon their consciences; yet the Devil for all this knowledge
is an unclean spirit. Though the Devil tempt men to errors, and heresies, and
atheism, yet he is neither Atheist or Heretic. The light implanted in him, and
acquired by observation of things, prevents such darkness and clouds upon him.
Now what a goodly sign will this be to boast of, wherein the Devils do exceed
thee? The Devil has his very name (...) from knowledge, yet that is no
advantage, we may say the Devil is an orthodox Devil in some sense.

Use 1. Of Instruction, That although we are to bless God for orthodox
Churches, yet that is not enough unless we be holy and godly Churches. Neither
may thou Use 1.
confide in thy self, because thou art no heretic, thou art no erroneous
person, thou love the honest old orthodox truths. Alas the Kingdom of God, of
grace, reaches further then to the understanding only. Now if so be the
orthodox indeed may not thus be self confident, how intolerable is it, when
men for their heresies and false doctrines, though esteemed truths by them,
judge themselves the nearer salvation! What a miserable delusion is this, to be
thought the more accepted to God and endeared to him by the false ways they
walk in? Stir up thy heart therefore, that as thou can not abide heresies
nor false doctrines, so neither can thou endure impiety or profaneness. It
is a shame to be able to confute heretics by books, and not ungodliness by
our lives, yet what Lamentations may the godly ^eremiahs of this age make, to
see how possessed men are with their Tenants and Doctrines, when it may be
false, as if none were godly, but such as are found among them, as if the
Kingdom of God did only consist in their opinions, and in the mean while, the
known and powerful way of godliness is laid aside.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, To turn all knowledge and truth into practice. Take not
the points of Religion, as little children do books only to look upon the gay
pictures, Use 2.
and not to read the matter therein contained. If thou can tell what it is to
be converted, what it is to believe, what it is to be justified against all
false teachers, labor experimentally to find all these in thy own self. Would
a painted fire content you in a cold winter? Would painted food satisfy your
hungry appetite? No more should the mere doctrinal part of Religion, without
the practical part. Alas it is a poor privilege to say, We have the true
Church, the true Ministry, the true Administration of Ordinances, if we have
not also the true way of believing, heavenly-mindednesse, and mortification.
The Socinians they make sport in their books with the Protestant Authors,
because they call themselves the Orthodox, and say, We use it as a spell,
thinking thereby to charm all dissentiats. But could the Godliness of our
lives, be as convincing as the purity and truth of our Doctrines, Christ would
say to us, Thou art altogether fair and lovely, the chiefest of ten thousands;
then would he come and sup with us: In our Congretions he would manifest a more
glorious and efficacious power.

Let therefore all truth be incarnated into practice, be a living definition, a
walking definition of repentance: that we may learn from your lives what Grace
is, as well as from books.

SERMON XXIII.
Declaring what deceipts men lie open to in judging those things to be works of
the Spirit, which indeed are not.

1 JOHN 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they be of God.
THe Apostle having asserted immediately before, in the verse precedent of the
former chapter, a true and sure sign of our state of Grace, viz. The saving and
sanctifying operations of Gods Spirit, by which the Spirit discovers it self,
as the sun does it self by its beams and heat, or as the rational soul
manifests it self by rational operations: He does in this verse regulate us in
our proceeding about this sign, advertising us not to be too credulous, or
overhasty in believing every thing that may seem to be of the Spirit. Where by
the way you may see it is no good argument against the use and truth of signs,
That men may be deluded, and think they have them, when they have them not: For
the Apostle at the same time says, We know that he abides in us by the Spirit
which he has given us, and yet adds, believe not every spirit, taking Spirit
in both places Metonimically, the effects of the Spirit either real or
pretended, for the efficient cause, the Spirit it self: So that in the words
you have a cautionary admonition, set down

First, Negatively, Believe not every spirit: That is, every Doctrine or
Doctor, pretending Revelations from the Spirit, and by consequence not thy own
heart, either in Doctrine, or Consolation that may seem to be of the spirit:
for although the words following argue spirit, to be meant of Doctrinal
positions, yet the words going before in the former chapter, are to be
understood of the operations and consolations of Gods spirit; and therefore we
may understand it universally of all the works of Gods Spirit, whether relating
to Doctrinals or Practicals.

In the next place the duty is set down Positively, Try the Spirits, which is
to be meant thus, by the word of God: for all trial supposes some rule by
which the thing tried is to be examined: and this duty is imposed upon all
believers, who though they have not a judgment of Decision, yet have of
Discretion for their own selves.

In the Third place you have the reason of this Examination, Because many false
Prophets are gone out into the world; Many who shall boast of the Spirit, and
say, It lodges with them: And that we may be the better guided in this
Examination, he lays down one rule as it concerns Doctrine, verse 2. Hereby
we know the spirit of God, if it confesses that Jesus Christ is come into the
flesh: which may be understood either largely, as acknowledgeing all matters
that pertain either to the person and office of Christ; so that although we may
acknowledge Christ's incarnation; yet if we deny his offices, we offend against
this rule, and so have the Spirit of Antichristianism, as in Popery; or else
more strictly, for that determinate particular point of Christ's incarnation;
for though a man be heretical in other points, and so have the spirit of
Antichrist, yet so far as it acknowledges this truth, it is of God. And thus
Austin said, Heretics and Schismatics are of the Church, so far as they hold
any thing that is true and good: but wherein they are divided from truth, they
are divided from the Church, and wherein they are united in truth, they are
united to the Church.

Obs. That a man may much delude, and deceive his own soul, about his spiritual
estate, by judgeing those things to come from the spirit of God, which indeed
Obs. There is much of self-deceit in judgeing those things to come from the
spirit which do not. Introductory Explications. 1. There are such comforts,
etc. of the Spirit, in which a Believer cannot be deceived.
do not.

We may think indeed we have revelations, raptures, spiritual consolations from
the Holy Ghost, when we are all the while in great delusions: this point
deserves many things introductory for Explication.

First, The spirit of God does in and by the word, comfort, assure, or instruct
the soul so certainly, that the true believer is not, or cannot be deceived.
Therefore the Scripture calls it, The testimony of the spirit, and the sealing
of the spirit: and it would be horrid blasphemy to make the spirit of Truth,
the spirit of Falsehood: Hence Faith, which is the work of Gods spirit, is
called (...), and (...), words that signify a sure and certain establishment:
we must not therefore with the Papist, who commends doubting for humility,
profanely make such scoffing interrogations as these: one man thinks he has
the spirit, another thinks he has the spirit, and yet anathematize one
another spirit: therefore there is no certainty about our knowledge of having
the spirit in us: For howsoever hypocrites may be deluded, and heretics
deceived about the spirit, yet those that indeed partake of the Holy Ghost,
they are not deceived. It is true, this evidence and persuasion cannot be made
clear to another: and no wonder, for God gives not this persuasion to assure
others, but that heart in whom it is. Take we heed therefore, that because
there have been miserable and sad instances of horrible delusions by men
boasting of Revelations, and spiritual raptures, that we fall not into
Atheistical, or Skeptical thoughts about the true works of Gods spirit.

Secondly, Therefore to make you afraid herein, it is an high sin to attribute
those 2. To call works of Spirit Diabolical delusions is a great sin.
works which are done by the spirit of God, to impostures and diabolical
delusions. Although we are to Examine the spirits, whether they be of God,
whether in our selves, or others: yet to make that coming from the Devil, which
is indeed of God, is a sin of the greatest magnitude. Therefore take heed least
that which thou say is hypocrisy, and dissimulation in the Godly, be not
indeed true Godliness in them, and so thou do despite to the spirit of Grace.
It is a great dispute, What is the sin against the holy Ghost? Austin said,
Forte in omnibus Sanctis Scripturis nulla major quaestio, nulla difficilior
invenitur, it may be there is no more difficult question in all the Scripture:
Yet Math. 12. 32. It seems to lie much in this, when a man does wilfully, and
maliciously attribute those works that are done by Gods spirit, to the Devil,
as they said, Christ cast out Devils, by the Prince of Devils. Hence Mark, 3.
30. gives the reason why Christ spoke of this sin to the Pharisees, because
they said, He has an unclean spirit. It would be like boldness, said
Athanasius, if we should attribute the Creation of the world to Beelzebub. And
howsoever Cajetan and Jansenius take the words Holy Ghost essentially, as if it
were to be understood of blasphemy against God, and so any of the Persons,
because its spoken oppositely, and by way of distinction unto a sin against the
son of man, yet it is more ordinarily understood of the third Person, yet not
as the third Person, but as it is his proper work to enlighten or sanctify.
Therefore as we must take heed we do not embrace Diabolical delusions for the
spirits Operations, so also take heed of calling the spirits Operations,
Diabolical Suggestions; and this especially concerns some of Gods own
children, who will not take notice of the graces of Gods spirit in themselves,
but reject all as hypocrisy and falsehood: know that in this thou call good
evil, and light darkness: hence the Schoolmen make despair one part of the sin
against the Holy Ghost, because unbelief does immediately oppose the spirit of
God comforting and sanctifying of thee. Be therefore afraid how thou deniest
Gods work in thy soul, this is a greater sin then thou think of in doing so.

Thirdly, The Devil is Gods Ape, and imitates him in all those ways or worship
that God has appointed. Hence there has been no true way of God at any time,
but 3. The devil affects to imitate God in all his appointments.
there has also been a counterfeit way of Satan at that time. How wonderfully
was Jesus Christ demonstrated to be the son of God by signs and miracles, yet
our Savior himself said, There should be many false Christ's: so there are
false Prophets, and false Apostles, all which did boast of the spirit, and that
they had received doctrines from Christ: Some learned men say, The History of
Apollonius Thyaneus with his strange wonders, was writ on purpose to obscure
Christ's wonderful signs, Salm. Tract. 2. de virtute signorum Christi. 2 These.
2. 2. The Apostle exhorts the believers, Not to be shaken in mind about the
day of Christ's coming, neither says he, By letter or word, as from us, nor by
the spirit. Some there were that told the Church they had Revelations, and
secret illuminations of Gods spirit about this: 2 Cor. 11. 13. There are false
Apostle transforming themselves into the Apostless of Christ; and no marvel,
for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light. Thus wheresoever that
Christ or the Spirit is in the Church of God, Satan has his juglings and
cosenings: and therefore as God is said to have his (...), deep things, so have
they the depths of Satan also.

Fourthly, These delusions of Satan may be, and are as large as the works of
Gods 4. Delusions of Satan are as large as the works of the Spirit.
spirit. The spirit of God, is the spirit of Truth, and leads into all Truth:
Now Satan has his delusions about Doctrines: hence come all those Heresies in
the Church of God: As Christ has his Apostles, and Pastors in his Church, To
build up in the most holy Faith; so the Devil has his false Apostles, and his
Instruments of darkness. Again the spirit of God is our comforter, and joy is a
proper fruit of the Holy Ghost: Now the Devil by delusions and suggestions, can
fill the heart with much consolation: hence he is called an Angel of light. Now
light in the Scripture, signifies not only Truth, but joy and gladness:
whence have those joys and consolations flown, which have been in those that
have been manifestly in Satan's ways, but from Satan? Again the spirit of God
does persuade, and imbolden the heart by believing against all discouragements
whatsoever. Thus the Devil also does imbolden, and harden a man in a false way,
that he has no fear at all. Hence the Devil is said To fill Ananias his heart:
that is, as learned De Deiu shows by a parallel place out of Ecclesiastes,
obfirmed and made his heart audaci^us: so that as in the Godly there is, (...),
so in deluded men there is (...), Their Spirits and hearts are raised, and
fitted for boldness to any false way.

Lastly, The spirit of God does foretell things that are to come: And this is
properly to Prophecy: and this the Prophets did; Agabus and others in the New
Testament. Now the Devil also may use his instruments to foretell something to
come: not that of his own nature he can foretell things to come, for so it is
Gods property; but by Revelation from God, God justly permitting this for to
punish those that shall be seduced: thus the Devil told Saul what should befall
him. And in the story of the Anabaptists in Munster, when a Law was made, That
all the Citizens should bring their goods into the common stock, there were
maids that could tell certainly how much every man had hidden at home of his
goods: Now this is like that of Ananias and Saphira: and this Revelation (very
probably) was by the just judgment of God made to the Devil; for seeing the
Devil is an instrument to execute Gods justice and wrath, what should hinder
him from knowing that which God on purpose imployeth him about for the
judgment of others. Aemulantur divinitatem dum furantur divinationem. This is
clearly confirmed, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2. Where a false Prophet is said, To give a
sign or wonder, and the sign or wonder is supposed to come to pass: So that
false Prophets may by Gods permission and Revelation foretell some things to
come: but mark the reason why God permits this, The Lord your God does this to
prove you. Oh therefore with what holiness, humility, and circumspection ought
the children of God to walk in the midst of such Delusions: In so much that it
is called, (...) The efficacy of deceiving.

Fifthly, As the Devil in a Church corrupted, and defiled with Idolatry and
Superstition, does there prevail by humane Traditions, and Forms of
will worship, 5. The devil accomodates his designs to the corruptions, and also
Reformations of a Church.
whereby all spiritual worshipping of God is wholly neglected: so in times of
reformation, then he seduceth men in another Temptation, under the pretense of
seting up the spirit, and its revelations, it cries down the word of God, and
all the ordinary Ministerial Officers Christ has appointed. The first worthy
Reformers, and glorious instruments of God, found a bitter conflict herein; so
that they were exercised not only with Formalists, and Traditionary
Superstitious Papists on one side, but men that pretended themselves to be more
enlightened, then the Reformers were, on the other side: hence they caled those
that did adhere to the scripture and would try revelations by it, Vocalistas
and Literistas Let^erists and Vowallists, as men acquainted with the words and
vowels of the scripture, having nothing of the spirit of God. And wheresoever
in any Town the true Doctrine of the Gospel brake forth to the displacing of
Popery, presently such opinions, like Tares, came up among the good Wheat,
whereby great divisions were raised, and the Reformation made abominable, and
odious to the world; as if that had been the Sun to give heat and warmth to
those Worms and Serpents to crawl out of the ground. Hence they inveighed
against Luther, and said, He had only promulged Carnale Evangelium, a carnal
Gospel. And that the Protestant Doctors did only Carnalia sapere, by them
indeed aliquot fr^ndes de Antichristianismo succis^, s^d arborem and radices
adhuc superesse. They burnt all books but the Bible, and said, That happy time
was come when all should be taught of God. Many remarkable passages I might
further relate but this may suffice to show, That as the Devil in one time of
the Church in the deformation of it, deceives by superstitious, pompous, and
visible worship; so at another time, in the reformation of it, does he delude
by revelations, and pretended high Teachings of the spirit of God, even above
the Scripture.

Sixthly, That therefore we may not split our selves upon inevitable Rocks, God
has left us his Word as a Rule, by which all revelations, and operations of
his spirit 6. The word of God is the rule by which the workings of the Spirit
are to be tried.
are to be tried. All the Scriptures are (...) by Divine inspiration; and
therefore the breathings of Gods spirit, are to be expected in this Garden: and
those commands of attending to the Scripture only, and to observe what is
written, is a plain demonstration that God has tied us to the Scriptures
only: so that as the child in the womb lives upon nourishment conveyed by
the Navel cleaving to it, so does the Church live only upon Christ by the
Navel of the Scripture, through which all nourishment is conveyed: Hence the
Apostles Doctrine, though inspired by the Holy Ghost, Yet was examined by their
hearers, whether agreeable to the Scriptures: And for this their zeal was
commended: hence it is, That because these erroneous persons could not prove
all their dogmatical assertions by scripture, they accuse the scripture as
insufficient and imperfect.

As the word of God is the Treasure of all revealed truth, so God also
implanted a Natural truth in our consciences; so that the Spirit of God does
suggest nothing that is contrary either to revealed Truth, or implanted Truth,
The Anabaptist instanced in by Spanhemius in his History, pretended he had a
revelation to kill his brother, which accordingly he did: this revelation could
not be of God, because against natural light, but of the Devil. Whatsoever is
either against revealed, or implanted light in Men, cannot be thought to come
from the Holy Ghost.

Seventhly, As the operations of the spirit of God, are discovered by the rule
of Truth, so also by the concomitants and effects of them: Which are two
especially, 7. Concomitants and effects difference the spirits workings from
delusions.
holiness of life, and humility.

If you examine the course of the false Prophets in the Old Testament, and of
those recorded in the New, their fruit was corruption in manners, and worship,
encouraging those that were ungodly in their evil ways: It was Michaiah only,
not the other 400 Prophets that Ahab hated, because he only faithfully reproved
him for his sin: so the Prophetess suborned by Nehemiahs adversaries, was to
discourage him in the work of Reformation. Humility also will quickly manifest
the spirit of God working in a man: Paul had a great rapture, even into the
third heavens, but least he should be lifted up with the multitude of
revelations, there was a thorn in the flesh, and buffettings of Satan
continually afflicting of him. The holy Ghost descended in the form of a Dove
upon Christ, to show how meek and humble the operations of it are in those
where it dwells.

Lastly, Not only suggestions from Satan may delude us, as if coming from the
8. Strong motions and imaginations of our own hearts often deceive ns, by
seeming to us the spirits workings. Why men are so confident in delusions. 1.
From the violence of false motions.
Spirit, but also violent motions, and strong imaginations of our own hearts;
we may take them as coming from Gods Spirit, which flow only from the violence
of our own spirits: Thus the false Prophets, they speak of themselves, and
according to the strong inclinations of their own heart: so great a matter is
it to difference that which is humane in us, from that which is divine. Now the
reason, why in delusions we are so confident, Is

First, From the violence of all false motions, whether from our selves, or of
Satan. They being (...) irregularities, do hurry the soul beyond all bounds and
limits; so that the Devil works in men's souls, as he did on their bodies,
with violent and sudden alterations: and these must needs produce strong
passions and affections in us, of love, joy, or hope; whereas the spirit of God
working conformably to the rule, is more sedate, and orderly. Indeed the
efficacy of Gods spirit is demonstrated by that apparition of fiery ^loven
tongues, and by a mighty rushing ^ind; but at another time appearing in the
form of a Dove, demonstrateth that it is such fire and power, as also is
consistent with other graces of meekness and humility. Hence the people of God,
who are partakers of the Holy Ghost, are also possessed with an holy fear and
trembling in themselves, whereas others are not so.

Secondly, Therefore are men confident in these, Because they are admired by
others, 2. From others admiring and following them
and they draw a multitude of disciples. Many times even godly men have been
drawn aside too much after those, who have pretended to Revelations, and
Ecstasies. The Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 2. 4. That he was among the Corinthians,
not in enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the spirit.
But how was that? because his Doctrine was consonant to Gods word, and it was
companied with an efficacious power to raise up to all Godliness. Now false
Apostles, that they may also be applauded, would gladly come in some
demonstration of the spirit; nothing so prevailing as such resemblances: It is
known in Ecclesiastical story, how foully Tertullian was deluded by admiring of
Montanus and Priscilla as Prophets, contemning all others as mere natural men:
It is said of Swinkfeldius, who so much magnified Revelations, and debased
Scripture, That Caput regulatum illi defuit, cor bonum non defuit, he had a
good heart, though not a sound head: so easily are good men tempted away, with
that which seems to be more spiritual then ordinary.

Lastly, Therefore are men so confident in these things, Because to many these
delusions come by way of a judgment for abusing former light, and not
receiving the 3. It is inflicted upon many as a judgment.
truth in the love of it. Those four hundred false Prophets in Ahabs time, are
thought by the learned to be true Prophets at first, and such as were in the
company and College of the other Prophets; but abusing that gift to the
pleasing of men, and seeking themselves, they were justly by God delivered up
to such a false way. And that they were hardened in this deceitful way,
appears by Zedekiahs impudence, 1 King. 12. 24. When he struck Michaiah upon
the cheek, saying, which way went the spirit from me to thee? Thus if there be
Revelations among the Papists, as they bragg of them, What is the fruit of
them, but to confirm them more in believing of a lie? And where spiritual
judgments are, they make secure, and full of self-flattery.

Now the reasons why we are not to rely on these, are Reasons for non-reliance
upon these motions. 1. They are not marks of a Church.


First, Because that cannot be the mark of a Godly man, which is not the note
of a Church. Now although Bellarmine make Lumen Propheticum, Prophetical light
a mark of the true Church, and would prove that we are not the true Church,
because we have no Prophets, or Revelations amongst us, as they have: yet the
Orthodox do reply, that even false Prophets may have prophetical illustrations,
as is before quoted, Deuteronomy. 13. 1. and certainly Balaam was a wicked man, yet
for all that, he had a spiritual Revelation from God. Yea, and Caiaphas, one of
the worst of men, yet it is said he prophesied, because he was high Priest that
year: Therefore though thou had predictions, diverse Raptures, and extatical
illuminations, yet these are no sure mark of thy good condition: and seeing men
unsanctified, may by the Holy Ghost work wonderful things, is it such a
strange thing if they may also have several raptures?

Secondly, Neither may these be regarded, Because such pretended illuminations,
2. They are consistent with the works of unrighteousness.
are consistent with the works of ungodliness, and injustice, as appears
Math. 7. Those that prophesied in Christ's name, were yet workers of iniquity.
Spanh^imius out of Sleidan has several instances like wise to confirm it, In
his short history of the Anabaptists. Therefore the surest discovery of Gods
spirit in us, is not by any pretended Revelations, raptures, or secret
conference with God, but by holiness, humility, and a conversation justifiable
by Scripture-rules: Therefore what the Apostle said of all outward ceremonial
worship, Bodily exercise profits little, and opposes it to godliness; so we
may say, This soul exercise profits little, and oppose it to godliness: but
godliness is profitable to all things.

Use of instruction, to direct us between two rocks: Take heed of being found
in the number of those that scoff at the Spirit, and the workings thereof,
condemning Use. Take heed of scoffing at the workings of the Spirit.
all the godly for Enthusiasts and Illuminists. This is the rode of profane
and superstitious men, that cannot abide the very word of the Spirit. This is
to go far on in the way to the sin against the Holy Ghost: and then on the
other side take heed of a contrary error, that under the pretense of
Revelations, thou despise the Scriptures, the Ministry, and the Ordinances. If
Satan cannot seduce thee the former way, then he sets upon thee in the latter
way. We might out of Ecclesiastical history, give you large instances of the
sad ruins that have come upon many, being thus carried away: though upon some
God had mercy, and recovered them out of such delusions. Be not therefore
credulous; be afraid lest God should leave thee; take great counsel and advice,
that thou may not be seduced.

SERMON XXIV.
Manifesting that the greatest Sufferings for Christ are not infallible
Evidences of Grace.

1 COR. 13. 3. And although I give my body to be burned, and have not Charity,
it profits me nothing.
THe Apostle his scope in the former part of this Chapter is to commend the
graces of Gods Spirit above the gifts of the same. Hence he makes suppositions
of the most excellent perfections, which if without Charity, are but as a
tinkling cymbal that may please the ear of others, but it self is worn out and
destroyed thereby. And by charity he means that unfeigned love of God, Charity,
what?
and the good of others, whereby all our gifts are improved for this end, and
not for our selves.

His first instance is diversity and variety of tongues, a gift in the
Primitive times, that made the enjoyers thereof admirable.

A second is of Prophecy and understanding of all Mysteries, all Knowledge,
and All faith.
all Faith. This place does not prove justifying Faith to be separable from
Charity. But either it is a conditional, hyperbolical speech, like that Gal. 1.
If an Angel from Heaven, etc. as not only some later Divines, but even the
Ancients have thought: or else it may very well be restrained to miraculous
Faith, in this sense, If I had all miraculous faith, so that I were able to
work the greatest miracle. And thus it is plain, such a faith may be severed
from true love.

The Apostle having thus instanced in Gifts, he further proceeds to give two
glorious instances of the external works of grace, which are most admirable
amongst men, whereby he would teach us, That the most specious and glorious
external acts of grace, if seeming only, are nothing, if grace it self does
not inwardly animate them; so that inward grace in respect of those external
actions, is like the soul to the body, like art to the instruments of Music,
without which an uncertain sound is made.

These glorious externals the Apostle specifieth are of two sorts:

1. A work of extraordinary mercy, If I bestow all my goods to feed the poor.
The Greek word (...) signifies to divide victuals in several pieces, and so to
distribute it. Now this is very terrible to consider, that a man may do all the
external works of mercy, even the highest and most transcendent, yet not have
true love.

The second instance is of remarkable fortitude and glorious courage for Christ
and his truth, which is expressed in the designation of that action, wherein my
courage may manifest it self, If I give my body to be burnt. Where some observe
this aggravation, Though a man be not summoned by others, and condemned to
death, but although he willingly and ultroneously offer himself, and then not
to be whipped or imprisoned, but to die, and that the most terrible kind of
death, even burning, yet if all this be without true love to God, his glory,
Church and truth, (...), All this will profit me nothing. In which sense Hierom
said in Gal. 5. Timeo dicere, sed dicendum est, Martyrium ipsum si ideo fiat,
ut admiraetioni, and laudi habeatur a fratribus, frustra sanguis effusus est. A
man may be the fleshes martyr, the devils martyr, as well as Christ's.

No kind of external sufferings, though never so grievous either for the truth
of Observe. The greatest sufferings for Christ and conscience, do not infallibly
testify grace in the heart. Consider, 1. Persecutions often discover firmness
of grace.
Christ indeed, or for that which a man's conscience judges to be the truth of
Christ, is a sure and infallible sign of the state of grace.

This Doctrine will be like a two edged sword, dividing between the joint and
marrow. It Is not all thy marks, stripes, imprisonments, persecutions, though
for a good cause, is enough to evidence thy true interest in Christ. To open
this Point many things are considerable.

First, That many times persecutions are a true discovery of a man's firmness
in grace. Insomuch that all the while Christ's cause and carnal accommodations
are conjoined together, every hypocritical and unsound heart makes as great a
show, as that which is faithful, But when storms and tempests arise, then the
house built upon the sand falls, but that on the rock endures. Thus Matthew. 13.
when the hot Sun arose, persecutions began to be violent, then that which was
not deeply rooted, presently withered. So that howsoever we may not certainly
gather the truth of our grace, by our perseverance in persecutions, yet
troubles and oppositions do frequently discover who is false. Hence afflictions
and not mercies are always in Scripture called temptations, God is never said
to tempt by a mercy, but by an affliction, because it is more difficult to
withstand an evil then to enjoy a good. The high and strong winds discover how
well-rooted the tree is; the fire will manifest the cracked vessel. Oh then
account it nothing to rest upon, that thou art for the truth, thou ownest God
and good men! Alas as yet thou losest no good, no profit by doing thus. If a
man may be imprisoned, impoverished, undone for the truths of God, and yet be
nothing; then what a poor nothing indeed is Christ's truth and thy riches with
it! Alas Christ has not put thee upon any trials, and thou know nothing by
thy self as yet. It Is true, outward sufferings, and that to death, are the
highest expressions before men; and therefore we are to judge with charitable
apprehensions of all those who are able thus to suffer for that which is the
truth, especially they at the same time demonstrating all Christian deportment.
Therefore it was cruelty in the Popish persecutors to charge those blessed
Martyrs with stoutnesse and pride. Hence also it is, that we account the
Martyrdom of so many millions of all sorts for Christ, to be an eminent
testimony of the truth of Christian Religion. No Sect could ever instance in
the like, as Christians may, which we read was acknowledged by Trajane the
Emperor; and Justine Martyr confesses the consideration of the willingness
and zeal of Christians to die for Christ, was the occasion of his conversion.
The Heathens instance only in Socrates and some few Gymnosophists for their
false Religion.

Secondly, From hence it follows, That wheresoever the Scripture promises 2.
True motives that draw out the heart to patient sufferings for Christ, are
supposed in promises to the external action
salvation to any external action that is by way of Patience or Fortitude for
Christ; That must be understood with this proviso, that as the action for the
matter is good, and the cause is good; so the motives that draw out his heart
be also good. Matthew. 10. 33. Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will
my Father also acknowledge before his holy Angels. In this place a glorious
reward is promised to a stout confession of Christ in the midst of an
adulterous generation, yet you must explain it thus, supposing he do as for
Christ, so out of pure ends and holy affections, without which these external
actions are but as so many glorious branches without any root at all; for we
may see this fully confirmed in a parallel about giving of alms, and relieving
the poor. There is scarce any religious duty has more promises made to it in
the Scripture then this has, yet a Pharisee who frequently gave aims, could
take no comfort at all from those Promises, because his motives were carnal and
unworthy. Thus in sufferings for Christ even in imprisonments and death it
self, it being possible that corrupt grounds may sway us, as well as heavenly,
there can be no solid comfort from such external sufferings, though never so
sad and miserable. Therefore no promise of heaven is made to the most specious
external exercise of any religious action whatsoever; Even now as on the
contrary our Savior says, He that shall deny him before men, him will God
also deny. This is to be understood universally, for Peter and many godly men
have denied Christ, yet God did not deny them, because their denial was through
infirmity out of fear, not from any malicious or purposed obstinacy against
him. So then in all external duties we are not only to look to the matter
that it be good, but also to what frame of heart, we do those things with; and
in this lies the marrow of Christianity, to look to internals, as well as
externals; the former only commends us to God, though the later make us
admirable among men.

Thirdly, It is very possible for a man to suffer much loss, and endure
hardship for 3. There may be patient suffering for Christ, without soundness
of heart.
Christ, and yet have not his heart sound toward God. In the Apostles times,
troubles were so great, and carnal discouragements so many, that we may wonder
any hypocrites or unsound men should join to that way which was so opposed and
persecuted, yet there were false Apostles and false Brethren; There were many
that sought their own, and not the things of Christ, as Paul complains, Phil,
1. 22. and this was strange, for if they did seek their own, why did they not
renounce Christ? why did they not abjure the Gospel, seeing that was the cause
of all the violence brought upon them? All that professed Christ in those days
were like Sheep among Wolves, Doves among Hawks; yet even among those
acknowledging Christ in the midst of an adulterous generation, all were not
upright. Judas left all as well as the other Apostles, and this was a kind of
suffering, this was a taking up of the Cross and following him; We see when
Christ required such things of others, though they seemed to profer themselves,
yet they presently revolted. Therefore Judas went further. And the Apostle Gal.
3. 4. supposes men may suffer great and grievous troubles for Christ, yet all
in vain, Have ye suffered (...) an aggravating word, so many things for number,
so grievous for quality, and all this in vain? implying, that if they revolted
to those Mosaical Ceremonies from Christ, all their former sufferings for the
truth, would be wholly unprofitable, indeed he adds a rhetorical correction
[If so be in vain] as hoping better things of them. Take we heed then, that we
do not only lose all our prayers, Sacraments, and such like Duties, but also
our sufferings and troubles for a good cause. For sufferings for God are more
then doings for God. Hence the Apostle speaks by way of aggravation, We
account these light afflictions, not comparable to that eternal weight of
glory, and for an instance of losing our sufferings for God, we have a
remarkable instance Act. 19. 33. of Alexander venturing his life in the
multitude enraged at Paul and others for the cause of Christ, yet by most
learned Interpreters, this is that Alexander Paul does so complain of, 1 Timothy
1. 20. that did him so much wrong. And it is abundantly known, that many who in
Queen Mary's days continued faithful to Christ, in Queen Elizabeth's days
through peace and quietness grew corrupt.

Now that it may more plainly appear, our sufferings though for a good cause
What sinful in gredients make sufferings unprofitable? I. When men suffer for
truth as their interest
may be corrupted, we may take notice of what sinful ingredients there may be
which will make these sufferings unprofitable.

First, A man may suffer for the truth, or a good cause, not as it is true or
good, but as his interest is in it, and as it is that way he has engaged
himself in. Thus a man may die for Protestanism against Popery, not so much
because it is the truth of God, but because it is that truth he has lived in,
it is that wherein all his outward interest lies. O beloved! This cursed
corruption is too common and frequent, not to look upon the truth of Christ,
the cause of Christ, as his, but as it is ours, and so we become sufferers or
Martyrs for our selves, and not for Christ. Among the Corinthians, some said
they were for Paul, others for Apollo, others for Christ. It is judged by some
Interpreters, those were indeed for Christ, but they set him up by way of a
party and faction, as their Christ, rather then Christ. Although therefore
imprisonments, persecutions, are terrible and dreadful to flesh and blood, and
they may be thought great testimonies of love to God and his cause? Yet be not
too confident here, make diligent search of thy heart, whether that which
moves thee in all these sufferings, be not thy interest, thou art engaged in
this way; And so an argument from thy propriety, not Christ's propriety, prevail
over thee. We may observe of Christ's kindred, how desirous they were that
Christ should do miracles; now their motive was not spiritual, that hereby he
might be demonstrated the true Messiah, and so men graciously receive him, but
from carnal pride, because he was their kinsman, and this might exalt their
glory among others, such carnal self-seeking affections men may have to the
truths of Christ, desiring they may be exalted, because hereby themselves shall
be exalted.

Secondly, The power of truth may undeniably so work on the conscience, that
they II. Suffering only upon truths conviction, not sanctifying operations.
cannot deny it, yet for all this not powerfully sanctify their hearts. Thus a
man may be so convinced of the true Doctrine, and his conscience set such a
strong seal to it, that if he had all the world, he dared not gainsay it.
Balaam, though he had a house full of gold, yet would not curse those whom he
saw God would bless. There is a natural light and goad by the conscience,
whereby it makes a man willing to undergo any punishment rather then contradict
it. Thus Socrates he died for this truth, that there was but one God, and when
he was condemned by the Magistrates, staid himself with that which we read of
the Apostles, It is better to obey God then man. This makes it evident, that a
man having no more then nature in him, may yet die for those truths he is
convinced of. Thus there are many who it may be reform not their lives from
gross impieties, yet would die rather then turn Papists or Socinians, I mean
learned men, who have their understandings fully satisfied with the truth. And
History affords us many examples of Heathens, who would rather endure the most
terrible death, then do any thing against moral honesty, why may not there be
such orthodox Protestants, venturing as much for those truths, which they are
persuaded are of God? There is a know approved sentence, Causa non poena facit
Martyrem, the cause not the punishment makes a Martyr, but this is not enough,
for neither punishment nor cause make a Martyr, without a gracious frame of
heart, at least to God, though with man he may be judged so. So that these
three must go to make a Martyr, punishment, a good cause, and a good heart.
Therefore in all thy sufferings, say, It is not enough that I suffer for God
and his truth, but do thou also suffer with such a gracious, humble and
heavenly heart, as Gods cause does require? Look that besides conviction of
judgment, there be also renovation of affections.

Thirdly, A man may suffer, though for Gods truth, yet the motive be the III.
Suffering for truth but from a stout stomach.
mere stoutnesse of his stomach, and undaunted resolutions of spirit. As there
is a spiritual fortitude wrought in us by Gods Spirit, so there is also in some
men a natural height of spirit, whereby they fear not dangers or death. Now it
is much to be enquired into, Whether thy sufferings arise from the strength of
Gods Spirit, or the strength of thy own? Even Aristotle with his purblinde
light of nature could make a difference between fortitude a virtue, when a man
would die for virtues sake, and upon virtuous grounds; and an audacious man,
who would contemn death out of a rash boldness in him. Oh then! How straight
is the way to Heaven? How rare is grace, when our very sufferings in a good
cause, may be so much corrupted and polluted through sinful ingredients? when
men shall say not only, Lord, we have prayed in thy Name, prophesied in thy
Name; but Lord we have suffered in thy Name, been imprisoned in thy Name, died
in thy Name, and yet God return this answer, Depart from me, I know ye not.

Fourthly, A fourth corrupt motive in sufferings though for God, may be IIII.
Suffering to get a name.
Pride and Vainglory, Ambition to get a Name in the Generations to come. One
would think this were a poor thing to venture a man's life for such an aerie
bubble. Yet if we read humane Histories, and see how willingly men have
exposed themselves to death for this outward glory; or if we peruse
Ecclesiastical Histories, and consider, how much the Patriarchall Heretics,
Heads of Factions, have suffered to propagate their Sects, we will cease to
wonder; for as by the blood of Martyrs, the Church has flourished, so
sometimes by the blood of Heretics, Heresies have increased; as Paul said,
Many of the godly waxed bolder by his bonds; So many times do erroneous
persons grow more obstinate by the sufferings of their fellow Heretics. Though
ashes and fire are barren things, yet pride is such a Salamander, that will
live in these flames.

Fourthly, In the fourth general place, As sufferings for Christ, do not 4. To
suffer for supposed truths but real errors, cannot possibly argue grace.
argue necessarily a state of Grace, so much less do sufferings for those
things a misguided conscience thinks the truths of God, but are indeed
damnable Herefies, and dangerous Opinions. Yet how often do we find this in
Books to prove Heresies great innocence, because they go with a good
conscience, they deny all carnal emoluments, patiently suffer the utmost
dangers! but (alas) here is no solidity in this: For first, A false misled
conscience may put a man upon all outward dangers. A deluded conscience in
matters of Religion, will throw a man, as that Devil did the party possessed,
Sometimes in the fire, and sometimes in the water: So that as our Savior said,
Some men thought they did God good service in putting others to death: So
again, They may think they do God great service in suffering themselves to be
put to death. Do not Socinians die? Do not Papists die for their Religion? A
false Religion, especially if received upon conscientious, not political
Principles, will make a man think his blood not dear enough to lose for that.
The Pharisees by what reason they compassed Sea and Land to make proselytes, by
the same they would have lost their lives to defend their superstitious
worship. Do not then hereafter admire that specious Argument for Heretics?
Do they seek themselves? Do they not deny all worldly hopes? Do they not
give their bodies to be destroyed? for this is no more then Heathens do for
their Idols. Nor is it any wonder, if men die thus for a false Religion, seeing
we read of Atheists who have died because they held there was no God. Vaninus
who once wrote a Book to prove God and his Providence, yet afterward revolted
to Atheism, holding no God, and was put to death for it at Paris: And being
commanded by the Judge, that he should ask forgiveness of God, and the King,
and his Judges: He answered, Of God he would not, because he did not believe
there was any: Of the King he would not because he had not wronged him; Of his
Judges he would not, but rather if there were a Hell, as he believed there was
none, he would curse them all thither. Thus Voetius de Atheismo. You see here a
miserable wretch, dying for this professedly, because he thought there was no
God. So that all sufferings even to death, are not presently to move us.

And if you ask, What should make them thus venturous, if they be not in Gods
way?

I answer, two things, First, There is a Carnal Self. Secondly, A Spiritual
What makes men so ready to suffer, if out of Gods way. 1. Self.
Self; which also is carnal, though not gross. A carnal Self is then set up,
when a man prostitutes all Religion to outward advantages: Of such were some
false Apostles Paul speaks of, Whose God was their belly, who minded earthly
things, and did all they could to avoid persecution. Such an one was one
Theophilus a Bishop in Ecclesiastical History, nicknamed Euripus, because of
his fickleness in Religion, turning his conscience, as Diogenes did his
Barrel always against the wind. This man, when the war was between
Constantine the Christian, and Lycinius the Heathenish Persecutour, appointed
his Deacon to reside at Constantinople, with this Direction, That he which did
prevail in the battle, either Constantine or Lycinius, he should gratify his
victory with some Presents to him. This kind of carnal Self is odious in the
eyes of all men.

But then secondly, There is a Spiritual-carnal Self. When a man seeks not
outward greatness and pomp in the world, but is inwardly proud, ambitious,
affecting a Name by some singular thing; And because this cannot be had in the
world, without outward passages of worldly self-denial, therefore he is
diligent to deny himself carnally, that he may seek himself spiritually: and
this has been the temper of many Heretics, prizing their Opinion and
intellectual Abilities above all external glory. Now this spiritual carnal
self, is that which may put them upon imprisonments, and all outward ruin; So
that herein they be the fleshes Martyrs, Pride-martyrs, not Gods. Hence
although they may suffer like true Martyrs, yet for the most part they discover
a carnal temper then, not showing that holiness, humility, self-resignation
into Gods hands, as the godly Martyrs do. So that their very external
sufferings have not such sweet Concomitants, as the godly men have. The godly
men burning in the fire, being like Juniper in the fire, sending a sweet smell.
The Heretic like crackling Thorns in the fire, full of discontent, rage and
revenge.

2. The Devil who was a Manslayer from the beginning, he through strong 2.
Satan.
delusions tempts men to such hardiness, as to be prodigal of their lives.
That as when he possessed the bodies of some, he delighted to torment them, and
to make them miserable; so he does also when he has bewitched their souls. It
is matter of amazement to me, when I read the Story of the Donatists,
especially the Circumcelliones, how greedy they were to die, threatening to kill
men, if they would not kill them. Whence should this madness arise, and fury
to die, but from the Devil? yet they thought this great piety, and contempt of
the world. Therefore the Devil by Gods just permission, may benumme and harden
a man to die, as well as the Spirit of God in a gracious manner imbolden a man:
And this may suffice to open the Point.

Now two grounds among others there are, Why we may not judge the firmness Why
we may not judge of our spiritual estates by these sufferings. 1. Because
inward life only makes all externals good.
of our spiritual estate by these sufferings.

First, Because no externals, whether in actions or passions, are any further
good, then as they are animated from a spiritual life within. These outward
may be informed from a corrupt principle, as well as a spiritual one. We cannot
judge of the Tree by this fruit, because it will grow both upon good and bad.
Now herein we daily delude our selves, because we judge our estate good, by
external Actions, when yet reprobates may do the like. It is not here as it
was with Moses, and Jannes and Jambres, Moses does many miracles, and they do
the like, but at last Moses does such things which they could not imitate. If
you speak of externals merely as abstracted from inwards, we cannot judge. Do
the godly pray, hear? so do the reprobates: May the godly suffer, be
imprisoned, die for the truth? so may reprobates. It is true our Savior says,
Greater love then this can no man show, then to lay down ones life for another.
So one would think, to give ones body to be burnt, and yet have no Charity,
were to speak a contradiction. But when we consider how strong and potent
corruption and a false Religion is, then we may no more admire. We read in the
Old Testament of some superstitious parents, that would make their children
pass through the fire to Moloch, that is, they offered them as a Sacrifice in
the fire to Moloch: who would not wonder, how the tender bowels of a father or
mother could ever become thus senseless like a stone? But superstition made
them thus unnatural. And certainly as they offered their tender children, so if
Moloch their god had required it, or rather his Priests for him, They would
have given up their own bodies into the flames. Judge not then of the goodness
of thy estate, by any externals whatsoever, though never so specious. They are
a sheath that will receive either a golden, or an iron Sword in them. They are
the Trumpet that make no other sound, then what the mouth blows into them.

2. That is not a pillar to be relied on, which may consist with unmortified
lusts 2. Because outward suffer(...) may cons(...) with unm(...)fied lusts.
and affections, yea with ungodly practices. But experience teaches us, how
many men in their imprisonments, yea death it self, have been unsavory,
ungodly; insomuch that their ungodliness has more dishonored the cause they
suffered for, then their sufferings have honored it. Therefore if thou restest
upon thy sufferings, and yet live in sin, say as Austin, Habes quod in te
occidas, martyr thy sins, before thy body be martyred. If therefore thou
suffer for one truth, and hold any thing, or practisest any thing against
other fundamentals, it is no true Martyrdom; Hence the Primitive Church never
judged a Macedonian (for example) who denied the Deity of the holy Ghost, to be
a Martyr, though he were put to death by the Arrians, because he professed the
Deity of Christ.

Use 1. Of Instruction, not to admire as signs of grace, or Gods being in a
man, Use 1.
when you see a man patient, denying all outward advantages and comforts for
his opinion and doctrine he holds. As some, misunderstanding places of
Scripture, have given away all their goods and estates, and one parting with
his very garments that covered him: being asked, Why he did so? held up the
Bible, saying, Hoc me nudavit, This has made me naked, whereas indeed it was
his error, his mistake. Thus many may say, It is their conscience makes them
endure all misery, whereas it may be corruption or carnal motives, or at most,
an erroneous, misguided conscience, which although it may excuse a tanto, yet
not a toto. Those that read what Heathens have done in this way, will never
admire at Christians.

Use 2. Of Direction, If God call us to suffer, Rest not on all the hardship
thou Use. 2.
have endured for Christ, Boast not of the bonds and chains thou have born for
his sake, but examine with what heart thou have undergone all this. It is a
woeful thing to be imprisoned in chains here for Christ, and at the day of
Judgment Christ to cast thee in everlasting chains of darkness. It is
miserable to be burnt with fire here for Christ, and afterward Christ to bid
thee, Depart into everlasting fire hereafter. Lose not then thy sufferings by
any corrupt frame and sinful disposition of heart. It is a great matter to
suffer for Christ, but it is a greater to suffer with that heart Christ
requires.

SERMON XXV.
Showing that, and whence men have such strong Persuasions of their exact
keeping of Gods Law.

MAT. 19. 20. The young man says unto him, All these things have I kept from
my youth up: What lack I yet?
THis Text is a remarkable History, wherein many excellent practical doctrines
are contained. The whole scope being to represent a man that has good
affections and desires for heaven, yet because of some strong corruption and
temptation violently detained from it; for in the close of the History he goes
away, not reviling and raging at Christ, as the Pharisees used to do, but
(...), exceeding sorrowful, and as Mark has it (...), as sadly affected, as
the sky seems to be, when it is black with clouds, and threatens rain; so that
in this posture with Christ he is like the Poets Medea, or like Aristotle's
incontinent person, who has great conviction, but strong corruption.

In the History observe the Person and his Question propounded: The person, as
appears by the Harmony of three Evangelists was a rich man, a great man in
power and place, and a young man: All which three were sore temptations to
prejudice him against Christ and his way: Yet by his Question it seemed he was
not altogether profane and worldly, for his desire is to know What he might do
to have eternal life. In which Question although we may perceive a
Pharisaicall leaven in him, thinking by works to be saved, yet there appears
for the main a good desire in him. Our Savior intending to beat down his
Pharisaicall confidence, which is as great an enemy to Christ as Publican
sins, first reproves him for his compellation, and then answers his
Question. His reproof is, Why call thou me good, there is none good but God?
Christ refused this title, partly because he called him good in no other sense,
then as some eminent and singular Prophet, not as indeed the Son of God: but
especially to teach the young man that he was wholly corrupted, and therefore
whatsoever good is in us, is to be acknowledged, as coming from God; it is his
gift, it is none of our work.

In the next place our Savior directs him to keep the Commandments,
instancing not in the Ceremonial, but the moral, nor in the moral duties
that relate to God, but that belong to our neighbor, which were most vulgar,
that hereby he might teach this Pharisaicall man, that he never yet performed
any one Commandment aright. Therefore the ignorance and the arrogance of this
young man in the text is remarkable; All these have I kept from my youth up; he
thought he had kept not some but all, and that from his youth up, as soon as
ever he could act with reason; some Expositors think, that he grossly lied
against his own conscience in saying so: but that is not likely because Mark
says Christ loved him, upon this speech, and that could not be if he were such
a dissembler; and if you take the word love, for to praise or kindly to speak
to a man; as the Septuagint sometimes do, Caut. 1. 1, 4. 2 Chronicles. 18. it will
argue that he was no hypocrite, and hereby we see, that it is a Ministers duty
to love and encourage those men, who though they have not the truth of grace,
yet have a fair, civil, honest life, and have general desires for heaven. He
did not therefore lie against his conscience, but yet he spoke that which was
false, for he had not kept one of those Commandments perfectly, as appears
by that trial or exploratory precept Christ puts him upon: only he knew no
better: He was brought up in ignorance about the spiritual latitude and extent
of the Law, and so thought a mere negative, or not doing gross wickedness, to
be a positive keeping of the Law.

Obs. It is a very difficult thing to drive an unregenerate man out of this
false sign Obs. Many men though falsely; yet confidently think they keep Gods
Commanments.
of his good estate, viz. that he keeps the Commandments of God. This was the
(...). In this was the fundamental miscarriage of this great man, that he had
a confident persuasion of his good estate, because he did no murder, he
committed no Adultery, he bore no false witness against his neighbor, Now
falsely judging this to be all the Law required, he concludes that unless
Christ has some new and extraordinary way about this, these matters are so low
and easy, that he observed them along while ago. Upon this point was our
Saviors greatest controversy with the Pharisees, who like Serpents, though
they had a fine skin and color, yet inwardly were full of poison: and the
great work that the Ministers of God have to do in their Congregations in these
times, Is it not to show to men the pure glass of the Law, that they looking
therein, may see their deformities, and be wonderfully out of love with
themselves? Does not every man walk with this self-damning principle, that his
heart is good? What would you have him to do more then he does? Is he any
Drunkard, Whoremonger? and thus he pleases himself with an external
righteousness, being altogether ignorant of the pure and excellent work of
regeneration, and from hence it is, that our auditors are filled with so much
stupidity and security, that it is a wonder to hear of a man or woman, with
fear and trembling, expostulating after this manner: The Law is so spiritual,
and I am so carnal; regeneration and a new nature is so necessary, but I am so
plunged in that sinful estate and corruption I was born in, That I fear my
self, I quake at my condition, Oh for the Lords sake, help ye Ministers by your
prayers and directions, that I may be put in a safe way.

For the clearing of the Doctrine consider, Whence men's strong persuasions of
their exact lives arise.


First, Whence it arises that men have such a strong persuasion of their good
lives, as satisfactory to Gods Law. Why is it that though a man by nature be
indeed like a Job, or Lazarus full of wounds and sores: ye he judges himself
like Absalom, altogether fair, without any blemish at all?

And the first ground is ignorance about the total deep, and universal
pollution of our 1. From ignorance of Natures pollution.
natures, whereby this Leprosy has made all we are and all we do unclean: and
in this sense our Savior faith, we may call none good, for can we call any
spiders, any serpents, any toads sweet? so neither can we call any man good or
holy. Therefore the Scripture that it may lay a foundation for our prizing of
Christ, and open our eyes to see the necessity of regeneration, is very
diligent and copious in aggravating this natural defilement. Paul is a clear
instance in this, Romans 7. his heart was like a dungeon full of noisome and
crawling vermin, but because no light was in his heart, therefore he did not
see, or believe this. Let me therefore expostulate with thee, who please thy
self in thy good estate: Is thy life as free from sin as the child new born?
may no more iniquity be laid to thy charge now, then could be to thee, when
thou suckedst at thy mothers breast? yet, if no more, thou ought not to take
any content or delight in thy self, but to tremble and earnestly to importune
to be translated from that darkness into light: lay aside then thy high, and
self-flattering thoughts; say no more, thy good heart, thy good meaning, thy
good life, but cry out unclean and unclean. Woe, woe unto me, for I am polluted
in my blood, and God might not say unto me in my blood, live, as he did to the
Church, but to die, and be damned: Would thou therefore no longer be sick of
this dangerous surfeit and fulness? study more, and meditate more of original
corruption, how universal and diffusive it is, how contagious and infecting of
every thing that we do, so that although we could speak with the tongue of
Angels, and work with the hands of Angels, yet we being in our natural
condition, all that would be abominable: Without faith it is impossible to
please God, and the tree must be good before the fruit; To the defiled, all
things are defiled. What therefore is external righteousness, moral justice,
formal piety, as long as we abide in that old bitter stock of nature? Pray
therefore, Lord give me to understand what I am by nature, make me to know how
sinful and loathsome it is, and let not this be a general, speculative, barren
knowledge, but let it be a close, particular applicative, and practical
knowledge, whereby the whole heart may be set on fire, and powerfully wrought
upon, even to bid all creatures, all comforts, all businesses stand aloof till
thou be redeemed from this thraldom.

2. Another cause of this bold persuasion is, An ignorance of the spiritual
exactness 2. Ignorance of the Laws spiritual exactness.
and obligation of the Law. It was the received opinion of the Jews, and the
Pharisees they so explained it, as appears, Mat. 5. that the Law commanded
only external acts, and that we satisfied it, if we did keep it in the outward
man. Therefore our Savior seemed to bring new doctrine into the world, when he
explained the Law of heart-sins, and showed that men might be adulterers,
murderers, etc. though they never committed those external acts. This was so
paradoxall to the received doctrine at that time, that men were amazed at it.
Now howsoever (it may be) people will acknowledge the doctrine true, yet in
practice they are as gresse and secure as ever Jews and Pharisees were. Neither
did they ever make their works a refuge, and a bulwark, more then people now
adays do. And no wonder, for Paul so great a proficient in the knowledge of
the Law of God, yet confesses his great blindness and mistake herein, Romans
7. insomuch that when he comes to understand how spiritual the law is, and
how carnal he is, he cries out of himself as most miserable. The Law is
spiritual, says Paul, that is, it reaches to the sins of the spirit, it
forbids all inordinate motions there, it prohioits all their secret
irregularities: so that as God is the father of spirits, thus the Law is the
Law of spirits, and thou may become an ho^rid transgressour of this in thy
heart when thy outward I so seems pare and innocent; The Law is compared by
James to a glass; now it is no wonder that a man never abhors the foulness
of spots and dirt upon his face, as long as he looks not in there. No man can
bewail the obliquity and crookedness of his actions, that does not diligently
apply them to the straightness of the rule, Oh then say, This justice, this
honesty, this freedom from gross sin is highly esteemed among men: but what
is it to Gods Law? how foul a transgressor shall I be convinced to be, if I
compare my self with that rule! Hence therefore arises all that
self-righteousnesse, in that men do no more understand how holy and exact that
rule is by which they ought to walk. There is a world of unseen, and unknown
filthiness in thee, and if thy eyes were opened to behold it thou could no
longer abide thy self. But it is no wonder, that unregenerate men who have no
life at all in them, feel none of these distempers, when the godly themselves
as appears, Psalm. 19. cry cut, Who can understand his errors, cleanse me
from secret sins: By that David implies, that there is more corruption in his
heart then he is aware of. Much unknown pride, hypocrisy, earthliness dwells in
their hearts, and they perceive it not. If therefore it be thus with the godly,
that they are not able to understand how loathsome and wretched they are, is it
any wonder if men dead wholly in sin, feel not any burden, though mountains
lie upon them? Soon therefore would thou depose those lofty imaginations, if
so be thou would on purpose consider how exact the Law is, forbidding the
root, as well as the branches of sin, making every inordinate motion,
(thousands of which rise howerly in thy soul) a Transgression of the Law.

3. Therefore are they so confidently persuaded, because they attend only to
the 3. From thoughts that the whole of man's duty lies in negatives.
negative Commandments, Thou shall do no murder; Thou shall not steal; Thou
shall not forswear thy self, etc. And so suppose that the whole duty required
by God of us, is swallowed up in those negatives. This made the young man no
doubt so bold; from his youth up, he had been preserved from such foul, gross
sins. Indeed he speaks arrogantly when he says, I have kept these; as if he by
his own power had restrained that sea of corruption from overflowing the banks;
for what evil has been committed by any man, which he might not also have
done, had not God bounded and limited his wickedness? Well but howsoever
though he be thus spotless in his life: yet that is not all God requires, God
has positive commands, as well as negatives; and the same authority which
says, Do not steal, do not kill, says also, Keep the Sabbath holy, and
sanctify the Name of God. Now although this be a very small matter to build a
man's salvation upon, yet we may wonder to see that all the covering many men
have for their nakedness, is only these fig leaves: That they are no
drunkards, no whoremongers, no thieves; A mere negative godliness, what pity
is it, that a people instructed out of Gods Word, living under the means of
salvation, should apprehend no better in matters of God?

4. Another cause of false persuasion is, that although they may mind
affirmative 4. From not understanding the comprehensive sense of affirmatives.
precepts, as well as negatives, yet they understand them not in their
comprehensive sense, and so think they have attained to what the Law requires,
when indeed they fall exceeding short. As for example, this command Thou shall
do no murder, does not only forbid that sin, but command the contrary duty, and
not only so, but all the means, occasions, and circumstances that tend
thereunto; and so in every commandment. Now if a man consider seriously how
many occasions and circumstances, and causes there are of all sins; as on the
contrary, how many occasions, motives and causes there are of holy duties, he
will stand amazed to see himself so much guilty in millions of sins, which he
thought could never have been laid to his charge; so then as the Gospel has a
mystery of grace, and original sin a mystery of sin, so that we are never able
to go to the depth and breadth of these: So the Law is a mystery of duties: and
as the Logicians say, The ten predicaments do contain every created being that
is in the world; so do these ten Commandments all the duties required of us;
It is therefore of great consequence if ever men would be driven out of these
golden dreams, and foolish Paradises they fancy to themselves, to study, and
understand the comprehensive sense of every precept.

5. Another stupifying and benumming principle, is the total neglect of that
5. From neglect of self-examination.
necessary duty, self-reflection and self-examination; Whereby a man lives
forty or threescore years, and is a mere stranger to his own self. Hence are
those duties so frequently pressed, to commune with our own hearts, to sweep
them, as some translate, to dig into them, as others; and this duty is to be
done with much stillnesse and quietness of spirit, and at those times when we
are most free from disturbances, according to that rule, anima sedendo, and
quiescendo fit sapiens. In other Texts, it is called searching our hearts, and
trying our reins; which duties imply, that our hearts are not presently what
they outwardly appear: Gold may be in the surface, and iron or stone in the
bottom; you know how impossible Hazael thought that should be in his heart, and
done by him, which the Prophet foretold. Man in that he is rational, can only
reflect upon himself, beasts cannot, and it is a great obstruction to
salvation, that men use this no more, no man says according to the Prophet,
What have I done? Therefore deal with your selves as an enemy would do. The
Hebrew word for an enemy is an Observer, because he watches and lies at the
carch to see what haltings and failings there be; Do thou thus become an enemy
to thy self, and that is to be a friend to thy self; Say, O Lord I arraign my
self at thy bar, I would be winnowed that my chaff may appear, I would be
filed, that my rust come off. It is strange to consider what sins men may
live in, and yet not attend to the consideration of such. The making of a
practical Syllogism would be very introductory to our full conversion unto
God, in this manner: The Scripture in several places speaks terrible
threatenings to such and such sins. But I live in such and such sins. Therefore
all those threatenings belong to me: oh how can the soul put off this
conviction? how can it extinguish this light shining upon it? what have I to do
but to repent and turn to God! There is no other course can be taken by me.

6. Therefore are men thus senseless, because of that abominable self-love,
and 6. From self-flattery.
self-flattery, which cleaves to every man. This ruined the Pharisees, our
Savior tells them plainly of it; You are they that justify your selves, but
that which is highly esteemed amongst men is (...), an abomination before God.
Wonder not at this in wicked men: see David a godly man, through self love, how
did he favor himself in his gross sins, and applies nothing till Nathan say,
Thou art the man. And this lay at the bottom in this rich man's heart, an
over-weaning of a man's self, and an immoderate love, whereby we judge every
thing we do well done: Many times a godly man through pusillanimity of spirit,
and an holy fear, does bear false witness against himself, he will not own or
acknowledge those good things Gods Spirit inableth him to do, and thereby he
walks both unthankfully, and uncomfortably. But the unregenerate man he is in
the other extremity, he presumes of good to be in him, when it is not; a full
instance of this is, the Church of Laodicea, who said, she was full, and wanted
nothing, as if she were God himself, for he only is allsufficient, yet she
boasts, she wants nothing, not a God, or Christ, or his grace, when at the
same time, she was miserable, and wanted all things. Here was a great
difference between Gods judgment about them, and their own; and it is a poor
small thing to be acquitted by our selves, when God does condemn us: Therefore
say, It is thy folly, it is thy madness, it is thy self-love, makes thee
conclude thy self in a good estate: Does God say so? Do the Scriptures say so?
It is a sin to call good evil, and evil good, in our selves as well as in
others.

7. Fear of guilt, that also makes us hoodwink our eyes that we will neither 7.
Fear of guilt appearing upon examination.
look into the Law, nor into our hearts: so that it is with us as with
Bankrupts, that are loath to cast up their accounts, because thereby they shall
see how undone they are. As it argues guilt in heretics that they are
lucifugae scri^pturarum, they are such Owls that cannot abide the day, such
thieves that love not the light: so it argues our guilt in our own hearts,
when we are walking without any disquisition to persuade our selves of the good
in us. Oh we are afraid to be troubled, we think we shall find that which may
disquiet us, and so by this means, we rest in generals; thereby to deceive our
own souls. But as it is folly in a wounded man to fear the searching of his
soar, for if that be not discovered he can never be made whole: No less
wickedness is it in a man not to search out the worst by himself, and to know
the greatest danger he is in, that thereby he may indeed come to be healed.

8. Therefore are men thus well conceited of themselves, because they are
ignorant of regeneration, they know not the necessity of being born again: yea,
they 8. From Ignorance of the necessity of Regeneration.
bless themselves they are no changelings. They have found no manifest
alteration of themselves from the beginning. We see Nicodemus a man much
conversant in the law of God, yet altogether to learn about this great point.
If therefore a Master of Israel knows not these things, is it any wonder that
an ordinary disciple does not? Therefore take most men, they do as grossly
mistake about godliness and regeneration, and know no more of it, then a
blind man of colors. If therefore thou did know the nature and necessity of
regeneration, thou could take no more delight in thy self, or any thing thou
do. Thou would say, I am but a weed and no flower in Gods garden, I am a
thistle and no branch of the true Vine. And in this case thou would cry more
bitterly then the blind or lame did; for thou need life it self.

9. There is an extrinsecall cause which adds to all this, and that is, the
devil, 9. From Satan's blinding men's eyes.
he reigns in the heart of every one by nature, he has blinded their eyes,
and hardened their hearts. Now our Savior tells us, that while the strong man
keeps the house, all things are quiet: There is no trouble or contest. Even as
Pharaoh let the people alone, till he saw them desirous to go out of his power.
Wonder not therefore to see moral, civil men, with such great peace and
quietness in their conscience, never fearing of their condition, never
doubting of their estate, for all this calmnesse comes in part from the devil,
who keeps every thing quiet, and hardens in presumption more and more: bless
not God then for every peace and quietness thou feel in thy self: The body
may feel no pain from rom rottenness as well as soundness, and it may be thy
condition were far better if thou could neither eat or drink, or sleep for
fear of thy condition: Blessed are they that mourn, and woe to those that laugh.

10. The last and main reason is, because every man naturally is destitute of
the 10. From being naturally destitute of the Spirit.
spirit, without which we are all devoid of light and life. The Spirit of God
Joh. 16. is that which convinces the world of sin; so that a man can never
vigorously and powerfully be affected with his wretched estate, till these
Sunne-beams shine into him, which will discover the least motes; The spiritual
man judges all things. Hence it is that godly men though great proficients in
grace, have lower thoughts of themselves then unregenerate men, only because
the spirit of God is always convincing them of sin, as well as sanctifying,
and comforting of them against it, Paul never had such debased and humble
expressions about himself before his conversion, as after: Would he ever have
said all his righteousness was dung and dross? That he had not yet attained
what he desired? Would he ever have acknowledged himself the greatest of all
sinners in his former days? No: The people of God are more debased for their
imperfect duties, then wicked men are for their greatest sins, and whence is
all this, but because of Gods Spirit dwelling in them, and inlightning of them?
But wicked men being without this light, are not able to judge any thing about
themselves.

The Use is, To take heed of this self-conceit and self love, desire Gods Word
Use.
may be a two-edged sword in you, dividing between marrow and joints: I am
afraid this Laodicean fulness is the sin of most now adays, and this is as
desperate an enemy to Christ and his grace, as gross profaneness, yea, in some
particulars worse. More Publicans and Harlots were brought to repentance, and
so to the kingdom of heaven, then Pharisees. Oh then fear, lest that which
thou judge thy blessedness and happiness, be not thy greatest danger and
misery. Thou think it well that all is at peace and ease within thy soul: O
pray rather that God would convince and trouble thy soul more effectually, and
so give thee true peace.

SERMON XXVI.
Declaring that many rest upon a strict way of Religion, which yet comes not
up to, but often is besides the appointment of the word.

ACTS 26. 5. Which knew me from the beginning (if they would testify) that
after the most straitest Sect of our Religion, I lived a Pharisee.
THe Text is part of Paul's Apologetical oration to Agrippa, wherein we have the
Exordium, or Preface, and the Narration, or substantial matter summarily
contained therein. In the Preface Paul does with great Rhetorique captare
benevolentiam, endeavor to incline the affections of Agrippa to him,
accounting it an happiness to Apologize before him, who was so expert of all
the Jewish customs: In the Narration, we have

First, The history of his former life.

Secondly, Of his present state and conversation.

The Text is part of that Narrative which relates to his bypast conversation,
wherein he described himself from the religious condition he then was in, and
that first more generally, then more particularly: Generally, He was after the
most strict way of Religion (...) the Original for Religion. Plutarch tells
us, comes from the Thracians, eminently taken notice of for their devotion:
and it is used sometimes in a good sense, sometimes in a bad sense, as it
degenerateth into superstition. The Original for Sect, is (...), Heresy, and
so the several sects among Philosophers were called Heresies. It is the opinion
of Gerhard, a learned man, That this word is always taken in an ill sense in
the Scripture: but this place with two or three more in the Acts of the
Apostles, seem to imply the use of it in a middle, or indifferent sense, any
particular way that a man shall choose different from the rode, although in the
Epistles it is used in an ill sense: Therefore Tertullian called it Secta
Christianorum, The Sect of the Christians. Now this way Paul walked in, is
aggravated with this adjunct, (...), in the superlative sense: and so Josephus
speaks of the Pharisees, as those that were most accurate in the observance of
instituted and Traditional obedience: more particularly, his way is described
by its denomination, a Pharisee. There were three Sects sprung up among the
Jews, the Pharisees, Sadduce ^s, and Essenes; the Scripture speaks nothing at
all of the latter, because as some say, They lived like Hermits, in remote
solitary places, and so the Evangelist had no occasion to mention them: Now the
Pharisees were called, either as some say, from a word to open and explain,
because they expounded the Scripture; or from a word to Separate and Segregate;
and Cameron upon this place makes the Hebrew word (...) not to signify every
kind of Division or separation, but that which is after a most subtle, and
minute manner: Hence Isa. 28. 29. It is applied to the teeth of a rake, and
Horse riders (...), are called, (...), because of their spurs: and Proverbs 23.
It is applied to The sting of a Be: Therefore to be a Pharisee, was to be a
scrupulous, anxious man, which did subtly examine all things: Hence they were
so strict, that they would not sleep upon any easy thing, least they should
have any vain, or indecent thoughts so much as in their very dreams: and
because of this strictness, it was that they were so admired among the people,
whereas the Saddueces denying Angels, Spirits, and the Resurrection, were for
the most part of the richer, and greater sort, because such opinions did best
suit with their lusts; yet because of their greatness though they held such
fundamental Errors, yet they were not Excommunicated Errors.

From the Text we may observe,

That an extraordinary strict way taken up in Religion, is thought a sure and a
good foundation by many for their eternal happiness. Observe. Many think a
strict way in religion a good foundation for happiness.


The Pharisee for this unusual, and supererogating way of exactness, as they
judged, was reputed by himself and others, as those that should certainly go to
Heaven, if any did. How confidently they used to presume of this, appears by
Paul, Phil. 3. 5, 6, 7. Where making a Catalogue of those things, He once
thought a gain to him; he instanceth in this as one of the last and most noble
privileges, that he was after the Law, a Pharisee: Insomuch that if any might
have confidence in external privileges, he says, he might. Where Paul also at
another time, Acts 22. 3. Declaring his former conversation, mentions this
particular, as the main, saying, He was taught according to the perfect manner
of the Law of the Fathers.

To discover this false sign, several things are considerable, as

First, The way to heaven is a strict and exact way, and all our duties are to
be done 1. The way to heaven is strict
with a curious circumspection: Our prayers are to be exact prayers; our
obedience exact obedience: so Ephesians. 3. Walk (...), exactly: Hence the Gate
that leads to happiness is straight and narrow, as the way to hell is broad and
easy. I shall not therefore speak against a true and Scripture-exactness: the
people of God may, and ought to take comfort, in that they walk in a more
singular and exact way then the world does, and a man living and dying in the
common rode and practices of men, having nothing more extraordinary in him then
they; has no symptom of grace upon him: Math. 5. Our savior speaking to his
Disciples, That they should love their enemies; For says he, If ye love your
friends, what singular thing do ye? do not the Publicans the same? Therefore
from hence it follows, That the people of God ought to do singular things to
men of the world: There is a good singularity and preciseness: and howsoever
the profane world make a taunt, and reproach of this, that you are so singular
and precise, yet none are Godly that are not so: Do not even the Publicans the
same? He that goes no further, and does no more then Publicans, has no
evidence for salvation: Therefore lay down this for a foundation, The way of
Godliness, is a strict, precise, singular way. The Scripture makes it an exact
course; and therefore my dissolute, careless, negligent walking, can no more
claim a Title to heaven, then darkness to light. Attend to this, you whose
lives are as most of the world are; proud as they, profane as they, contemning
of Religion as they.

Now, That godliness must be strictness appears partly from the nature of
Grace, I. From the contrariety of grace to our affections.
which is contrary to our affections, and so does with prevailing power subdue
them to the grief of the unregenerate part: Hence the Scripture calls it,
Mortifying, and crucifying the old man; which implies the pain and Agony our
corrupt part is exercised with by Grace: Christianus est perpetua naturae
violentia, to conquer lusts, is To pull out the right eye, and chop off the
right hand: and by this we may see how few are Godly, because they are rare
that feel this spiritual conflict and agony, there is no mortifying and
crucifying within them.

Again, Godliness must needs be exactness: partly, Because our duties are so
bounded, and circumstantiated in their principles, manner and ends, That to do
any good action, is always to hit the mark, as to sin, (...), is to miss the
scope and white. Aristotle placed his Moral virtue, in medio, and so made it
difficult to avoid extremities on both sides: but (alas!) the word of God
requires far more concurrences then ever the light of nature could discern: so
that if you take any religious action, whether elicite, or imperate, to do it
after a godly manner, there must be a great deal of circumspection: there is so
much required in the cause, in the manner, in the motive, that we may cry out
for every particular duty, which Paul did for one main one, Who is sufficient
for these things? so that negligence, formality, and luke-warmness can no more
consist with godliness that is of a strict and exact nature, then hell with
heaven.

Therefore in the second place, It argues a tougue and an heart set on fire
from 2. It is a great wickedness to reproach strictness.
hell, to reproach, and cry out against strictness in the way to heaven. Oh
that even among Christians, there should be men whose Throats are such open
sepulchers, as to send forth such noisome and filthy speeches: What needs all
this strictness? What needs all this singularity? Why should men refuse to do
as the most do? Is it not their pride and hypocrisy? Alas, ignorant and
profane wretch! What think thou of that place, The Kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force? What think thou of
that, Strive to enter in at the strait Gate, for few enter therein? Are these
places of Scripture true or no? if so, then woe be to thee, for thou make the
Kingdom of hell to suffer violence, and take that by force, though the Word,
and Minister, and thy Conscience be against thee: so thou that live in
dissolute profaneness, ordinary neglect of public and private Duties, Is thy
life such a strict life? Must there be such striving to do as thou do? Oh
consider, either Gods word is wrong, or thou art out of the way: thou art not
yet such an Atheist to assert the former, be therefore so far ingenuous as to
acknowledge the latter.

Thirdly, From hence it follows, That the number of those who are truly 3.
The number of the Godly is very small.
godly, are very few. They are but a little flock; and they are but few, not
only compatatively to the whole world, but in respect of titular and nominal
Christians, who have the name, and own the profession of Christ, but deny the
power thereof. Many are called, but few are chosen, even few of those that are
called: as the gold is but little to the other part of the earth; and flowers
are few in respect of weeds: so that the ground why people do so easily
persuade themselves of their good condition, is because they understand not how
exact and strict the way of Grace is. You have this notably cleared Mat. 19.
25. Where our Savior showing that it was as impossible for a rich man to be
saved, as a Camel to go through the eye of a needle: because its hard to have
riches, and not to trust in them, or love them immoderately; when his Disciples
heard this, says the Text, They were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can
be saved? They do not say, what rich man? but, who can be saved? because as a
rich man has his riches, so every man has something or other that his heart
is too immoderately carried out after. Therefore say they, who can be saved? Oh
beloved, while we look upon Gods gracious promises, and Christ's merciful
invitations, while we think of his love in dying and suffering for us, we are
apt to think it a very easy attainable thing to be saved, and no question the
Disciples looked on these considerations, else they would not have so startled,
and been so amazed at Christ's Doctrine: But then on the other side, when we
consider what strict qualifications, what exact conversations cught to be in
those that go to heaven, we shall then stand amazed, saying, who can be Godly?
who can pray, hear, as the Scripture requires these duties? Hence our Savior
to allay the Disciples astonishment, brings that universal Axiom, With men
this is impossible, but with God all things are possible: the way therefore to
bring you to resolve upon a more exact way of life, is to put you into this 4.
The word of God alone reveals the exactness of the way to heaven.
spiritual astonishment, and amazement at the accurate way of Godliness.

Fourthly, As the way to heaven is a most strict and accurate way, So the word
of God does only declare and reveal what that exactness is: So that as in
matters to be believed there is no Doctrine can be urged as necessary, which is
not contained in that writing: So in matters to be practiced there is no
degree, or high strain of holiness that is a duty, which is not also commanded
in Gods word: those two commands, one Negatively, Thou shall not lust the other
affirmative, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and soul, and
strength, do command both for matter and manner, all that possibly can be done
by man, and therefore can never be fulfilled in this life, because of those
innate and adherent corruptions in us. I have seen an end of all things, says
David, But thy commandments are exceeding broad: they contain the whole duty of
a man, and this particular is more to be observed, because we are apt to go to
extraordinary ways: as if the word of God were indeed a total and adequate
rule for our faith, but not for our practice and conversation.

Hence, Fifthly, All strictness introduced, that is not according to Scripture,
how 5 All other strictness is to no purpose.
specious and glorious soever it may seem to be, yet it affords no true solis
comfort to those that are employed therein. Now you must know, that as there is
a proneness in men, curiously to pry into doctrinal matters above the word of
God, to be wise above that which is written, so there is also an ithching
inclination in us, to affect an holiness above the Scripture, to bring in a
greater strictness then God has required; not that it is indeed strictness (as
is to be showed, but carnal looseness) only it has the appearance so to the
eyes of flesh and blood: As for example, The Pharisees way that seemed to be
more religious and exact, then the course our Savior taught, and therefore
they called him a wine bibber, and charged him for keeping company with
sinners: The Pharsees would not come near any such profane men: they would not
go out, or come in, but they would first wash themselves, least they should get
any uncleanness upon them. Here in outward appearance, they seemed to teach a
more exact, and strict way then Christ: though all this outward austerity did
flow from a poy oned, corrupted fountain within.

Let us instance in several ways whereby men may affect, and introduce an
higher strictness, then the Scripture speaks of: And I shall not instance in
false worship, which was a great part of Pharisaical strictness, busying
themselves in those things God never required; for I shall speak of that (God
willing) in the next sermon, because it is the greater sign by which many
superstitious and ignorant people cosen their souls. I proceed therefore to
other affectations of extraordinary strictness, such as these.

First, When the Scripture or word of God is accounted too low a thing to guide
us, 1. When the Word is accounted too low a rule.
and therefore they expect an higher, and more extraordinary teaching by the
spirit of God, and that for other matter then is contained therein. It is true
indeed, the word of God as it is Scripture, without the Spirit of God, cannot
enlighten or change the heart: therefore these two must never be opposed, or
disjoined; but the word of God is the only adequate rule, to which we are
tied, and the Spirit of God that works in and by that: so that as God will
not produce any extraordinary new material light to direct us bodily, but in
and through the Sun, so the Spirit of God will not vouchsafe any new spiritual
light, but in and through the Scriptures Hence it is, that although God be not
bound himself, yet he has bound us to that only: To the law, and to the
Testimony, and search the Scriptures: yea, Timothy must not look for infallible
directions from Paul, but give himself to the study of the Scriptures, which
were able to make him fully perfect for every good work. Now the Papist and
Enthusiast they both agree in this, to debase the Scripture, not to make it a
full and perfect rule; to expect higher, and more noble teachings then are from
that. Hence the papist call it inkie Divinity thus to walk and believe only by
Scripture: who can think, say they, That God would have us tied to Paper and
Parchment: and they apply that place of Paul, Ye are our Epistle, 2 Cor 3. 3.
Not written with ink, but the spirit of God, etc. making all those that adhere
to the Scripture as a rule to live by, the Letter, and not the Spirit: so on
the other side, Enthusiasts they undervalue the Scripture; and its reported of
them, that they called it Pessimum idolum mundi, the worst Idol in the world:
and no wonder if they cry down the Scripture as being a low form, seeing some
Anabaptists have denied the humane Nature of Christ, and called those
Creaturistas, Creaturists, that held it so: even as some complain that Christ
is made a form, and that we ought not to stay on him but go immediately to the
Father. Howsoever these high things may seem to ravish men, and but people into
admiration: yet they are indeed low and false things: do not therefore grow
weary of these plain Truths concerning faith and regeneration, or those plain
Sermons that teach this; for thou will shortly come to be weary of the
Scripture it self, as too plain and mean a thing: That as some corrupt fancies
have disdained the Scripture (such as Politian and Austin once confessed of
himself) because there was not humane eloquence enough in it: so these nauseate
the word of God upon another ground, as not having high and lofry Doctrines fit
for their Eagle eyes. Therefore it is a miserable thing to consider how such
preachers, and people that are thus elevated up to cloudy things, do Torrure
and perplex Scripture, to fasten their absurd imaginations upon it: Alas, the
cripture was not made for such curious Aerial speculations: Let not therefore
such go any longer a Tiptoe, as if no Christian in all his glory were like to
them, because of their abstruse conceptions: for they are higher then others
but as chimneys are higher then other parts of the house, that carry away
empty, smoaky, obscure vapors. I am the larger upon this, because it is a
great part of Grace to sit down contented with the plainness and simplicity of
Scripture, both for matter of it, and manner of delivery.

A second extraordinary strict way in which men support themselves, is the
undergoing voluntary penalties, or bodily chastisements for sins past, or
setting upon external 2. When men set up an external severe discipline over
themselves.
austers discipline, to prevent sin to come. The Apostle describes such, Col.
2. 21, 22, 23. where he speaks of bodily discipline, as having a show of
humility, and neglecting of the body; then he explaineth the manner how this
neglect was demonstrated, viz. by several precepts, Touch not, taste not, handle
not. Judicious Calvin does think there is a gradation, and that superstition
grew higher, and higher: therefore by the first command Touch not, he
understands according to the Scripture use of the word sometimes Eat not, the
Antecedent being put for the Consequent: so that their superstition swelled
higher and higher: First, Eat not, then Taste not, which is more; then not so
much as handle, which is highest of all: But what account does the Apostle make
of all these, in which some put the substantials of Religion? Truly, nothing
at all, in that he calls them Rudiments of the world; and such as argue men not
alive with Christ. Where you may observe, That our spiritual resurrection with
Christ, does not only raise up our hearts above sin, and earthly things, but
also all such humane Ordinances, though seeming never so much to promote piety.
True Godliness and participation of spiritual life from Christ, carries a man
not only above lusts, and the world but all humane institutions that seem so
admirably holy to flesh and blood. Indeed there ought to be a sober, moderate
use of all bodily comforts: Therefore the Apostle says, He kept under his
body, an emphatical word, 1 Cor. 9. 27. yea, the whole Context is an expression
from these Wrestlers, or Fighters that were known in antiquity: now the
adversary that Paul fought with, was his body, that hindered him in his course
to heaven: Therefore he says, (...), he did beat his face black and blew,
(...), and (...), Triumph over his body, and make it a slave. If you ask, how
he did this? he expresses it in that general rule, Every man that striveth for
the mastery, is temperate in all things: There ought to be in every one a
temperate, sober use of clothes, food, delight: because our bodies are so many
adversaries to hinder us in our race to heaven. Auferte ignem, adhuc enim
paleas habio, said a languishing sick man of an alluring object standing by
him, Take away that fire, for I have straw, or chaff that will kindle quickly.
And certainly this Doctrine is much to be pressed upon you that are Citizens,
who live in much ease and plenty, and go richly clothed: are you so strict and
riged as you should be, in making your body instrumental to serve God? The
string of the Instrument, if it be wet and not dried, is not fit to make any
melodious tune; no more is the body overmuch replenished with any pleasure. We
see Timothy going too far in the bodily discipline; Therefore Paul advises him
To drink a little wine for his present infirmities. John Baptist, he also came
in an austere way, his garments being of Camels hair, and his food locusts:
This way of his was different from Christ's: nor is John Baptist an example to
us; but his deportment was peculiar, as being most suitable to him that was
putting a period to the old Testament-dispensations.

Therefore all those affected Austerities of (...), eating of herbs, and other
dry things, as also Humicubaticus, or lyings on the ground in rough sackcloth,
though the exercisers therein did no doubt much please themselves, and thought
hereby to endear God to them: yet all this is but a vain refuge: The Apostle
determines, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is
profitable to all things. He makes a distinction between bodily exercise, and
godliness; therefore one is not the other: Do not then measure thy hopes and
assurances of heaven, though very specious to a carnal eye, by such outward
strict observances.

Thirdly, An extraordinary strictness which makes men confident, Is a
voluntary abdication, and actual dispossessing our selves of all outward
comforts, and applying our selves only to religious exercises. How did this
mistake seduce thousands of devout souls, who were zealous for God, but wanted
knowledge? Hence came those Monasteries, renouncing of riches, wealth, and
whatsoever comfort was in this life: As if those places, Unless a man forsake
all, and deny himself, taking up the cross and follow me, etc. did command an
actual abdication of all, and not rather an habitual preparation of heart to
leave them all when God shall call for them. And if we read of Philosophers
that have thrown all their wealth away, that they might the better study
Philosophy, is it any wonder if a false zeal carry some to part with all, that
according to their thoughts, they might the more expeditely come to the races
end? It is true indeed, the Scripture commands such strictness in our
affections and desires to all worldly comforts, That those that have them must
be as if they had them not: And who is there that can stand under those exact
commands of God herein? yet we may err on the right hand, as well as on the
left. Such were those Euchetae, that gave themselves only to pray: And the
Donatists upbraiding the Orthodox with their impiety, and commending their own
godliness, Nos formidamus divitias, We (say they) are afraid of riches.

Fifthly, Men may judge their Spiritual conditions the better, Because of an
extraordinary strictness in Church Discipline, and Church Dispensations, when
yet there is no ground at all for it: That there may be overmuch rigor in
Discipline, appears plainly, 2 Cor. 2. 7. where the Apostle blames them,
That they did not receive into favor that incestuous person, who had truly
repented: And the Apostle does in part suppose it is part of Satan's subtle
devices, when he cannot destroy a Church by profaneness, and dissoluteness, to
overthrow it by too much severity. Now how many ways there may be an excess in
rigid Church ways, we have upon another occasion showed: As when men hold
only perfect men; or if not so, only truly godly men to be admitted into
Church Fellowship; and men, though qualified with sufficient knowledge, and
free from Scandal, to be debarred many privileges: As also when they think men
committing such sins, were never to be received again; which was the error of
Novatians and Donarists: or if they did admit such repenting, yet not for many
years, in which excess the primitive Church did fall. Now all these Doctrines
and Practices, having a specious pretense of more strictness, and exactness
then others, is a temptation to many, that they build themselves upon these
ways and manners, not at all attending to the power and life of Godliness;
this is a seasonable Doctrine at this time. Oh, puff not up thy self: do not
conclude great things for thy self, merely because thou judge thy self in a
more strict Doctrinal, or Church way then others. Alas these external ways
profit little, but god liness profits to all purposes. Many times high
principles, have but low practices, and strict opinions, sometimes large
conversations. Now the ground why these instituted, and introduced
strictnesses, are not to be rested upon, is because they are not what they seem
to be. We call them high things, but they are indeed low things; we call them
strict things, but they are indeed large and loose things. For take this
Pharisaical most exact and straight way; alas, their hearts were large and
loose enough; so that all strictness, which is not commanded by Scripture,
comes from a loose principle, and tends to a loose end: for it proceeds from a
carnal heart, not acquiescing in Gods word as a rule: it is not subject to
Scripture directions, and then the end is carnal; for it is always for some
self-advantage, though it be in a subtle and crafty way. As you see the
Pharisees st(...)ctnes was, (...), to be seen of men: should they not have
applause, and profit, and Disciples to admire them, they would never have
engaged in such austere ways.

Use 1. Is there indeed a true Scripture-strictness, without which heaven
cannot be obtained; Then see what a gulf there is between heaven and you, who
live in all looseness, negligence, and careless contempt of what is good. Is
thy life thou live so difficult, so contrary to flesh and blood? Is to be
drunk, to cosen, to be unclean, like pulling out of the right eye? Thou can
not have bread for thy mouth without the sweat of thy brows, and think thou
to have this prize without earnest running in the race? Do thou think God
will provide Salvation for thee, as he did a wife for Adam, by casting thee in
a dead sleep, and thou know nothing, nor discern nothing of it? But especially
do you tremble, who scoff, reproach, yea, persecute and oppose men for
strictness in religious ways: This argues a legion of Devils in thee: thou
can not abide the image of God: thou can not endure to see the practical
power of it. The fire of Gods wrath will be heated seven times hotter for such
opposers as thou art.

Use 2. Of admonition, to examine and judge wisely of all strictness commanded
to thee: For the Devil may seduce thee in thy zeal, as well as in thy
profaneness: and do not persuade thy self of Grace, because of a more strict
opinion, or Churchpractice thou conceivest thy self to be in: For this is not
the Scripture-strictnesse in which the essence of godliness consists; for that
lies in the inward circumcision of the heart, in the powerful mortification of
the affections, in walking humbly, in living by faith, and
heavenly-mindednesse. Oh, it is easier to be of the strictest Church way in the
world, then to practice strict Graces. Oh, what a reproach is it, to pretend a
singular way, and not to have a singular heart, and a singular conversation?
but are men in the broad way, proud covetous, earthly, wanton? so art thou in
thy strict way; what a contradiction is this?

SERMON XXVII.
Zeal and Diligence in false Worship no ground of Comfort.

MARK 7. 7. Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
traditions of men.
THe Text is part of an historical Narration, wherein is manifestly deciphered
the envious and malicious disposition of superstitious persons and hypocrites
against the pure and upright, for here we have the Scribes and Pharisees, that
were reputed the only Saints of the world, because of their outward devotion,
quarrelling and contesting with Christ, about the neglect of a superstitious
custom. So that you have their impeachment in the 5th verse, Why walk not thy
Disciples according to the tradition of the Elders, that eat bread with
unwashen hands? They do not say, Why is Gods Law, or Moses his Law
transgressed? but the tradition of the Elders. The Elders among the Jews had
brought in under a specious pretext of piety and religion, many devout customs
and religious usages, which they called Sepimenta legis, hedges to the Law of
God, but they were indeed Impedimenta, for hereby Gods commands were
frustrated. Now among other traditions, this was introduced by them, that they
did before they went to meals, or when they came home from business abroad,
wash themselves. The ground was, lest they should touch any thing unclean, and
so be defiled unawares; hereupon also it was, that they used frequent washings,
as of themselves; so also of Cups, Pots, Vessels and Tables: where by the way
we may observe (...) and (...), to signify in the general any washing, and not
dipping only, as some contend. If you ask, Why our Savior would not conform
to such a tradition, seeing there was no visible appearance of evil in it,
neither was it a sin to do so? Chrysostom gives this reason, because those
that are intent to the most necessary and serious matters of Religion, use to
neglect, what is supersluous: but we may say, This tradition was used not upon
civil respects, for so to wash their hands was comely and decent before they
eat bread, but upon religious considerations, hereby worshipping God, and
thinking thereby to approve themselves more acceptably to him.

To this Accusation of the Pharisees our Savior answers two ways:

First, By Recrimination, and then by Positive Information, verse. 14, 15. My
Text is part of the Recrimination, which consists partly in application of
Isaiahs Prophecy to them, This people honors me with their lips, but their
heart is far from me. This was spoke to the Jews living in the Prophets time,
but because they were guilty of the same sin, he extends the Prophets
speech to all that are guilty of hypocrisy in the like kind.

Again, Christ's upbraiding is partly in the manifestation of the vanity and
unprofitablenesse of such false worship, In vain do they worship me. The Hebrew
word is Fear in the Prophet; but because that is many times used for the whole
worship of God, therefore it is expounded so here. And although the word in
vain is not used by the Prophet Isaiah, yet the Septuagint has it, and this
sense is necessarily implied by consequence.

That it is a vain and unprofitable sign to support and comfort our selves by,
that we are diligent in the worship of God, if not commanded by him. Observe.


The Pharisees made their observation of religious traditions to be the eminent
ground of all their happiness. In this they placed all their Religion and
Sanctity; whosoever concurred not with them herein, was accounted profane and
cursed; but how light and empty is all this found, when weighed in the balance
of the Sanctuary? And it is wonderful to consider, how in all the ages of the
Church, this Pharisaical leaven, has leavened most persons. Insomuch that Gods
Commandments have been wholly laid aside, while men's traditions have been
admired; So that it is a true Assertion of Augustines, Sincerus Dei cultus apud
paucos est, The sincere and pure worship of God, is but among few. So that the
discussion of this Point, will much clear the true Nature of the service of God.

Therefore to be informed herein, consider, Several Propositions about
worshipping of God. 1. It lies upon all as a duty


First, That it lies as a necessary duty upon all to worship and serve God.
The Hebrew words and Greek are several and observable, that express this
worship, which are exactly handled among the learned; The ground of this
worship is, Because he is the Jehovah, who gives us our being, and all other
mercies: It is therefore most natural, and a most indispensable debt to
acknowledge him for his supreme excellency herein, and to give him a peculiar
and proper worship. Now this worship and service is either internal, or
external, or mixed, compounded of Worship distinguished.
both; internal consists in our love of God above all things, Faith and Hope in
him, Obedience to his commands, which the Scripture prefers before all
external worship; External is that of adoration and inclination of the body,
kissing the hand, bowing the knee, dedicating Temples, Altars, and Offering of
Sacrifices; Mixed is compounded of both these, such as calling upon Gods name by
Petition and Thanksgiving.

Secondly, This worship and service of God is not given to God, because he
needs it, 2. God needs no worship. It is for our own good.
or is made more happy thereby. This is a good consideration to debase
hypocrites who are so apt to swell and to be secure, because of their worship
of God. Thus David does acknowledge that his good reaches not to God. God is
no more bettered by our worship, then the fountain is, because a man drinks of
it; or the Sun, because a man sees by the light of it. Such do not advantage
the fountain, or the Sun, but their own selves. So God has appointed this
worship, not that he might receive good from us, but communicate good to us.
Thus God says, The beasts upon a thousand hills are mine. God there shows, he
needed not their Psalm. 50. 10, 11.
Sacrifices; This is a necessary truth, for hypocritical Formalists to meditate
on. Thy worship of God consists not in thy giving to him, but receiving from
him. It is for thy own good and advantage that God has appointed thee to hear,
pray, and to be exercised in any godly duty.

Thirdly, Such is the infinite Excellency and Majesty of God, that we are to
tremble 3. We are to be ashamed of our best services.
and greatly to be ashamed of any worship or service we tender to him. The
Angels that are not conscious to the least sin in themselves, but are pure
above the Sun, that cannot call themselves dust and ashes, yet cover their
faces before God. An expression to signify the dazeling Majesty of God in
their eyes: Then much more ought man to abhor himself in any worship, and
that as he is a creature, though he had nothing but that excellent and pure
stamp of holiness, then with what humiliation and self-abhorrency should
sinful man stand in the presence of God! It is a remarkable expression in
Joshua, Ye cannot serve God, for he is an holy God, Josh. 24. 19. Ye cannot
serve him, viz. according to his nature, as his Majesty deserves. Oh how
should such considerations as these work more awful and trembling thoughts upon
you, when you are in any worship, why are ye so drousie, sleepy, dull and
careless, when ye are worshipping of God, what high contempt is this?

Fourthly, God only may appoint that worship which he will accept of. The
second 4. God only may appoint the worship which he will accept of.
Commandment contains all the instituted worship of God, and by what reason
Images are forbidden, by the same are also prohibited all parts or means of
worship invented by man, though upon specious and glorious titles. Hence are
they so often blamed for a way of worship, which they choose of their own heads,
and for walking after their own imaginations. The deformity of an Ape lies in
being so like a man, and yet not a man; so does the loathsomeness of all false
worship lie in this, that it imitateth the worship of God, but indeed it is not
so. Augustine acknowledges that of Socrates, as good and true, God must be
worshipped in that way only he has appointed: And the same Augustine lays
down an excellent position, Erroris hoc est principium, quod quae placent nobis
etiam Deo placere putamus; and quae nobis displicent etiam Deo displicere.
Nothing though it seem never so good, may be added to Gods precepts. Therefore
in all worship, look to a warrant, else thy sin is very great. Hence Joh. 4.
The Samaritans are said to worship they know not what, because they find not
Gods appointment for what they did.

Fifthly, Our Savior does excellently and briefly lay down what is acceptable
5. What it is to worship God in the Spirit.
worship unto him, ^ohn 4. 22. Those that worship him, must worship him in
Spirit and truth, and as a Father; such worshippers he seeks for, though he
needs them not. To worship God in the Spirit, is to have a spiritual and holy
inward frame of heart in all our addresses to him. This is worshipping of God
in a way the most of men are not acquainted with: The Jews and Pharisees were
generally ignorant of this; Paul said, Whom I serve in my Spirit. Oh it is an
hard matter to have a spiritual man in prayer, hearing and other worship! And
indeed this is the soul and life of the service of God. The other way of
worship is in truth, which by some is explained against hypocrisy and guile of
Spirit; for this God complains of, That they drawed nigh with their mouths,
but their hearts were far from God. Lastly, as a Father, they must worship,
though humbly, yet not slavishly and servilely. Seneca speaks of the
superstitious intimidated person, that while he worships God, he provokes him,
Quem colit, violat.

Sixthly, Howsoever worship of God be commanded by him, yet such is the nature
of 6. Obedience to moral duties required before instituted worship.
all moral duties, that the obedience to them is required before any instituted
worship. I will have mercy and not Sacrifice. Go and learn what that means,
says our Savior. Insomuch that comparatively to obedience, God is said not to
command these at all. And herein Samuel gives Saul a remarkable lesson,
Rebellion or disobedience is like the sin of witchcraft. He has showed thee,
O man, what is good, to walk humbly, to do justly, etc. Therefore how diligent
and busy soever thou art in outward worship, yet if not obedient to the known
Commandments of God, thou can not be called a true worshipper of God.
Consider this, you who live in gross sins of swearing, lyings, filthy lusts,
yet what a stir do you make for outward worship and ceremonies not
commanded. If so be that God be to be worshipped, why does thy tongue blaspheme
him by curses? Why does thy body dishonor him by filthy defilements? What have
thou to do (says God) to take my words in thy mouth, and hate to be
reformed? Oh remember obedience is better then all bowings, inclinations and
incurvations of the body!

Seventhly, The heart of man is exceeding subtle and ingenuous to palliate over
all 7. Many wise and learned men have pleaded for superstitions in worship.
false worship: Insomuch that there never were superstitious abuses of the
worship of God, but that there have been learned men, and wise men to plead for
them. The Pharisees were accounted the only learned, and knowing men of the
Jews, yet who more zealous for this traditional worship then they? And thus in
Popery for their Altar-worship, Image Worship, all their pompous adoration.
What heaps of distinctions have they minted to represent them lawful? Insomuch
that Sixtinus Amama speaks of a Papist, that confesses he had need have
ingenium valde metaphysicum, a most metaphysical ingeny, that can understand
all those abstractions and precisions which are requisite for the full
conception of the manner of their worship. How do they color over their
worship of Angels and Saints, by making a twofold religious worship, one
primary, as to the fountain of all excellency, and so they acknowledge God only
to be worshipped: The other secondary as to instruments and mediators, yet
still they hold it religious. But divine worship appointed by God is
indivisible, like conjugal love. Hence false worship is so often compared to
whoredoms and adulteries, and Gods anger to jealousy. Now as it would be no
excuse to a married woman, if she commit lewdness with another man, to say,
she keeps her primary love to her husband, for that were not lawful, no not in
that woman in the story, who yielded her self to the lust of another, to redeem
her husband from captivity, though love to her husband put her upon this fact,
yet it was not justifiable; so neither can any good intentions, or a loving
heart to Gods glory and zeal for him, excuse or legit(...)te any worship he
has not appointed. Take heed therefore of pleading good intentions, and a good
meaning in Gods worship. Who seemed to be more excusable then (...) yet God
struck him suddenly dead for that transgression? If people were truly sensible
of this, they would not so revile and rage at a Reformation as they do; What is
more cheering and rejoicing a true godly man, then to see the pure
administration of all Church-worship? And on the other side, nothing does cut
and pierce the heart of a carnal superstitious man more, then to have his
superstitions removed: Then they think all Religion is removed with it. Well,
howsoever thy intentions are good, as thou say, yet God accounts it so much
worship done to Devils. It is said of Jeroboam, His worship was to Devils. Alas
did the people think so? Were not their intentions for the true God? But God
calls it worshipping of Devils, for all false worship is brought in by the
instigation of the Devils.

Eighthly, God under the New Testament has appointed all his worship in a
plain 8. The worship of God plain and simple.
simple way, not to please the eye, or affect the heart, but only to draw out
the spiritual exercise of the soul. Insomuch that it is the most difficult
thing that can be, not to be offended at the simplicity of Gods worship now
appointed; I am afraid, says Paul, (...) as the Serpent beguiled Hve, so your
minds should be corrupted from the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ. Paul
was afraid of this, the Devil is to be feared more as a glittering subtle
Serpent, then a raging roaring Lion: and in nothing 2 Co. 11. 3.
does his serpentine art appear more then in introducing worship that is
pompous and ceremonious. As children love to play with babies; so do ignorant,
carnal people with an external sensible worship. And the more spiritual any
Ordinance, or the administration of it is, the less glorious it is unto a
corrupt heart; whereas a gracious heart sees glorious Majesty in spirituality.
Christ's presence in the Temple, expounding, informing and reforming, made the
second Temple more glorious then the former, which did exceed in gold and other
magnificence. As the painting of a precious jewel hinders the native and proper
luster of it. So does humane pomp added to the pure institutions of Christ take
off from the innate beauty and glory of them. God indeed in the Old Testament
appointed a solemn external worship, full of sensible glory and pomp, but it
was because they were infants, and children had rather have a baby then a rich
inheritance. Expect therefore in the worship of God, that which may exercise
thy faith, heavenly-mindednesse, and dependency upon God, which may make a
divine impression and stamp upon thy soul, not that which may ravish thy eyes,
and thy ears.

In the next place, let us consider, why such men so addicted unto external
superstitions, Why false worship and worshippers are vain.
though they much admire themselves, yet are indeed vain men, and lean upon
vain props.

1. Because always such persons have the bitterest enmity against true
godliness. Our Savior and his Disciples had no greater enemies then these of
the Pharisees. Luther had no stouter opposites out of alehouses and brothel
houses, then he had out of the Monasteries and other religious places, as they
call them. And observe now adays, who are more implacable enemies to all
godliness and t^^e power of it, then those that dote upon ceremonious worship?
who manifest a greater enmity unto a Reformation then such. Shall thou
therefore take delight, and have hope in thy self and ways, when thou art in
the first rank of those that oppose true piety: And the reason of this enmity
is, because true godliness does discover the falsehood and hypocrisy of that
painted worship, and brings it out of repute in the world, all which is a
torment to their galled hearts. How can thou say thou art godly, who
abhorrest, reproachest and persecutest it, where thou find it practiced?

2. Here is no ground of confidence in these, because they are consistent with
the ordinary 2.
practice of gross and sinful courses. The Jews cried, The temple, the temple
of the Lord, when yet their lives were fraughted with murders, adulteries, and
all kind of notorious sinfulness; and this is still to be seen, none so
zealous for superstitious ways, as men of corrupt lives, and dissolute
conversations; and it seems very strange that a man should be so seemingly
for God in worship, and yet so really against him in practice. The first
Chapter of Isaiah is a most excellent remonstrance against such men, I have
your new moons, your sacrifices are as if a dogs hear were cut off. Wash ye,
make ye clean. Here you see that which God looks at, is real Obedience: yea God
judges all such worship a great dishonor to him. And indeed it must needs be
so, for such men think God like themselves, Thou thoughtest (says God) that I
was such an one as thy self. God is indeed the God of Abraham. Isaac and Jacob,
the God of believers and of holy men, but not the God of Cain, Lamech, Esau and
Judas: What blasphemy would it be to entitle God to such. God is God of the
living, and not of the dead, in this sense, viz. who are dead in gross and
wicked impieties. Know therefore, that notwithstanding all thy worship, thy
ceremonious addresses, thou art but a dead corpse, which makes every thing
unclean it touches.

3. If a man may not rely or trust on the instituted worship of God, yea nor
on the 3.
graces wrought by Gods Spirit in us, then much l^sse in a worship of his own.
Paul who once put confidence in his strict way of Pharisaism, when converted,
accounts his very graces and holiness, but dung comparatively unto the
righteousness of Christ. If therefore the temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord, be not sanctuary sure enough to flee unto, shall the temple of Baal, or
the Image of Moloch, be a City of refuge? If the Sacraments and Ordinances
appointed by God are no symptom of thy grace, Can those bowings and
incurvations or external Discipline set up by thy own self? If the green tree
cannot endure the fire, shall the dry hay and stubble encounter with it? If thy
own graces are not helmet strong enough to repel Gods wrath, then thy own
voluntary worship is but so many cobwebs, when a furious tempest blows upon
them.

4. These are not to be relied upon, which are vain and unprofitable, and so
frustrate 4.
of that end we expect. Now the Text says, In vain do they worship me; other
duties commanded by God, though they are not pillars to be leaned on, yet they
are not vain. God says not to Jacob, to seek his face in vain, but all this
service is lost labor: Who has required all these things at your hands. Now
of all things to labor in vain in religious matters is the saddest expense of
all. After all that zeal thou art never a whit the nearer heaven, thou art no
more indeared to God, Thy state is no ways spiritually advantaged: yea though
it be a fruitless labor one way, yet it is not another way; for there is a
fruit of these labors, but it is bitterness and wormwood, God is more provoked
by thee. These false worships will be written down in the catalogue of thy
other sins, a drunkard, a swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, and a false-worshipper.
Now consider that this sin of false-worship, though it be not so condemned by a
natural conscience, yet it is far above all sins against the second Table
caeteris paribus; for, 1. God is said only to be jealous about this sin. The
rage of a man is seen in his jealousy, if wronged therein, he can least bear
it. And thus God describes himself about superstitious worship. That which
thou with a great deal of comfort and satisfaction delightest in, is an
abomination unto God. Thy lies in thy trade, thy curtain sins do not so offend
God, as thy Church sins, those superstitions thou art acting there. 2. It is a
sin against the first and second Commandment; yea if our worship be not done as
God has appointed it, it is (as you heard) done to Devils; and hence it is
that of all sins God did most remarkably punish the Israelites with captivity
and sword, for defiling and corrupting his worship. How then can that be a plea
for thee, which will be the greatest plea against thee? Of all blindness, it
is most terrible to take your crimson sins for your service to God, and to
place Religion in that which is the greatest irreligion.

5. That which is a sad curse and fruit of former sins, that can be little
comfort to 5.
any man that rightly considers of things. Thus we say, it is an absurd thing
to be proud of clothes, for in that thou need clothing, it is an argument
thou art fallen from integrity and innocence: But in this matter, the curse of
God is more wonderful upon thee, for all that admiration and applause of false
worship is inflicted upon thee as a punishment, because thou have not received
the truth in the love of it. That Antichristian spirit in Popery, whence is it?
to believe a lie for truth; to take Idolatry for Religion, is it not because
men are given up to believe a lie? because they loved not the truth And thus
our Prophet Isaiah from whom our Text is alleged, speaks of the blindness God
had given these idolatrous Jews up unto, that they cannot understand nor know
the mind of God: As therefore you have Gods judgments upon some to be
delivered up to carnal gross sins, which they cannot leave; so there are also
some given up to spiritual delusions and superstitions.

6. These of all men are in a most unsafe estate (notwithstanding their
security) because 6.
they are in a most absolute contrariety and indisposition for receiving of
Christ, in whom only our souls have rest. Publicans and Harlots went to Heaven
before the Pharisees, why so? because the former were sooner convinced of their
sin, their undone estate, and so more willingly flying unto Christ. Come unto
me ye that labor, and I will give you ease. But when do we ever hear of such
pharisaical spirits burdened with sin? when do such feel the weight and load of
it, desiring to be refreshed? The full stomach loatheth the honeycomb. And God
fills the hungry with good things, but the rich he sends empty away. As in
Gods providence we see he commonly helps not, till all the oil in the cruse be
spent, till all outward helps fail. And Christ when he was upon the earth,
cured not those diseases, which for the most part could be healed by
Physicians; so it is in the work of Justification, the righteousness of Christ
is not revealed, but to those that are naked, poor and miserable in their own
feeling.

Use. Of Information, Why of all men those are so hardly recovered out of their
Use.
ways unto Christ, who accustom themselves to false worship, why they are so
bitter unto the powerful ways of godliness, why they make such outcries when
such superstitions are taken away: all this arises from that self-fulness and
self-righteousness they persuade themselves of, by such religious practices.
How unacquainted are such with the heavy weight of sin, if they were, how
insufficient would they see these plasters for their wounds? They would call
them miserable comforters, and throw them away. When do you see any of these
lying like the man of Jericho, wounded and half dead, desiring oil to be poured
in his wounds: therefore let such be awakened from that desperate condition
they are in; let them see they run in vain, they worship in vain, they serve
God in vain. Let them tollere and legere, take up the Scriptures, and read
those many places that speak against such corrupt worship.

SERMON XXVIII.
External Obedience to the Law of God no sure evidence for Heaven.

MAT. 5. 20. For I say unto you, that except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.
I shall take that doctrine for granted which the Orthodox prove against
Papists and Socinians, viz. that in this Chapter our Savior does not as a
Lawgiver impose new commands, and duties, which were not obligatory in the Old
Testament; but does only vindicate the Law of God from corrupt glosses and
interpretations; so that although his doctrine and interpretation was new,
through the default of those corrupt traditionall Expositions, which the
Pharisees had delivered, yet it was not new indeed, for the same duties had
always been commanded. Our Savior does as the Painter, which does not draw a
new image or picture, only varnisheth it over, where the color and beauty was
lost; He does not dig up new fountains, but cleanses away that earth and mudd
which these Pharisees had thrown in. The Lord Christ in this Chapter teaches
excellent and admirable purity and holiness, transcendent not only to
Pharisaicall glosses, but to all the corrupt opinions and judgments of men,
pressing upon us heart-duties above external obedience, and prohibiting inward
and soul-sinnes above outward filthiness. And in the Text, he does by a
vehement asseveration, remove all that reputed righteousness, which dazeled
the eyes of the world in those days.

So that in the words you have a necessary qualification for out entrance into
the Kingdom of Heaven.

The qualification is in an exceptive expression; Unless your righteousness,
etc. By righteousness is not meant that Evangelicall righteousness imputed to
us, but inherent wrought by Gods grace, and therefore called your
righteousness, because subjected in us: our holiness is called
righteousness, not because we are justified or accounted righteous before God
because of it: but because there are all the essential parts of righteousness
commanded by the Law, though defective in the graduall intentions thereof.

In the next place there is the necessary requisite to our righteousness, viz.
that it does exceed, abound, as the greek word, or increase and be greater then
that [of the Scribes and Pharise^s] Scribes are named because of their
learning, and Pharisees because of their pretended exactness in piety. He does
not say, unless your righteousness be more then Publicans and Harlots, for
that would easily be granted, but more then Scribes and Pharisees. Nor, unless
it be like and equal to that of the Pharisees, but unless it exceed. This was
extremely offensive and paradoxall, and it is, says Musculus, as if in the
time of Popery a Preacher had said, Unless your righteousness exceed that of
the Minorites and Carthusians, you cannot be saved; Now the general ground why
the Pharisees obedience was insufficient; was because it consisted in an
external conformity to the Law, without any inward change or renovation of the
heart, as Paul speaks of himself, that he knew not inward lusts to be sins.

That external moral obedience unto the Law of God, though it be much relied
upon Obs. External obedience unto the law of God is no sure evidence for
Heaven. What is meant by external obedience. 2. A freedom from all gross sins.
by men; yet it is no sure evidence for heaven.

To open this consider these particulars.

First, That by external obedience we mean an innocence or freedom from all
gross vices. No drunkard, no whoremonger, no prodigal, etc. For the Pharisees
made clean the outside, howsoever inwardly their hearts were dens of theevish
Iusts: Now although this innocence be no symptom of grace; yet how many such
noisome and filthy weeds grow in Christ's garden! how many such beastly swine
are in Christ's sheepfold, sins that should not be named among Christians, are
yet practiced and boasted of among them. What comfort and hopes caost thou have
in thy conscience, who carriest about with thee such evident plague-tokens of
Gods wrath? What do such Crows among Christ's Doves? What do such Brambles among
his pleasant plants? Depart ye workers of iniquity from Christian assemblies
for these know you not: God called you not to uncleanness but unto holiness.
Oh that these spots and reproaches of Christianity were once purged away from
us.

Secondly, By this moral obedience we mean a fair external conformity 2. An
external conformity to the duties of the first and second Table.
both unto the duties of the first and second Table: so that they have the
outward lineaments both of piety and righteousness. For thus the Pharisees
they were careful about the external worship of God, how zealous about the
Sabbath, charging the pollution thereof upon Christ! and as for moral duties
among men, had they not excelled therein, they could not have enjoyed such
admiration and applause of men. It is true, our Savior made them the worst of
men, pulling off their vizards and discovering their pride and covetous ends in
all they did: but though they were inwardly ravening wolves, yet outwardly they
seemed innocent sheep. Hence our Savior called them hypocrites several times
together; If therefore you have a man that is careful in duties to man,
faithful in his word, just in his dealings, but neglective of Gods worship, a
profane despiser of the Sabbath; this man is not to be accounted so much as a
moral righteous man, Again, if you see a man strict about the worship of God,
in keeping of the Sabbath, in writing and repeating of Sermons, yet unjust and
deceitful in his doings, this man rises not so high as this Pharisaicall
righteousness. That which must be exceeded is an universal, general
conformity unto all the Commandments of God.

Therefore thirdly, That wherein this moral obedience to all the Commandments
3. Wherein this obedience is defective.
of God is defective in, is, that it is a body without a soul, a shell without
a kernel, a picture without life, there is nothing but an outward shape of
righteousness; as for a principle of regeneration, and a new life within, that
is wholly absent. Now this was the fundamental miscarriage of the Pharisees,
as appears by Nicodemus, they were wholly ignorant of original corruption.
They believed not that all was carnal and defiled within them, and thereupon
saw no necessity of being born again, of having a new nature infused into us,
and so become new creatures. And this is the rock upon which thousands split
their immortal souls still. They please themselves thus, I live honestly, I do
justly to every one, I frequent the Church, and receive the Ordinances of God,
what further thing is there to be done? I thank God no man can accuse me, nor
does my conscience accuse me. But in the mean while, are miserable seduced men,
and are at that very time, in the state of gall and wormwood; Paul though he
walked with a good conscience, and concerning the righteousness of the Law
unblameable: yet when God enlightened his soul, what a heavy doom did he pass
upon himself, and called all that dung, which he judged gold once! Therefore
herein is the danger of mere moral obedience, that it is like a glorious house
without any foundation, a fair apple with a rotten kore, a comely beautiful
face with impostumed vitals.

4. This moral obedient man though he comes so far short of heaven, yet is the
worlds 4. Such a man may be the worlds Saint, and why.
Saint, and admired by them: for he having only the lineaments and form of
godliness, without the power and activity of it, hence it is that he is the
more beloved of the world; Whereas if he had the vigorous life of grace, and
were zealous for the glory of God, and active to pull down the kingdom of sin
and Satan, then all the rage and hat^ed of the world would be derived on him.
Look upon Christ and his conversation, there was more righteousness,
holiness, patience, meekness, and all loveliness in him, then in the
strictest Pharisee: Yet the people generally preferred a Pharisee before him,
because the one had but the picture of godliness, and the other the lively
expression of it, which is very offensive and troublesome to a carnal heart.
Hence the world says, give me an honest, quiet, peaceable man, that troubles
us not for our drunkenness, wickedness, and debauched courses; but as for
these strict, precise, zealous men, what have we to do with them?

5. Although external obedience and outward actions of piety are not to be
rested 5. Yet external obedience is necessary. 1.
on, yet this external obedience is necessary.

First, Because outward actions are a complement and a perfection of the inward
habits of grace; God has put all the internal habits of grace in the heart,
that they might produce external operations in our lives, and when they do so,
they attain their ultimate perfection. Aristotle placed happiness in the
actions of the soul, not in habits and faculties, because they are not most
excellent: It is not therefore enough for a man to please himself with
contemplative good affections, but he is also to demonstrate his grace in the
powerful operations thereof.

Secondly, Outward acts of obedience are necessary because the commands of God
do especially oblige to these. Thus thou shall love the Lord thy God, and 2.
this is his commandment to believe on him: Howsoever therefore that actions
are not sufficient, unless they flow from supernatural principles within, and
an inward rectitude of the frame of the heart; yet the commands of God do bind
to these, as those whereby God is most glorified, it being not the having of a
thing so much as the exercising of it, which makes us acceptable to him that
imployeth us therein.

Thirdly, Outward acts of obedience are necessary, because these do corroborate
3.
and strengthen grace within. The frequent exercise of outward duties do
greatly confirm the inward principle of grace. Even as it is in sin, the
outward acting and daily committing of sin does increase and inhance the
power of sin within. Hence sins we have been long practiced in, become like
an old Oak, that is hardly removed out of its place: Such devils as possess us
from the youth up, are not cast out without prayer and fasting. Thus it is also
in the works of grace, and outward obedience, the more diligent and frequent we
are in them, the more does our inward man grow stronger and stronger.

4. They are necessary in respect of others, Let your light so shine before
men, that they may glorify your Father which is in heaven: We ought by our
outward conversation 4.
to draw on others to godliness, and to give good examples in our externals,
that men may not learn from thee to curse, drink, ^^^ff at godliness, but to
pray and fear Gods Name. Thus you see, that howsoever outward obedience be not
foundation sure enough to build thy hopes of heaven upon, yet it is necessary
in its kind, and therefore the want of this does discover two kind of
hypocrites.

1. Those that are called Nicodemites, who think it enough to keep their heart
for God, although they pollute their bodies with any corrupt worship. There
have been some who have much pleaded for this, and it is very pleasing to flesh
and blood, for hereby we shall always save our selves, and martyrdom will be
a foolish and unlawful prodigality of a man's life: but that place does wholly
cut the sinews of such an opinion, With the heart we believe, and with the
mouth confession Romans ^0
is made unto salvation. The heart without the mouth is not enough for
salvation.

The second sort of hypocrites discovered by external obedience, is
professedly disputed against by James. There were some who thought it enough to
believe the doctrine of Christ, although no good works flowed from this faith:
Now the Apostle does by many arguments demonstrate the absurdity of such a
conceit, and makes this says no better then that of devils. Show me thy faith
by thy works: says the Apostle. So that it is a a vain confidence in any man to
presume of salvation without external obedience, and good works issuing from
faith: for says and holiness is inseparable, and faith has a twofold
operation, which can be no more disjoined then light and heat in the fire, the
one relating (...), within, to Christ laying hold on him, the other (...),
without, bringing forth godly fruits to eternal life. Though therefore you
cannot by the presence of outward obedience necessarily conclude eternal life,
yet by the absence of them you may infer eternal death. These things are
considerable by way of exposition.

In the next place, consider the sad effect upon that man's soul who deceives
The sad effects of trust(...) in an ^x(...)ll obedi(...). 1.
himself with th^s sign, thinking all that God requires lies in such an
outward conformi^y.

First, He will never see the necessary of being a new creature; He sindes no
necessity of change but in the outward man only: Whereas the main and
principal work of grace is that which reaches to the heart of a man: yea, God
begins the work of grace first upon the inward principles and affections of
the soul, 1 Th. 5. 23. I pray God sanctify you throughout, your whole spirit,
soul and body: first spirit, then soul, then body: and thus our Savior
pleads that the tree must be made good before the fruit can. When the Prophet
intended to make the bitter waters sweet, he threw his salt into the Spring as
the fountain and cause, which if once sweetened, would make the streams so. It
is therefore a woeful condition to live a man ignorant of the heart-change that
should be in thee. Thou have been prephane, but now thy life is changed; Thou
did commit such and such sins, but now thou have left them, This is well,
but if a greater change and alteration has not been made in thy soul, thou art
yet in a state of sin and wrath, (...) therefore look about the^, and fear
lest God have not wrought such a glorious work within thee as is necessary.

A second sad consequent is the neglect of Christ and all his offices; for as a
man 2.
is trained up in this external obedience, and thinks the Law requires no
more, he sees no need of Christ; He finds not the heavy and weighty curses of
the law hanging over him, but is secure and quiet, as if all were safe and
well; Come unto me ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you. Till a man
find a load upon his soul, he desires no ease: Ye are they that justify your
selves, says our Savior: hence they sought to establish their own
righteousness, and would not submit to the righteousness of Christ: so that
what Atheis^n does in respect of God as he is governor of the world, exclude
and shut him quite out; the same does a moral righteousness to Christ, as he
is a Mediator, and clothed with righteousness for us; such being full of
themselves, they are as if there had been no Christ, as if he had never died
for us. These make Christ in vain, his life and death in vain, and all the
glorious riches of Gods wisdom and grace in the Gospel a mere figment.

Thirdly, Here is this evil effect also, that purity and holiness of heart
which God 3.
does especi^lly look at, is quite laid aside; for how can men bewail the
inward defilements and foulness of their heart, when they fell them not? how
can they desire the purifying and cleansing of the soul, when they see no
necessity thereof? Hence all this obedience is but a work of nature, not of the
holy Ghost, and so come far short of the excellent frame God requires.

In the third place let us examine the grounds, why it is no safety to rest
upon such outward obedience. (...).


And the first is, From those many causes which may produce this outward
righteteousnesse that come short of a true ground: As first, this external
freedom from sin Whenee external freedom from sin may proceed. 1.
may arise only from the restraining providence of God, which as it has put
bounds and limits to the sea, that it overflow not the earth, so also does
stint the corruption of man, that he does not sin so much as his corrupt nature
would carry him to. That every man is not a Cain, a Judas, an Absalom, comes
from the mercy of God determining and ordering men's sins. As on the other
side, it was from God that so many Romans were endowed with moral virtues in a
glorious manner. Abimelech was ready to fall into whoredom, not knowing any
thing, and God by his providence merely prevented him. Do not therefore
presently build thy hopes, because thy life is a good and an honest life. Thou
have not those blemishes and spots upon thee which others have, whence comes
all this? is it from grace restraining or grace sanctifying? Is it from the
love of God checking thy corruptions, or changing thy heart?

Secondly, If thy righteousness come not thus, then it may be from the sole
power of natural conscience and humane strength: for although it be true that
2.
by the strength of nature we are not able to do any thing supernaturally good,
but there must be antecedent to such an action spiritual illumination of the
mind, and a powerful alteration of the heart: yet those things that are good
in a civil, or political sense, and so, good for the matter, may be done by
the natural dictates of conscience, such implantations are made in man, that
he believes There is a God, That parents are to be honored and succored in
necessity. Now according to that natural light we have about God and a
conscience persuading to it, there may also be a natural prosecution of the
same good; But all this is wholly within the sphere of nature, not above it.
Art thou then a man doing all the works of moral righteousness? Consider from
what stock this grows, from what fountain this streameth, Does it arise from
any other principle, but merely that of a natural conscience? and if so, this
cannot be a plaster to any soar, or a balm to any wound. As good Saints as
these grow of themselves in the heathenish parts of the world.

Thirdly, This outward innocence and righteousness may be merely for want of a
temptation. The heart is ready enough to conceive such monsters, but these 3.
want objects to cause this. We see in Scripture such sins latitant in our
breasts, which will break forth by the midwifry of opportunities, that a man
before would abhor the very thoughts of them, as in Hazael and Peter. Hence
the Disciples were warned by Christ to take heed of drunkenness, a sin that
probably the disciples were far remote from, yet for all that occasions might
kindle such lust in their hearts; It is not therefore presently to be concluded
that all is well, because our lives are unblameable, for it is not from any
goodness within, but from defect of matter without. We see the hedges and
springs of wood are free from snakes and venomous creatures in the winter time,
but it is not because they are not a fit bosom to nourish them, but there
wants the Sunbeams to warm and revive them. As godly men many times would do
good, but they cannot because they want the objects and opportunities thereof:
so also wicked men many times have hearts prepared to do a great deal of evil,
but these mad men have not those swords ready whereby they would destroy
themselves and others.

Lastly, Therefore may thy conversation be so laudable, because the fear of
humane laws and punishments, or else Gods judgments are like a fiery sword to
4.
keep thee off, Romans 13. Magistrates are a terror to those that do evil, so
that many men are not so unclean, unjust, as they would be, because the
Magistrates sword affrights them: and truly it is a great mercy, when in a
kingdom men are necessitated to do things that are good and righteous; The end
of all civil punishments is, that others may see and be afraid, and do no such
thing: so that many a man's external conformity to good things is from the laws
of the kingdom, wherein he lives: or if these do not curb him, sometimes the
heavy judgments of God impending over him make him, to do his duty. Thus Ahab,
when he feared no humane laws to punish him, yet he humbled himself and mourned
before God, because of Gods judgments that were almost devouring him; if then
a man's outward Obedience may arise from so many various grounds, and they all
rotten and corrupt, What comfort can a man take from it? Therefore unless
beyond and above all these, there be an heavenly and supernatural principle
within thee, moulding and forming thy outward conversation, thou art not to
live quietly in such an estate, but seek out for a redress.

Secondly, External Obedience cannot be ground sure enough to stand upon,
because it is not such which does answer the command of God. There is a
twofold 2.
Obedience to the Law accepted of by God; The one is perfect without any defect
at all; and thus the Law of God is not satisfied by any; The other is true and
sincere, but being imperfect the defects are pardoned by Christ. But external
Obedience merely, is not that true Obedience required by the Law; I do not
say, the Perfect, but the True; and the reason is, because the Law is
spiritual, and so reaches primarily to the hearts and spirits of men; and God
calls for them, yea he rejects all external addresses to him without this;
and therefore being this Obedience, this Righteousness, this Piety, is not
such as the Law would have; therefore think not to put off thy brass for gold;
God is not like old Isaac, that takes Jacob for Esau, he regards not the
garments thou have on, but looks into thy heart.

Thirdly, Mere outward morality will not afford any comfort, because this is
consistent with a professed hatred of, and enmity to the practical power of
Godliness. 3.
Therefore it is not godliness, for like would never hate like. Yea it is an
argument that all that righteousness is but a carnal, earthly, fleshly
righteousness, because so opposite unto that which is true godliness; Now
experience will abundantly confirm this, that none commonly are such enemies
and bitter adversaries to the ways and life of godliness, as those that are
mere civil righteous men: What needs all this zeal, all this forwardness,
all this exactness (say they?) Hence they can no more abide a powerful and
soul-searching Ministry, then profane wicked men; yea Christ and his Apostles
had not such opposition and persecution from profane Publicans, as from those
righteous Pharisees.

Fourthly, It is not true Righteousness, and therefore he that thinks himself
happy, because 4.
of this, is as if a man should judge himself rich, because of a coffer of
brass Counters. It is not true, partly because its but the outside only, the
external lineaments, There is not the inward soul and life of godliness,
partly because this is not the image of God, which properly is true holiness,
for the image of God consists not in bodily actions, but in the actions of
the Spirit after a godly and holy manner. Therefore as in all your earthly
commodities you buy, you examine whether it be the right and true commodity
indeed, you would not have that which is sophisticate: so do here. Here are in
the world many pretenses to righteousness; some judge this godliness, some
judge that, others think this is enough, others that it is not enough. Let me
therefore make a diligent search hereinto. For the word of God that only is
the standard to discover what is true, and what is counterfeit.

Fifthly, This is not true grace, because all this external Obedience is done
with ease and facility: There is no struggling or wrestling by the contrary
corruption, 5.
whereas in all godly actions, The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the flesh, so that we cannot do the things we would. It is in
matters of good to be done, as in truths to be believed; if a man assent to a
conclusion in Religion, drawn by the mere power of reason, there is no
difficulty to believe it, because this is suitable to our nature, but if he do
it, because of Gods word, then he finds difficulty, for here is a supernatural
motive; so if a man do that which is good upon humane motives, here is no
contrariety in him, but if carried out upon heavenly considerations, then the
unregenerate part gain-sayes.

Use of Instruction, Upon what a weak prop many lean for their everlasting Use.
hopes! The Scripture signs and symptoms of grace they have none at all, only
they please themselves with false evidences of their own; and as counterfeit
pearls do many times glister more then true ones, so false signs of grace many
times make a greater dazeling then true ones. We are to bless God that he
restrains men's corruptions, that men are of honest, civil, righteous
deportment, otherwise Commonwealths would become robberies, and men would be
wolves to one another. Only this is not enough for Heaven; we may say even to
such a man, as well as to a profane man, Unless thou be born again, ye
cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: And unless your righteousness be a
better then this, there is no salvation for thee.

SERMON XXIX.
That a Divine Faith or Persuasion of the Truths in Religion, is not Evidence
sure enough of our being in the state of Grace.

JAMES 2. 26. For as the Body without the Spirit is dead; so Faith without
Works is dead also.
HOwsoever the Apostle his scope in this Chapter be much controverted, yet
verse. 14. does manifestly evidence his purpose, which is to take off Titular
Believers, who glory in the Name and Profession of Faith from all their
confident boasting, if their Faith be not accompanied with an holy and godly
life. Some think this dangerous mistake grew from a misunderstanding of many
places in Paul's Epistles, where he seems only to set up Faith, and makes no
matter of Sanctification. Whereupon the reconciliation of Paul and James, these
two great Apostles, has to all seemed very difficult; to others impossible,
who therefore have expunged this Epistle out of the Canon.

I will not trouble you with the several ways of Reconciliation endeavored by
the learned; That which I shall pitch upon is this, That Paul speaks of Faith
in it is relation to Justification, considering it only in that act, showing
that Faith only, and no other grace justifies. James demonstrateth what kind
of Faith this is, viz. an actual operative one, which puts a man upon all holy
duties. Paul proves that Faith alone justifies, and James, that this Faith
which does only justify, is not alone, but accompanied with other graces. Paul
argues against a Pharisee that sets up his own works against Faith, James
argues against a carnal Gospeller or Publican, that thinks a bare profession
will save. Nor is it any wonder that such an error spread, That a man by his
Faith only should inherit heaven, seeing even in Augustines time it was a
general opinion, which that Father did with much fear and modesty gainsay,
That every Christian, in that he was a Christian, though a drunkard,
whoremonger, etc. would be saved?

The Apostle uses several weighty arguments to overthrow such a vain
confidence, in all which he does not derogate from Faith, but discover
Presumption.

For in the first place, to show the weakness of such a profession of Faith,
he compares it with a profession of Charity, verse. 15, 16. If one give good
words to a brother in need, bid him, Depart in peace, be warmed and filled, but
give him nothing, would not this be ridiculous? So thou believe there is a
God, a hell, a day of judgment, but live in profaneness and impiety, Is
not this thy Faith a mockery?

Secondly, He compares this Faith with that of the Devils, and shows the
Devils go further then such loose Christians; they believe a God and tremble,
but so do not many dissolute believers: how Devils believe, and whether an
hypocrites faith goes further then theirs, are noble Questions, but not at
this time to be discussed?

Thirdly, He proves the insufficiency of such a Faith from Abraham's faith, the
pattern of all: Abraham's faith that justified him, was a working faith, it made
him offer up his only Son, when God commanded him. That very place which
Paul brings to prove Abraham was justified by faith, James brings to prove,
that this faith was not alone, but working eminently.

Lastly, In my Text, The Apostle argues a simili, from a similitude, as the
Body without the Spirit is dead, so is Faith without Works. By Spirit, some
understand breath, and so they think, that as without breath the body is
discovered to be dead, so without holy works faith is declared to be dead; and
this they do, lest it should be thought, that as the soul is the form of the
body, so a godly life should be the form of faith: Whereas indeed by other
places, Faith is the form or efficient rather of holiness; and therefore Faith
is much rather to be compared to the soul, for it is that which animateth all
our actions, and makes them acceptable to God. But we may retain the word
Spirit, understanding it of the Soul, for the Apostle does not consider a man
here ad intra, in respect of God and Justification, but ad extra, in respect of
others, and the declaration of his Justification. And so the sense, as the body
is known to be dead, if we perceive no vital or animal actions flowing from the
soul, we perceive it not breathe, stir, or move; so is a man's faith dead, if we
see it not demonstrated by effectual operations in the way of grace. Thus as it
was in Christ, his Divine Nature, which was hidden, became manifest by those
miraculous operations he wrought, that none else could do; so faith is latent
in a man, and breaks out in the discovery of it self by an holy life; and in
this sense Faith is said to be made perfect by works, viz. declaratively, and
by manifestation.

That a divine Faith, or persuasion of the truths in Religion, is not evidence
sure Observe.
enough of our being in the state of grace.

Orthodoxy is not enough for Heaven. To be a good sound Protestant and no more,
will not carry us out of the wilderness into Canaan. To have a sound
judgment, but an ungodly life, is to be like the Toad, which they say has a
Pearl in her head, but her body is full of poison. It is not enough to say, You
thank God you are none of the Heretics or Sectaries, unless also you can say,
You are none of the swearers, proud, profane men. We may by experience observe
what a strong support this is to many men, when they die, that they die in the
true faith, they die no Papists, no Arminians, etc. Now although when errors
creep in, as the Frogs once did into Egypt, getting into every house and
chamber almost, it be a great mercy to be preserved in the truth, and that also
by truth we come to grace; yet because there are too many Solifidians, as the
Papists calumniate the Protestants Doctrine, men who rely only upon this,
that they are of the Reformed Religion, but yet are not of a Reformed
Conversation, it is necessary to drive this Point home to the very heart.

For the opening of it, consider these particulars:

First, That although the word Faith be of a very vast signification in the
Scripture, 1.
yet this distinction is necessary to be observed; Faith is either taken for
the Object which we do believe, or the true Doctrine; in which sense the
Apostle calls it one Faith, and Jude exhorts to contend for the Faith. Though
Junius very improbably would interpret that of the act of Faith, expressly
rejecting that Exposition of the Doctrine of Faith. This was afterward called
Dogmaticall and Catholic Faith, or Fides quae creditur; or secondly, it is
taken for that act of the soul, whereby we give assent unto truths revealed in
Gods word, and this is in the heart, not Catholic, but Personal and
particular; and in this sense the word is most commonly taken, and this is
Fides qua creditur.

Secondly, This Faith thus in the mind and heart of men, is by the Orthodox 2.
divided into an Historical Faith, not called so because they believe the
Scripture for the Authority of the History-writer, nor because it believes the
History of the Scripture only, for it believes the threatenings and Promises
also, but because the historical part is the greater part in quantity of the
object believed. 2. A miraculous faith. 3. A temporary, 4 A justifying: by
which division the learned do not distribute an univocal genus into its
distinct species, but only grossly lay down this difference, for in a
justified person its the same habit of faith that believes the History, and
particularly applies the promises of Justification, the one being a general
act, the other specifical. The Papists scorn at this distinction. To the
Protestants, says Maldonate, Tot sunt sides. quet in Lyra, jesting upon the
word Faith: The Protestants have as many saiths, as there be Fiddle strings
upon a Fiddle; but the Scripture compels us to make such a distinction; for we
read of many who are said to believe in the Scripture, who yet had not a true
lively work of grace upon them.

3. To Faith or believing, there are three acts required, Knowledge, Assent 3.
and fiducial Application; Hence its usual with the Scripture to describe faith
by one of these acts, not excluding but supposing the other, as, This is
eternal life, to know thee, etc. Joh. 17. 3. by knowledge is meant the
powerful receiving of Christ into our hearts, and herein does this historical
faith come short, because its not so fiducial, and so receptive of Christ, the
fountain of life, as it should be; and in this act its said to justify,
compared therefore by Divines to the hand, to the eye, to the glasse-window in
the house that only lets in light; to the navel by which the child in the
mothers belly lives and obtains all its nourishment; but we at this time
speak of faith in the second act as it is assensitive, and gives credence to
the truths of God.

4. Our assent and persuasion of the truth in matters of Religion, may be
either 4.
humane merely, because of custom, education, and the Authority of the Church:
or divine, being inclined and moved thereunto, because of Divine Authority.
This distinction is much to be observed, because its to be feared, that most
Protestants have no more then a humane faith. They believe our Religion upon no
more divine ground then Papists theirs, or Turks theirs. It is the Religion of
their Fathers, and of the State and Commonwealth wherein they live. Thus you
see how in King Edwards days the generality of the Kingdom turned
Protestants, and in Queen Mary's Papists, why so? but because their Religion
was placed as the Heathens did Fortune upon a round Globe, which quickly moved
this way, and the other. But Divine Faith has this ground, The Lord has said
it. And as a man sees the Sun by the light of the Sun; so they believe the
truths in Scripture, because of that Divine Authority shining therein, I do not
therefore speak of an humane faith in matters of Religion, but a divine faith,
whereby men are enabled upon supernatural grounds to believe the truths of God
revealed; for faith is the gift of God, and that in all the acts of it,
Knowledge, Assent and fiducial Application, and the Spirit of God does so
enlighten the minds of many unregenerate men, that they believe the word of
God, as Gods word, and yet for all that, are not in a soul-saving way united to
Christ. It may indeed be well doubted, and some Divines incline that way, that
no unregenerate man has so much as an historical faith, as infused by God in
them, and acting upon divine motives: only they say, they have an humane
assent, as we spoke of. But because the current of learned men go otherwise,
and we see the Scripture expressly saying, that many did believe in him, who yet
did not mortify vainglory, and sinful fear of men, therefore we shall take
it for granted, that they have a divine faith, though not justifying.

5. This historical faith, though it be not enough to Justification and
salvation, 5. Historical faith absolutely necessary.
yet it is absolutely necessary, and is to be laid down as the foundation. The
ground why men living under the Ministry are damned, is because they have not
so much as historical faith. Who has believed our report? They do not firmly
believe that there is a God, that there is an hell, that the threatenings of God
are true; for if so, what fear, what great alterations would this make upon
them! We see what humane faith will do, if a man believes that he is in such
danger, that such enemies lie in wait to kill him, that he is condemned by the
Law to death, how restless and troubled is his soul? how much more would the
heart of a sinner quake within him, if he did believe That Word of God which
does thus threaten and damn my sins is infallibly true, it will be made good,
do I what I can: heaven and earth will sooner fall to pieces then one iota or
tittle of it: Whether shall I fly from it? how shall I escape it? These
vehement workings of faith would be like fire in his bowels, burning and
consuming him, till he be cooled by the blood of Christ. Therefore though this
faith be not enough, yet here is no building without this foundation.

6. This historical faith though in some respects it be like that of the
devils, especially because of the barrenness and unfruitfullnesse of it: yet
it is in other respects 6. Difference between this faith and that of the devils.
far different: for this faith is an habit infused into the believer, and so
wrought by God, but in the devils it is from evident experience, so that it is
not a voluntary but a necessary faith, for they being already in torments, and
finding part of their torments already inflicted upon them, they are forced to
believe there is a God. Now although this be so, yet we may with the Apostle
make a comparison of both of them together, and thus far argue, that if the
mere acknowledging and believing of the matters of religion were enough, then
the devils might be saved as well as such believers.

7. Although faith has knowledge (for a man cannot believe that which he has
not either evidentiam rei, or evidentiam testimonij at least. The Trinity
though 7.
it has not evidence of the thing, yet it has evidence of the testimony
plainly in Scripture) yet that knowledge is not by demonstration, which
Philosophers call scientia strictly, and therefore is obtained not so much by
disputation as resignation, bringing the understanding into captivity, says
the Apostle: and this should be thought on by these sceptique times, who are
busied in knowing but not in assenting, which makes them so fickle and
unconstant: Austin said, that not intelligendi vivacitas, but credendi
simplicitas tutam facit turbam; but how many like those Valentinians Irenaeus
speaks of are puffed up with arrogance and pride in knowledge, as if they could
number the hair of a man's head, and tell the stars in the heavens, or the sand
on the sea shore!

Lastly, It cannot be denied but that the Scripture does attribute salvation in
some places even to this historical faith, Mat. 9, 28. Christ required only of
that 8.
blind man, a faith that he was able to help him; so Luke 7. 9. Mat. 8. 10.
The faith of the Centurion so much commended, seems only to be of the
historical truth of Christ's Divinity and omnipotency. Peter's faith which
Christ so praised, was only, Thou art the Son of the living God: so Martha's
faith, Joh. 11. 26. and that is remarkable, 1 John 5. 1. Every one that
believes that Jesus is Christ, is born of God. These and the like places make
Papists conclude that all the justifying faith that is, is to believe these
truths only: yea Arminius, and I wish not too many of late, hold this to be
saving and justifying faith, when we believe that Jesus Christ is the
Mediator, and will save all those that believe in him, and they are not a to
say, that Abraham believed no more: I am not now to confute this unsound Tenet;
only take notice, That the reason why the Scripture sometimes attributes
salvation to the mere believing of Jesus Christ to be God, was because the only
question then was about the person of Christ, not the office of Christ; The
godly doubted not whether if he were the Christ he would be a King and Priest
to them, but whether he was the Christ or no; and because it was so great a
matter to believe him to be the promised Messiah, who was outwardly ^o mean and
contemptible: Therefore does the Scripture so much magnify this act. And 2.
though the Scripture give salvation to such acts, yet it does suppose the
other, so that we must compare other places with these, and then we shall see,
that it is not enough to give a bare assent to these things, but there also
ought to be a powerful (...)ence of this faith into our conversation, These
things thus explained, let us consider why such a faith is not enough, that so
you may not deceive your selves. Comfort not your selves merely in this, I have
the true religion on my side: but rather enquire, whether all the concomitants
and effects of it also be to be found in you.

Now the deficiency of this faith arises several ways. First, The subject
wherein The (...)cy of this ^aith discovered. 1.
it is, This reaches no further then to the perfecting of the understanding.
Whereas full saving faith Romans 10. is fixed in the heart, with the heart man
believes, so purifying their hearts by faith, and Christ dwells in our hearts
by faith; so that faith extending no further then to the understanding, cannot
bring that happiness the Word speaks of. A man of a sound brain, but corrupt
vitals, will quickly go down to the gates of death. Now this is the general
temper of most Protestants, They have no further work then upon their
understandings, many times their lives are as noisome as dunghils; Men are
Protestants in doctrines, and recusants in lives, because they refuse the yoke
of Christ, and will not submit to his Law. Hell is filled not only with Pagans
and Heathens, but ungodly Christians: Truth like Aarons oil must not be powered
upon the head only, but run down to the heart and other parts: The Orthodox
were called Protestants first, because at the beginning of reformation they
made a solemn protestation against those Articles of Popish Religion, which
were to be established: but what if thy tongue protest for the truth, and thy
life protest against it?

Secondly, There is a defect in its acts, for although this faith carries us
out to believe 2.
it as true, yet not to embrace it as good; Whereas the Word of God is not only
faithful, but worthy of all acceptance: It Is a frigid exposition to say, that
faith it called the substance of things, because it makes them to su^sist in us
by way of understanding merely; no, it causes those things hoped for to dwell
in the soul by strong imbracements, so that the heart of a man is knitted to
them, Abraham believed my day, and rejoiced; The people of God believe, and
herein their hearts do all burn within them: It Is like the burning-glasse,
which by its beams sets the prepared object on fire: pray therefore to love the
goodness of it, as assent to the truth of it.

Thirdly, There is a defect in the efficacy and power of it; True lively faith
will 3.
like fire devour all dross, whereas we see the historical believer cannot
subdue sin. The Jews though they did believe on Christ, yet they for fear dared
not to confess him, because they loved the praise of men more then the glory of
God; They believed him to be Christ, but would not be afflicted or persecuted
for his sake; so John 2. 23. Many believed, but Jesus would not commit himself
to them, for he knew what was in man; but lively faith would make a man like
Paul, triumph over all difficulties, because they look upon the things that are
not seen: If faith bring Christ, the fountain of grace into a man's soul, that
man's life can be no more constantly wicked, then if a man could carry the sun
in his hand he could walk in darkness. As therefore the people stood looking
upon John as if he were the Messiah, and John denied himself to be the Messiah,
saying, there is one more noble then I, whose shoe-latchet I am not worthy to
unlose, so do thou say, Though there are these acts of faith, to know, to
assent to Gods truths; yet there are such further noble acts, as that these
deserve not the name of faith comparatively, such are, to purify the heart, to
justify, to sanctify, to keep from all sin, and to bring Christ to dwell in
our hearts.

Fourthly, It is defective in its Concomitants; This Historical faith is not
necessarily conjoined with other graces, whereas a true and lively faith can no
more be 4.
separated from other graces, then light and heat can be divided in the
Sunbeams, for true faith is that branch which sucks of the Olive fatness, it
uniteth us as members to Christ, and when we are so, it is impossible but that
power and life should be communicated to us; Hence all those eminent acts of
holiness spoken of Heb. 11. are given to faith, and Gol 5. faith is said to
work by love; but Simon Magus had Historical faith, and it was alone, there
were no graces to accompany it. Hence we distinguish between faith alone in the
subject, and faith alone in the act of Justification. The hand alone receives
that which is offered to it, but the hand could not do this if it were alone,
separated from other parts. Hence it is that Believers and Saints are used
promisenously one for another, because true lively Believers can no more be
without holiness, then the Sun dark, or the fire cold: Yet for all this, This
historical faith is a true faith, and it is the gift of God, even as other
common gifts of Gods Spirit are: As copper is a true metal though it be not
gold. By this means it comes about that a lively faith is proper to the Elect
only. Hence it is called the faith of the Elect; and as many believed as were
ordained to eternal life. Oh therefore consider your selves, you who boast of
your faith, you who glory in this, that you change not your faith as others do,
make diligent search whether it be not a Simon Magus his faith that leaves
thee still in a state of gall and bitterness, I am (thou say) for the
doctrine of the Church of England, and art thou also for the life required in
Gods Word?

Fifthly, The deficiency of it is seen comparatively, with other graces; If a
man make a beast of such a grace in his heart, and demonstrate no real effects
5.
thereof, is it not hypocrisy and delusion? The Apostle makes a parallel in
charity, which gives good words, fair promises, but exhibits no real comfort:
Even such a t^ular believer is a man that assenteth to the true doctrine of
Christ, but neglects real godliness: faith is called the acknowledging of
the truth after godliness; when a man's heart comes to be heated with burning
love, as well as enlightened with shining light, this is of sure consequence.
All the graces of God have their real effects, they are not barely notionall,
but as fire does really burn, gall does really imbitter, so does grace produce
its sensible, and powerful effects, Show me thy faith by thy works, says the
Apostle: Show thou beleevest there is a God by fearing of him, by obeying of
him: Show thou beleevest a day of judgment by preparing to give an account at
that time. All grace is for operation as its perfection, therefore the commands
of God are for the acts, not the habits, and we may as well carry fire in our
bosoms, and not feel it burn us, as carry true lively faith, and it not
cleanse our life.

6. Historical faith if not growing into a saving, lively way, is but a kind
of hypocrisy and mocking of God; for to profess that we believe him to be
omniscient, 6.
omnipotent, that all those terrible threatenings belong to us, and yet we live
in those sins that will bring those judgments; what is this but to delude
God as much as lies in us? But be not deceived, God is not mocked: nay we
delude, and mock our own souls; for so says James, If any man seem to be
religious, and bridles not his tongue, he does (...), deceive his own soul: put
a fallacy upon himself, he argues a non causa, procausa. He thinks this
outward profession, this solemn, external acknowledgement is enough, and a
good cause of comfort: Whereas it is none at all: God complains of this of old,
that men draw nigh to him with their lips, but their hearts are far from him.
Consider this, you who are apt to judge the people of God that endeavor
faithfully to secure him, though subject to many infirmities, hypocrites and
deceitful persons; know you are the grossest and most notorious hypocrites
that ever were; You profess you believe in God, you love him; you proclaim to
the world, that you think there is an hell and heaven, but is not thy life a
flat contradiction of all this? only to all this which has been said, we must
add this caution, that while we make historical faith thus separated from a
godly life, possible in many men, and that it is in effect a dead faith,
because it is not available for those necessary privileges of justification and
salvation: yet we lay not any ground for that popish distinction of a faith
informis and formata: an informed faith they call a belief of the truths of
religion, without any love to them, or of God: a formed faith they call that
which is enabled by love, and animated by that to do that which is holy. Thus
they make faith of it self a mere speculative apprehension, which is to be
molded into obedience only by love. But this is false, for it is true and
lively faith that puts us upon loving and doing all for God, therefore called
faith that works by love, and I believed therefore I spoke. Thus Heb. 11. By
faith Noah, Abraham, and all those eminent Saints and those glorious acts of
holiness. Therefore faith is rather a form assistant of love and other graces,
then they of it: Historical faith when it is formed into obedience, is
thereunto enabled not by love but by justifying faith.

Use of instruction concerning the necessity of discovering this false sign.
There Use.
is nothing more common then to build all our hopes upon this, that we are for
the truth. That as the Jews boasted, the law was given to them, and not to
other Nations: and therefore thought, though they lived in all wickedness,
that would save them; thus do Christians about Christianity: Oh, they believe
as well as any; They will live and die good Protestants, not attending to what
iniquity may be seen in their lives: but what are thy oaths, thy lusts, thy
opposings of godliness? are these signs of a good protestant also? There was
one Eunomius a wretched heretic in the Church, and he taught, that whosoever
would be of his sect, a disciple unto him, his very faith would be enough to
save, though he should commit the most flagitious crimes that ever were; and do
not we thus about the true religion? The Antinomian he makes that a dead and
dangerous faith, when we do not believe that God sees no sin in us, and
that we are as perfectly righteous as Christ, and therefore charge all the
godly Ministry and people of England with no more then a dead faith: but we
see that is a dead faith in Scripture sense, which does not enable to all
mortification, and godliness: Therefore the Antinomian faith is a dead faith
in the Apostles argument: Well then, let none run to this altar, He is a good
Protestant, if ungodly in life, for it will fall out to him as to Joab, though
at the horns of the Altar, he will be dragged away, and adjudged to eternal
death. Many complain the Creed is banished out of the Church, and they consider
not they have long agone banished it out of their lives; for what does not thy
profaneness, thy impiety, say there is no God, there is no resurrection, there
is no day of judgment? How can ye believe (said Christ) when ye seek the glory
of one another; Alas that seems a small matter, how can ye believe, when you
oppose and scoff at godliness, profane Gods Sabbaths, neglect all Family
duties? Consider you are not only called out of Popery to have a better
religion, but out of the world to live better lives.

SERMON XXX.
That every peaceable frame of heart, and persuasion of Gods love, is not a
sure Testimony of saving Grace.

JOHN 8. 54. If I should honor my self, my honor were nothing, it is my
Father that honoreth me, of whom you say, he is your God.
IN this chapter we may observe several sharp skirmishes between Christ and the
Pharisees: but as Satan in his conflict was overcome by him, so are his
children in these hot disputes. The Pharisees in the latter end of this
Chapter, charge two things especially upon him to make his doctrine odious, the
one is, The he had a Devil, and so all his Doctrine and Miracles to come by
Satanical impostures: the other, That he did all out of vain glory, to have a
multitude of Disciples, and to be admired by them: Our Savior is both
defensive in this cause, vindicating himself from those horrid aspersions; and
offensive, retorting the same things upon them, That they were of their Father
the Devil, because he was a man slayer, and abode not in the truth: So says
he, You seeck to kill me, a man, that is cruelty, Who tells you the truth, that
is ingratitude, Which he heard of God, that is impiety: and because they
gloried in this, That Abraham was their father, he shows the disparity
between their works, and Abraham's works: because also they said, God was their
Father, he drives them also out of this refuge; for if they were of God, they
would hear and know his Word; Children do presently discern their Fathers
voice. To that accusation of vain glory, he answers in my text, by showing
the vanity of all humane glory: if I should look at this, I should but catch at
a shadow, open my mouth to swallow air: it is nothing. Now if Christ did judge
all the glory which he should hear by his Doctrine and miracles, nothing; how
should this make Ministers afraid, who affect honor for some new notions,
excellent Sermons, and parts? Christ did not glorify himself, why should we
then? Yet least they should think him without glory, he tells them, There is one
that honors him, viz. God the Father, by immediate testimony from heaven,
and by many miraculous operations: and to humble them the more, he says, This
that honors me thus, is he of whom you say, he is your Father, of whom you
make your boast and braggs, that he is yours. I shall stand only upon this
passage, intending to show that a people may have great confidence, and a bold
persuasion of heart that God is their God, and yet they be of their Father the
Devil. For whereas the last time I told you a man might have an historical, or
dogmatical faith in matters of religion, and yet be destitute of Gods Spirit in
a saving manner: now I shall show you, he may have some fiducial application of
Gods favor, and confidently repose himself in the bosom or arms of Christ, and
yet Christ say to such, Depart, I know you not. A necessary subject to be
handled, because most people who have no true claim or interest in God, yet it
is strange to consider what quietness, and peace, and boldness they have in
their hearts, when indeed fear should compass them round about.

Doct. Every peaceable frame of heart, and confident persuasion of Gods love,
is not asure testimony that such an one is in the state of Grace.

Paul, Romans 7. Shows he was alive without the Law, That is, he had great
quietness and ease of mind; he thought himself in a sure and safe way: but
alas, this was his ignorance, his blindness. Even as a man in a dungeon may
think himself safe, when there are Serpents and poisonous creatures round about
him, only he does not see them: or as a man in a Lethargy feels no pain,
though he be near the gates of death: Such is the condition of many persons,
they thank God they have no trouble, their soul is at much ease and quietness,
they doubt not of Gods favor and love to them: hence in the midst of their
afflictions they will say, I thank my good God, when (alas) we may say of such,
as Christ of the Jews, You say he is your Father, but you have not known him;
so they know nothing powerfully and practically about God.

To open this, Let us consider what is the nature of this secure quietness.
The nature of this false peace. 1. Free from terror.


First, It is accompanied with a great deal of ease and peace in a man's heart,
so that their consciences have no terror, no tremblings, but all is well
within them. Now that wicked men may be in such a condition, is plain by that
where they say, Peace, peace, then shall come sudden destruction: and the
Psalmist does with some kind of emulation, describe the joyful quiet condition
of many wicked men. They have no bonds in their death: They seem to live more
cheerfully, and dye more quietly then Godly men: so then, all peace and
quietness in thy conscience, is not presently a good testimony; for this
security may arise from blindness, from self-love, from a senseless cauterized
heart, as is to be showed: So that this frame of Spirit is so far from being
boasted of, that it is indeed the wofullest and saddest calamity that can be;
better to be so many Cains, fearing every thing will damn a man, then to be one
of Lachish, sitting at ease, and fearing nothing. It is true, the Prophet
says, There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked: and is therefore
compared to the sea, always foaming and disquieted: So that by this place, we
would think it were not possible for a man to be a wicked man, and have any
peace, but the Scripture speaks there of a true and right peace, such as when
the Apostle says, Being justified by faith, we have peace with God: Insomuch
that the wicked man's quietness does not deserve the name of Peace. There is
only a forbearance of wrath: and it is because his heart is rotten, that it
feels no pain; even as the member of a man's body rotten, is not sensible of
any torment. The Apostle speaks of some, who had cauterized consciences, Seared
with an hot Iron, or cut off, as some expound it: and of others who were past
feeling. They were so brawny and crusted over, they had no sense of any pain:
Alas this cannot be called peace. Take heed therefore lest that security and
quietness in thy heart, come not from a mere rotten, senseless, stupidity in
thee. Certainly this truth does much concern us; do not think to put off God as
Jacob did Isaak; do not think to steal a blessing and heaven from God.

Secondly, As there is nothing but quietness within, so there are bold and
confident persuasions about God, and his love toward them. Now a man's
condition cannot be 2. They are persuaded of God, love.
more desperate then when he is deluded with a resolute persuasion that God
loves him; even as some mad men have been persuaded that they were great Kings
and Emperors, and had such great Kingdoms, when at the same time they were
under cruel hardship. Oh such a madness is upon most men, that do not, with the
Devil, look upon all the Glory of the world, and say falsely, all that is his,
but upon all the Glory of heaven, and say presumptuously, all that is his: This
was the Pharisees impudency, who were confidently persuaded that God was their
Father, that he he loved them, when they were the miserable wretched Impps of
Satan! This also was the grand cause of all those expostalations the Prophets
had with the Jews; they trusted in Gods love, though they did lie, steal,
swear, yet they would come into his Temple, and call upon him, which the
Prophet Jeremiah with much heavenly zeal expostulates with them for. Oh, this
gross impudency is too visible in our days: have you not many profane
sinners? many liars, cursers, opposers of what is good? Yet they will come
here, and say, Our Father: nay, you cannot meet with any beastly sinner, but
his heart is filled with this bold impudency, to think and hope that God is
his Father; So that we may cry out, Oh that God would touch these mountains,
that they might melt before him, Oh that God before whom the very earth did
tremble and quake, would also make such men's hearts afraid before him.

Thirdly, Where such bold apprehensions are concerning God, there is not only
confidence in the general, that God is merciful, but they have also a fiducial
application, and appropriation 3. They may have fiducial applications.
of God to their own selves in particular: And herein they have a great
resemblance of justifying faith, as Paul said, Who loved me, and gave himself
for me: so these will apply Christ to their particular: I thank my Christ, my
Redeemer, my Savior. In the Godly such applications are of says in the most
excellent manner, in the wicked it is of mere presumption, without any true
ground at all. It is indeed the glorious fruit of the covenant of Grace, that
thereby God becomes the God of his children, Hosea 2. They shall call me Ishi,
and no more Baali, that is, My Husband, not my Lord: they shall have more dear
and appropriated meditations of God; and at the end of the Chapter, I will be
their God, and they shall be my people. Hence Jeremiah, 4. 3, 4. God would have
the Church repenting, say, My Father. Fiducial applications of Gods love to us
are a duty, as the learned prove against the Papists: Hence faith is called,
Eating and drinking of Christ. When a true broken heart loaded with sin, cries
out with Thomas, My God, my Lord, this is not carnal presumption, but holy
believing. But now when men whose hearts were never smitten with Gods
displeasure for sin, find no burden of it, and so cry not for ease to Christ;
when (I say) such say, I thank my God, and my Redeemer, this is bold
presumption in them. God is not the God of the dead, we may say, but of the
living; he is not the God, the Father of such who live in, and love their
wickedness. It would be a dishonor to be a Father of such Children: but he
inviteth those to call him Father, and my Father, who are deeply humbled for
sin under his hand, who are of self-emptyed and poor spirits, acknowldeging his
Grace only. As therefore we are not to discourage the wounded heart, but to
imbolden him to appropriat Christ to himself in particular, and that he is to
set against all se^vile fears and doubts that would like the Devils to the
possessed man, keep him always about the tombs, and make him gash and wound
himself; so we are also to set a flaming sword, as God did to Adam, to a
profane man, lest he venture to come into this Paradise. Oh then he advised
and consider, whether it be faith or presumption makes thee say, My God, my
Redeemer. A Paul may say so, and a Pharisee may say so.

Fourthly, Where this boldness is, there is a shifting and putting off all
those considerations that may bring us to make any doubt, or any question about
our selves: and 4.
truly that is a real demonstration; thy peace, thy comfort is not right, thou
art so unwilling to be brought to light: the thief hates the light says our
Savior: now observe it, many of those persons who have such bold persuasions
of Gods love, they cannot abide to hear terrible Sermons, they love not to hear
of hell, and the day of judgment: they cannot endure to hear of the
differences of Gods work upon men's hearts, and how far hypocrites and
reprobates may go: Oh these things cut them, and make them mad; and why is all
this? but because the peace and comfort they have, is a false and unsound one,
which will abide no touchstone, cannot endure any shaking or moving at all.
What was the cause that the Pharisees were so immoveably persuaded of Gods love
toward them? did hate and oppose Christ even to death? It was only because he
manifested their godliness was not true godliness, their comforts were not
true comforts, their peace was not true peace, and thus woeful self-flattery was
their ruin. God seeing such a pro^enesse to deceive our selves, makes express
provision against it: If a man when he hears all the curses of the Law, shall
yet bless himself in his heart, and say, None of these evils shall come upon
me, God will expressly set against such a man. Oh it is terrible when God
curses thee, the Law curses thee, the Ministers of God declare his curses
against thee, yet thou to bless thy self, and to say, God loves thee, and will
do good to thee: Oh take heed of these cursed shiftings: this untempered mortar
will not hold out, though thou daub it up never so craftily: do not ev^^e and
say, These judgments of God, these threatenings do not belong to me; for I love
God, I have a good heart, I do that which is just and good to all; for all this
slippery Ice will thaw when the sun arises.

Fifthly, Where this quietness is, there is much boasting and glorying in this,
that they have a good heart, and so rely much upon this. It is a wonder to hear
men that 5. He is much in glorying of his good heart.
live in a constant neglect of holy duties, yea sometimes wallow in the filth
and mire of laothsom sins, yet how they will boast in this, They have a good
heart, and that as good as any of the strictest professors have: What wild
Logic is this? How can there be a good heart, if there be not a good life? How
can there be a good tree, if there be not good fruit? Is that a good fire that
burns not, that warmeth not? Is that good meat that nourishes not? Oh, why
do not such consider that excellent Aphorism of the wise man, He that trusts
in his own heart, is a fool? Oh take heed that all thy boastings of thy heart
being good, whatsoever thy failings be, are not mere folly. It is folly to
trust in a man's heart, because it is so deceitful: He thinks he does repent,
when he does not: he thinks he loves God, when he does not. Do thou
therefore appeal to thy heart, and call thy heart to witness for thy
godliness? Oh, that is the very cheat and cousener in the world: It is
deceitful in all things says the Prophet, who can know it? Do not thou rest on
that which is naturally full of ^es, and hypocrisies: It is true, when the
heart is enlightened by Gods spirit, as in the godly, then it is made a true
heart, and a faithful heart though not perfectly: and so those graces in us,
which of themselves would never evidence themselves, by Gods Spirit become
visible; even as some relate of a precious stone, which will not cast any
glorious luster unless the sunbeams shine upon it.

Sixthly, This carnal presumption and boldness may hold in the midst of Gods
calamities and wrath, yea at the strokes of death it self. The people of
Israel, though 6. This false considence may continue in calamity and death it
self.
smitten by God for their abominations which were evident, yet says the
Prophet Micah, would come and lean upon God: they were either actually under
Gods judgments, or under the terrible denunciation of them by the Prophet: yet
they would lean upon God, as if he were their God, and that such secure
confidence may hold to death, appears by the foolish Virgins, who found no
lack of oil till it was too late: And we see those condemned persons at the day
of judgment, pleading for themselves, with a wonder why they should be
condemned, for they neglected no duty required of them: When saw we thee sick,
and visited thee not? So that it is no sure sign, though a man even at deaths
door abateth not his confidence in God for all that. The Psalmist says, they
have no such bonds in their death, or pain and fear as sometimes other men may
have: a godly man may dye doubting, and a wicked man presuming: It is not then
the saying, and the professing they have a great deal of peace in God, but the
grounds why, and the motives, they must be searched into. Therefore though we
blame Papists for teaching to doubt, and making a doubt a duty, yet we press
for an holy search, and a godly fear and trembling in the trying of our hearts,
lest we be deceived.

In the next place let us consider, why such bold confidence is not to be
relied upon: Why such confidence is not: to be relied upon. 1.
And

First, Because it comes not from a true and genuine ground, which is the
spirit of adoption, the comforter, the seal, who only quieteth the heart in a
gracious sure way, but it comes from carnal self-love, and self flattery: we
are in love with our selves, and we think God loves what we love. Thus the
Psalmist notably to the secure wicked man, Thou thoughtest I was such an one as
thy self: as the Roman painter being in love with a woman, painted every
goddess like the woman he loved; so does every man set up such a God in his
thoughts and affections, which he would have, and is most like himself: and by
this means, because he says, all is well, he judges all good within him,
therefore he supposes God does so also. Oh then know, that self-love and the
Spirit of Adoption, differ more then heaven and hell. Indeed if thy assurance,
if thy boldness come in the Spirits way, it were a comforting by it, a
rejoicing by it, then thou might rejoice and be glad in God: But when it
comes from thy muddy and filthy heart, all this will wash away. It is God that
justifies, and it is God that condemns; it matters not though a thousand
hearts justify us, if God do not. If a malefactor be condemned, and has a
pardon from inferior magistrates, he judges that nothing, unless the supreme
Magistrate absolve him. Oh, therefore judge thy self: think, it may be for all
my good thoughts God says otherwise: I bless it may be, but God curses it
may be; and know, it cannot come from any thing but carnal love, if thou have
this boldness, and yet live in gross sins unrepented of, and unreformed.

Secondly, It is because Satan does not frown upon, trouble and molest them.
Now that cannot be called a good quietness, or a good peace which is so only
because 2.
the Devil looks upon them as his own, and so will no wise disturb them: our
Savior does abundantly confirm this, when he says, That as long as the strong
man keeps the house, all things are at quiet: Thus those that are under
Satan's Dominion, they have jollity, security, hardness of heart, that so they
may not be sensible of their misery, and thereby seek an escape out of his
snares. Pharaoh then used the Israelites most cruelly, when they began to be
weary of their bondage, and to seek comfort somewhere else; so that thou have
little cause to be glad of this thy peace, for it is a peace thou art beholding
to the Devil for; it is he that hardens thy heart; it is he that makes thee
desperate; that has put out thy right eye that thou can not behold the enemy
that lies in wait against thee: Therefore do thou no more be secure in this
quietness.

Thirdly, This bold confidence does not arise from a good motive: It comes
from general apprehensions of Gods goodness and mercy, such as heathens have.
They 3.
conceive of God in general, as one who is altogether merciful: they think he
that made them, will save them: whereas devils might thus argue for hope,
because God made them, yet he will not save them. What a miserable support is
it to have no more ground for thy salvation, then the damned spirits in hell
have? But a true gracious confidence is from the Covenant of Grace in Christ;
it has respect not to the nature of God absolutely considered, but relatively,
as in Christ reconciled with us. Hence the promise of God is mutual, I will be
their God, and they shall be my people: Do not thou think that any natural
apprehension about God can give the least hope, know this must come wholly by
revelation: set the word of God aside, which does reveal Gods good pleasure to
believers, and the way of pardon and salvation is no more possible then that of
the Devils: so then the godly man's confidence is from Scripture revelation and
direction, whereas the presumptuous man's is from natural suggestion.

Fourthly, This confidence is defective, because it does separate and divide
those things which God has inseparably joined together, and that is the means
and the end. 4.
The presumptuous man's confidence is maintained and kept up, though he go not
in the right way, yea, though he walk in a contrary way: as those wicked men
who though they defiled themselves with abominations, said, No evil shall come
nigh us: and such as had made a Covenant with Hell and death: but the godly
man's faith, it cleanses the heart; and he that has this hope, purifieth
himself even as God is pure. How unsufferable is it to see a man confident of
Gods love, and yet walk continually in the ways he hates! There is no making
our calling and election sure, but by the gracious f(...) of Gods Holy Spirit.
Think not to ^o into the North, by taking a journey So(...)d: and it is as
absu^d to call God ^hy God, when God^ wa(...) are not thy w(...), Gods commands
are not obeyed by thee. The Spirit of God that seals and comfort, does
al^o sanctify and make holy: Think not therefore to have (...), and no heat.

Fifthly, This secu^e confidence is not fill(...) (...) a Evangelical in its
operation: It is not spiritual and in(...): they are not hereby ca(...) out to
ob^^ Gods commandments, 5.
out of lov^ and delight in God: love apprehend by (...)vil^ (...)sh
dispositions, makes them more d(...), they turn the grace of God i(...)
wan^onnesse, and make (...) lov^ abounds: But love shed abroad in the hea^^
of G(...), it works Evangelically, graciously, d(...) to become like God,
w(...) us. Having these Promises ((...) the Apo(...)) let (...) cleanse our
selves from all filthiness. 2 Cor. 7. 1. The promises were, That God would be
our God and Father: So then, conf(...) of Gods love in an unregenerate hear, is
like some unkind influences of the stars, that cause diseases and
pu^i^factions. When Papists o(...) against (...) assurance, that it b^ee^s
contempt, neglect of means, and d(...), We Answer, Presumption indeed ^oth, and
a vain p(...), which wi^^^d men have of Gods love; but in the godly it breeds
a (...) like (...), and holy f^ar to displeas^ that God, whose goodness we so
(...) taste of. Examine therefore what the operations of this confidence are
upon thee: D(...) thou her by take liberty in the ways of (...)? This is
ungodly.

Sixthly, It is not a c(...) arising out of spiritual conflict and agony: and
this 6.
is indeed a ^o(...) discovery of all (...) confidences: carnel pr(...) of Gods
favor, it m(...) no opposition: (...) man so carried away, never (...)t
trouble of sin is, what the terrible d^^ts of the A(...) are, how difficult and
supe(...) a work it is to rely upon Gods promises; but all his joy and peace
comes with a great deal of ease to him: but in the godly it is otherwise, I
(...) my unbelief: so David's Psalms, what ebbing and flowing ^e has, confident
of Gods savor at one time, then presently as much dejected and despondent: See
how he expostulat^th, Why art thou cast down, O my soul? still trust in God Now
the ground of this difficulty and combat, is from the opposition every thing
spiritual, has to that which is carnal: an unregenerate heart does oppose Gods
spirit sealing and comforting, as well as convincing and sanctifying. The
easiness therefore that thou find in having this comfort, may justly make
thee suspect it: say, My quietness is from the Devil, else my heart would
oppose it more, I could not get into a true Canaan, unless I went through some
wilderness.

7. This carnal security is at that time, and in those conditions, when the
Scripture calls for the contrary, Therefore it cannot be of God. As for
example, Thou art thus persuaded 7.
of Gods love, though thou live in constant ways of profaneness; though
thou neglect(...) the exercise of all holy duties. Now remember, does (...)
Scripture call upon thee to believe that God is pleased with thee? That he
loves thee? No, Gods word commands thee clean contrary: it bids such mourn and
w^ep: it calls upon such to believe that the threatenings of God belong to them;
that God is not their God; that their sins are not pardoned: Oh then, why will
ye presumptuously, and wilfully believe a lie? Why do you apply promises to
you, when you should do threatenings? Thou must make a new Bible, a new
Scripture, e're thou can take any comfort to thy self: Oh therefore if thou
did know what thou did, and how it is indeed with thee, what an alteration
would there be? For all that quietness, horror and trembling; for all that
jollitie, mourning and howling: for that easiness to believe, thou would find
it most difficult; Oh, who can believe? Lord make me to believe.

Use of Exhortation, To awaken, if possible, all such secure persons: Do not
Use.
the generality of Christians, as those of the Jews, glory in this, God is
their Father? But how comes this about? Where is your evidence? How will you
prove it? put your hearts to it. If this confidence of God being your Father
were right, and of God; thy life would differ from what it is, as much as light
from darkness, a wilderness from a garden. Oh how may the Ministers of God
with Jeremy say, Our souls shall mourn in secret for you. Had we not as good
set our shoulders to a great Mountain to remove that, as make men begin to
search whether their peace be a good peace or no, their quietness a good
quietness? Oh do ye not say to us as the devils to Christ, Why are ye come to
torment us? As we would not unsettle or put doubts into any that truly fear
God, so on the other side, to those that vainly rely upon God, when yet he is
not theirs; we could desire these words might be as arrows shot into their
hearts, wounding of them; so as to take no rest till they have a true peace
indeed.

SERMON XXXI.
That outward Success, Prosperity, and Greatness in the world is no true
Evidence of Grace.

DEUTERONOMY. 9. 4, 5. Speak not in thy heart, after that the Lord thy God has cast
them out from before thine eyes, saying, for my righteousness the Lord has
brought me in to possess this land, etc.
THe people of Israel after a sore and dangerous voyage are now entering into
their haven, after a wilderness full of troubles and dangers they are now
possessing a land of Rest, a land that flowed with honey; but l^st they should
surfeit of this honey, and lest this rest and quietness should be like that of
pools, which breeds nothing but noisome creatures, Moses is exceeding
vigilant to inform them as of the great mercies God had done for them, so of
the great duties he required of them: and this is the scope of Moses both in
the precedent, and this present Chapter, with some others that follow. The
mercies God vouchsafed to them are aggravated by an enumeration of the several
wonders God had wrought for them, as also by a lively description of that Land
and Country they were now made Lords of, Chap. 8. 7, 8, 9. called therefore
the good land frequently, and is made a type of heaven, for the joyful
pleasure of it, as if the Israelites now possessed of Canaan were brought into
Paradise again; and for the full commendation of it the Scriptures expression
is remarkable. Deuteronomy. 11. 12. A Land which the Lord thy God cares for, The eyes
of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the year to the
end of it: a phrase much like that which the Scripture uses even of his own
children, as if he had the same care of that Land as of his own people. As he
thus lively describes their mercies, so he does as powerfully quicken them up
unto their duty, which is to take heed of all those sins, that fulness, ease,
and security, would quickly breed; whereof he instanceth in one more
especially, viz. an apprehension that God had done this to them, for their
righteousness, because they were more holy then others, as they thought;
Therefore they concluded themselves more happy. Because their land abounded
with all excellent fruit, they judged their lives to overflow with all graces.
They took all this prosperity as a reward of their piety. Now Moses removes
those foundations they built upon, instructing them that this mercy befell
them, not because they were so good, but their enemies so bad.

So that in the Text you have the sin forbidden, a false conceit of their
righteousness and uprightness, amplified with their confidence therein; Speak
not in thy heart, etc. The soul can talk to it self, and though man cannot hear
what it speaks, God does. Thus John to the Pharisees, Say not in your hearts;
and the exhortation in a good sense is, to commune with our own hearts; This
phrase does excellently imply, what discourses and apprehensions men are ready
to frame to themselves, and although these lie in the breast, and cannot be
discovered by men, yet God takes notice of them to punish them. When Moses
excludes righteousness and uprightness of heart, by the former he means all
outward actions of righteousness, and by the latter all inward intentions and
purposes of heart, though they fail sometimes externally; Now as Canaan was a
type of heaven, so as the introduction of the Israelites thereunto was only of
Gods grace, so is our possession of heaven. This their groundless apprehension
to make outward blessings a sign of their righteousness, Moses confureth, by
attributing this to other causes, as first, the impiety and wickedness of
their adversaries; as for their righteousness it moved not God, but the horrid
transgressions of the Canaanites, they provoked him: The iniquity of the
Amorites was now full, not the righteousness of the Israelites. Another cause
was Gods Oath and promise, which he made to their fathers, whereby though he
was not a debtor to their righteousness, yet he was obliged to his own truth
and fidelity: Hence Deuteronomy. 7. 7. The original of all the blessings vouchsafed
to them, is reduced to Gods love merely, not any excellency in them. Now that
this sinful persuasion might not abide in them, see how the Scripture
follows it over and over again in these three verses: Speak not that it is
for thy righteousness, etc. ver. 4. Not for your uprightness, ver. 5.
Understand therefore that it is not for thy righteousness, v. 6.

That men are very prone to make the outward prosperity and ^ncrease which God
gives them, an argument of their righteousness, and so of Gods love to them,
to save them. They think it impossible that seeing God has so blessed them
here, he should damn them hereafter. This false sign does not belong to every
one, but to those who have abundance of outward mercies, especially if brought
to partake them from a low and indigent condition. The more their change is
admirable, the more testimony they think of Gods goodness to them, and their
own inherent goodness. For the discovery of the weakness of this prop, take
notice first of these particulars.

First, That prosperity, wealth and success, they are in themselves blessings,
mercies, and so good things to be desired. Hence the Scripture does so often
use 1. Wealth and prosperity, good things to be desired.
them as encouragements and incentives to holiness, If you observe these, you
shall be blessed at home and abroad, see Deuteronomy. 29. and lest we should think,
that outward wealth and prosperity were only to be regarded in the Old
Testament, because they had not such a measure of Gods Spirit, we see what Paul
says in the new, It is more blessed to give then receive, and he speaks of
it as a speech that the Lord Jesus was wont to use, though the Evangelists do
not record it: so that outward mercies are in themselves blessings, and the
want of them by the Scripture is made a misery and affliction: Aristotle made
the outward affluence of wealth necessary to that Beatitude he speaks of, but
Christ his discipline is otherwise. Hereupon our Savior when he speaks of
several blessednesses to several graces, with spiritual happiness he
reckons temporal, Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth.
Hence we read of the people of God praying for these earthly mercies, and we
have a direction for it in the Lords Prayer, when we pray for daily bread,
which although some learned men understand of heavenly bread, and translate it
supersubstantiall, yet that has no probability. It is true indeed the very
petition does much limit and moderate our desires, for it is after the great
things that belong to Gods glory; and it is but one Petition, whereas there are
diverse for spiritual things, so that our Savior would have us to be about
these earthly things, as those fowls of the heaven are, which on a sudden fall
on the ground for their food, but presently fly up to heaven again: and then,
it is daily food, or as the most learned expound it, food convenient, and decent
for our place and calling, not supersluity. Thus though these cutward mercies
are blessings, yet we are to circumcise our affections about them; l^st as when
the waters overflow the banks, it gets much soil and di^t, so our affections
immoderate grow polluted.

Secondly, Although these are blessings and mercies, and so good things; yet 2.
They sanctify not those that have them.
they are not sanctifying of those that have them. Dives said, he had good
things laid up in store; but how were they good? which m^de him b^^? how were
they good which could not keep him out or hell? Riches therefore are neither
good or bad, but indifferent in their nature, and says Austin, God gives
wealth to wicked men, to show, that the nature of it is not good: and sometimes
Are of themselves neither good not evil.
to godly men to show that it is not evil (...) their nature. Therefore these
outward mercies are not good, as grace and holiness is, which makes them good
that have them. Hence though they come to the godly from the grace of God, yet
the Scripture never calls them grace, as it does the fruits of Gods Spirit; so
that this may abundantly comfort those that are poor in the world, yet rich in
grace. Thou have the best good that is in all Gods Treasure, in making the
godly, he has bestowed a greater blessing upon (...) then if he had given thee
all the riches of the world: A man that has gold, thinks not himself poor for
want of clay or brass; so neither may a Christian that is in (...) with
holiness think himself poor, because he wants outward mercies. Those are good
things which make us good.

Thirdly, As outward wealth and increase are blessings, so they do belong by 3.
As they belong to godliness by promise, so they are blessings.
promise unto godliness; Godliness has the promise of this life, and the
li^^, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Look over all temporal mercies that are in the Scripture,
and you shall find them made only to the godly man. Hence these earthly (...)
^^ey are appendices to the Covenant of grace; when God promises to be our
reconciled father, then he promises us also heaven and (...), (...) whatsoeve^
(...) for our good. I do not say with some Divines, That (...) men have no
right to their goods; That they are usurpers, and shall answer for every (...)
of (...) they eat, as robbers and thieves: No, it is a dangerous po(...)on to
hold (...) (...)on and right to be placed upon godliness. The earth (...)
given to the children of men, says the Psalmist, to all men as well as to the
(...)ly; (...) is a lawful, civil right, so there is a sanctified use, and
(...). All wicked men shall indeed answer for every mo^sell of (...), every
(...) of drink, every penny in the purse, but not as if they were th(...), only
as (...) did not improve all they had for the glory of God. This is also of
(...) to the godly, art thou poor, art thou despised, art thou imprisoned? The
promise of wealth, honor, liberty, belongs to thee, as well as of pardon of
sin and grace, only these are not so absolutely necessary; if they were as
necessary as Christ, and grace, and heaven is, thou should be no more
without them then without these: Thou art rich in bonds and bills even wherein
the Lord is obliged, though thou have not the actual use of those good things.

Fourthly, It is no wonder, that particular persons may conclude of their good
4. Wicked men have a right to worldly goods.
estate by the outward felicity God bestows upon them, seeing it is the
professed and maintained doctrine of the learned men in the Church of Rome,
that temporal felicity is a mark of the true Church: Would ye know (say they)
what Church to join to? join to that Church which abounds in outward
prosperity and wealth (say they,) and it cannot be (think they) that the Pope
is Antichrist, and Rome Babylon, for if it were, the Lord would have plagued it
with sor^ destructions, and not so wonderfully have blessed them for many ages
together. But this is a weak argument, and it has no strength, but with
carnal hearts that account nothing great and good, but what is earthly. Paul
was discovered a faithful Apostle by his iron chains on his legs, not his
golden ones about his neck. By this doctrine we may see how imbred a thing it
is in a man to be high minded, and secure in his spirit, as if God loved him
more then others, because he has bestowed more of these earthly blessings upon
him then others. They think that as God gives them a higher place here on
earth, so he will also in heaven: Especially this sin is committed by you of
the City, many whereof have been blessed by a bountiful increase from little
or nothing: you say with Jacob, With a staff came I over Jordan up to London,
and now I am become two bands: You are above him in the Parable, his five pound
gained ten, yours one penny a thousand, and do you not take this great
providence of God to you as an argument of your righteousness? Do not you
speak in your heart, as the Text says, though not with your mouth, that this
makes you have hopes, that God who has done so much for you here, will do
much more for you hereafter? Here is little true comfort in all these thoughts,
as is to be showed.

Fifthly, Although we cannot conclude grace by outward mercies, yet thus far 5.
we must by Scripture say, that God out of a general love in a providentiall
way does give many a man outward prosperity and wealth, for his diligence,
industry, upright and honest dealing in the world. Thus Solomon says, The hand
of the diligent makes rich, and truth and justice in our way is blessed by God
to increase. Thus Austin attributed all the temporal greatness that the state
of Rome came to, unto the justice of their commonwealth, but this comes only
from a general Love of God, not from that peculiar love which belongs to his
people; it does not come from the same fountain that mercy and pardon comes;
Therefore it is a fruit of providence, not of election: it argues upright
dealing, but not an heart made pure and upright to God: what then though thou
say, God has blessed my diligence, my honest dealing? yet thou can not say,
This is the fruit of my conversion and regeneration, being turned unto God.

Lastly, Some go into another extremity, and conclude of their good estate and
holy condition, because they are in a poor, needy, miserable estate, and
destitute of all earthly comforts; They read in the Scripture, that the poor
receive the Gospel, Christ invited the lame and blind, That persecutions and
afflictions are the way to heaven; They hear Christ said, Blessed are those
that mourn and weep, and Woe be to those that laugh; They hear God has not
chosen many rich, many noble, and therefore because they are in great
extremities here, they do not think God will make them have an hell here and an
hell hereafter. But every poor man is not a Lazarus, nay, there are many times
none more wicked, cursed, profane, and enemies to all goodness, then those
that are in a low and miserable condition; A woeful thing it is indeed to have
nothing but misery here, and nothing but torments hereafter. If thy poverty
indeed were sanctified, thou wast more holy; humble, heavenly, then that estate
would not be contemned by God: he does not disdain the prayer, of the poor,
humble and lowly ones; but then be sure thou art such a poor man as the
Scripture speaks of, otherwise as thou many times here on earth want a crum
of bread, so thou will in hell a drop of water.

In the next place, let us consider why outward prosperity and blessings do not
Why outward prosperity does not argue a man's good estate. R. 1.
argue a man's good estate.

And first, It may be demonstrated from the original or fountain whence they
flow; It is not only from Gods love, but his anger and hatred also: Sometimes
God gives men the outward comforts of this life in his hot displeasure; Thus
Dives, it was Gods anger to him made him rich: Solomon speaks of this vanity,
that many times a wicked man has wealth given him, not for his own good, for
he has no power to enjoy it, but for the good of others: Solomon often takes
notice of this, that the wicked lays up for the righteous; not that
intentionally he does so, but providencially it shall be so, Quandoque divitiae
dantur ad panam, says Austin; God gives wealth to men, as Saul did Michal his
daughter in wife to David, not out of love, but to be a snare unto him, let
their table become a snare to them. As the immoderate length of Absaloms hair
was an occasion to hang him, to be his death, so the overflowing of mercies and
comforts are sometimes the instruments of men's destruction: Do not thou
therefore boast and grow lofty by that which comes from wrath and will end in
wrath. Thy fat pastures are only to fat thee the more for hell; Do not bear thy
head high, because thou have more abundance, wealth, greatness then others.
The higher the trees are, the nearer to thunder and lightning. Oh what a
difference did Dives in hell find from himself faring deliciously every day!

Secondly, Therefore may not outward plenty and mercies be made a sign of our
R. 2. Riches and prosperity do wicked men hurt. 1.
good estate, because they have always in corrupt hearts corrupt and sinful
operations: which we will take notice of, that so you who have what your hearts
can wish, may know you have not what your hearts ought to wish.

As 1. Outward comforts in the plenty of them are apt to beget pride and
loftiness of heart, so as to despise and contemn those that are under them:
Hence Paul bids Timothy charge the rich men of this world, that they be not
high minded, but fear; charge them as if entreaties and mild persuasions would
not do them any good, but charge them, and then that they be not high-minded;
all outward comforts are apt like ripe fruit to breed some worms, especially
that of pride and insolency of heart: Mark therefore whether the blessings thou
have make thee bold, secure, lofty. Thou beginnest to care for no body, to fear
nothing: Alas, God has not done these great things to thee out of love to
thee, for they have unkindely, and sinful influences upon thee.

2. If these outward mercies deadden thy heart to the things of God, or the 2.
exercise of those means of grace God has appointed; Oh thou have cause then
to tremble in the increase of them. We see Mat. 13. that the cares of this
world, and ceitfulnesse of riches, did eat like a Cancer into the heart of
those hearers that came nearest to godliness. They were next to the good, but
these thorns springing up choke the good seed; so the Apostle says, That some
made shipwreck of their faith and conscience, because of their inordinate love
to the world; Divitia a dividendo, says one if they divide the heart between
God and them, if they distract in prayer, in duties, all thy profession of
religion, is more withering and languishing, since God has done thus
mercifully to thee; think thou have little cause to have any confidence from
hence; Demas he did cleave to this world, some think he totally apostatized,
others that he did wonderfully abate in his former zeal, that he forsook Paul
in his Pilgrimages and Travels for the Gospel, and betook himself to some more
profitable way: which soever it was, we see how quickly such worms as these may
devour the fairest gourds. Thou therefore that say, God has blessed me thus
much from nothing, God has given me a great increase; Tell me true, Has God
blessed thee in thy love to God, in the exercise of holy duties? do thou pray
better? are thy family duties more vigorous and zealous? Oh it is an ill
symptom to grow up more into the world and down more toward hell. Thou
blessest God thou art come from nothing to a great estate, and thou tremblest
not to think that thy flourishing hopes of grace are now come to nothing. Oh
therefore take heed how you boast your selves in that which God abhors: Has
the increase of mercies been the decrease of duties? Is the flowing of wealth
the ebbing of holiness? Then thou have no cause to be confident, but rather to
fear and tremble. Though duties and the means of grace, be wings to elevate
thee to heaven, yet if these outward blessings are a clog or millstone about
the neck to press thee down, the latter will quickly justle out the former.

3. Then can outward abundance be no comfortable sign, when the means to 3.
get it and the way to preserve it are unlawful, and such as the Scripture
condemns: The Lord many times suffers unjust and deceitful men to thrive
for a while in the world, and so ungodly men have much outward prosperity. even
Idolaters, when Gods own Church has been much afflicted: David and Jeremiah
expostulated with God about this, no wonder wicked men thought the better of
themselves, when David a godly man was so discontented hereat, that he thought
all his integrity and pure worship of God was in vain: Yea the Heathens they
have busied themselves, Plutarch and Seneca have on purpose debated this
providence of God, Why it is many times so ill with the godly, and outwardly so
well with the wicked: but till David went into Gods Sanctuary, understood Gods
word, he was not satisfied, but by that perceived they were in slippery places,
and he began to think he would not have all their prosperity, with the sad
consequents of it; and indeed it is never well with the wicked, though in
abundance, and never ill with the godly, though in deep extremities: say ye to
the righteous, it shall be well with him. say ye to the wicked, it shall be ill
with him, say it, Gods Ministers are boldly and peremptorily to pronounce this;
that morsel which went down at first as sweet honey, will at last be emptied
like gravel out of the belly. Do not therefore conclude of thy great mercies,
it may be the manner and way may afford thee little comfort, it may be that
which thou think a demonstration of Gods love to thee, is an argument of thy
wickedness; when men come to great estate, presently we ask, How is it raised?
as the Geographers dispute about the spring of Nilus: Outward mercies in Gods
way are sweet and comfortable, but in unwarrantable and unlawful ways, they
melt like wax before the fire, and besides they sting like a Scorpion, and bite
like an Adder.

Thirdly, Therefore may we not trust in outward prosperity, because God 3.
many times gives a man all the good things he shall have in this life only;
and afterward there is nothing but everlasting woe and misery. Thus Abraham
answered Dives in hell, Remember thou receivedst good things in thy life time.
Now this is an heavy doom if men did rightly consider it. Thou have much
abundance, much ease, thou thrivest and growest fat in the world, thou eatest
and drinkest, and make merry. Oh fear lest God give thee all thy good things
in this life only! What a wonderful change was made with Dives and Lazarus;
the one having only good in this life meets with only evil, not a drop of
water to cool his tongue; the other having nothing but evil, meets with that
which is altogether happy. You may read in Judges about Gid^ons fleece, how
that was first all wet, and then the floor dry, afterward the floor was wholly
wet, and the fleece dry. Thus Dives in this life, Soul, take thy ease, for thou
have much good laid up for thee; in the other life, Soul tremble and plunge thy
self in horror, for thou have much torment and wrath treasured up for thee,
all is changed.

Fourthly, Therefore may we not trust in these, because we many times abuse 4.
them to a contrary end for which God gave them; he gave them to be instruments
of much glory to God, and good to others. If God give thee honors, dignities,
success, wealth, thou art to be glad of them no further then they may make
thee serviceable to God; Thou do not look at thy own ease, thy own profit by
them, but only attend unto the serviceablenesse thou may be capable of
thereby: But oh how rare is this! Rich men are the greatest men in debt of all
others; they are much to God, much to the public, much to others necessities;
now what comfort can thou take if God bless thee with these things, if thou
do not also find him making thee thereby instrumental to his glory? If thou
keep all the good mercies God vouchsafes to thee, as the Ants and Pismires
do their grain and corn which they hide in their little hills, and as they say,
bite it that it may not grow.

Fifthly, They are not to be relied on, because though all power to get wealth
5.
and prosper in the world, argue God is with thee, yet he may be only with thee
providentially and powerfully, not graciously; As when Nebuchadnezzar conquered
and prevailed; when Alexander became great, Augustus happy. God was with these
in a mighty providential way, but not graciously. It is an opinion that God
vouchsafes to some men an (...) a good success, so that they prosper in all
their enterprises. Again, others though as prudent, as pious, yet never have
good success. Julius Caesar was persuaded of this, when he said Caesarem vehis
and fortunam ejus: and concerning Alexander it is observed, that his very
pictures were succesfull; but Psalm. 75. 6. does well conclude this matter.
Well, grant there are such men whom God will preserre, make rich, great,
honored, whether they will or no; yet all this argues God is only with them
powerfully, not graciously. Now it is no solid comfort to perceive Gods power
and assistance with us, unless we also find his gracious presence.

Use 1. Of Reproof to those who desire these outward good things more then
inward and spiritual, that say of all earthly greatness, as Rachel about
children, Give me children else I die; or as Chrysostom reproved some that
would say, Give me that which is sweet, (...), although it choke me, give me
wealth, greatness, power, although it damn me: alas the fading, vanishing
nature of them should make thee temperate; these flowers will presently die.
You will cry out with Jonathan, I have tasted a little honey, and behold I must
die. I have enjoyed a few years profit, a few years pleasure, and now I must be
damned.

Use 2. Of Instruction to those who meet with much prosperity and outward
encouragements in this world: Take heed of thinking that God does this to thee,
for thy righteousness, for thy piety. Do not think this is, because God loves
thee more then others: Nay fear lest these mercies prove not like oil in hell
flames to make it scorch the hotter. O do not let thy heart run out Thus, God
has blessed me in my trading, in my buying and selling, in my enterprises and
undertakings; but withal consider how he has blessed thee with an heavenly
heart, with a gracious life; since thou have had more wealth have thou also had
more grace? The ship in the sea goes swiftly, till it touch upon the sands and
gravel under it, and then it is stopped. Oh take heed that ye be not like Corah,
Dathan and Abiram, swallowed up of the earth in a spiritual way, as they were
in a temporal.

Use 3. Of Consolation to the godly, who it may be want many of those outward
mercies the wicked have. Let them know they are no arguments of true
godliness, or of Gods dear love in Christ. If indeed thou had no portion in
Christ, no interest in his grace; If thou had no gracious fruits of his
Spirit upon thee; then thou might justly cry out, ah me, a wretched and
barren wilderness near to cursing and burning: but now it is otherwise, thou
have those things that do indeed accompany salvation. Besides, let not thy
heart be troubled at the want of these things, for they are not the best
things, nor are they the most necessary things, and God has vouchsafed them to
thee: Oh it is a sign thy heart is too carnal and earthly, that cries for
earth, when God has given thee precious pearls! Though all be gone, yet if
grace be left in thy heart, and God be not gone from thy soul, thou may
abundantly rejoice.

SERMON XXXII.
That a man's leaving those gross sins he has lived in is no Sign of Grace.

2 PET. 2. 20. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world
through the knowledge of Jesus Christ, etc.
THis Text may be called like that place in the Israelites travails, Meribah, a
place of strife and contention; The Arminian, Papist, and others considently
asserting a total and final apostasy from true grace, out of this Text. Nulla
orationis suada, nulla argumentorum vis, is required for this, Textus per se
lucet, say the Remonstrants. But you have the Orthodox as valiantly beating
them out of this ground: What is the true meaning of the Text will appear upon
a brief discussion; only in the general take notice of the excellency of this
Chapter wholly spent in describing of false Teachers, manifesting their several
evils of sin, and their several evils of punishment, which is so great that
the Apostle Jude has almost transcribed his whole Epistle out of this, with
very little addition: Pulchra sunt bis dicenda, said he. For the understanding
of the words, the Apostle used in the precedent verses two excellent
similitudes, whereunto he compared false teachers; first to fountains without
water; these invite the wearied passenger to drink, but when he comes near he
finds nothing but clayand mud; so false teachers promise such excellent and
wonderful truths, that were never heard of before, but indeed give noisome
filth. 2. He compares them to clouds without rain driven with the wind, which
denotes two things, First, Their vain ostentation, as the cloud seems to
bring rain, but yet emptieth none; and secondly, their instability, They are
clouds driven up and down (...), that is properly an impetuous turbulent wind;
and as such clouds do both raise great tempests, and obnubilate the Sun, so
do false teachers make heavy storms and troubles in the Church, and withal
bemist the glorious light of the Scripture. A third description is from their
affectation of great and swelling words. All tumors argue a windy
inflammation. In the next place he aggravates their condition by the pernicious
and damnable effect of their false doctrines, they do not only damn
themselves, but draw a troop of others into hell with them. And this they do in
a sly way, they do (...), as the Fisherman or the Fowler, show the bait, but
hide the hook or snare. Whereupon the Apostle enlarges himself concerning the
miserable estate of the seduced persons, as well as the seducers, the followers
as well as the guides tumble into the pit of destruction. The misery of seduced
persons is aggravated first in my Text, from the greater curse and wrath that
will now befall them since their apostasy, then if they had continued in their
pristine unbelief and Paganism. So that you have the deceived wretches
described by way of supposition;

First, In their former estate.

Secondly, In their fall.

Their former estate is deciphered in what they have done, and the means
whereby. The matter done by them, is to escape the pollutions of the world,
that is, their idolatry and great vices, which formerly they lived in, betaking
themselves to the true profession of Christ. The word (...) is but once, and
that here used in the New Testament, Jer. 32. 34. it is used by the Septuagint
of more grievous and gross crimes, but Ezekiel. 33. 9. of the pollution of the
heart only by covetousness. Bude us says (...) was piaculum, when a man had
contaminated himself with some grievous crime, contracting such guilt, that he
made himself and others obnoxious to the wrath of God in a conspicuous manner:
with Physicians the word signifies those pestilential seminals that are in the
corrupted air, whereby a general infection is procured; so that the Apostle
means whatsoever Idolatry, or the great sins committed by them in Paganism,
they had escaped.

Secondly, The means by which, is through the knowledge of Christ, so that
their lives were clean, not by moral precepts, and prudent dictates of nature,
but by faith historical or temporary in Christ; now here is the great Question,
Whether these were truly regenerated or no? Those that hold the Saints
Apostasy, say the Affirmative, and they press that word in the verse before
(...), they did indeed escape; I confess that is all the probability, but
diverse have read it (...) or (...) or (...), for a little time, or almost they
had escaped, as Agrippa was almost a Christian, and thus reading it would be no
advantage, and so we see it in the Margin of our Bibles: But I think it
dangerous to depart from universally received copies. Others therefore that are
Orthodox, say indeed, These were regenerated, but their fall was only partial
and temporary, for they did recover again as David and Peter: but the Text
affords no help to such an Assertion: I shall therefore conclude, That
although by the Christian Religion there was made a great and wonderful change
in the lives of these men, yet they were not inwardly regenerated, and my
reason is, because the Apostle compares them to a washed Swine, which though
never so white, yet is a Swine still, her nature is not altered, therefore she
will return to her mire again; So these though purified in their lives by the
profession of the Gospel, yet were indeed in their natural condition; and
therefore when temptations came, they returned to their own natures, therefore
verse. 14. are called unstable souls. But you will say, If they were not godly,
how are they said indeed to escape the pollutions of the world? Piscator
answers, because in the judgment of charity, and account of believers they
were judged so. Beza better, indeed, that is comparatively with their false
teachers, for they lived in all filthiness, yet counterfeited an holy life,
but lastly they did indeed leave the outward acts of wickedness, as the Sow
washed is indeed clean, but yet she is not turned into a Sheep; so these truly
and indeed had altered their manners, amended their outward lives, but were
Swine, were Dogs still. So that we affirm the Apostle to speak of men not
indeed regenerated, but yet changed in their lives from their former
wickedness, and having no inward change, therefore it is that they fall, and
falling their later end is worse then their beginning, partly because they
sin with more knowledge and understanding, and partly because they sin with
greater ingratitude and unthankfulness for further mercies; and partly because
they stand not at a stay till they fall into some foul ways of doctrine or
conversation: And thus much for the sense of the words.

That a great change made in a man's life by forsaking those gross actual sins
he Observe.
once lived in, does not presently argue such a man's conversion, or that he is
indeed in a state of grace.

A Christian may be a Swine, and yet washed. Thou that were once a drunkard, a
whoremonger, a swearer, may have forsaken these sins, and yet this
alteration be in externals only, not internals. Though thou have escaped the
pollutions of the world, yet not those of thy heart, and therefore thou art
still in the state of gall and wormwood. This is cleared in the foolish
Virgins, who are called Virgins, because they kept themselves from the Idolatry
and pollutions of the world; yet foolish, because they had not oil. Thus you
have the Israelites several times throwing away their Idols, by which they had
provoked God against them, and yet returning again to them: We may say, the
Israelites did clean escape those Idolatrous pollutions, and they did it
seriously, they were not gross dissemblers; but because their hearts were not
changed, and they steadfast in this reformation, they were swine washed
returning to the mire. Judas throws away his unjust gain, with great terror
and sorrow of heart, but he is a Goat, not a Sheep in Christ's flock. I confess
this sign seems to carry much probability with it; and commonly such men, who
have superseded their lusts, find a great deal of comfort: they rejoice to see
those fetters and chains of their legs, which once lust and the Devil had put
on them, taken off. They were sins prisoners, and went up and down in their
shackles, but now they are out of this dungeon. Considerations concerning the
point. 1.


To open the Doctrine, consider these particulars.

First It cannot be denied but that the Scripture does frequently comprehend
the duty of repentance, and conversion to God, under these words, of forsaking
our sins, casting away our transgressions, turning away from our evil ways,
etc. Insomuch that wheresoever there is such a forsaking, such a turning, there
seems presently to be the whole nature of conversion to God. Hence James
calls it, Pure religion and undefiled, to keep our selves unspotted from the
world. But all those expressions do but contain part of the duty; for every
forsaking, every turning from sin, is not presently, a gracious turning to God,
as is to be showed: Therefore think it not enough, That thou wast indeed once
such a prophaner, such a vain person, but now thou have left all such courses:
Do not thou say, Behold a true Israelite in whom there is no guile: Behold a
true child of God on whom are the sure works of grace: For though thus
outwardly washed, yet inwardly the filth may abound; though the outside be
fair, yet the Coar may be rotten within.

The reason why the Scripture describes conversion by external leaving of sin,
is, because hereby our hatred and loathing of it is made more manifest, and
none can say, They cleanse their hearts, who do not also cleanse their lives:
It follows necessarily, That if the heart be washed, the outward conversation
will also be washed; but not on the contrary, that if the conversation be
unpolluted, the heart is.

Secondly, An outward reformation of life, and forsaking of sin, may be from
several 2. Outward reformation may proceed from several principles.
principles.

1. From the grace of sanctification, which does wholly alter, and change the
nature of a man, putting new and spiritual affections, and inclinations in him,
whereby he is carried out against sin from the pure love of God, and delight in
grace; and forsaking sin from this ground, is only comfortable.

2. Another leaving of sin, is from the restraining power, and providence of
God, II.
whereby bits and bridles are put into man's jaws, that they rush not out so
madly into sin as their impetuous lusts would carry them; and such a forsaking
of sin, though it be outwardly for the glory of God, his name is not so much
blasphemed, others are not so much scandalized; yet it affords no true solid
joy to him, that upon these terms only parts with his sins.

3. There is a repressing of sin by the dictates of Nature, and the power of
Moral III.
precepts instilled into a man. Thus there is a famous story of an Heathen, who
was a debauched and profane man, that went to hear Socrates read his lectures
of Morality, with purpose to deride and scoff him; but he was so potently
wrought upon by Socrates his precepts, that he went away changed, and never was
such a debauched man any more; and no question it was from these natural
dictates, with the common help, and assistance of God, that many heathens lived
such pure and unblameable lives. So then, if upon these three several stocks,
the outward emendation of a man's life may grow, it behooves every man, who
hopes he is now turned a penitent and a convert, to enquire from which of all
these his change is made upon him.

Thirdly, Men's lusts and sins are for the most part so dear and sweet to them,
that it must be some great work either of grace Sanctifying, or grace
restraining, that will make a man leave them. We see the Israelites would give
all the wealth they had, yea, the very fruit of their womb to Oblations, rather
then leave their accustomed sins: This makes our Savior compare them to a
right eye, and a right hand, as those things which are most intimate, and dear
unto us: And what is the ground of all that malice, and hatred against the word
of God, and soul-searching Truth, but only men's inordinate love and affection
to their sins? Insomuch that when you see any wicked man leave his accustomed
sins, you may with wonder cry out, What aileth this Jordan to turn backward,
and this Iron to swim? How comes this Blackamore to a white skin? Though
therefore it be no sure sign, yet it is a great duty: we may go out to see it
as a great wonder in a parish, Behold! once a Swearer, once a Blasphemer, but
now he does so no more!

Fourthly, Though this outward alteration argue no grace in the heart, yet it
is to be acknowledged as a merciful work of God. When the word of God, though
it 4. Yet outward reformation is a mercy.
does not work to conversion from sin, yet it does to repression of sin: so
that men; though they cease not to be wicked, from holy principles, yet they do
from a strong aw and fear which Gods word brings upon their consciences: so
in that Herod feared John, and was thereby restrained fom many sins, though not
from all, is was very laudable. Thus King Josha, that kept from several wicked
ways, as long as Jehoiadah the Priest was alive, it was a mercy.

1. For hereby several good issues flow, as God is hereby less dishonored: a
I.
Christian profane in his life, blasphemes the name of God; thy Oaths, Lusts
are a kind of blasphemy against God: where therefore there is a forbearance of
these, God is less dishonored, let the grounds be what they will be.

2. Again, hereby Gods wrath is not provoked so quickly against a people, to II.
destroy them with temporal judgments: Be not evermuch wicked (says
Ecclesiastes) Why should thou die before thy time? and thus for Oaths,
Injustice, and Oppression, the land mourns: Hence gross sins, are called
crying sins, because they make a noise in Gods ear, importuning for vengeance:
now it is a mercy to a place when no such crying sins are committed, when God
is not importuned to consume a place.

3. It is good, because hereby godliness has a repute, and an esteem, and
wickedness III.
has a discouragement and brand upon it. The Scriptures speaks of an whores
forehead, and a face that could not be ashamed: Now it is well when Gods
Ministry has brought sin into such an Odium, and matter of shame, that none of
any ingenuity, any care, dares commit any vile sin: and Oh that in all our
congregations, if there were not such sanctifying grace, yet such ingenuous
dispositions wrought in men by the light of the Word, that men would say, I am
taught better, I know better, I scorn and am ashamed to serve any lust, or
commit any known sin: those that are drunk (says the Apostle) are drunk in the
night, and so those that steal, steal in the night. Thus let Ashkelon and Gath,
let Sodom and Gomorrah, who are in the night and dark, have wickedness
committed amongst them; but let not Jerusalem, or Sion, who is in the light,
thus stumble in the day and fall. How much is it to be deplored, that where the
Gospel is received, and the word of God read, and preached, every profane
person should not be as much ashamed to show his head, as a theif when he is
taken?

4. Here is this good comes by forsaking of sin, though not upon right
principles, IIII.
that others are not encouraged to imitate and do the like. Sins in the Text
are called pollutions contagions, they have a pestilential infection with them;
and because so, how good is it when this arrow does not walk abroad that would
destroy at midday! Certainly if we praise God heartily for the abating of the
plague, or sword, which have such open mouths to devour, may we not much rather
bless God for freedom from gross sins in the place where thou live? If thou
love thy self, thy family, thy relations, thou can not but rejoice to live,
where they shall learn from others to do that, which is according to God and
his Law.

5. It is a mercy, because where such great impieties are restrained, there is
less V.
grief, and trouble to the Godly. Esai cries out, Woe be to me, because I live
among men of polluted lips: and David, Woe be to me, because I live in the
wilderness of Meshech: And the same good man bewailed his exile among those
that knew not God. Lot was tormented as in hell, with seeing, and hearing the
ungodly practices of the Sodomites: So that where God does not work to
regeneration, if yet he does to restraining and binding up of men's corruptions,
that their wickedness does not make the place an hell to live in, the godly do
much praise him for it.

Lastly, Though leaving of sin do not always argue an interest in Christ, and an
VI.
evidence for heaven, yet such men shall have less torments in hell; their
judgment will be easier. Thus Austin said, Camillus will be less punished in
hell then Catali^e; and so a wicked man forsaking his ^ear lusts and sins,
though not upon Sanctified principles, shall have more Temporal blessings here
and less punishment hereafter, then those that wilfully persevere in them.

Let us in the next place consider, Why a mere forsaking of sin, or a
reformation in externals, is not enough: and this will be manifest from several
demonstrations.

First, Because (as was intimated) sin may be left from forced principles
without, 1. Why an outward forsaking of sin is no true sign of Grace.
not sanctified grace within. Forced principles are terrors of conscience,
grievous judgments of God, whereby a man is taken off from his sins, as a
mastive is pulled off from worrying a sheep, and sucking its sweet blood, by
putting red hot Iron in his mouth. Nothing but a flaming fiery sword can keep
him off from sin, which he accounted paradise: But that which is comfortable
reforming of a man's life, is when a supernatural principle is infused within,
whereby we are made new creatures; and so from the love of God, and his
holiness, arises all our hatred and loathing of sin. Thus the Apostle abhors
that which is evil, cleaves to that which is good, Romans 12. When our hating of
sin like hell, arises from a sweet intimate cleaving to good as glue, (for so
the word implies) this is matter of rejoicing. We see in nature, operations
follow the nature and essence of a thing; therefore departing from evil is not
kindly, till it come from a pure, and sanctified nature.

Secondly, A mere leaving of sin, is not perfectly a touchstone of grace,
because it may be done unwillingly, with great grief that we cannot keep our
lusts still: And 2.
this is a consequent from the former particular; for when we leave sin from
forced principles, there is a great deal of reluctance: Thus Pharaoh and the
Israelites under Gods judgments, they go from sin as Phaltiel was taken from
his wife, They run crying after them to have them again. Oh, this is the
wretched temper of too many; they have an heart to do thus, to live thus, and
they are grieved their lusts cannot be accomplished, but other things keep them
they dare not; as Paul said, The evil he would not do, yet he did it, but still
he delighted in the Law of God in the inner man. So these, the good they would
not do, yet they are compelled to do; and therefore still they delight in the
law of sin, and with their minds they serve it: do not many cast away their
sins, as the Mariners did Jonah out of the ship in the sea? they used first
all the means they could to keep him in, and when that could not be, then with
great trouble of spirit they threw him away. Thus many use all means secretly,
publicly to keep their sins, plead for the lawfulness of them, excuse the
committing of them, till a tempest of Gods wrath is so violent upon them, that
they cannot hold them any longer: Oh, therefore if thou were once so and so,
but now washed, now no such ulcers and sores are upon thee, consider with what
willingness, delight, and joy in God this is done, if otherwise, say not,
Grace is in thee.

Thirdly, Therefore may not leaving of actual sin, be a good testimony, because
this 3.
is not accompanied with mortifying sin in the root, and in the body of it; For
that only is the true forsaking of sin, which goes to the very bottom of all,
which lays the Ax to the root of the tree, which endeavors to kill the dam
with the young ones, which would destroy sin as they did Jericho, never to be
built again. Thus David repenting of those gross actual sins, goes to the
Fountain, his polluted nature and unclean, bitterly bewailing that: hence also
the Apostle calls for crucifying of the flesh, as well as the lusts of sin.
The Scripture speaks of the body of sin, as well as members thereof, and
exhorts to the mortifying of one, as well as another: And Paul, Romans 7. In that
great combat and conflict, he fights not with small sins or great, but the
king, Original pollution. Sampson did but cut his hair, and when that grew, all
his strength grew up again; if it had been pulled up by the root, then he had
recovered his power no more, so it is here. If actual sins be only
circumcised, pared off, and not a pulling them up by the roots, they all
increase to their former prevalency again. Know then, it is not enough to dry
up the streams, unless the fountain also be: see how the root and seed-plot of
all lust, and sin in thy heart is consumed, and then there is hopes thou
biddest thy sins be gone upon right terms; otherwise this falling out of
lovers, will be the renewing of love; or as water cast upon the Iron, makes it
burn the more vehemently, so will this forbearance a while from sin afterward
inflame thee seven times the hotter: and certainly here ought our sorrow and
hatred to be most vigorous, because here sin is in its strength and power.

Fourthly, Therefore may we not take comfort from mere external reformation,
because it may be nothing but the change of gross sins, into a channel of
Spiritual, and 4.
more refined sins. Now this is only to change such Tyrant-sins, but not the
Tyranny of sin. The Pharisees they carefully avoided all gross Publican sins:
they thank God, they are no drunkards, publicans, adulterers; but what then?
they are proud, covetous, superstitious; they avoid gross sin corporally, but
they greatly defile themselves with other sins spiritually. A man diseased with
distillation of humors, if the Physician do not remove the humor, but divert
it to some other part, that is more vital and dangerous, he does not cure, but
kill his patient; and thus it is here, that flux of blood, that noisome sore of
sin, which did run out in a bodily way, is turned now into a mental way of
pride, self-confidence, self-righteousness; and thus as many times the drying
up of sores and issues, strikes presently to the heart, and kills immediately,
so does the forsaking of gross sins fill thy heart with self-love selfd-elight,
and hereby thy estate is more dangerous then ever.

Fifthly, Take not comfort presently from thy leaving of sin, for it may be
only a partial 5.
and limited leaving, not an absolute and universal. There is many a man has
made a wonderful change in his life, and has cast away all those visible sins,
that others observe in him; but yet some secret, pleasant, profitable lust he
keeps, by which means he is still under the dominion of sin, and in Satan's
snares. Thus Herod, he did many things, but one thing he would not do: Now I
know thou love me (says God) when thou have parted with thy only son Isaak,
and then God knows thou truly love him, when thou leavest thy own personal
^iniquities; when thou can say, Lord, I have willingly parted with that which
I was most addicted to, which I have been long accustomed to which I would have
desired of all to have spared: Thou may with Saul, kill many a petty sin,
but will thou kill Agag? Will thou part with the fat cattle, as well as the
lean? be impartial in this point.

Sixthly, Escaping of worldly pollutions, is not always an argument of a
renewed 6.
nature, because sin may drive out sin, even as Divines say about popish
exorcismes, when the priest calls out devils from men possessed, it is by
collusion: the devil recedes not, because those exorcismes are of divine
efficacy, but because hereby he would confirm people more in believing a lie.
Thus a man that has propounded to himself any great worldly end, of profit,
pleasure, or advancement, he must for a while be a saint, that he may be a
devil. Thus diverse Heretics have been men of unblamable, and excellent lives,
that their seeming Sanctity may stamp the greater reputation upon their
Heresies. It is Machiave's counsel to his great ones, That by all means they
should get the name and repute of virtue (...) though the thing it self be a
burden; see then whether thy reformation of life, be not subordinate to carnal
designs; if so, thou art but a serpent with a glistering color, but a body
full of poison.

Lastly, This amendment of life is not satisfactory, because the means by which
it is wrought, is not durable, rooted, and firm: It is said in the Text, by the
knowledge of Christ: howsoever some would lay much upon the word (...), yet
that is many times no more then a bare (...), an historical knowledge of Divine
things, with some light impression upon the heart. Our Savior differenceth the
foolish and the wise builder, by the depth of the foundation they lay, and its
the knowing of the Truths as they are in Jesus, that makes a man put off the
old man with all its lusts: Therefore examine, by what means art thou persuaded
thus to reform? how comes it about that thou dare not do as thou have door?
If it be only general, historical faith of matters contained in the Scripture,
this is too weak and languishing; it is one thing to leave sin from mere
illumination in the head, and another from a powerful inflammation, and
renovation of the heart; thou must with thy heart, and soul, and strength love
God, and leave sin, as well as with the mind.

Use of Instruction, How manifestly and evidently they have no hopes of heaven,
Use. 1.
or grace, who live in the constant, common practice of gross sins; yet even
such men would judge it hard to be told, That they are of their Father the
Devil, that they are in a state of darkness, and bitterness; yet what is more
clear? You need not have one from heaven come and tell you, your state is
damnable, neither one from hell, with hell flames upon him, crying out, for
such sins as you daily commit, Behold, I lie roaring and yelling to all
eternity: If therefore any that is called a Christian, a believer, be thus a
profane, an ungodly person, let him see the wrath of God written against him
so evidently, that though he runs he may read it. What is a Swine, though
washed, under the sad doom of Gods wrath? What then is the Swine wallowing in
its mire, and tumbling in its dirt? And such an one art thou, who committest
gross sins with greediness.

Use of Exhortation, Not only to leave your sins, but upon such right grounds
as will be of everlasting comfort: Cast away your iniquities, says the
Prophet; Use. 2.
That implies willingness, readiness, vehement detestation, never to receive
them any more; but thy sins are pulled from thee, thy heart is the same, thy
love is the same, unless God hedgeth thy way with thorns, that thou can not
follow thy lusts. Have thou therefore left off all those evil ways thou once
livedst in upon Scripture ends, with such a love of Godliness, that though sin
come like Joseph's Mistress, in all her loveliness, pleasure, and importunate
temptation, saying, Come, and lie with me: yet thou leavest garment and all,
saying, How can I do this, and sin against God? Take heed thou art not like
that man out of whom devils were cast, but he comes with seven worse
afterward, and finds it garnished and swept, prepared for him; a sheep
washed, loves not to go into the mire again, though a Sow does.

SERMON XXXIII.
The Difficulty, and in some sense impossibility of Salvation notwithstanding
the easiness which men fancy to themselves thereof.

MAT. 19. 2^ When the Disciples heard this, they were astonished, saying, Who
then can be saved?
HAving in several instances discovered the weakness of those props, which
most lean upon in reference to Salvation, I shall conclude this matter with a
discourse upon the Disciples pathetical exclamation in the Text, Who then can
be saved?

In the verse precedent, we have mention made of one, who had good wishes and
desires for heaven, but being put by our Savior upon an exploratory duty, it
proved like jealousy water to him, discovering his rottenness; he was a
spurious brood of the Eagle, for he was not able to endure these pure
Sunbeams, He went away sorrowful, for he had many possessions. It does not
say, for he loved them, but he had them, it being very difficult to have these
things, and not immoderately love them: they were (...) indeed, because they
possessed him, rather then he possessed them. He had much wealth, as we say, a
man has a feavor, when that has him, destroying and wasting his health. Upon
this we have our Savior uttering a strange and paradoxal speech to flesh and
blood, Christ's words were miracles as well as his works, It is hard for a rich
man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: compare this with Mark 10. and there
are several aggravations; first, our Savior says, its hard; Mark says, he
spoke it with admiration, How hard is it? Then this he affirms with a
vehement asseveration, verily, yea Mark says, He looked about him, to signify
he had some extraordinary thing to say, and therefore would have them
attentive, yea the Evangelist says, he sighed also, when he spoke this further
he spoke this to his Disciples, though not rich, as appears by that
compellation in Mark, Son, how hard is it, etc? as a tender father he bids
them beware.

In the next place Christ does not only show the difficulty, but at last the
impossibility by a proverbial speech, It is as impossible for a rich man to be
saved, as a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, a Proverb in the Eastern
parts to express an impossibility. Those that would understand it of a
Cable-rope, as they mistake about the Greek word, so they consider not the
greater impossibility is implied in the phrase the more significant it is. Now
this speech of our Saviors is an hard speech, but thou art not to expostulate
or contend with Gods Ministers about it, for truth it self has said it: only
by rich men, Mark expounds those who trust in them, but Matthew speaks it
absolutely, because of the difficulty not to trust in them, when we have them.
Upon this speech of our Saviors, we see a notable operation on the Disciples,
expressed first in their outward disposition, and then in their speech. In
their disposition (...), they were stricken with amazement, it was with them,
as if they had had some astonishing blow given them; and then you have their
admiration, who then can be saved? This implies that they thought before they
heard this a very possible, if not an easy thing to be saved, but now they
despair of it: But why do they say, who then can be saved in the general, and
not rather what rich man? for of them our Savior spoke, such poor men as the
Disciples might be saved for all this. it is answered thus, though all men are
not rich, yet all men have a desire and appetite after riches, and so they are
thereby stopped in their course to heaven. Or thus, Though all men are not
rich, yet as rich men have their wealth which they immoderately rely on: So
there is no man but he has some creature or other, he does inordinatly affect,
and that makes him a Camel with too big a bunch to go in the strait way to
Heaven.

That howsoever men may suggest to themselves many probable and easy grounds
for Obs. Salvation difficult, and in some sense impossible.
their salvation, yet upon Scripture-consideration it will appear a great
difficulty, yea in some sense an impossibility.

Thus the Disciples while they happily attended only to Christ his gracious
invitations and manifold promises of his love, they thought it a very easy
matter to get to heaven; They found nothing but honey come out of his mouth.
Now when they hear our Savior speak of the exact qualification of him that
shall be saved, they are affected with fear as the Israelites were, who thought
it impossible to possess Canaan, because of the tall Anakims that must first
be conquered.

For the clearing of the Doctrine, let these three things be premised; Three
things premised for clearing the Doctrine. 1.


First, That when we say it is such a difficult and impossible thing to be
saved, we do not relate to that natural impossibility which is in every man;
for so not only rich men, but even infants newborn, it is as impossible for
them to be saved, as a Camel to go through the eye of a needle; for seeing all
are by nature dead in sin; we can no more put spiritual life in our selves,
then Adam could at first have made himself of a lump of earth, a living soul.
We do not then fetch this impossibility of Salvation so much from the weakness
of nature, as from the exactness of the way of grace, for our Savior in the
Text lays not this impossibility upon the impotency and inability of a man in
respect of original defilement, though this stream will by long windings at
last empty it self into that fountain, but upon the curious bounds that grace
prescribes our affections even to lawful things; so that although we may love
and desire, and use these creature comforts, yet if we go but one step beyond
those limits, we have presently transgressed; and so when our Savior says
upon this to comfort the Disciples with some hopes, with God all things are
possible. Though it be universally true, yet it is more peculiarly to be
limited to the matter in hand, God can level this Camels bunch, he can command
the waters of our affections to stand still, and not to overflow.

Secondly, This therefore may be extended not only to a natural man in his
unregenerate estate, but even to a regenerated person, so that we may cry out,
2.
What godly man can be saved? The work of grace is so exact, temptations are so
great, corruptions are so strong, that we may say, Who of the godly can be
saved? for though Gods grace will give them to persevere, as Christ's presence
in the ship did or might assure them they could not perish, yet when they saw
their danger, and were in tempests and storms, they cried out, Master save us,
we perish; so even a godly man, though while he look to the Covenant of grace
he may anchor his soul securely; yet at the same time beholding his temptations
and infirmities, he may frequently cry out, O Lord, support me, I am falling
into hell; we will therefore suppose a man in the state of grace, yet, were it
not that with God all things are possible, this godly man would make shipwreck
of his soul a thousand times over ere he could get into that glorious haven.
Thus Peter 1 Pet. 4. 18. The righteous is scarcely saved, which although it be
principally meant of temporal deliverance, yet spiritual salvation is by
necessary consequence included.

Thirdly, Although this be true, yet it must be acknowledged, that if we do 3.
respect the grace of Christ, and his fullness, it is a very easy thing to be
saved; for let sin abound in the guilt and power of it, yet grace in the
justifying and sanctifying effects of it, does much more abound. Hence Gods
mercy in pardoning is compared to the heavens, and our sins are but like the
earth a punctum in comparison, Isa. 55. 9. or as a drop of the water to the
Sunbeams, which is quickly dried up. In the fifth of the Romans you have an
excellent opposition between the second and first Adam, showing how much more
potent Christ is to save, and grace to give life, then Adam was to destroy, or
sin to curse and condemn; in which respect Christ is said to give life, and
that more abundantly; now this is to be marked by the dejected, tempted heart,
which seldom looks up to grace, but to all the difficulties that are in heavens
way. They cry out, O never godly, never believing, never coming up to
Scripture-principles; but they do not join Gods power and their infirmity, Gods
grace, and their guilt together; They do not say, O Lord, because this is
impossible to me, Is it also to thee? Because I have sinned away my own grace,
Have I also sinned away Christ's fullness?

Therefore mind the strict qualifications to make thee walk humbly in fear and
trembling, mind the gracious fullness of Gods love and power to make thee full
What makes salvation so easy to a man's natural thoughts. 1.
of hope and comfort. Put the Camels bunch and Gods power together.

These things premised, let us consider what are those considerations that make
salvation so easy to a man's natural thoughts.

And the first is, A representation of God altogether pitiful and merciful,
without taking any notice of his purity and his justice, that he is a God Who
will not acquit the guilty. This half representation of God unto a man's heart,
makes him thus confident. Men argue, How can we think God, who says, He would
not the death of a sinner, who says, Why will ye die, O house of Israel; Who
has put pity into men's hearts, shall not much more be a fountain when streams
are so plentiful? This has been aggravated so much, that it has been an
opinion of some, that at last all men, yea and devils also shall be saved: but
the Scripture speaks of Gods sting as well as his honey, of his fury as well as
his pity; The Scripture speaks of his rejoicing in the destruction of the
wicked, as well as pitying them; Do not thou therefore deceive thy own soul, by
minding Gods mercy merely. Gods justice is to find out those, who have abused
mercy, and he is a fire to consume as well as to give light.

A second ground which makes salvation so easy, is the general offer and
tender 2.
of Gods grace by his Word, whereby none seem to be exempted: Now if to this be
added, a doctrinal opinion also, which does abound in these days, viz.
universal Grace, and universal Redemption, they now quickly persuade themselves
the way to heaven is a broad way; but this Doctrine does quite overthrow the
Doctrine of a particular Election of some only to salvation, which yet the
Scripture manifestly declares, and it puts the whole discriminating event of a
man's self from others, into the hands of free will: for if Judas have as much
of the grace of God, and as much by the death of Christ, as Peter; the only
reason why Peter does repent and Judas not, is merely, because the one
improveth his power well, and the other does not. Therefore although general
tenders of grace are enough to encourage those that are hungry and thirsty
after it, and such as are burdened by sin; yet they lay no foundation at all
for such an universality of grace as they pretend to; neither do we lay a
foundation of despair in this, for we say, this grace does truly belong to
every one that believes and repents; And the Arminian cannot go further, he
dare not say, This grace belongs to you whether you believe or not, repent or
not: so that we are as universal in pouring of oil into wounded souls, as they
are.

Thirdly, Salvation is thought easy, Because of a mistake about faith: Oh say
they, 3.
if a man do but believe, then heaven is his, Christ is his: as to him that
believes not condemnation belongs. Now all natural men think it a very
easy thing to believe, What, to trust in Christ with all thy heart? how ready
is every unregenerate man to say, he does it? And upon this it is, that the
Papists charge us as making it such an easy pleasing way to go to Heaven; It Is
but believing (say they) and then all is well. But all this is a mistake about
faith; he that says, Faith is easy, never knew what it is to believe: To
presume is easy, to be secure and self-flattering is easy; but out of the
true sense of sin and deep humiliation for it to rely on Gods grace; this
the godly heart finds not to be done without many conflicts and spiritual
agonies; faith therefore is made the work of Gods Spirit, and it is that which
the devil does most oppose, because that does most withstand him.

Lastly, Therefore men make it easy to go to Heaven, They may seek that in 4.
the last place, Live in all jollity, and then to cry, Lord have mercy on me at
the last gasp is enough, because they wholly mistake what true Godliness and
Repentance is. What godliness is they understand not, they think not of being
borne again, of the pangs and travail the soul commonly is in, before it is
thus formed; They consider not the way to Heaven is a strait way, and few that
enter therein; if they did, could they be so silly, as to think such vicious
lives as they live, such formality and morality they continue in, were the way
to Heaven? Certainly if this be so, then the Scripture speaks falsely, Strait is
the way, Mat. 7. 13, 14. No, broad is the way, large are the paths, and few
miss them; You therefore think it easy to be saved, because you take copper
for gold, counterfeits for pearls; and thus a man may think himself very rich,
when he is indeed very poor. Again, they mistake about repentance, for they
think all kind of sorrow for sin, every Lord have mercy upon them,
especially if this be with tears, a true Repentance; but if this be so we may
cry out contrary to the Disciples, Who will not be saved? Then blessed Ahab,
godly Pharaoh, holy Judas, for all these more or less acknowledged their
sin, and begged for pardon; But if thou examine Scripture, and see how much
goes to godly sorrow, what principle it must come from, what motives must
produce it, what effects flow from it; Thou will be amazed, and say, O Lord, I
doubt I never truly repented, my tears are too salt to come from a contrite
heart in a gracious manner. Now do but observe all those men who are secure
and confident about their salvation, you may as soon persuade them a Blackmore
is white, as they begin to have the least doubt and suspicion about
themselves; and you shall see its one of these pillars they lean upon, if this
their foundation were razed all their hopes were gone. Could you drive them out
of this refuge then they would cry out, Men and brethren. What shall we do to
be saved?

Let us therefore in the next place consider, why upon Scripture-grounds, Why
it is impossible without Gods wonderful grace for any man to be saved. 1.
it will appear such an impossibility without Gods wonderful grace; for a man,
yea a godly man to be saved; so that of all miracles, it will be the greatest,
to see a godly man passing all the Rocks here, and safely lodged in Heaven.

And first it appears a wonder, If you consider that grace in a man's heart is
not in its natural soil. It Is like an Herb transplanted and put into some
ground it does not agree with. Now it is a wonder this herb of Grace does not
wither, alas the soil helps nothing to it. God gave command at first to the
earth to bring forth grass; but alas our hearts cannot do so: Grace in our
hearts is like a stranger in a strange Land, like a spark of fire in the deep
ocean, like a candle in a boisterous windy night, it is a wonder if it do not go
out. And certainly if Adam so quickly lost his grace, when yet it was
connatural to him, his heart was a fit soil; were it not for the Covenant of
Grace, which fails not, a godly man would fall seven times a day wholly from
God, as well as the Scripture says he does so often in temporal calamities. Oh
then wonder how any grace comes to be alive in thy heart, that those coals are
not smothered up, that every night thou do not as that mother lie upon thy
child, and through security and negligence kill this poor infant of grace.

2. The impossibility of it appears in the several manifold works of Gods
grace, 2.
which are absolutely necessary after we are regenerated: So that suppose a man
be converted, yet if grace do not afterward help, and that several ways, this
man would die in the wilderness and never get to Canaan; now Gods grace is
various, There is preventing grace, whereby a man is kept from those many sins
and temptations, which if plunged into would utterly undo him. Thus David was
kept from murdering Nabal; and as Paul said, 1 Cor. 15. 10. By the grace of God
I am what I am; So he might have said (says Austin) By the grace of God I am
not what I am not. Yea Divines say, Plures sunt gratiae privativae quam
positivae, Gods preventing mercies are more then his positive mercies. Oh
therefore think, If the grace of God did not keep off this sin, this lust,
this temptation, how had it swallowed thee up, as the Whale did Jonah! Again,
There is protecting grace, and that is, when thou art in the midst of all
temptations, yet grace defends thee, and thou sinnest not; we wonder at Gods
miraculous deliverance to Daniel, who was kept alive in the midst of roaring
Lions. Alas God does no less for thee every day. There are devils like so many
roaring Lions, seeking to devour thy soul, and its grace has a covering over
thee. Its a remarkable expression of the Psalmist, mercy does compass the
godly, Ps. 32. 10. its a Court of guard against all those assaults that our
spiritual enemies would make upon us. There is also quickening grace, whereby
the principles of holiness are daily blown up and enlivened; now if this
bellows were not always blowing, if this were not always filling our sails,
we should lie like so many dry bones; This wind must arise ere they can come
together. David found the necessity of this, when he so often prayed, That God
would quicken him. Thy very graces would lie and rust away, were there not this
exciting grace; Do not the people of God fall into diverse lethargies and hurtful
sleeps, because of the want of this. Again, there is cooperating grace, which
goes along with us to do, as well as to purpose in our heart: Its Gods grace
that works in us not only to will but to do, Phil. 2. 13. when we have
desires and affections to duties, how many times are we diverted, and through
laziness or distractions interrupted, but grace carries us out to the work it
self. There is also corroborating grace, whereby the principles of holiness,
being weak and unsteady, are confirmed and strengthened more and more; for grace
though it keeps us from sin, yet carries us on to holiness weakly and
faintly. Thus he prayed, I believe, help my unbelief, Mar. 9. 24. Thus the
flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, that many
times they do the things they would not, Gal. 5. 17. Paul calls this to be
strong in the might of the Lord; and I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me. Paul has a kind of omnipotency, and to him all things are
possible, because possible to grace which inableth him. Lastly, There is
persevering Grace; for let a man be furnished with all the former fruits of
grace, yet if this of perseverance be not added, their works are not crowned;
when we do things (...), then they are (...), as they are often put one for
another. Its not of the essence of grace to continue always in the subject
where it is, for then Adam and the Angels could not have fallen. It is
therefore a distinct work of grace to give perseverance from the first infusion
of it.

3. The impossibility of it is seen in those sly insinuating motions of lust
that do still 3.
abide in the heart of the most holy men. Insomuch that it is a wonder all the
sweet fruit of thy soul is not quite eaten up with these worms that breed in
them, all godly men consumed by those motions and sparks of sin, that are not
yet extinct. James does excellently describe the subtle working of original
corruption, Jam. 1. 14: it does (...) entice a man away, with a sweet or
profitable bait hiding the hook, and it does (...) draw the heart aside from
considering all those arguments and motives that would make him forbear sin;
now that this spawn of sin which would quickly prove Serpents and
Cockatrices, is not destroyed, appears by Paul Romans 7. How strong and unruly
does he find those remainders of sin in him, that were it not for Gods grace
ready at hand to heal him, Paul's soul would quickly become as noisome through
spiritual sores, as Jobs body through bodily ulcers. Its a wonder then that
every man is not a Cain, a Judas, considering what fuel there is in every man's
heart.

4. The impossibility of salvation without grace, appears in the temptations
that 4.
are in lawful things; Insomuch that when outward gross sins could not damn,
the immoderate love of lawful things has been like a millstone about the neck
to drown in perdition; when the Philistims could not undo Samson, a Dalilah in
his bosom can. Thy wife, thy children, thy houses, thy trade, these kill thee
by secret poison, whereas gross sins destroy by open sword. One of the
Ancients in a vision saw the world full of snares, and so it is; a shop is a
snare, wife, children are snares. Our Savior on purpose shows this in that
Parable, where those invited to the feast, say not, I am a drunkard, a swearer,
and cannot or will not come, but I have bought, and I have married, and
therefore cannot come, Luke 14. 20. Seeing then every thing we touch is like
pitch, every thing we meddle in is ready to entangle us, who can be godly, and
so who can be saved? This wrought to an extremity upon some, that thought
unless they gave over all worldly imploiments, and spent their days in cells
and caves with continual devotion they could not be saved: but this was too
much.

5. This will further be clear if you consider all the enmity, subtilty and
power of the 5.
devil against a man, especially if godly, Ephesians. 6. it is with principalities
and dignities in high places, and Satan has desired to winnow you. He chooses
out the godly in a more special way to undo them, Luke 22. 31. There is two
things in sitting or winnowing, the one is concussion and tumbling of the corn
and chaff, or refuse together; the other is the separation of the good from the
bad; now the devil he desired the first only, to mingle grace and corruption,
to bring them all into a confusion, and so overcome them. Now did not Christ
powerfully intercede, our faith would quickly fail in such extremities. That
same Parable of a man going to Jericho and meeting with thieves, was miserably
wounded, being left half dead, if it may be applied to a man's spiritual estate,
is not meant of him before conversion, or in his natural estate, for he is
wholly dead, but after his conversion many times foiled by Satan, and therefore
needs oil and balm continually.

6. The impossibility of it appears in the manifold duties and ordinances
which God 6.
has appointed us to he frequent in; All which suppose the fire would quickly
go out; he has appointed frequent preaching, administration of Sacraments,
daily prayer, and why is all this? that these warm clothes, and continual
rubbing of thee may keep life in thee. God knew how fading our graces were;
hence he has commanded this continual dropping and watering, else thy soul of
a Paradise would quickly become a barren wilderness: and to this head may we
bring those continual afflictions and chastisements which God does most
exercise his children with; and why are these, but as so much soap to refine
us, so much fire to get out dross? They are like the beating of the garment to
get out the dust and moths; now then if there should not be such a continual
praying, preaching, purifying, who could be saved? What godly man would not
become like a standing pool full of mud and filth? so that salvation is a prize
hardly obtained.

7. The impossibility appears, in that there is requisite a presence of all
graces, and 7.
a proportionable cooperation of them. Now without God how impossible is this,
Add to your faith temperance, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 6. If any one of these be
lacking, it is a monster, not the image of God. Hence so many have come near
godliness, been very like it, but have proved apes only, not really good; as
there must be a presence, so a cooperation also. The Scripture commands the
putting forth of such graces that to mere nature are inconsistent, they never
act one but they prejudice the other. Thus we are to come with bold assurance
to the throne of grace, and yet we must be in holy fear and trembling; so we
must have repentance and faith, godly sorrow and godly joy together, we must
have prudence and zeal accompanying one another; now who is godly if these
things be so?

8. This will appear in the miscarriages of so many, who have put fair for
heaven, 8.
and yet fell short. Oh if grace and salvation had been an easy haven, men
could easily have got into it! why have so many suffered shipwreck in the
havens mouth? What was Judas, what was Jehu, what the foolish Virgins, what the
second and third kind of hearers? Did they not do much and suffer much, and
yet at last proved blazing comets ending in slime, not fixed stars? Oh me
thinks you should all stand and tremble to see them wallowing in their souls
blood, as they did at Asahel in his bodies blood.

9. The strict and accurate endeavors of the godly, argue they concluded on
this principle, 9.
that it was difficult to get to heaven. I made a Covenant with my eyes, says
Job, Job 31. 1. I set a watch before my tongue, said. David, Psalm. 141. 3. I
keep down my body, says Paul, lest I become a reprobate, 1 Cor. 9. 27. Think
of this and tremble, whose affections and thoughts on good things are by the by
only. Its hard for the poor man to get wealth, for a languishing sick man to
get health, but above all for a man to get grace, and when he has it to keep
it.

SECT. IIII. Wherein is handled the Nature of sanctifying Grace under the Title
of Regeneration with the counterfeit thereof.
SERMON XXXIV.
Showing what the New Birth or Regeneration is.

JOHN 3. 3. Jesus answered and said, Verily, Verily, unless a man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of Heaven.
OUr work formerly has been to show the possibility of knowing our selves to
be in the state of grace, as also the lawfullnesse of proceeding by signs: We
have also discovered what are true signs, and what insufficient. The next thing
therefore in order is to handle the nature of the state of grace, which because
the Scripture expresses in several words, all which have a peculiar notion
with them, we shall take them in order:

And first I shall begin with the expression of regeneration or new birth, out
of these words, which are part of a remarkable History, viz, a Dialogue between
Christ and Nicodemus; wherein is in a most lively manner represented the
ignorance and stupidity even of the most learned and knowing men about the work
of regeneration; and certainly it is of infinite consequence that the holy
Ghost has left a full testimony of the stupidity of those in this matter who
were reputed the Masters of Israel.

In the Text you have a Proposition, unless a man be born again, etc, then the
asseveration, verily, verily. It Is observed that whereas other Evangelists use
this asseveration seldom, or if so, singly only. The Evangelist John for the
most part doubleth it: some assign one cause, some another, but it may be
attributed to the peculiar disposition of John, for the Spirit of God uses
their peculiar abilities to his work.

In the next place there is the occasion of these words, implied in that, Jesus
answered, for it does not appear to what words of Nicodemus Christ does answer,
and therefore the ground of this speech seems very difficult to find out. In
the New Testament to answer is sometimes no more then to begin to speak, not
denoting any relation to a discourse going before: but here it may well be
connected to the words before: Either thus, as some, Thou think, Nicodemus,
I am a mere Prophet only, Thou look upon me only as a man sent from God,
verily thou can not perceive or discern any more, unless thou art
regenerated. Others think more probably that Nicodemus after that honorable
compellation given our Savior, did then enquire how he might be made partaker
of the Kingdom of heaven, only the Evangelist did not relate it, because our
Saviors answer did sufficiently manifest it.

We come then to the Proposition, where is considerable, 1. the subject, then
the attribute: The subject, unless a man be born again, wherein mark the
universality, unless a man, he does not say, Unless thou, including hereby
every one: And be born again, he does not say, be healed, or cured, or restored
to health, but born again; The greek word (...) some make from above, as it is
used afterward in the Chapter: but it is plain that it signifies as much as
(...), by the reply of Nicodemus, how can a man be born the second time: The
attribute is, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, that is, possess it, as the
Latinists say, cernere haereditatem, by this is meant, not the present
dispensation of grace, but future glory in heaven.

Without regeneration there is no salvation. Observe. No salvation without
regeneration.


It is not enough to be born once naturally, but we must be also a second time
spiritually. The main thing to clear this doctrine, will be to show what
regeneration is, and I shall do that first negatively, then positively:

What it is not. What regeneration is not. 1.


And first, It is not as Nicodemus grossly conceived, a second entering into the
womb; It Is a wonder that Nicodemus a learned man, not in Aristotle, or humane
arts, but in the Law of God, in the Scriptures, where he had read of a new
heart, and taking away the heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36. 26. yet should apprehend
no better: but though a man could in a natural way be born a thousand times
over, yet such is that abominable defilement and pestilential contagion in
every one, that this natural being can be no more made glorious in heaven then
a black coal a glorious Star. Thus our Savior afterward showing the ground
of regeneration, says, That which is born of the flesh, is flesh. What a folly
then is it to glory in a man's birth, a Prince, a Nobleman, a Gentleman by
birth! for though these have privileges among men, yet they do not exempt from
curses before God: Oh that those who glory in their blood could discover well
the works of Gods Spirit in them, and this is universally true, even of those
who have excellent, ingenious, good natures, such as Bonaventure of whom by an
hyperbole it was said, In hoc homine non peccavit Adam: This good nature, this
kind, this ingenious nature must be born from above; It must not only have
external culture and dressing, but internal alteration, and without that it
burns in hell as well as others.

Secondly, Its not, in another extremity, to have a new physical being, As not
to lose the essentials we had of a soul and the faculties thereof: some have
confusedly 2.
talked of a transubstantiation into the being of God, and tells us of a strange
deification, or being made God with God. These men have affected uncouth and
obsolete expressions, as the Paracelsians do in Physic: No, though born of
God, yet not made God, only we have the image of God in us, and that which is
by way of substance in him is only by accident in us. It is true, the Scripture
calls it a divine nature, 1 Pet. 1. 4. a new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. the
inward man, and this made Illyricus with his followers at least in words to
err, (for some excuse his sense) when he said, The substance of a man is
corrupted, and so his substance must be changed. It Is true the Scripture uses
such expressions to show how real, intimate, and fixed the work of grace is;
It Is not a notion, it is not a fancy; No more then to be a man, to live, to
speak, to eat is. Thus grace where it is, makes a wonderful alteration, though
not in the essence, yet in the qualities and operations of a man, so that in a
Theological sense he is wholly a new man, he is not the same he was: and this
is discovered as really and powerfully in him, as when Adam out of nothing was
made a man: Take heed then of being in the number of those who account all the
change wrought by Gods Spirit in a man, to be only a melancholy fancy, and
attribute all to such cloudy imaginations, or else speak of it, as a particular
constitution and temperament of the body: No, The Scripture would never call
grace by such real powerful names, if it had not also as real and powerful
effects: so that regeneration is a real, supernatural change in a man, as
when of dead a man is made alive, of foolish, wise; not a relative change, as
when a man is made an Husband or Magistrate, wherein his principles and heart
are not altered.

Thirdly, It Is more then an outward acceptance and acknowledgement of the
ways of Christ. For though this seem to be a great conversion, dead men begin
3.
to live, yet our Savior extends his sense further: so universal and
general as corruption has been, so extensive must the restoration of the
soul be. The Jews called their Proselytes recens natos, newborn; but to be a
Proselyte externally, not inwardly changed in our natures, is not this
regeneration in the Text: Therefore this new birth is the greatest riddle in
the world, even to those who may outwardly very readily submit to the ways of
Christ: why then do men rest satisfied in this external profession, as if
nothing else were more required? May not Christ look upon thee as he did on the
fig tree, see leaves but no fruit, and so eternally curse thee? Thou, though
turned from Paganism or Popery, yet art not newborn, till God has changed
that Tigers nature of thine into a Lamb; say then, O Lord, I do not only desire
new eyes, new ears, new hands, but a new heart, and a new nature.

Fourthly, This is not that moral and civil deportment of a man's self, which
may be attained by humane precepts and helps of Philosophy. Although Heathens 4.
have called the new moulding of our lives, a new birth: and Nobis ad arbitrium
nostrum nascilicet, said Seneca, we may be born what we will; yet this is far
short of that heavenly and spiritual birth the Scripture discovers, so that as
our Savior of all subjects thought this most necessary to insist upon with
Nicodemus: the like ought the Ministers of Gods Word to do: for seeing all
people generally are so full of self-righteousnesse, please themselves in a
moral, ingenious carriage, this ought again and again to sound in their ears,
Unless a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Now
though this be so confessedly neceslary by Scripture grounds, yet who searches
deeper into his heart, and who looks further into his own soul, then a mere
external righteousness? if this were so, regeneration might be found in
Aristotle's and Plato's School, as well as Christ's, but its the property of Gods
word only to beget this new nature in us: Our Savior means not, unless a
profane man only be born again, but also unless a mere civil man, and
outward virtuous man be born again, he cannot be saved.

Fifthly, Neither are those common gifts and graces which sometimes are
bestowed upon reprobates, this regeneration: Judas was not born again though he
had 5.
power to work miracles, and was enabled to preach the Gospel of Christ. It is
not with man as trees, every leaf and blossom argues some life in the tree;
but not in man, every ability to preach, to pray, though with great
approbation, does not manifest supernatural life. These indeed come from
Christ inabling us and assisting us, but not dwelling in us: such as these are
abortives or monsters, they are in a probable way of being born again, but
prove unshapen, sometimes by deficiency, sometimes by redundancy, and sometimes
these have pains and pangs of heart, their souls are in travel, as if Christ
would be formed in them, but at last there is nothing but wind and emptiness,
the issue of them, so that if you consider what this regeneration is not, you
will find excluded from this number, most of those who yet externally account
themselves in Christ's flock, and children in his house: do not therefore judge
spiritual parts and head-abilities any such great matter, for if these come
not from a new heart within, if they are not streams flowing from this
fountain, they will vanish like vapors, and be but as the garlands of flowers
that were upon the beasts that were near sacrificing: Oh but how is this work
of regeneration and gracious mercy of God now neglected? Who attends to it?
Who in the midst of these several opinions that fly abroad in the world,
minds this necessary thing?

In the next place, let us consider wherein this lies: and that in the
general we Wherein regeneration lies.
may say is the restoration in some measure of that image of God, in which we
were created: Adam was made after Gods image and likeness, Genesis 1. 27. holy as
he was, Ephesians. 4. 24. called therefore the Son of God, Luke 3. 38. This consisted
in an universal rectitude of the whole man, in an holy frame of all the parts,
faculties, and affections in a man: now when Adam fell, this curious
workmanship was broken to pieces; no part, no affections could do their duty:
grace therefore regenerating is to restore and repair these breaches again: The
blinded understanding is enlightened, The contumacious will obedient, The stony
heart softened, The unruly affections crucified, so that this grace of
regeneration makes the most excellent alteration and wonderful change that can
be. It Is far more then raising the bodies out of the grave, and making them
incorruptible and glorious, and certainly if the people so wondered to see a
lame cripple walk, a blind man see, how ought we to admire the greatness of
Gods power in this supernatural change? Now this Image of God had these
remarkable things in it; There was an universal harmony and proportion of all
graces; for it is not the Image of a man if there be only the head or the
hands, there must be the proportion of the whole body; so in this work of
regeneration there must be an universal alteration: Every part must be born
again, as well as every part is corrupted and every part shall be glorified.
Then again in this Image there is likeness and resemblance, for so to be an
image, is a relative thing, and therefore by this we are said to be born of
God, to be children of God, because we have an heavenly disposition, love what
he loves, delight in what he delights, hate what he hates. Even as wicked
men are said to be of their Father the devil, Joh. 8. 44. because they do his
works, they lie, are malicious to the godly, resist and oppose the means of
grace, as Satan: Thus the godly are of God their Father, because his works they
do, are holy as he is, merciful as he is, righteous as he is, though with a
vast disproportion. Lastly, There was connaturallity and sutablenesse of this
image with man's nature, insomuch that Divines call that righteousness
natural, not in respect of the principles from whence it came, for so it was
supernatural, but the subject unto whom it was a due perfection, supposing
Gods will to create man for the enjoying of himself, even as his soul also may
be said to be due to him; Now although this regeneration be to us
supernatural, and wholly of mere grace, yet when it is in fused, it makes such
a change that the ways of God are a delight to him, I delight in the Law of
God in the inward man: There is a sweet proportion between the heart that is
made an holy subject, and the Law of God which is an holy object.

But more particularly let us consider the nature of it.

First, This new birth makes grace to be in us by way of an infused life, and
supernatural principle, fixed, and permanent; It gives a man esse
supernaturale, a supernatural 1.
being: Therefore is it called the hidden man, the inward man, 1 Pet. 3. 4. The
new creature, the divine nature. It Is compared to a root, to a fountain, to a
foundation; and now for want of this, we see so much inconstancy and
unsetlednesse in the matters of religion and piety. Men have not a new nature,
they have only new notions, or new motions, not new natures. When grace becomes
thus a rooted principle in us, then though the winds and storms blow, a man
will continue firm: Aristotle observed some men had a disposition to moral
virtues, but not an habit, now this disposition he made easily separable from
the subject, whereas the other made a man like a square stone, which ways
soever it falls, it will stand sure: You have some bruit creatures that act
many things like men, but because they have not an humane nature they are still
brutish, and so many things may be done in the way of holiness, which yet
come not from that inward principle of renovation, and therefore is but copper
and not gold: Oh let us not then consider so much the outward actions, the
outward duties of religion, as that root from whence they grow, that principle
from whence they come, are they fixed, settled ones by way of life in thee? then
art thou born of God.

Secondly, By this means a man does participate of God; and whereas we cannot
be like God in his greatness, infiniteness, omnipotency, we are like him in
this, 2.
Be ye holy, for I am holy: Lev. 11. 44. As therefore in God, the Angels, of
all Gods attributes do especially celebrate that, Holy, Holy, Holy, Isa. 6. 3.
so of all considerations in man this is his greatest glory: it is not wealth but
holiness, it is not honors but holiness, it is not prudence and wisdom, but
holiness. This new nature is a participation of God (so far as creatures can
partake) in that glorious attribute of his: Magistrates they are called Gods,
because of that external authority God has stamped on them, and because they
resemble him herein, but the people of God resemble him in a more excellent and
admirable way. The Apostle calls it bearing the image of the heavenly, 1 Cor.
15. 48. Hence come those expressions of setting our affections on things above,
and sitting with Christ in heavenly places. This is a wonderful elevation and
lifting up of the nature of man: As the humane nature of Christ was infinitely
glorified to be hypostatically united unto the divine nature, so it is a great
honor for man to be graciously united to Christ, whereby as the branch
receiving juice from the Vine, brings forth fruit suitable to the nature of the
Vine, so the soul ingrafted into Christ produces operations suitable thereunto.

Thirdly, Hereby the work of (...) grace is manifested to be a real, active,
working thing in a man: for why is it compared to life, to a new birth, to a
fountain, but 3.
only to show that these things are not imaginations or dreams, but carry along
with them real operations? As a man cannot have fire in his bosom, but he
will quickly find it scorching and heating there, so (...) man cannot have
this new nature infused into him, but it will incline and move the soul, not
suffering it to lie still: see what a fire this kindled in David's, and Paul's
hearts, therefore the spirit of regeneration, Isa 4. is compared to (...)
spirit of burning, which like fire consumes the dross, a godly man is said to
(...) rivers of water running out of his belly. It Is true the people of God are
some (...)es in desolations, in desertions, they feel no life, they apprehend
no power of (...)e upon their souls, and then they look upon themselves as dry
bones, withered (...)anches: but this is for a while only, this is a
temptation, and afterward the (...) of grace will manifest it self more: The
Tree though it has life in it, yet in the winter buds not, blossoms not, so
neither may that principle of grace discover it self in its good effects, and
then it does not hold, that a good tree may be known by its good fruit: Thus
Austin in his confessions does acknowledge these real and powerful motions of
God upon his soul.

Fourthly, Because his nature is new, his actions (...) are new: all Old things
are passed away, 2 Cor. 5. 18. Paul that once persecuted (...)ehold he prays,
and such were some of you (says Paul) but ye are washed, but y^ are cleansed;
As every man 4.
is (says Aristotle) so is he affected, so he speaks, and so he lives; When
therefore thy life is supernatural, so thy affections, thy word^, thy
conversation is also: The life that I now live, is by faith in the son of God;
says Paul, Gal. 2. 20. Oh this is a sad symptom, that few are acquainted with
regeneration, because all things else are not made new in them: They have the
old conversation, the old affections, the old discourse, the old passions (...)
used to have: This argues thee to be in the state of bitterness still. There
cannot from a sweet fountain come only bitter streams, so neither can there
come from a refined spirit only corrupted actions. As the thorn cannot send
forth grapes, so neither do grapes send forth thorns; why then if thou art born
of God, do thou discover so much of the old man in thee? why is the Egyptian
in Canaan? this is as the Father said, for coelum pluere gehennam, in another
case: did grace and Christ dwell in thy soul, were it possible that thy heart
should be a den of lusts, and a cage of unclean imaginations? shake off
therefore all negligence and lukewarmnesse, observe how thou art changed,
whether it be otherwise with thee then what thou have by nature.

Fifthly, As the actions of this newborn man are new, so are his desires,
comforts, 5.
contentments: Whereas before he could with the Prodigal be content with
busks, now nothing will satisfy him but his fathers mansion, and his fathers
feasts. Take every natural man, while unregenerated, as he knows no other
good, so he desires no other then that of the creature, as Moles love the
earth, and the Swine draught. Thus while we are corrupted in our estates, we
mind only earthly things, but when this great change is made, then these
cockelshels are grown away; then the favor of God, the light of his
countenance, society with him, and enjoying of him, are the only desires of his
soul; Thus David his heart, his flesh, and all breathe after the living God,
Psa. 84. 2. Thou will not judge it such an happy thing to be wealthy, great and
honored in the world, but to have the light of Gods favor shine round about
thee. Examine therefore thy self. Do thousee the glory of the world, and thou
fallest down to worship it? Do thou in the increase of worldly comforts say,
It is good for us to be bare. Then fear thy self, say, When I was a child,
it is no wonder, I thought, spoke as a child; but when a man, other
apprehensions came in: When thou wast unregenerated thou spakest like a
natural man, thou thoughtest like him, but now God has made thee a spiritual
man.

Sixthly, Being thus new born, he is carried out with afiliall affection in his
obedience to God: All his service is sweetened with a great deal of love,
delight and joy. 6.
What he does for God, he does it not slavishly, servilely, as heretofore,
enforced thereunto, but from an Evangelicall and kindly principle within. Thus
those that are new creatures are said not to be under the Law, but under Grace.
The Law is a rule to them, so they are under it, but the Law is not only a whip
and a scourge to them, so that they should pray; hear, do things out of
constraint: yet this filial confidence and love is also accompanied with a
reverentiall fear, and holy awe of God, so that from the one he is encouraged,
from the other he walks humbly. Now from this spirit of Adoption all our
duties should arise. Prayer is but a bitter crab, or a wild grape, unless the
Spirit of Adoption sweeten it, and so of all other duties; if then we be born
of God, his presence, his favor is dear to us, our approaches unto the Throne
of grace are with holy assurance, we call God Abba, Father, by ingemination, to
show partly the efficacy and intention of this spirit upon us, and partly the
opposition that is made by the guilt and blackness which is upon our own souls.

Seventhly, Where there is this new birth, there a man is not only above sin,
to eschew and hate that, but also above the world, and all immoderate
affections thereunto, 7.
Ephesians. 3. it is called the life of God, not only because he works it, but because
it imitates his life. Hence in the Scripture not only transgressions are made
contrary to this life, but also the Love of father, mother, or any thing that
is dear unto us, Mat. 10. 37. so that it is a poor thing for a man thus
regenerated to say, he loves God more then sin, more then the lusts of the
flesh; he does also embrace him more then outward comforts in the world; Thou
therefore who hopest thou art a child of God, why is thy soul thus bowed down
to the creatures? why art thou so disparaging and debasing that heavenly nature
of thine? thou art not made a worm to crawl on the earth, not a serpent to lick
the dust of the ground, but thou art made like unto God, to love what he
loves, to delight in what he delights in: Do not then labor after an
impossibility, which is to serve God and Mammon, to bring heaven and earth
together. No if this new nature be infused into thee, it makes thee above
trade, wealth, friends, honor, life; It fills thy heart with such heavenly
inclinations, that as the stone cannot hang in the empty air, but hasteneth to
its center, so the regenerated heart cannot abide in any thing on this side
God; Whom have I in heaven but thee, and whom on earth but thee?

Eighthly, This birth is inexpressible: He that is thus born again, cannot
declare 8.
how, so our Savior afterward, The spirit or wind blows where it lists,
and thou know not whence it comes, or whither it goes. As a man
understands not how fearfully and wonderfully he is made in his mothers womb;
so neither how admirably God does put these inclinations and dispositions into
his soul: How is it that he who was backward, yea, an enemy to what was good,
yet now with all delight follows it? motum scimus, modum nescimus, we find
these great changes made upon us, but cannot declare how: From this also it
comes about that we cannot express it to another, only experimentally feel it
in our selves: As a man cannot express to another what it is to live, only he
feels the motions of his life in himself: Thus also he cannot tell to another
what that new life, that new birth is, what that power of God is which he has
felt in his soul: but says as the blind man to the Pharisees concerning
Christ, I know not how he made me whole, only this I know, I that was once
blind, do now see, Joh. 9. and so here, I know not how it comes about that I
am thus altered, I cannot tell how I am changed, only this I know, I that was
not afraid to sin, now I am; I that did not delight in God, now do.

Ninthly, In that the Scripture calls this regeneration, a birth again, It Is a
metaphor, 9. A resemblance between the natural and spiritual birth. I.
and so would give us to conceive some resemblance between the natural and the
spiritual birth, I shall touch upon some most evident.

First, Here is in this new birth God a Father, Therefore often said to be born
of God, and children of God. This as it denotes our impotency, for if we
cannot make our natural selves much less can we make our supernatural
selves; so it also manifests the great power and efficacy of Gods grace,
which says to us as unto dead Lazarus, Come forth out of the grave of sin:
Every godly man is an Isaac, a child of the promise, for he is born only by
the mere power and grace of God: Man's free will is Sarahs dead womb; It is
Philo's allegory upon that of Jacob to Rachel, Am I a God (says he) that I can
give children? so says he, God only puts grace and virtue into the womb of the
soul; We may say to Pelagians and Arminians, Are we Gods that we can raise the
dead, give life where there is none? This is good to be observed, for there is
scarce any doctrine more pernicious to the glory of God then this, whereby we
shall be Creators of the new creatures. We cannot make a fly, and yet we think
we can make our selves godly. Oh therefore look up to heaven, and say, O Lord
new make me, new create me.

Secondly, The seed or means by which this new birth is accomplished, is the
Word II.
of God preached: Thus often, he has begotten by his word, Jam. 1. 18. and it
is that whereby we are quickened; Take all humane eloquence, all Philosophical
precepts, they do no more then the Prophets servant to the dead child, though
laid upon him, yet it would not bring life into him, his master must come ere
there can be life. Alas, to instruct men with arguments from reason about a
good life, such as the heathens are very busy to persuade men by; they turn
not, or alter the heart. The Word of God is that two-edged sword, is that fire,
that hammer, that seed, that Manna, which serves to subdue sin, and to quicken
up to grace. Oh therefore how careful should people be both to get and to live
under the preaching of Gods Word! This is the wind that must make dry bones
live: This is the voice of a trump, that must make the dead come out of the
grave. How mean, impotent, contemptible, men may esteem it, yet God has
appointed no other means to convey supernatural life, but after this manner.
Therefore where no vision is, the people perish, where no preaching is there
cannot but be a worse judgment then that of Egypt, where there was one dead in
every family; Alas there all must needs be dead in every family. This new life
comes by preaching.

Thirdly, As the natural birth is with many pangs and troubles; In sorrow they
III.
shall bring forth, Thus also is this new man wrought in us with much agony and
trouble, many a heart-ach, many a violent trouble of soul, ere Christ be formed
in us. Hence as when Christ was born all Jerusalem was troubled, so when this
new life is infused into a man, much commotion, much division of heart. The
devil when he was cast out of the possessed person, did more tear, torment, and
vex the possessed person, when he was going out: so grace expelling Satan from
those holds and dominions he had over thee, puts thee to great fears, raises
more terrors in the heart. Besides that Christ and the way of grace may be the
more welcome and precious, Gods spirit is for a while a spirit of bondage, to
make every thing a burden, sin a burden, our lives a burden, our shops burdens,
our fields burdens, that so there may be the greater joy for this manchilde
that is born. A woman cannot bring forth in her sleep, or in a dream, without
feeling pain, so neither can the heart of a man be thus new changed, and molded
without several pangs, yet we do not limit this to such degrees, nor to every
person in such a sensible manner.

Fourthly, As this natural life at first infused is the root of all vital
actions, and IV.
if any thing proceed not from this, it is dead; so this supernatural life is
the foundation of all vital actions in grace, and whatsoever is not from this
root, cannot be called a living action. If a man prays, if he hears, and
this not flow from the principle of regeneration, it is not accounted in the
number of spiritual actions. When therefore thou set upon the exercise of
religious duties, still consider from what life this proceeds; for thy
hearing, thy praying, thy family duties may come from education, custom, formal
devotion, but not from this divine life. Therefore this is the only necessary
thing, if thou have lived to threescore years, and this new principle not
infused into thee, thou have not yet done one acceptable duty. As the Apostle
speaks of a dead faith, Jam. 2. 26. so there are dead duties, dead
performances, and our auditory may most consist of dead men. You see Clocks and
other artificial instruments have their motions, but they are not motions of
life, because not from a principle of life within, and on such motions may all
the religious exercise of thy soul be; and hereby men perform holy duties, as
Caiaphas prophesied, not knowing what he said. So that regeneration in holy
duties is like the soul in the body, which gives life and acceptance, and all
to it.

Now there are two obstructions which hinder men both from the knowledge of
Obstructions hindering men from the knowledge of the necessity of this, and
desire after it. 1.
the necessity of this, and an earnest desire to obtain it.

The first is, Ignorance of that woeful depravation and defilement which is
upon us through sin. As long as men know not themselves to be beggars, they
will never cry out, unclean, unclean. As long as Nicodemus knows not that he
is altogether flesh and in his sins, the whole doctrine of regeneration is a
mystery. Men therefore that would be edified into this high building, must
begin with this deep and low foundation. He that does not groan and sigh under
all those soars and ulcers that are upon him by nature, will never seek after
this glorious change. Therefore thou that buildest duty upon duty, exercise
upon exercise, and have not first begun here, though thy building be as
glorious as that of the Temple at Jerusalem was, yet the time will come, when a
stone will not be left upon a stone: And it is much to be feared that generally
people are in a wrong way to heaven; they think the flesh and blood they were
born in will bring them to heaven, and therefore, when you may hear many talk
of repentance, of serving of God, of amendment of our lives, yet not one among
many speaks of regeneration, and the necessity thereof, and the first rise of
this calamity is because they are ignorant of Original sin.

The second obstruction is, A self-fulness, an heart puffed up with humane
excellencies, 2.
which indeed are but as the grass and the flower of the field; for so Peter
having spoken of this incorruptible nature we attain unto, he makes it more
excellent than any humane power, prudence or righteousness, 1 Pet. 1. 24.
because all this fades, but the Word of God which begets this new nature
abides for ever; and therefore of all the things in the world, which John
Baptist was especially to pr^claim aloud, as to make way for Christ, was that,
All flesh is grass, which the Prophet understands not so much of our
mortality, and vain ^ives, as of our righteousness, humane excellency, and
whatsoever has repute in* this world: upon this ground it was, that the
Pharisees were so ignorant about this, that if we read among the Schoolmen,
men of great parts and strong abilities, we shall find very little, or nothing
at all of Regeneration; yea, if we read the Popish Authors whether Doctrinal,
or Devotional, we shall not find any thing at all about this new Birth; and
whence is this? Because some of them are busied with high and sublime
Disputations, some in the external Rites and Ceremonies of Religion, and these
puffing up the heart in a fleshly manner, they are no fit Disciples to receive
this great Truth about Regeneration.

Use 1. Is there such a necessity of Regeneration, then let young men and old
Use 1.
men, rich men and poor, profane and civil, have their ears tingle, or
rather their hearts wounded at this: It may be thou art an old man ready to
fall in the Grave, and art not thou acquainted with this new Birth? It may be
thou art a Doctor and Master in Israel, and art thou not convinced of this? Oh
blind souls, how near are you destruction, and you are not aware of it! Thou
can in time of sickness, in fears of death, to thy prayers, to thy tears, to
the Sacrament it may be; thou call for a good Book to be read to thee, a
good Minister to come to thee, but ah Miserable soul, all the work is still to
do within; say once therefore this Text unto thy soul, Unless I be born again
I cannot enter into heaven. Born again, O Lord what is that! Was ever such a
thing done upon me! Oh I fear the contrary; if I were born of God, I could not
grovell thus on the earth, I could not wallow thus in filth. You Parents, you
labor to have your Children born to great Estates, to large Revenues; oh, but
how shall these Children of yours curse the womb that bare them, and the
breasts that gave them suck, if they have not their new Birth?

Use 2. Is the Word preached thus the means of this new Birth; then let us Use
2.
lament the miscarriage of the Ministry in these latter days. Who are born
again by it? What has God no more people to be saved in England? has God no
more in London to come to eternal life, that no more are by the Word begotten
anew? Few Ministers can say with Isaiah, Behold I and the Children whom the
Lord has given me; few People can say, You are our Fathers who have begotten
us in the Lord; you may say, We have many Instructors, but few Fathers, as the
Apostle in another case.

This is the reproach and grief of the Ministry, but it is no Argument (as some
would enforce) of the nulli^y, or unlawfullnesse of it; or if it be, it will
prove their Ministry who use this Argument as unlawful as any. This is the
great end of the Ministry, and as the Sun shines in vain to blind men, the
Clouds drop in vain upon hard rocks, so is the Word preached in vain, and
people hear in vain, where this great alteration follows not: The
profaneness, ignorance and universal unsavouriness in men's spirits, do
sufficiently proclaim to all the world, that the Lord has given us dry
breasts, and miscarrying wombs.

SERMON XXXV.
Showing how ignorant men of great Learning and outward Righteousness in the
world, may be of Regeneration.

JOHN 3. 10. Art thou a Master of Israel, and know not these things?
WE have already defined the nature of Regeneration, and before we come to the
discovery of the counterfeits thereof, there are other observable things in
this colloquie with Nicodemus, that should not be pretermitted: I shall
therefore in the next place, discourse of the ignorance and stupidity of
Nicodemus about this great work of God, which our Savior with much severity
does reprove him for in my Text. Nicodemus does several times manifest his
gross blindness in this point, while he discourses with our Savior.

First, He understands our Savior of a natural birth again, by going the
second time into the mothers womb; our Savior therefore confirms his
assertion the second time, and withal explicates the ground of this
regeneration, because all are naturally corrupted, yet for all this, Nicodemus
marvelleth at it.

Lastly, Our Savior does by a familiar example from the wind, show the work of
regeneration, and for all this, Nicodemus is not satisfied.

But a Third time, verse 9. he cries out, How can these things be? Whereupon
our Savior upbraideth him with his ignorance, not by way of contumelious
insultation, but to humble this Pharisees, who being puffed up with the opinion of
his learning and righteousness, could not at all discern of this grace: now
our Saviors reprehension is very emphatical, Art thou a Master? not a
Disciple, not one of the vulgar sort, but a Master? And as some consider the
Article, Art thou the Master? Or that Master? As if this Nicodemus among all
the Teachers in Israel had the greatest repute: Then, Art thou a Master of
Israel? A people that were especially called by God, and taught by him; the
most knowing people of the world in respect of Gods Law? Further, a Master of
Israel; all Israel was his scholar: not a Master of some Disciple, but of
Israel: And lastly, know not these things. He does not say, Not practice it,
not feel the power of it on thy own heart: but thou have not so much as the
bare historical knowledge of it: So that this speech of our Saviors is a sad
rebuke, and reproach to all the carnal wisdom, and self-righteousness of men,
which is like the Bat or Owl to the Sun, when it comes to these spiritual
things. I have observed that men in discourse, will merely apply this to
ordinary matters: Art thou a Master in Israel, and know not these things?
They will say so of any news, or customs discoursed of: but the truth is, this
Text should be matter of fear and trembling; for it does discover the horrible
opposition and enmity that is in men, to any heavenly work of God; As your bats
and owls can see well enough in the night but not in the day, so natural men
have parts, abilities, wisdom, quick apprehensions in the things of darkness,
matters of sin, and the world; but in the things of God, they are stark blind:
therefore says our Savior. If I tell you earthly things, and ye believe not,
how shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly? The sense is, If when I speak
of regeneration by earthly similitudes, and expressions obvious to the sense,
you are not able to apprehend them, How then if I should speak to you of
heavenly things, in an heavenly manner, without such sensible representations
at all?

Observation, That men of great Learning, and outward Righteousness Obs.
in the World, may yet be grossly ignorant about this great work of Regeneration.

Before we lay down the grounds of this ignorance in every natural man, we may
take notice of some particulars, as Introductory to the point: as,

First, That it is a most requisite, yea, necessary thing for every Minister
that is to 1. Introductory particulars. A Minister should be inwardly
acquainted with this Doctrine.
be a Teacher, and guide of others, to understand well, and be inwardly
acquainted with this Doctrine of a new birth. When our Savior says, Art thou
a Teacher, a Master of the people, and know not these things? he supposes
it was a great shame and reproach to him: And indeed, seeing the one principal
end of the Ministry is to beget men anew unto God, how can he be skilful in
that office, which is wholly unacquainted with the end of it? It is true, that
opinion of the Donatists: That an ungodly Minister is never used instrumentally
to the regeneration of others, is rejected as false. Judas, and those who
preached Christ out of envy, might be serviceable to bring others to Christ,
else Paul would not have rejoiced in it, Phil. 1. 19. although this it may be
is very rare; and as God in the Old Testament would have no Minister with any
bodily deformity, so in the New, without any soul-deformity; he must be
unblameable: we do not therefore dispute of the possibility, but it is very
rare for dead men, to beget living men; for ministers unexperienced in the life
of grace, to revive others: although this be so, yet it is the auditors duty,
as our Savior informs about the Scribes and Pharisees, To hear them as long
as they sit in Moses chair; but not to do what they do: for a man to neglect
good doctrine, because of the bad practice of the teacher, is as Austin well
says, as if a traveller that sees the post in the high way, that has an hand
to direct him on his journey, should not go forward because the post that
directs him does not go forward. But though these things are so; yet it is a
wonderful uncomfortable and deading thing to live under that preaching, which
is not discovering of a work of regeneration within: when a Minister speaks of
this great work, as some bragging men of the remorest part of the world, which
he has only by hearsay, or by books, not by experience in his travels. The
Minister must speak from the heart, else he cannot speak to the heart; as they
could not give any account of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which had not so
much as heard whether there was an holy Ghost or no; so those Ministers are
never able to give direction, consolation to the Godly in their temptations
about this, that know not the power of it in their own hearts. The Scripture
calls it, The tongue of the learned, to be able to speak a word in season, to
the broken and contrite in heart, Isa. 50. 4. This is necessary learning, more
then all humane knowledge, though that also be requisite.

Secondly, There is a twofold knowledge of regeneration, the one is merely
speculative, 2. A twofold knowledge of regeneration.
and Theoreticall, the other is Practical and Experimental. A Speculative
knowledge, is when a man is convinced in judgment by several arguments and
reasons, that there is a necessity of regeneration; but this knowledge is not
like Aarons oil, that descends from the head to other parts, but it only
lodges in the brain: Now Nicodemus had not so much as this speculative
knowledge, he had not so much as an historical assent with his mind, of the
necessity of such a spiritual change; whereas it was a great wonder, that he
who had read those promises of the taking away the heart of stone, and giving
an heart of flesh, of creating a new heart in, etc. could not easily be
convinced in this. But Nicodemus does not only question the necessity of it,
but the possibility also of it: he does not only think there is no such thing,
but there can be no such thing: whereas, he that knew God breathed a natural
life into Adam, when a lump of earth, might easily believe God able to infuse a
supernatural life: besides the Sacrament of Circumcision, and that legal
custom of Purification of Women, did teach as Original pollution, so a
necessity of cleansing and washing. But besides this speculative, there is also
a practical knowledge, when a man finds the sweet and lively power of this
upon his own heart. You have many a learned man that is very orthodox in his
judgment, who by considering the reasons and disputes on all sides, is
convinced of a necessity of regeneration, and hereby he can preach for it,
write for, and dispute for it: but yet this man does no more, then as he that
should say honey is sweet, when he never tasted of it: And so as Moses saw the
land of Canaan, but never entered into it, so these discern afar off this work
of grace, but are never possessors of it: when therefore both these kinds of
knowledge concur together, speculative and experimental, when he can feel it in
heart, as well as read it in books, this makes a man a fit teacher to others.

Thirdly, As this knowledge is requisite in the Doctor, so also in the
Disciple, otherwise 3.
the choicest and chiefest matter in all religion, is preached in vain. The
Apostle says, He had rather speak five words with understanding, then five
hundred in an unknown tongue: and it is the Ministers desire to speak a little
of those Mysteries of Grace to men that can go along with them, then much to
those that understand nothing at all. Had not our Savior been meek and humble,
he would not have born the indociblenesse of Nicodemus: The Apostle complains
he could not speak unto the Corinthians as spiritual, but as carnal, 1 Cor. 3.
1. To preach to dead men, to throw pearls to swine, how unsuitable is it? There
are many Auditors, that if you preach about controversal matter, or the times,
or any moral matter, they are quick and intelligent; but if you explain, and
insist upon this work of regeneration, there they lose you. As they themselves
never felt the power of it, so they do not at all attend to the Doctrine of it:
He that has ears to hear, let him hear; no man has an hearing ear, or a
seeing eye, or an understanding heart, till this supernatural life be infused.

These things being laid down, we proceed to show the grounds of this
ignorance, The grounds of this ignorance.
and gross mistake in matters of Godliness: and

First, They do not understand it, because they are ignorant of that universal
and deep pollution, which sin has plunged them into. Hence was the ground of
Nicodemus his mistake: therefore our Savior discovers the foundation when he
says, That which is born of the flesh, is flesh. As Nicodemus was thus
ignorant, so Paul also was as much out of the way: for he was a long time er'e
he was persuaded of that inward latent venom that was in him, and thereupon
must needs see no necessity of a new birth. Would thou therefore come to
have thy eyes opened? Thy heart awakened so, as to prize an inward Renovation,
or a new change of thy heart? study more, meditate more upon that Native
uncleanness; Say, How can this flesh and blood inherit heaven? How can this
uncleanness put on glory? Is there any sutablenesse between thy depraved
heart, and eternal happiness in Heaven? Can that mind of thine think glorious
things of God? Can that heart of thine rejoice in the goodness of God? If not,
then say, O Lord, make me all new.

And certainly, if the Apostle to those whom he supposes regenerated, says,
Put off the old man, and put on the new, because of those relics and
remainders of corruptions which are within us, Ephesians. 4. how much rather is
this to be pressed upon those wholly wallowing in their natural blood: Put off
the old man, says the Apostle: Austin makes it an allusion to the snake that
puts off her old skin; but that is not enough, the inward poisonous nature, as
well as the skin must be put off. Marvel not therefore if ye see men no more
sollicitous about this new birth, if their hearts, desires, and earnest prayers
are no more after it; for as long as men are blind in this point, viz.
Original sin, they will also be blind to the other, viz. Regeneration. Upon
this account it is, that of all men, moral men, civil virtuous men, are very
remote from, yea opposite unto this great change: For they of all men are least
affected with their blots, and spotted nature: they having no actual gross
sins to humble themselves, do not see that heart-filthinesse, and soul
deformity which is upon them. Oh, therefore entreat God to give the spirit of
illumination to see thy self, that the hidden corners of darkness within thee,
may be manifested unto thy self.

A Second ground of this gross blindeness, is self-righteousness and
self-fulness. Nicodemus 2.
was puffed up with that external legal righteousness, which he constantly
performed, and therefore thought nothing more was requisite to him. Thus the
Pharisees being full of their prayers, alms-deeds, and religious fasts, settled
their hopes upon these; and therefore our Savior preaches very suitable,
though strange Doctrine, when he bids them make all clean within, and the tree
must be good, before the fruit be good: What is that but to say, their persons
must be regenerated, before they can do any holy action? This self-fulnesse
does not only cross the grace of justification, as the Jews, who would
establish their own righteousness, submitted not to the righteousness of
Christ; but also the grace of regeneration; for that which is accounted already
whole, already sound, what need it go to the Physician to be healed? Thus
Laodicea because she thought her self rich, full, and lacking of nothing,
therefore she was the more miserable and wretched, Rev. 3. 15. The heart
affected with self-love, and self-righteousnesse, promises nothing but mercy,
and happiness to it self, will not endure to be found a sinner, or to have
iniquity discovered; now this self-righteousness is that, which bears up the
heart of every unregenerate man, otherwise it were impossible that under the
spiritual discovery of all his filth and poverty, he should ever be able to sit
still, to eat, or sleep because of the wrath of God compassing him round about.
Take therefore away this rubbish, and then a good building may quickly be
reared; otherwise here is Laesum principium, the very principles of a man are
corrupted; and what good can we then expect? Christ cast out all the Timbrels,
and Musicians, er'e he would raise the dead; and thus must all thy carnal hopes
and carnal joys in thy self-righteousness, or in any other Creature be thrown
out, er'e he will raise thee from this spiritual death. Oh do not then be
prejudiced against this truth, by thinking in thy heart, If I yield my self to
be thus a sinner, if I abhor, and throw away all my righteousness, I shall then
despair, I shall be like one in the sea, without the least plank or board to
preserve my self: Do not fear this, for thou must feel thy self dead, er'e thou
be made alive; thou must look on thy self as undone, before thou can be
saved. Is not the vessel broken into pieces and melted, er'e it can be new
molded? Must not the old house be pulled down, er'e the new one be raised up?
As the Apostle says, In matter of resurrection, we are loath to put off this
corruptible body; we would fain be clothed upon; we would have heaven without
dying; so we would be new born without pangs or sorrow.

Thirdly, Another ground of ignorance in the work of regeneration, is not
attending to the spiritual exactness and obligation of the law; for that does
not only require 3.
us to do those things that are good, but to do them from such an inward
principle of rectitude, and a divine original, that our hearts and affections
may be holy therein, as well as our conversation. Therefore the heart if good,
is called the good treasure, out of which all good things are to proceed: God
is not holy only in his providence, and outward administrations, but in his
nature also: As when any sin is forbidden in the commandment, the root and
cause of it is much more forbidden; so where an holy duty is required, the root
and cause of it is much more commanded; God therefore commands thee to love
him; but how? from a renewed heart; to be sorrowful for sin; but how? from a
changed heart; to pray, to hear, but still from a regenerated heart. Now men do
not attend to this; the law is spiritual, it reaches to the root, as well as
the branch, it looks more then to good fruit, it will also have a good tree. Oh
if men did drive the matter to this head, happily they would cry out, Ous,
hitherto in a wrong way? We must begin all again; we have prayed in vain, heard
in vain, professed in vain: we wanted a true foundation; we did not dig deep
enough, and therefore our house will fall. You have Paul excellently
discoursing upon this matter, experimentally in himself; and what wonderful
alterations he then found, when once he began to understand the spiritual
latitude of the Law, Romans 7.

Fourthly, Therefore do not men believe this, because they do not understand
the 4.
true nature of the Sacrament of Baptism, which if rightly understood, would
make every man see the necessity of regeneration. If the Pharisees had known
the end and use of the Sacrament of Circumcision, that would have led them into
the knowledge of their natural defilement, and the necessity of cutting it off.
Hence God promises to circumcise their hearts, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. and circumcision
was properly that of the spirit in the inward man, Romans 2. But the Jews they
rested wholly upon the external sign, and never regarded the thing signified.
Now Baptism in the New Testament, does also proclaim the necessity of this new
birth, called therefore the laver of regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. as some expound
it. And although it be much disputed, whether that expression of our Savior to
Nicodemus, Unless a man be born of the water and the spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven, be meant of Baptism, and the outward element in
that Ordinance: yet the very water which is commanded to be used by us in that
administration, does evidently signify the pollution of our natures, and so a
necessity of washing: For children that have no actual sins are washed, because
they have Original filthiness, so that regeneration is necessary to a young
infant. Who art thou, that because thou keep free from gross sins,
abstainest from the evils of the world, and therefore see not such a
necessity of regeneration? For if thou were as clean as the infant new born, If
thou had no more sins then that has; Yet this spirit of regeneration must
new mould thee, er'e thou can be a pollished stone in that heavenly
Jerusalem? But as it was with the Jews, so it is with us Christians: we rely on
Baptism, rest on the Sacrament administered, never considering whether we are
made partakers of that inward nature-washing or not.

Fifthly, Therefore men are stupid about this doctrine, because they consider
not 5.
Gods gracious promise which is made for this great work. Does not the Prophet
Jeremiah and Ezekiel speak often of giving a new heart, of writing his law in
our inward parts: Ezekiel. 18. Jer. 31? And do not other Scriptures speak of
circumcising their hearts, and turning their hearts? It was therefore much that
Nicodemus, who no doubt had read those places over and over again, did yet no
better understand it. But do not men so still? Read those Chapters, yea, hear
sermons that are made on purpose about it, and for all this go away, not
knowing what it means? Gods Evangelical promise is not to give new eyes, or
new hands only, but a new heart also: and truly herein is the omnipotency of
Gods grace seen, that it reaches to the spirits of men. It makes them know,
will, love, and delight in those things which their hearts were opposite unto;
and hence must we fetch our ground to wrestle with God in prayer for it. O
Lord, is it not thy promise to give a new heart? have thou not said, Thou will
take away this heart of stone? Now, O Lord, my heart is too strong for me, I do
but wash a Blackamore, that makes him blacker; by all my endeavor and natural
strength, the more I strive, the faster I stick in this pit of sin: O therefore
this promise of thine I own, I look to have it fulfilled: O Lord, it reaches
to my life, to make that clean, my conversation, to make that unspotted; but
Oh, let it reach to the inward parts, to make them pure.

Sixthly, Another ground of men's ignorance is corrupt errors in the judgment,
insomuch that many men's professed Doctrines and tenets, which they held, do
expressly 6.
destroy the truth of regeneration. As those opinions which deny Original sin;
for if there be no such inward depravation, then there needs no such inward
renovation: Thus also those that extol the power of free will by nature, they
must thus far at least deny any regeneration, or healing power of Grace upon
the will: yea, all opinions of Popery, Socinianism, Arminianism, do either in
whole, or part destroy this new creature: for so far as a man has power to
prevent Gods grace, or determine it, so far it works by an innate power, and
virtue of its own: Thus also those that hold grace only for the more easy
doing of that which is good, or that compare a man in his regeneration to a
captive prisoner, that cannot walk because of fetters and clogs upon him: but
let them be losed, then he is able to walk by his own inward power; but such a
man in that case is improperly said to be born again. Take heed therefore of
those corrupt opinions about Original sin, and free will, for these make
regeneration not necessary; and men blinded in their judgments with such
doctrines, can never pant and breath after that great work upon their own souls.

Seventhly, The busying of men's selves about superstitious invented worship by
men, does also make a man altogether ignorant, or not attentive to this. We may
say 7.
to Monks, Friars, Superstitious persons, Are you, or would you be accounted
Master in Israel, and know nothing of this? look on all the popish devotional
books, their heaps of external ceremonies, and in all these things, not a word
or manifestation of any regeneration. Thus it was also with the Jews, and with
the Pharisees; they placed all religion in external addresses to God, but never
acquainted themselves with the knowledge of the inward efficacious work of
grace. The heart of a man is finite; it is not a spring that can fill two
channels; if therefore all the intention of it run out upon invented worship,
it neglects what is more necessary. Hence it is that none are greater enemies
and scorners of this work of God, then those that are most pertinacious in
traditional worship. He that is busy where he should not, is always negligent
where he ought not to be: who has required these things at your hands? says
Christ; but where things were required, there they did nothing at all.

Eighthly, Therefore are men ignorant of this doctrine, because they set
themselves 8.
to know unprofitable things, sooner then profitable. It is a great corruption
in our understanding, that we seek to find out those things that do not
advantage us, or benefit us; but the things of use and edification, those are
laid aside. The Apostle blamed this in the Corinthians, therefore he shows,
That knowledge puffs up: and he that is proud about his knowledge, he knows
nothing as he ought to know: Oh, what an unhappy instance are our days of this
wild immature knowledge? How many disputes about this and the other
controversy? Into what parties and sects are we divided by the pride of
knowledge? Whereas now if we did desire to study, discourse, confer, and
meditate one those things that tend to regeneration, to mortification, to make
us new creatures, this would be to some purpose: You see the Apostle Paul
mattered not Jew or Gentile, Circumcision or uncircumcision, but a new
creature, Gal. 6. 1. Thus should we be affected: lead not me into labyrinths of
disputes; elevate not my understanding with sublimated notions, but instruct me
how to be a new creature: what will Philosophical knowledge avail to understand
the nature of herbs, and plants, when thou know not this divine nature?
What will skill in Physic advantage thee, to be able to make sound bodies, and
recover out of mortal diseases, if thy soul be not healed of its diseases? What
to understand the law of man, and to direct about Purchases, and Evidences, and
Assurances of Estates, but know no assurance of a spiritual estate? Yea, in
Divinity points, to dispute about predestination, universal Grace, Church
Government, and all the controversies of the times, when thou know not this
Doctrine of regeneration? Bernard said, He loved not to read Tully, or any
humane Author, because he did not find the name of Jesus there: So do not thou
love those disputes, those controversies, those books, where there is not
something to mind thee of regeneration: this is to be sought in the first
place.

Now the excellency of (...) experimental (...) of regeneration, will appear
The grounds of this ignorance.
in these particulars.

First, A (...) so (...), has a good and sure (...) laid to all his duties,
and spiritual performances. Where this new life is, there is an excellent root
for all the branches of spiritual duties to thrive and prosper: In nature the
heart is the first liver; and therefore nature (as some say) begins with that
part first, as the fountain of all life: But now the Painter that draws only
a shadow, he begins with the lineaments and outward proportions first. Thus
hypocrisy, that begineth to change in outward actions first; but true grace,
that begineth at the heart and vitals first: give me a man regenerated, and he
is a man of some substance, some foundation, you know where to have him; but a
man of mere parts, abilities, and notional fancies, yea, or fervent duties
without this foundation, he is but a bubble and a vapor. He is tossed up and
down like a straw with the wind, whereas if he had weight, and solidity in him,
he would stand like a rock. Oh therefore know, it is a wise man's course to look
to first principles, to be diligent about what foundations he lays.

Secondly, Where there is this experimental knowledge of regeneration, there is
an 2.
endeavor to beget others like them. As God bid every creature increase in its
kind, so do these new born children of God desire to multiply. When they were
once regenerated then Oh that my Parents were, Oh that my children were, Oh
that my kindred, Oh that all under my charge were! It is much to consider what
great expressions Paul uses even about some women, calling them
Follow-labourers, and great promoters of the Gospel: Why is all this? But that
spiritual life in them makes them fervent to bring home others. Come and see,
says Andrew to Philip: And what an high expression has Paul concerning the
salvation of his kinsfolks after the flesh: and if in public relation as
Ministers, as Masters, as Fathers, Oh how are their bowels straightened within
them, how grieved and broken where they see God does not give such a
supernatural life! Whereas now, a man merely civil, he desires his children
may be civil men, no Prodigals; but to desire them to be godly and holy, that
he is far from.

Thirdly, Where this experimental knowledge is of regeneration, there is a
great 3.
sympathy and agreement between others that are regenerated. As face answers
face, so does the heart of one regenerated man to another. The same
temptations, the same consolations, the same operations, they dwell in one
another hearts: and where this new life is most active and efficacious, there
they bend their greatest desires and love. But now take a man that knows of
regeneration by the book, by hearsay; though he may plead for it in the
general, yet the particular practice he cannot abide: A minister may preach to
a people to get this new birth, and yet scoff and oppose those that have it,
and all this is for want of experimental power of it upon the soul: but we have
already spoken in the general to these things heretofore. Let this suffice to
quicken us up to the right understanding of this mystery, be not in the number
of those to whom this work is a riddle. Thou may not say, this is for
Scholars, and learned men to know: no, it is for every one to be acquainted
with it.

Use of Instruction, To bewail the common ignorance of this main principle, Use.
even the Doctrine of regeneration. Art thou a learned man, and do not know
it? Art thou a rich man, and ignorant of it? What is it to be accounted a man
of parts and abilities in other things, but in this great matter a mere Bat and
Owl? Some have not the knowledge of God, says Paul, I speak it to your shame:
We may say, some, yea most have not the knowledge of regeneration, we speak it
to their shame, and it ought to be their grief. Art thou an old man, and
know not this? Have thou read so long in the Bible, heard so many Sermons,
and can not tell what the meaning of this is? What a miserable thing is thy
natural birth without this? how much better to have been born Toads, Serpents,
and the most loathsome Creatures in the world, than not to be new born?

Do not think this was one man's case to be ignorant of it, and it might be
easily in those times, but for us Christians we all are taught of God; for if
he did not know it, how should thou come to know it?

SERMON XXXVI.
The ground of the necessity of Regeneration is the corruption of men's Nature.

JOHN 3. 6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh.
WE have already observed the nature of Regeneration out of this famous
Dialogue, as also the ignorance and mistake that the wisest have about it* the
third thing observable in this History, is the ground and reason of the
necessity of this new Birth, and that is contained in my Text. Nicodemus he
dreamed of a carnal Birth a second time, whereas if he had been born an
hundred times this way, it would not have advantaged him, yea he would have
been an hundred times thereby the child of wrath: Our Savior therefore would
instruct Nicodemus by opening the fountain, and discovering the root of this
necessity; as if he had said, The reason why thou art so grossly ignorant in
this matter (O Nicodemus) is, because thou know not what corruption does
cleave to every man, how contrary this is to the Kingdom of Heaven; if thou
were rectified in this, thou would quickly see the necessity of the other.
Know therefore, That whatsoever is born of the flesh, is flesh, and so not
capable of everlasting glory.

The words then are a Proposition containing a Reason, why there must be a
Regeneration before there can be any entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven;
wherein you have the subject described, That which is born of the flesh. Flesh
is sometimes used in Scripture for the bodily part of a man, as corruptible, in
which sense it is said, All flesh is grass; sometime it is used for man as he
is sinful and unregenerate, In my flesh dwells no good thing, says Paul.
The first sense denotes our fragility and meaneness, the second our guilt and
sinfulness; both aggravate our misery and baseness; and this expression is
universal, That which is born of the flesh, is flesh. This extends to wise
men, to great men, noble men, Kings and Emperors; they are flesh of flesh.
Secondly, there is the predicate, Is flesh. The expression is in the abstract,
to show, how totally, deeply and universally he is fleshly. Thus the Apostle,
Romans 8. calls being in the flesh, as surrounded and compassed about with it.

So that our Saviors reason lies in this, Every thing expresses the nature
of that kind in which it is, That which comes of a Wolf has a Wolvish nature,
that which comes of a Sheep has a Sheepish nature, and that which comes of a
corrupt unclean kind must also be unclean: So that our Saviors expression is
like that of Jobs, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Lambs come
not from Bears, nor Figs from Thorns.

The great Corruption of man's Nature is the ground of the necessity of
Regeneration. Observe. Whence the necessity of Regeneration proceeds.


Men never apply themselves to more than Morality and Civility, till they are
persuaded that the greatest part of their vileness and loathsomeness lies in
their inward parts. We are most sinful and deformed there where the natural
eye perceives nothing at all: Men never provide a plaster any further than
they think the wound reaches; now if men perceive no wound in the inward frame
of their heart, they never look at any change there.

In the opening of this point, let us consider the nature of this original
defilement, The nature of original defilement, and Regeneration answering
thereunto.
and so the work of Regeneration answerably thereunto: for whereas in sin there
are two things, the guilt of it, and the filth of it; There is a twofold grace
answering this, The grace of justification, which blots out the guilt; and the
grace of Sanctification, which removes the filth: so that sin is like
leprosy, and grace regenerating makes all to come fresh and beautiful upon
the soul, which before was loathsome; whereupon it is, that a man is by
Regeneration really changed in the qualities of his soul: As original sin
comes in the place of original righteousness, so this grace of Regeneration
comes by degrees in the place of original sin; so that if we seek after
this work, we are not so much to look for it in our actions and conversations,
though it will be seen there, as in our inward frame and disposition of heart.
The Kings daughter is all glorious within, as before her conversion she was all
loathsome, and noisome within.

Hereby it comes to pass, that as men's thoughts are greater or lesser about
original Sin, so they are also about Regeneration.

First therefore, This native Corruption is deep and radicated in us, got into
our 1.
very bowels; That as Toads and Serpents have venom in their natures, and the
one cannot be divided from the other, so it is with us, we may as well put off
the nature of a man, as put sin out of it. This made the Father compare it to
the Ivy in the wall, or in the tree, that gets into the very heart, and
cannot be removed, unless the Wall it self be pulled down; and that is the
reason why the Scripture calls it our flesh and members, not that it is our
natural substance, but inevitably cleaving to it, and the innatenesse of it is
herein seen, that although we have this work of Regeneration, yet it is not
quite expelled, all this drosle is not got off. Paul complained bitterly of the
relics and remainders of it in his soul: Now the grace of Regeneration, that
goes as deep into the heart, that enters as powerfully into the soul;
therefore it is called writing of the Law in the inward parts; not upon the
eyes, or hands, or feet, but in the inward parts. There is many a man Jer. 31.
has Gods Law written upon his tongue only, or upon his outward conversation,
but not in his inward parts: So that as the Scripture has notable expressions
to describe how inward and rooted our filth is, we may apply such things to
grace wrought in the godly, only there is this difference, sin makes us all
over sinful, so that there is no good at all abiding in a natural man; but
grace does not so perfectly heal to expel all sin. As in natural men, the
imaginations of their thoughts are evil, not only actions but thoughts, not
only thoughts but imagination of thoughts, or that very shop of the soul,
whereby all apprehensions and affections are minted and framed, though not
perfectly: the imaginations of the thoughts of a Regenerate man are good and
spiritual: The heart of a natural man is a Den of Thieves, a Cage of unclean
Birds: The heart of a Regenerate man is the temple of the Lord.

By this you see, that all external Reformation, all outward freedom of
sin, does not at all amount to this new Birth: the only thing to be
considered, is how far this oil has entered into thy wounds, whether it be as
deeply rooted as sin in thee; Oh this will discover what a rare thing
Regeneration is.

Secondly, This Original Defilement does first and more immediately corrupt the
2.
nature of a man, and then mediately his person, Prius corrumpit naturam deinde
personam. Hence it is, that our Children have their defilement, whereas our
personal sins are not communicated to them. Hence also it is, that an Infant
new born, before there be any sinful motions, or expressions of it, yet is
corrupted in its Nature; though it speaks no evil, thinks no evil, loves no
evil, yet it is dead in sin, and a child of wrath. Now the grace of
Regeneration does more immediately tend to heal this natural corruption, and
then secondarily personal corruptions. Not as if a Regenerated Father could
beget a Regenerated Child always, for so grace is personal, but because it
does first renew and sanctify that principle and inward root of all affections
and actions in us. It is disputed in the Schools, whether grace be first
immediately subjected in the very Essence of the soul, or whether in the
faculties and powers of it. But we need not be so Metaphysicall and nice: This
is enough to conclude, that grace does first heal and renew the soul, as it is
the principle of all our actions; and then when this Fountain is clean, the
streams also are clean, when this root is sweet the fruit also is. This is the
good tree, and the good treasure that our Savior speaks of. We see in the
works of Gods Creation and Providence, first he gives Creatures their Nature,
their kind and being; then he commands them to increase and multiply. So its
here, first God gives a supernatural life, renewed principles, and then our
conversation is answerable. Now this can never be enough pressed upon men; they
think by spiritual and godly actions to get spiritual nature; they think in
Divinity as Aristotle teaches in Morality, by doing virtuous actions, to
acquire at last the habits of virtue; but the Scripture is otherwise; we must
first be born again, wherein we are altogether passive, and thereby be enabled
to walk holily. Oh therefore that men would consider these things, then would
auditors be spiritual, when they once are lifted up to this inward
supernatural life: you are but Weeds and Brambles, what Blossoms soever you
have, till you thus be renewed.

Thirdly, This Corruption is the seed-plot, and root of all the actual
impieties that 3.
are committed by man. Out of this evil Treasure came Cains murder, Judas his
Treachery, and whatsoever crimes are at any time committed by the Sons of men;
David bewailing his Adultery and Murder, presently thinks of this, as the
cause of all. Thus the work of Regeneration is the seed-plot of all holy
actions. Though the Scripture say, By faith Abraham and Noah, etc. did such
worthy Acts; yet a principle of Regeneration was the root of all, therefore
it is called Gods Law written in our hearts, his whole Law; so that whatsoever
God commands outwardly by his Word, his Spirit does graciously incline us to
obey. It is here as it is in Original sin, though there be the cause of all
wickedness in him, yet by reason of complexion, or other temptations, he may
incline to one sin more than another; and there are some sins which a man
cannot at first commit, till he be hardened and made obdurate in his
wickedness; so there are many graces of a more Heroical and noble Nature, at
least the actions of them, that a man newly regenerated cannot presently
perform. But as your green Timber is not presently sit to be made Pillars to
bear the weight of an house till it has lain a while, and the moisture of it
be excocted; so neither are new Converts fit for those graces of Patience and
Victory over the world by suffering, which yet by degrees they obtain at last:
And this might support the people of God, who in their temptations are ready to
think, that though such sins, and such difficulties may be overcome; yet there
are others again which they altogether despair of ever conflicting with; They
are to know that as the Acorn is the seed of an Oak, and has virtually in it
all the strength and substance an Oak has, thus the infused principle of grace
has virtually in it all the excellent expressions of grace, which are so
apparently abovethem: and this also may comfort the people of God, who
sometimes though persuaded such and such graces are in them, yet they are
extremely afraid there are other graces again that they never had. For as a
natural man, though he abound in Covetousness, yet has the root of
Prodigality in him; so a godly man abounding chiefly in such and such graces,
yet has those other also in his heart, though not visibly.

Again, this may also support the Godly heart, that labors and trembles
under the weakness of his graces, a weak faith, weak patience, for he has the
root of all grace, he has the Mine and the Treasury, though there be not that
graduall expression of it.

Fourthly, Because Original sin is the root of all sin, hence it is, that the
strength of sin lies there; And the greatest part of our wickedness is in
those sinful inclinations. 4.
The noysomness of a Toadlyeth not in the venting of poison at this or that
time, but that it has a nature to do thus always; and this if duly
considered, would deeply wound the heart of all Hypocrites, Moralists, and
Formalists: The greatest part of their vileness and loathsomeness lies within
doors, is hid as it were under ground: Thy ungodly actions are nothing to thy
ungodly nature. Thus also in grace regenerating; the strength of godliness
lies in the inward work of it, grace is more excellently grace, and strongly
grace, as it is in the heart, then as it is in actions: God is a Father of the
spirits, and does delight most in spirit-holinesse, and the graces of the
spirit; My son give me thy heart, and above all things keep thy heart, for
out of it are the issues of life and death: As Prove. 4. 23.
any wicked man is far worse inwardly than outwardly, so any godly man is far
better inwardly than outwardly, so far as grace works at any time in him. The
Waters are purer in the Fountain than in the Stream: Now how necessary is it
for the people of God to think of this? they many times are careful about
duties see they omit none of them (and that is very necessary; for as Clothes
keep the body warm, and help the inward heat, so the vigorous exercise of holy
duties redouble the strength of grace within,) yet the main care of a Christian
should be to get grace more and more rooted in his heart; any holy duty done
from grace in the heart differs from what is done without this, as the living
from the dead: As a man that does any wicked thing, yet if this have not got
into his heart, it is not so dangerous; so any good action done, if the love of
this be not in the heart, it is not comfortable nor acceptable.

Fifthly, This Corrnption does so plunge a man into sin, that there is a
connaturality and agreement between his heart and sin. As the Swine delights in
mire and 5.
filth, because of its loathsome nature; as the Beetle-flye delights in
Horse-dung, and is killed by sweet Herbs, so a man naturally is carried out to
act those things which are suitable to his corrupt heart, though never so
offensive to God. The contrary is in Regeneration, for grace infused makes us
to delight in the Law of God, to love holiness for holiness sake. Thus Paul,
Romans 7. speaks of his delight in the Law of God in the inner man; and David
prefers it before all desirable things, gold and honey, and his necessary
food. A natural man is said to swallow down iniquity like water, Job. 15. 16.
The Fevourish man finds a great deal of sweetness, and desire after water,
and thinks he never has enough. Thus David, he swalloweth down Gods Word
like honey, he thirsts, he never has enough of God, or godliness; when a
man is Regenerated, he has a Fountain within him, not a Cistern that must be
filled with earthly motives to do what is godly.

Sixthly, This Corruption is universal in the extention of it. This leprosy
is of the whole man; this sore is over all the soul, the mind darkened, the will
rebellious, 6
the affections unmortified, and the whole heart in great confusion and
disorder; so that the Conscience of a man, which we would think might be best,
like Jobs Messenger, at least to bring the sad news of all that has befaln
us, that also is unpure and unclean. Answerable to this general infection, the
Apostle prays for the Thessalonians, That they may be renewed thorowout, in
soul, spirit and body. There is a body-filthinesse, and a soul-filthinesse; and
there must be a bodycleansing, and a soul-cleansing, and in this men woefully
mistake: They take some illumination in the mind, accompanied with gifts and
abilities in holy duties, for the through and universal sanctification of the
whole man; our present age is a Theater upon which you may see many such sad
spectacles: But this will not serve; as original corruption is not sin only
in the mind, or sin only in the will, but sin all over; so the grace of
Regeneration is not only faith, or love, or patience, but all graces.

Seventhly, The Apostle Romans 8. does describe this fleshly being in two things;
contrary 7.
to which is our spiritual being; First, that the fleshly mind of a man is not
subject to God, nor indeed can be: Herein this Original corruption does
manifestly discover it self, that it makes a man full of enmity, and hostility
against God and his Image wheresoever it shines; there is no agreement between
this darkness and that light. This wretched frame is therefore called a stone,
because of its contumacy, no impression is easily received, but it continues
obstinate against all remedies whatsoever: on the other side, this work of
grace is called an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36. in a far different sense then the
word flesh is used in the Text; for there it signifies plyablenesse,
flexiblenesse, and a tender impression made upon the soul, whereby he does
willingly subject his mind to Scripture-Truths, and his will to
Scripture-Commands. Hence those that are Regenerated are said to be taught of
God, and the people of God in the day of his power are said to be
willingnesses; Psalm. 110.
and herein the work of Regeneration is admirable, that it turns the heart of
a man to the love and practice of those duties which are against his pleasure,
profit, and all outward advantages whatsoever; grace touches these mountains,
and it makes them like wax to receive any form or fashion: Now the heart
renewed would be subject to none but God, and his will; no longer subject to
the lusts and desires of the flesh, to the temptations of the world, to disdain
obedience to any thing but God, or for God. For the soul now to prefer the
Creature before God in the love of it, is as gross as for the body to be
prostitute before an Image, and to worship that. The second thing which the
Apostle makes the fruit of being in the flesh, is, that it cannot please God.
To be carnally minded is death, so that whatsoever the unregenerate man does is
bitter fruit and sour grapes. It is an abomination to the Lord, he is all the
day long damning himself, and doing abominable things in the eyes of the Lord;
If he eats, if he drinks, if he buyeth or sells, all these are cursed to him.
Whithersoever he goes, the mark of Gods displeasure is upon him. Now where the
person is regenerated, there the curse and loathsomeness of a man's person is
removed by the grace of justification, and his duties are well pleasing to God
by sanctification: for although in the court of justification, it is no
blasphemy to Gods spirit to say, that the gracious works done by us are a
menstruous cloth, dung and dross, yet if we look upon them in the sphere of
sanctification, so they are graces and holy actions, and well pleasing to God,
their imperfection being done away through Christ; and thus as God smelt a
sweet savor in Noah's Sacrifice, so he does also in all the gracious duties
the people of God perform, though the Incense that sweetens all be the blood of
Christ. Therefore the Church of God is compared to a Garden, and every godly
soul to a Lilly and Flower, and their graces to sweet Spices; yet, she is made
altogether lovely; which although it has its ground from justification, yet if
the Church of God had had no inherent grace in her, we cannot say God would use
such expressions to her; whereas therefore before thou did pray, hear, God
could not abide the, thou wast a beast that made every thing unclean thou did
touch; now God accepts of thy holy duties, thy prayer, fasting, almsdeeds; as
he said to the Centurion. Thus you see how that in every particular, wherein
Corruption has made any defilement or breach, there grace does make some
glorious reparations; and as sin has abounded in the filth of it, so grace
abounds in the purity and glory of it.

In the next place let us consider, why regeneration is thus necessary to
salvation, because of this corruption in us. And first:

The happiness of heaven is chiefly in enjoying of God; and having communion
Why Corruption of our nature proves a necessity of Regeneration, before we can
be saved. 1.
with him: now how can man that is thus corrupt and wretched by nature, such an
irreconcilable enemy to him, be brought to this fellowship with God, as the
greatest blessedness? If so be to Duties and Ordinances God requires such
sanctity and sanctification in those that draw near, how much rather to the
enjoyment of himself? If the pure eye that sees the Sun, the Bat and Owl is
offended at the glorious beams thereof; God therefore and his glorious presence
would be a burden and a torment to a wicked man: They that bid God depart from
them, because of his holy Laws, and his holy Ordinances, how much rather would
they bid God depart from them because of his holy presence.

Secondly, The employment and work that God calls for in heaven is altogether
inconsistent 2.
with a wicked and ungodly heart. To praise God, and rejoice in him for ever;
to love him, and to delight in him, forgetting all Creatures, and be swallowed
up in him as the Ocean of all happiness, how can the heart of a natural man
be thus affected? We see in this life how odious and troublesome holy duties
are to the godly heart; and therefore much more would heaven be an hell to an
ungodly man. It is true, wicked men as Balaam may desire happiness, but then
they look to it only as it is a preservation from evil, and a preventing of
torment; they do not consider the positive part in happiness, which is to
glorify God, and to delight in him. It was much that the blind Philosophers
could stumble on this, to conclude that blessedness consisted in virtuous
actions, that the greatest delight and happiness that could be was to do
justly; so that an ungodly man could not have Aristotle's happiness, and do we
think he can have Paul's?

Thirdly, There is a necessity of the souls regeneration, ere it can be
glorified, because it would not be for the honor and glory of God to bestow
happiness upon sinful 3.
men. As it is Gods glory to be holy, holy; so it is his Childrens glory to be
like him in holiness: It is true, God needs not our holiness, neither does
he want our righteousness, neither does our goodness extend to him; yet the
outward manifestation of his glory is seen in those that are holy: The place in
the Temple that did represent Heaven was called the Holy of Holies; and if no
profane or unclean thing might enter the Temple, much less into that more
sacred place. The Papists calumniate us, as if we were enemies to holiness,
because we make it not meritorious of heaven; but we plead the necessity of it,
and God has made an inseparable connection between holiness and happiness. As
therefore this body of ours cannot be glorified in heaven as long as it is thus
vile and corruptible, it must be raised out of the dust, and all the
imperfections of it must be done away; so the soul must also have a
resurrection from, its spiritual death and loathsomeness, ere it can be made
happy.

These things happily may be acknowledged as true by all, but who takes the right
way to be happy? Regeneration is the writing of Gods Law; now is Drunkenness,
Profaneness, Pride, Worldliness, Gods Law? Men might quickly see they are
out of the right way to glory, if they would meditate on these things.

Use. 1. How vain and empty a thing it is, to glory in our natural birth! Are
we born great, noble, rich in inheritances? yet remember, we are also born
children Use 1.
of wrath; we are flesh of flesh, what debasement should here be for us! Look
upon any Toad or Serpent, their natural propagation, is more happy than thine;
Oh we never lay our selves low in the sense of our poverty and shame, till we
come to be affected with this natural depravation. The Scripture many times
would humble us, because we are Dust and Ashes, but this is only a natural
baseness; we ought much rather to ly down in confusion, because we are born so
full of sin; how little do we believe these things? Why art thou puffed up
in thy self, and boastest of external riches or honors: To be a sinful man
is shame and terror enough. The Heathen would have a Boy to speak in his ear,
in the midst of all his pomp and glory, Memento te hominem esse, Remember thou
art a man. But do thou in the midst of all thy outward comforts say to thy
soul, Memento te peccatorem esse; Yea, not so much a sinner as sin it self.

Use 2. Of Instruction. What is the reason, men that are of ingenuous, fair,
Use 2.
and just conversation, have so much quietness, peace and confidence, as if
all were well? The first rise of their mistake, is their insensiblenesse and
ignorance about original defilement, did they know how all that they account
good and excellent, is indeed abominable and filthy; how would they stand aloof
off, crying out, they are unclean, unclean; and certainly if men regenerated
speak of their good actions, which have indeed some true good, that they are
menstruous clothes, dung, and dross; what ought not you to think of an
external righteousness? O consider, that Regeneration is not only necessary,
because a man lives in such and such gross impieties, but because he has a
defiled nature; and therefore unless you civil men, good natured men, be born
again as well as Publicans and Harlots, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. Do not then look upon some profane and horrid wretches, saying, I
wonder this Sermon does not work upon them, I wonder they do not become new
men, it is strange how they can hear these things and be as they are; but
rather wonder at thy own self, and smit^ on thy own thigh, and be amazed to
consider, why thou do not think of becoming new.

Use 3. Of Exhortation. Is Corruption the ground of the necessity of
Regeneration, Use 3.
then see this latter extend as far as the former; corruption is in thy mind,
thy judgment, thy intentions, as well as in bodily actions, therefore let
Regeneration be also extended thither; we must not only have a new life, and a
new conversation, but also a new heart and spirit. The very spirit must be
sanctified as well as the soul; the choicest intellectual part of a man, as
well as his sensitive part. The Scripture calls flesh not only the bodily
sins of a man, but the actions of his soul, puffed up in his fleshly mind,
speaking of false worship: so Idolatry, and Heresies are made the fruit of the
flesh as well as external impiety. This is to be considered by those who judge
gross and abominable opinions no great crime or fault; No, the Apostle says
of all those enumerated vices, Gal. 5. 19. where intellectual sins are among
others, They that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.
Therefore we may say an Heretic needs conversion as well as a profane person:
And a man may discover he is a fleshly unregenerate man as well by some
Opinions and Doctrines, as by some corrupt conversations.

SERMON XXXVII.
Of the unexpressibleness of this new life.

JOHN 3. 8. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound
thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, or whither it goes, etc.
OUr Savior in these words does further clear the Mystery of Regeneration unto
Nicodemus, that so at last the scales may fall from his eyes; because this
spiritual nativity was not visible, as that of the body is, Nicodemus would not
believe any such thing. Now our Savior instanceth in a very fit similitude.
The wind blows where it lists, thou hear the sound of it, but thou see
it not with thy eyes, neither art thou able to tell from whence it comes: So
that this speech of our Savior does denote the difficulty of understanding
this spiritual birth, not only to the corrupt understanding, but also to the
renewed: for this in the Text arises not from the imbecility of the power or
faculty to perceive, but the subtle and pure nature of the object to be
understood: It is therefore the intent of our Savior to express this
spiritual birth, by a plain similitude. Some there are that take the greek word
(...), for the spirit of God: upon this rule, wheresoever it is with the greek
article, there the spirit of God is understood; but that is not universal, and
then it would be most improper: for it could be no illustration to manifest a
thing by it self, which our Savior should do if we take it so. Maldonate takes
spirit, or breath, for the soul of a man, and makes the sense thus; As we do
not know the nature of the soul, how it is infused, whence it comes, or,
whither it goes, only we perceive the strong operations of it; so it is in the
work of Grace. But there is no just reason to recede from our Translation in
making it to signify the wind, and so every thing will excellently agree.

First, The Air is necessary, so that there is no living, or breathing without
it: This work of Gods Spirit, is wholly necessary for this new birth.

Secondly, Thou hear the voice of this only, but thou see not the wind
it self: so the godly hear the voice of Gods spirit speaking to them to live,
and as to Lazarus, to come forth out of the grave; so do the Children of God.

Thirdly, As we cannot tell the beginning of the winds, for although the
Philosophers dispute much, some making it the flux of the Air, others
exhalations from the earth, yet there is no certainty; so it is in this work of
grace. The world sees men by the word of God new changed, new enlivened; they
wonder and admire to see this alteration: men are divided in their thoughts
about it: some say, they are of God, others of the devil, even as they differed
in their thoughts about Christ.

And then here is the liberty of Gods Spirit in Regenerating, He blows where
he list: To whom he will he manifests himself, so that all is to be ascribed to
the power of Gods spirit, not to man's ability.

Obs. The work and Grace of Regeneration, is rather felt and perceived by him
that Obs.
has it, then that which can be expressed, or made known to a man's self or
others, it being a wonderful hidden, and secret life.

The wind we feel and perceive in the motions of it; but the Originals of it,
we are not able exactly to describe: so it is in this great work: What the
wiseman speaks about the framing of the child, We are not able to describe how
the bones, and all other parts of the infant are composed, Eccles. 11. 5. which
made David say, He was fearfully, and wonderfully made. The like does God do
about our new birth, We are fearfully and wonderfully made again; so that the
difficulty to perceive aright of this work, may arise partly from that
corruption which is inbred in every one, and partly the unsearchablenesse of
the thing it self; and to this latter Christ relates: so that he only who
has the inward power of it upon his own soul, can best discern of it: and we
may say of this grace, as well as that of the Gospel, Eye has not seen, or ear
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, to conceive what the work
of God is herein.

For the better discovery of this, consider these things. Particulars to clear
this. 1.


First, That the understanding of a man is not only corrupted with sin, but
naturally weakened, so that it is not able to find out natural truths, much
less supernatural. The forms of things are hidden to us: Vitrum lambimus,
pultem non attingimus; the fire, the water, a stone, none can have essential
definitions of them: we cannot tell wherein the form or essence almost of any
thing consists, only we describe things by their effects, properties, and
common accidents, and we have but the shell, not the kernel. If then the work
of God in nature be so abstruse to us, and we know not what to say of it, How
much rather the work of God in Grace? Basil says, Diverse questions may be made
about a very fly, which no Philosopher is ever able to answer, How much rather
then in the hidden operations of Gods spirit? So that although it was Nicodemus
his sin, that he did not know, or believe the necessity of this new birth, yet
it was a natural impotency, rather then a moral, that he could not tell how
this wind did blow upon him.

Secondly, Men who have not the inward sense of this work upon their hearts,
may yet be able to give the description of it. This they have either by
learning, or reading of books, or hearsay; so that if you ask many, What
regeneration is? They can tell you it is a change of the whole man from that
state of corruption we are born in, to the state of holiness: or it is the
renewing of the image of God in us by degrees, which we have lost: This account
they are able to give; yea, a man may be able by way of dispute and scholership
to say more, and dispute more about it, then that man who is regenerated; so
that many an Orthodox man is able to prove the necessity of regeneration, and
to clear it in its nature, better then one not so perfect: but there is a
Theological knowledge, and a practical experimental knowledge; no question but
an unregenerate man, may in a Theological way maintain Divine truths better
then a regenerate man, that has not such abilities: a Godly man does believe,
when he is not able to answer all those doubts and objections that are made
about any definition of faith, that is usually given: and it is observed that
many times those that have the greatest learning and parts, do most disdain the
practical plain things of regeneration: Surgunt indocti, and rapiunt caelum, It
was the old speech of Austins, Idiots and unlearned men take the kingdom of
heaven by violence, when learned men are shut out. Bradwardin, a great scholar
called Doctor Profundus, the profound Doctor, speaks of himself how offended he
was at the reading of Paul's Epistles, because he had not Metaphysicum ingenium,
a Metaphysical head: and we see by miserable experience, what affectations men
have to speak, and hear sublime Ministers, and aerial notions, accounting those
things that make for our spiritual edification, and inward renovation, to be
but plain simplicities; but this will prove to be gold and silver, when the
other will be only hay and stubble.

Thirdly, Although this life be a secret hidden life, yet many things about it
are to 3.
be demonstrated. Even as about the winds, although there be several opinions
about the Original of them, and we may in the general say, they arise out of
the East, or West, etc. But the punctual particular Original of them we cannot:
so it is in the work of regeneration; The cause from whence it is, is God,
Unless a man be born of the spirit, etc. So the Orthodox declare the manner in
the general, that its irresistably wrought in us by an insuperable efficacy of
Gods spirit, and although it be hard to show the particular manner how the
grace of God determines the will, and changes the heart, yet that this is done
is very apparent, and the Scripture makes it very clear; and the consideration
of this may bridle our understandings, and make us sober, that we do not
curiously pry into things; for if upon the utmost enquiry we cannot tell our
natural conception and making, much less may we apprehend this spiritual
making. We come therefore in the next place to show wherein Wherein this new
life is secret and unexpressible.
this life is so unexpressible; for we conceive this assertion of our Saviors,
like that, Our life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. The work of grace
though it be admirable and wonderful, yet it does not incur into the senses:
and this is that which makes many so Atheistical, and scornful about the work
of Gods spirit in us. They either deny there is such a thing, or they judge
these things delusions and fancies, or the complexion of men's bodies: but as we
do believe we have a soul, though we cannot see it; that there is a wind,
though our eyes perceive it not; that there is a God, though no man has seen
him at any time: so it may certainly be demonstrated that there is such a work
of regeneration, though we perceive it not with our bodily eyes: and this is
necessarily to be pressed; for the more we are assured that there is such a
thing, and that every one who would be saved, must have it, then we shall make
the greater enquiry into this, whether we have it or no. The secretness
therefore of this new life is seen,

First, In those travels, and agonies of soul which commonly it goes through
with 1.
er'e grace be formed. The spirit of God does convince of sin, and causes
bondage in the heart: we hear some crying out, What shall we do to be saved?
For although a man be in this work of regeneration altogether passive, yea
obstinate and rebellious, therefore compared unto a stone, and a dead man; yet
in other respects God works in us sutably to reasonable men, by enlightening our
understanding, by opening our eyes to see our misery that we are under; as
Dives when his eyes was opened, saw he was in hell, which made him cry out for
ease: so these perceive themselves even dropping irrecoverably therein, and
thereupon they cry out, What shall we do to be saved? When there is this
discovery in the heart, then there are commotions, and Earthquakes in the soul.

Now come to any natural man, speak of these pangs and troubles of the soul, he
knows not what they mean, he understands not the meaning of them: as Job said
to his miserable comforters, Would your souls were in my souls stead, then you
would feel what that wormwood and bitterness is, which I do undergo: so had thy
soul been ever in those depths of God, then thou would have known what it is
to be in a spiritual travel. The Apostle speaking of the groans which Gods
spirit works in his children, he calls them groans unutterable, Romans 8. so
are these sighs unutterable, bitterness, and pangs unutterable. It is true,
these commotions of the soul are not so remarkable in some, as in others,
neither are these things felt alike in all. But there is in every one a sense
and feeling of his undone estate, and hunger and thirst after righteousness:
now in all these things he is a man in a mystery to the natural man: these
things are transacted secretly in a man's heart: examine therefore thy self:
Have thou ever been a man thus affected, thus exercised? has the spirit of God
convinced thee of sin? has thy heart been loaded with sin? has the Law
discovered sin? has every thing been as if turned into blood? As Stephen saw
heaven opening to receive him, so have thou as it were hell opened to devour
thee, here are the beginings of a new birth; not as if regeneration lay in
these, no, How many have felt sorrow, terror, yet have proved abortives? but in
many of Gods children, this is introductory, and when happily completed, these
fears and troubles are mingled with much faith and confidence: God has said to
thy soul, as well as of the woman's travel, In sorrow shall thou conceive and
bring forth.

Secondly, As these groans after God and his favors are hidden, so the
principles from whence they are enabled, are wholly invisible, and that not
only to the bodily eye, but to the mental eye of a natural man. A carnal man
cannot think that any man does any thing in reference to God, but upon carnal
and worldly self-principles: Thus the Pharisees, they charged Christ with vain
glory, and his own kindred would have him do his miracles more publicly, that
he might be externally advanced: they judged of Christ like themselves: John 7.
3. 4. They did all things from worldly principles, and so they conceived
Christ. The Apostle calls this work of Grace, The inner man. The glory of a
Christian is within; he prays outwardly, but his glory is within; he hears
with the outward ear, but his glory is within: It is the inner man, which is
the root and the fountain of all his external actions: now as the root of the
tree is hidden, and the springhead hard to be found out; so it is here, from
what inward principle it is that thou art carried out to do the things God
commands is wholly to be sought into. The Pharisees did against their own
consciences blasphemously make it a doubt, by what power he did those wonderful
things: but we may upon good ground ask, By whom do thou pray? do thou
hear? Is it from Gods holy spirit, acting and enabling of thee? Or is it from
thy own corrupt principles and suggestions; and this is that which comforts a
godly man against all those accusations of Hypocrisy, which the world casts
upon them.

Thirdly, As their principles, so the scope and intention of the whole man in
their conversation, is very hidden and secret, they being carried out toward
God, because of his excellency, and glorious fullness. David, how often does he
profess his joy in, and love of God? How does Paul profess his delight in the
Law of God in the inward man, and that because it is spiritual? The Pharisees
lose the acceptance of all their performances, because what they did, they did
to be seen of men. It is true, Hypocrisy is hidden also, and the corrupt
intentions of wicked men are also secret: There is the hidden darkness of
wickedness in a man's heart; but these sincere intentions are secret and
admirable in a further sense, because the heart of a natural man, cannot do any
thing upon such pure grounds: his eye is dark, and therefore his whole body is
dark also. As the earth cannot ascend upwards, because of its dense and heavy
nature; so neither can the heart of a man ascend so high, as to do things for
God, unless regenerated. Now until a man do things upon these pure motives, he
can have no true demonstration of grace in his soul.

Fourthly, The joys and consolations which aregenerated man obtains in his
course of a spiritual life, are such as a natural man also understands not.
Thou have put more gladness into my heart, says David, then they have had when
their wine and oylencreaseth, Psalm. 4. It is called therefore unspeakable joy.
Thus groans are unutterable, and joy is unspeakable; a stranger intermedleth
not with their joy: What an hidden and secret thing is this, That they should
take the spoiling of their goods joyfully, That they should in the midst of the
most furious and violent deaths, triumph with joy. How unconceiveable are these
things to flesh and blood? As therefore Christ said, I have other meat to eat
of, then ye know; so they have other comfort and delight to take, then a
natural man perceives of: were it not thus, How could it venture through all
those discouragements that are in the way to heaven? How could it endure in the
wilderness, if this Manna were not provided for him? As poor, yet making many
rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all things. The supply and provision
which God treasureth up in his soul, is that which makes him wonderful: Oh
therefore what enemies are all natural men unto their own peace and happiness?
It is not a life of Grace to have riches, honors, or great success in this
world, but to have the favor of God, and his love shed abroad in their hearts:
See what a glorious triumph Paul is lifted up into, challenging all opposition
in the world or hell against him. And thus Austin did much bewail, Sero te
a^^avi Domine, O Lord, it was very late e're I began to love thee. How long
does a man feed upon husks, and is miserable in the Creatures, till he come to
eat of the fatted calfe in Gods house? Say unto thy self, This is not all the
sweetness, joy, and comfort, that I might be made partaker of.

Fifthly, Their course and constant way of their life, is also hidden. The life
that 5.
I now live, is by faith in the Son of God, says Paul, Gal. 2. 20. What is the
matter, cries Chrysostom? Does not Paul live as other men? Does he not live on
food? Does he not breath in the Air, as others do? It is true, but this is not
Paul's life properly; but as the child in the womb lives an hidden life by
sucking nourishment from its mother, so does Paul live an hidden life by
deriving efficacy from Christ: we walk by faith, and not by sense. Thus
Habakkuk lived a Mysterious life; though the Figg tree did not blossom, though
the Olive tree failed, yet he rejoiced in the salvation of the Lord, Hab. 3.
17. To live by faith is not a visible known life to the world: The world has
no other oil to supply their lamps with, but from the creatures, and when these
decay, their hopes are at an end: but it is not thus with the Godly, Their life
is hid in Christ, and therefore not to be taken away by any outward power: As
the Parents lay up the treasures of their children, that they may not lose
them; so that faith lives, while all other things dye.

Sixthly, Their temptations and exercises are also secret. Look upon David in
his 6.
Temptations, How spiritual and hidden are they about the loss of Gods favor,
and the light of his countenance? Why art thou cast down, O my soul? still
trust in God: There are Temptations which wicked men are obnoxious unto; and
there are again spiritual exercises, which the Godly are only acquainted with;
so that the nature of our Temptations will as much discover our supernatural
life, as any thing else. Every state and condition has its excercises suitable
thereunto: The worldly man, worldly; the heavenly man, heavenly: and therefore
it is necessary in a Master of Israel to know experimentally this kind of
life, otherwise as Eli charged mournful Hanna with drunkenness, when it was a
spiritual distress upon her; so will they charge poor tempted Christians with
madness and folly, if they know not the nature of these exercises: They will
quickly break the bruised reed, and quench the smoking flax, being no ways
able to pour oil into the wounded soul, till they have been thus wounded
themselves.

Seventhly, Their privileges are admirable, but unknown. It does not yet
appear 7.
what we are: as Christ in respect of his outward humiliation did not appear
the Son of God. The privileges of Gods Children are justification, adoption,
free access unto the Throne of Grace, and fellowship with the Father; now all
these things are hidden. Who would judge, looking upon the afflictions,
troubles, and miseries of Gods Church, that they had such privileges? Should
we not say of them, as was of Christ? They are forsaken and hated of God. But
though others do not know what they are heirs unto, yet they themselves do.
This justification is called a white stone, which none knows but he that has
it, Rev. 2. 17. so that as the Tabernacle had a rough hairy covering without,
but there was the pot of Manna within; Thus, though Gods people lie in an
outward, rough, persecuted, or afflicted estate, yet they have Manna within:
and in the sense and full perswsiion of this, they encounter with all
difficulties, they triumph in streights; so that if a natural man's eye were
open, they would see how much is for them, though much against them.

Eighthly, Their increase and growth is also hidden, and that by wonderful
means. 8.
Our Savior instanceth in the seed sown, that it grows up, but the
husbandman knows not how, only he knows and sees it grown: Thus the Godly
man cannot perceive the growth of his faith, and other graces, only he sees
that whereas he was a babe once, now he is a man: His light is clearer, his
faith firm, his zeal hotter; so that as in natural growth of the body, a man
does not perceive he is growing, only he finds a difference in his stature at
last. Thus it is here, only here is this difference, that the spiritual
motions and increase of grace are more imperceptible then those of the body.
Therefore a Christian should not be inordinately dejected under Temptations
about its proficiency: Oh he is afraid he never grows, he still moves on
the same hinge: for if the rational workings of the heart be so hardly
discernable, to feel that a man understands, and wills such an object, much
more the motions of the spirit: and as the growth it self is hidden, so the
manner of it; it increases by opposition, it gains by losses, it lives by
death, it rises by falls, by sins, by stumblings it gets ground.

Use 1. Of instruction, Why wicked men are carried out to censure, and condemn
Godliness. It is because they know not what it is: Hence also they think it
strange, Use. 1.
that they run not into the same excess of riot with them. The wicked are
amazed to see why they are not as voluptuous, as excessive in all carnal
delights, as well as they: and all is because they know not this spiritual
life. All life has its proper motions and actions, as also delights which keep
it up. Therefore this supernatural life has its proper motions and joy:
Therefore we may say as the Psalmist, Come and taste how good it is: Come and
taste what this regeneration is: feel the powerful life of it in your own souls,
and then you will be otherwise affected then you are. The Pharisees spoke evil
of Christ, because they did not believe God was in him, and with him: Thus thou
harshly judge that for Melancholy, and hypocrisy, which is the work of God,
because thou believe no such thing as a new birth. As it is a great sin to
attribute that which comes from the Devil, to the work of God, so it is a
great sin to make that which is of God, to come from the flesh or Devil.

Use 2. How thankful they ought to be unto God, who have had this wind blow
upon them. How many have lived and dyed in their natural condition? But God
has Use. 2.
redeemed thee out of this state of darkness. The Psalmist makes it a great
mercy concerning the plague to a Godly man, That many thousands should fall on
the right hand and on the left, yet it shall not touch him: but here is
greater, many thousands shall fall into hell on the right hand, and on the
left, yet thou art preserved. Our Savior speaks of two in a bed, one taken,
and another left: Oh how great is Gods goodness? Two in a family, the one
regenerated, the other not: two in a seat, the one born anew, the other not.
How merciful is the Lord to thee? How was Christ affected in this
dispensation? Even so Father, for so it pleases thee, and the Son reveals
the Father to whom he will, Mat. 11. There are many great men, many rich men,
many wise men, and it may be God passes over them, and makes known this grace
to thee. What? shall we so bless God for preservation from natural death, that
he recovereth from the grave, and not much rather from eternal death?

SERMON XXXVIII.
Laying open the Counterfeits of a new Birth.

JOHN 3. 3. Unless a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of Heaven.
HAving in way of digression observed some remarkable particulars in this
excellent Dialogue between Christ and Nicodemus: I do now reassume this Text,
wherein a new Birth is so vehemently and indispensably asserted: And because we
have already demonstrated the nature of it; the next thing to be insisted upon
is the Counterfeit of it, that so no more any may deceive themselves, as if
they had it, when they had it not. For who is there who has heard the nature
of it laid open, and the necessity of it pressed, does not believe he has it,
although the work be so rare and supernatural? for a man would wonder, when
Christ who is truth it self, presses this upon every man, let him be never so
self-righteous and self-holy, what men think of themselves; for certainly
either they do not attend to, or believe these things, or else they make no
reflection upon themselves, saying, Am I such a man; or else they vainly delude
themselves with hopes, concluding that to be the work of regeneration in them,
which indeed is not.

Therefore to undeceive your souls herein, consider this great work may be
Counterseits of Regeneration.
counterfeited in several respects. There may be much glistering, which yet is
not this true gold; and because our Savior expresses this work
metaphorically, as a new Birth, we shall in allusion to that, discover the
false ways thereof.

And first, As in the new Birth the soul, as you heard, brings forth in sorrow,
there are pangs and groans unutterable; so many men may be in great pain, fear
and trouble about sin, As if some excellent and beautiful child of grace
were to be born, and yet at last after all those pangs, there come forth some
ugly Toad. Men after those troubles and torments about sin, proving as
loathsome, and as abominable as before; for men may be greatly afflicted in
heart for sin, and the Ministers of God may as Paul in another case, Rejoice
that they have made them sorrowful; They cry out in the agonies of their soul,
We have sinned grievously, The ground of this sorrows fruitlesnesse. 1. When
Gods judgments are upon them, but when removed laid aside.
what shall we do that we may be saved? And yet for all this travail the soul
brings forth nothing but wind and emptiness.

For, 1. Men may be in great troubles of soul about sin, while the
apprehensions of danger and Gods judgments are upon them, but when these are
removed, they presently settle on their lees again. The Israelites are a
pregnant instance for this, while Gods hand was heavy on them, their sins also
were an heavy burden, Is their affliction they sought God early, they humbled
and mourned before him, Hose. 7. 14. but their hearts were not steadfast; when
they had ease, and were delivered, they soon forgot God, who helped them. Oh
(Beloved) we have too many examples of such troubles for sin in our days!
Take some men in desperate sicknesses, when death the King of terrors is ready
to seize on them, or while they are under some public miseries which do so
immediately burden them they know not what to do. In these extremities, what
confessions, what resolutions have you? Do they not seem to be new creatures?
You never heard them speak, purpose, pray to God so before; you never saw them
so affected and wrought upon as they are for a season; but upon recovery and
ease they presently forget all, and were they profane, worldly, negligent, yea
opposite to God and his way? the same they prove again? Do not thou therefore
deceive thy own soul, saying, I remember the time since my sins have pained me
at the very heart, since I roared on my bed because of mine iniquities, I had
no comfort in my life, sin made every thing so bitter: grant all this, but
ask the Question, How come thou to be quiet again? How are those winds and
waves come to be appeased? Did Christ rebuke them and bid them be still, or
has time wore them out? or has the removal of the judgment removed also thy
trouble? Oh if this had been the true spiritual travail of thy soul, no outward
comfort could have appeased thee! No freedom from external calamity could have
pacified thee, till thou had in a godly manner obtained the light of Gods
countenance, and be reconciled with him. It was thus in David when wounded in
heart for sin, though Gods outward judgments were over, yea though Nathan
told him, His sin was forgiven, yet for all that his heart runs out like a
fountain of water before God, Psalm. 51. And this, if rightly considered, does
break the pillar of many men's hopes.

2. Men may be in great trouble of heart, and so seem to others and to
themselves, as 2. When men labor by all means to extinguish the sorrow they
feel.
if they were in this new Birth, but all provefalse, because they labor to
quiet and content themselves with earthly advantages, and in a carnal manner
labor to extinguish and to put out the sorrow they feel. These differ from the
former, because they are like the Heart wounded, that labors to eat out the
arrow; so these being troubled for their sin are fretted and discontented at
it, and so use all the ways they can to stupifie their conscience, and they
labor that their sin may not always be before them. How great and terrible
soever these men's estates may be, yet it will vanish like smoke. For where God
does graciously soften the heart, there is a tender melting, and a willing
mourning for sin, as Zech. 12. like a mother for her only child; but in
these men their hearts rage, and fret at the wounds, which God makes upon them,
and so they are like the devils and damned in hell, who are full of horror and
gnawings of heart for their sin, but yet blaspheme God, because of their hatred
against him; Such an one was Cain, who cried stubbornly, My sins are greater
then I can bear; and therefore to ease himself, builds Cities and uses all
means to divert his fears. Consider therefore, How have thou been under
terrible apprehensions of Gods wrath for sin? Have thou desired the
sanctification of them, that God would make a through and perfect change in
thee? Or else have thou desired to put out this fire, to bolt out this light?
Have thou judged those happy that live jollily in their sins, and find no
pangs upon them? All such tears are but like the waters of standing pools that
breed Toads and other Vermin. Take heed therefore that thy sorrow be not a
Cains sorrow.

3. Men may be in travel and bring forth nothing but wind, because in these
troubles 3. When men hearken to those that cure wounds slightly.
they apply themselves to false Prophets and false Teachers, who apply peace
when there is no peace. As it was with the Israelites outward condition. The
false Prophets slightly cured her wound, and cried Peace, sowing pillows under
their elbows, Ezekiel. 13. 18. Thus it is also with false teachers about the
inward estate of their people, they sooth up men in their evil ways; They bid
them die comfortably, believe strongly, they bid them, Go and prosper, as he
did to Ahab. This is daubing with untempered mortar, which when a frost comes
falls all to the ground again, and so when Gods terrible anger shall arise, all
that false peace will tumble to the ground; both the false teacher, and he that
receives the false peace and comfort will fall into the pit together. And hence
it is an heavy judgment to live under ungodly and profane Ministers, who
usually pour oil into all wounds, tell every man that is sick or dying, his
condition is good; but what says Paul, If I should please men, I were not the
servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. that is, please men in a sinful way, give
content to them in their sins; so that as in any outward sickness or loss it
is a grievous sin to go to the Devil and to Wise men, as ye call them; The
Prophet severely rebuked the King of Israel, and told him, his child should
die, and said, Is it not because there is no God in Israel? Its to deny the
true God, and to make the Devil your God; so in soul-troubles to go to those
loose teachers, who will proclaim peace to you, is to make all your sorrow, and
all your travail for sin in vain. Choose therefore a godly and wise Physician
for thy soul in such case, and say, Give me one, not that will flatter me, but
inform me impartially about my sins.

4. Men may be in trouble for sin, yet miscarry, Because of inordinate
dejection 4. When men are inordinately dejected.
and black despair. This is not so ordinary, men being for the most part
presumptuous, and there are few such sinners as the incestuous person, whom the
Ministers and people of God must comfort, lest they be overwhelmed with
despair; yet Judas was thus undone. As Rachel died in bringing forth of
children; so these are damned in those very sorrows and fears they have about
sin. God therefore who commands a soul to grieve for sin, and to come out
of the pit of iniquity, does also command the same soul to believe and seek for
ease in Christ. We must indeed despair utterly in our selves, but not of
Christ, and the ignorance of the acceptablenesse of faith unto God, and how
wel-pleasing it is for the humbled soul to rely on Christ, keeps many of Gods
children longer in the dark womb then they would. Insomuch that it is a mercy
of mercies in those spiritual agonies, to be directed into the way of
believing. Thus you see that all pain and trouble wrought in the womb of the
soul, does not necessarily infer, that there ought to be joy, because a
man-child of Grace is born in the heart.

A second sort, which miscarry in this new Birth, may be styled Embryoes, 2.
There may be Embryoes of preparative workings without, etc. 1. When sear keeps
men in awe.
Such who have some initial and preparative workings upon their heart, but they
die in the wilderness ere they come to Canaan. And they may be reduced to
these heads.

First, Those who by fear are kept in their duty, and because they are afraid
of Gods judgment, therefore they forbear sin, and perform the duties
required of them. This Romans 8. is called, The spirit of bondage. The Spirit of
God works such a disposition in them, though not the sinfulness of it, that
they are kept from sin, as the Wolf or Lion are kept from their prey, who
otherwise would greedily devour it. This is called by Divines servile fear, and
although a man while he goes no further is but an hypocrite, yet Augustine
compares this fear to the Needle that draws in the thread, it is
introductory sometimes by the blessing of God, of a more excellent way; and in
this respect there is a necessity of the Magistrate and the sword to repress
evil men, If thou do ill, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain,
Romans 13. for howsoever this external force does not sweeten and alter the
nature, yet by outward restraining of them, they may at last become sensible of
sin, and in stead of leaving it for fear, afterward forsake it for love; As
Paul rejoiced the Gospel was preached, whether for love or out of envy; So the
Ministers of God are to bless God, men are restrained from outward
wickedness, whether it be from fear or love, although it will not be
comfortable or soul-saving to those, who do it only from servile and slavish
fear. Let not men therefore think they have a sure sign of this new Birth
within them, if they find this external change wrought in them; they dare not
run in the same excess of riot, as they have done; they will set a watch
before their mouths, that they curse and swear no more; for if all this come
not from a principle of love and delight within, in that which is good, here is
no new Birth.

Secondly, Those may be said to have some preparatory work, who have some
resolutions 2. When men set upon good purposes and resolutions, their practices
remaining still the same.
and purposes to take up Christ's yoke, who are not in flat opposition and
contradiction to his ways, but show much general willingness to embrace his
way. Of this sort was that young man, whom Christ is said to love, because he
was not far from the Kingdom of Heaven. And there are many who declare good
affections, show a willing compliance with those things that are good, but they
move always upon this hinge. They never obtain any further degree in the ways
of God; Oh what pity is it, that such persons, who come so near the haven
should yet suffer shipwreck, that they should with Moses as it were see the
Land of Promise, and yet not enter into it! We tell such they are not far
from true Repentance, they are not far from this new Birth. Thy good
affections and compliances with good men and good things, but going no further,
make the Minister of God hope well of thee, and yet to be afraid of thee also.
They hope well, trusting God will give thee more knowledge, work more inward
power in thy heart, to break through all temptations, and to set upon the ways
of godliness, whatsoever it cost thee, and yet they are afraid also, because
where the fire of grace is, there it will burn sometimes or other; where this
life of grace is, there it will be growing sometime or other. Thy good
affections are more then leaves upon the tree, they are buds, only they
continue buds, they never blossom; we cannot say thou art dead, and yet we
cannot say, thou art alive, we do not perceive the breath of the life of grace
breathing from thee. Oh therefore that this Sermon might be like a fiery nail
(as Ecclesiastes speaks) fastened by Christ in the heart of such! If thy
affections and dispositions be real for God, it is not enough to stay there,
Come out of Egypt, do not be as Ephraim is called A cake half baked, the upper
part toward heaven all dough, but the lower part baked. If God and Heaven be
to be sought for in the first place, if the Kingdom of Heaven must be got by
violence, know thy good inclinations and sweet affections will not be enough.

Thirdly, They are Embryoes, who by instruction and good education of others,
are trained in a way of godliness, and in the constant practice of duties, but
in time discover 3. When all the good that appears is from the force of
education.
they never had the power of these things. Thus we read of King Joah, all the
while Jehoiada the Priest was alive, 2 King. 12. 2. who had the tuition and
education of him, He walked in the ways of God, but when he died, then he
turned aside to do wickedly; and many such there are also now adays, who
having godly parents are so accustomed unto the ways of Religion, that they
can pronounce Shibboleth, I mean, speak and exercise the whole form of piety;
but this is not a new nature wrought in them by God; it is their old nature
painted and varnished over with good education. It is true such instructions
are a mercy; and the Wiseman says, The way a child is trained up in, he will
not leave. As on the contrary it is a woeful curse to be born of wicked parents
from whom the children learn only to curse, swear, lie, and to be profane
opposers of God and godliness; but yet this excellent education is but the
external moulding of a man, not the internal renovation of his heart. It Is like
the midwifes bowing or ordering the limbs, it is not giving the limbs
themselves. Be not therefore deceived in this great work, Has God molded thy
heart as well as parents thy life? Thy Father and Mother they have taught thus,
and thou saw them live thus, but has God also taught thee the power of
these things in thy own soul.

Lastly, Those may be called Embryoes, who have many desires and wishes that
they 4. When good desires are overcome by temptations.
might be in this happy state of life, but then they have so many temptations,
so many obstructions and pull-backs in the way, that they presently give over.
Balaam (though we do not conceive of him, as in a preparatory way to grace,
yet) he wishes he might die the death of the righteous; and thus some cried to
Christ, Lord evermore give us of this bread out of a confused appetite; these
are like the sluggard that desires, but yet pulls not his hand out of his
bosom, therefore his desire is said to kill him. In this rank also you may have
many who have inward wishes and desires, Oh that they were such in whom God
delights! Oh that they might not only die the death, but live the life of a
righteous man. Thus they desire, but sometimes carnal friends, husbands,
neighbors, they throw water on these little sparks, and presently put out all,
or else their worldly imploiments, and earthly businesses they freeze the
heart, and make it senseless, or else their own sluggishnesse and dullness
choaketh that good seed in them. Therefore do not think all is sure, because
thou say, though I be thus and thus, yet I desire to do otherwise. Oh here
may be a dangerous delusion! Thy desires may be thy ruin; for if thou only
desire, and there is no further progress, thou restest in thy desires, and
these produce no real operations, they will prove but cobwebs to thee in time
of danger. There is indeed a position of Divines, That the desire of Grace is
Grace; as hunger and thirst argue a man is alive, and the promise of being
satisfied is made to the hungry and thirsty, but those desires are spiritual,
strong, constant, efficacious, and produce mighty operations; compared
therefore to hunger, which will break stone walls to get some food. Do not
therefore tumble in this pit of destruction, many have suffered shipwreck at
this Rock, saying, They desire to go to Heaven, They desire to please God; but
if thy desire were earnest and powerful, it would put thee upon the use of all
the means, that lead thee to such a blessed end. Notwithstanding the sluggards
desire to eat, yet his field was grown over with thorns and thistles, and so
though thou desire Heaven, yet thy life is the broad way to Hell.

A third sort of those who miscarry in this new Birth, are Abortives, such 3.
There may be abortives as to an appearing life of grace, never coming to
maturity.
who come not to their maturity. Now although it be true, That in the true life
of Grace there cannot be properly any Abortive, and where the life of Grace
has once been, though in the least degree, that is an immortal and
incorruptible life, yet we may call them Abortives, because seemingly in their
own judgment, and to all others they had the life of Grace, but yet it comes
to no true ripeness in them; Their Profession, their Duties; are wild Grapes.
These are denoted in the third kind of hearers, in whom the seed came up, and
there was Fruit, but says the Text they did not (...), They did not bring that
fruit to perfection, to ripeness. Thus Christ tells the Church, He did not
find her works perfect, Revel. 2. There was much outward appearing goodness,
but they were not solid, perfect works. Thy Duties are ripe, when all that sour
juice and bitterness is excocted, when they are not done out of Formality,
Customarinesse, Hypocrisy, when they are done from right Principles, in an
holy manner, and to holy ends. So that thy Profession, thy Family Duties, and
all thy external Demonstrations of Grace, do not prove any thing, unless they
be ripe, and unless Grace be predominant in them, though they cannot be done
without all dross. But has not God in his Providence showed (...) our
Humiliations and Professions have been to him, in the very fruit of the Trees,
and the Corn of the Ground, nothing kindly ripes, but waterish, and so not
making wholesome or pleasant food for the sustenance of man. Truly even such
has our Righteousness, our Reformation been, and that under his Judgments.
Our Prayers, our Family Duties, our solemn Assemblies have been full of
corrupt bitterness within. As that Body cannot be sound, though it may appear
never so well that has inward vital Diseases; so let thy outward Conversation
be never so unblameable and pious, yet if there be not a sound constitution
within, it will not endure; Know then this consideration goes deeper then the
former, this happily may shake the foundation of all thy Hopes and Comforts
thou have had a long while.

The last way of Miscarriage in this new Birth, is, When it proves a Monster;
4. There may be monsters brought ^o^^h.
For so the Soul that sometimes has been in great travail and trouble, at last
brings out a Monster in stead of a lovely Child; and as S^ptalius the
Physician on Aristotle observes, That of all Creatures, Monsters in mankind
are the most terrible and deformed, which he attributes partly to Gods wrath
and revenge upon men for their sins, or to presage some terrible Events in
the world; so Monsters in Grace in this new Birth are the most terrible of all.

Now as in Nature, so here in Grace, they come two ways: This happens 1.
From defect.


First, Through Defect, when there is want of due matter; and thus in Grace men
grow monstrous through defect,

First, When there is only the outward Lineaments and Shape of Christianity,
As, 1. When there is only a shape of Christianity.
but no inward supernatural life at all. When men have the outward Expression
and Profession of Religion, but in their lives there is nothing but
ungodliness. Thus a man that prays, comes to Church, takes upon him
Christianity, and yet lives in profane courses, this man is a spiritual
Monster, and ought to breed horror and terror in all those that behold his
ways Or suppose his life be outwardly clean, and there be no inward change;
this is a monster through defect, Thou have a name that thou live, but thou
art dead, says Christ to the Church, Revel. 3. 1. He is a Jew that is one
inwardly, and circumcision is that of the Spirit.

Secondly, A Miscarriage through defect is, When there are some inward 2. When
affections on the heart come to no perfection.
Affections and Workings of God upon the heart, but they come to no Perfection.
Such a monster was Agrippa, Thou have almost persuaded me to be a Christian,
Acts 26. 28. If therefore the Lord at any time cause trouble and fear to rise
in thy soul about sin, pray that thou may not miscarry: Oh Lord, say, I
fear all this pain may give over again; we see nothing more ordinary then such
miscarriages; What is become of those Troubles, Resolutions and strong Purposes
that were once in thy heart? Are they not all vanished? But this was touched
upon before.

Thirdly, A third Miscarriage is, Want of Perseverance, when men for a great
while have gone on with much Fervency and Delight in Gods ways; Who seemed
more Zealous then they, more Religious then they? but afterward prove wretched
Apostates, and return to their old vomit again: Oh these are terrible and
dreadful monsters! The Apostle charge some, That began in the Spirit, but
ended in the flesh. Is not this to make the Poets monster, Humano capiti, etc.
To add a Serpents body to a man's head, etc? A godly man ^e grows up further
and further into a full stature. Paul thought himself not to have apprehended
yet. As a man on the bottom of an high hill, thinks if he were on the top, he
were then able to touch the Heavens, but when he comes up he sees himself
infinite short still. Thus it is in the way of Grace. A natural man thinks,
if he could do thus and thus, he then should be complete, but if once God
change his heart, and he come to such a stature, he sees so far into the way
of Grace, and so much more is still to be done, that he judges himself even at
the highest, but to begin to be a Christian.

Or secondly, A Monster may be by Excess. Now although it be true, That a man
cannot exceed in Godliness, and that of the Father be true, Modus diligendi
Deum est sine modo, The measure of loving God is without measure; yet as we
say, Superstition is an Excess in Worship, because it runs out in the
practice of many External things God never commanded. So it is here. Thus many
have been troubled for sin, found great burdens upon them, and what have they
done? Betook themselves to some Monastery, afflicted themselves with many
penitential Chastisements, lying on the Ground, feeding on Herbs, etc. This
was to miscarry in the Excess; God has not required such things, and we are
to manifest our Humiliation, our Repentance only in such ways, and after such
a manner as God himself has commanded.

Use. Of Exhortation unto all those who make any pretense to Religion, that Use.
they would take heed of such Soul-Miscarriages. As they say of bodily
Miscarriages, They may endanger ever having a perfect Child afterward: So the
Soul that has been often in pangs and trouble for sin, yet has come out
again, without any Reformation, and this done several times, it falls out
very rarely that ever such come to any maturity in Godliness; Consider whether
thy Miscarriages are not in the Defect, for so the most are. Does the Word,
though it convince thy judgment, yet make thy Conversation holy? Thou have the
Name of a Christian, but the life of an Heathen, or a Pagan; What a monstrous
Composition is this? If there should be a soul of a beast in the body of a man,
to inform it, the outward lineaments of the body would not make him a man; for
it is the soul that gives the Specification, and Denomination. Thus it is here,
Thou have the body of a Christian, when thy outward life is conformable to his
Law, but the soul as it were of a Beast, when thy heart is fastened to any
sin, and thy Affections glewed to pleasures. Especially look to this, you who
have at any time found great pangs and troubles of Conscience for sin. Oh thy
heart has been in such fears, terrors, that thou need Minister after
Minister to pour Oil in thy wounds! Oh where are all these? What is become of
them? Why have thou begun in the Spirit, and ended in the flesh? As thou art
a Monster indeed, so thou should be in thy own apprehension, and to thy own
self. O Lord, I am ashamed to look on my self, to think on my self, I am so
misshapen, I am so foul a Beast!

SERMON XXXIX.
Declaring what both by Duty and Privilege a Son of God is, which he becomes
by the New Birth.

JOHN 3. 3. Verily, Verily, unless a man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of Heaven.
THe true nature of regeneration and the counterfeit thereof being already
discovered, I shall only insist upon one corollary, which may be deduced from
this Doctrinal point, and so dismiss it. From what therefore has been
delivered, we may by use of Instruction gather, That such who are regenerated,
Corollary from the Doctrine of Regeneration. It makes a man a child of God
or new born, are thereby become the sons of God. Those who by natural
propagation were children of wrath, by this regeneration are children of Grace.
This therefore shall be the conclusion I shall insist upon by way of inference,
viz. That those who are new born, are thereby made the Sons of God. They have
God for their Father, and are thereby put into a condition full of Privileges,
as well as of Duties. So that in the handling of this new state of Sonship the
regenerated persons are put into, we shall speak first of the qualification of
their Duties, and then of their Privileges: But before we do so, some few
particulars are to be premised. As

First, In being sons to God there are two things considerable. Premised
particulars. 1. In this Sonship are considerable,


1. Their right to the glorious inheritance of heaven. 2. Their sanctified
nature whereby they become like God, and imitate him in his holiness.
For as children of men do partake of their nature, and commonly imitate and
represent their Fathers in their manners and conversation; So those that are
born of God, are said to be Partakers of the Divine nature, and thereby
resemble God, (according to our capacity) being holy, as he is holy. Now in the
Sons of God we are to make a great difference between their right to heaven,
and their holy nature and conversation.

1. For the former is not grounded upon their regeneration, for that is
imperfect, 1. Right to the inheritance with its true ground.
and their holiness being imperfect, does Recipere magis and minus, does
receive more or less; but this is founded upon their justification, and is
commonly called, Their adoption. Orthodox and learned Divines differ about the
Order of Adoption; some make it a grace next to Predestination, and so before
Justification; others make it not indeed the same with justification, but
immediately dependent on it, and grounded thereupon: and none but Papists make
this Adoption, as it does invest us with a Title to eternal Glory, to be built
on our regeneration.

2. But then the other considerable property in our Sonship is, whereby we are
2. Likeness to God, with its ground.
made inwardly holy, and upon these principles act holily: this flows from
our Regeneration; and so because of our new birth we are made sons of God, and
are begotten anew by his word, because hereby we resemble God our Father: For
as on the contrary, wicked men are said to be of their Father the Devil,
because they do his works; So the Godly are of God their Father, because they
resemble him: He purifieth himself, even as God is pure, 1 John 3. 3. So that
these two carefully distinguished, will keep us from proud presumption on the
one hand, and yet be a great incentive to Godliness on the other hand.

Secondly, Consider that Christ is the only and true begotten of God by an
eternal 2. The difference between Christ's sonship and ours.
and natural generation; we are the Sons of God by a temporal, and free
gracious generation: So that it is a rule of Divines, Quod Christus natura, nos
gratia, That which Christ has by Nature, we have by Grace. Christ is the Son
of God, not in that sense as the Socinians, and such blasphemous Heretics say,
Non factus filius Dei, but Natus, Not the made Son of God, but the born son of
God, and therefore homo^usial of the same nature with God; and in this sense
the Pharisees and Jews understood him when they charged him with blasphemy,
Making himself, as they said, equal with God. It is true that place of the
Psalmist, Thou art my son, this day I have begotten th^e, Acts. 13. 33. is
applied to his resurrection, and the manifestation, or declaration of his
Sonship; but those places which speak of Christ's subsistency, before he was
incarnated, do evidently argue him so to be God, as that he was the same with
God from all eternity: and the first Chap. of John's Gospel makes it
irrefragably true, notwithstanding all the Heretics endeavor to elude it.
Well, as Christ is thus naturally, so those that are regenerated are thus
graciously, and so are said to be coheirs with Christ: though therefore we are
begotten of God, yet Christ is the firstborn, and has the preheminency in all
things.

Thirdly, Consider that we may be said to be the Sons of God in three respects.
3. We are Sons of God. 1. As his creatures.


1. As we are creatures, having our being from him: In which sense Paul
sanctifies that verse of the Poet, (...), We are his offspring, Act^ 17. 28.
What the Poet said of Jupiter, Paul applies to the true God. Thus God is a
Father by Creation; and all men, even wicked men are his children in this
sense; but this is no advantage, for though a man be born of God in this
respect, yet if he be no more, he shall never see the Kingdom of heaven. He
that made them, will not save them, says the Prophet, Esai 27. 11. Though ye
are his creatures, yet having fallen from him to take the Devils character, he
will deal no more with you as with his own.

2, There are Sons to God by an external Covenant, or administration of Grace.
2. As in an external Covenant.
Thus men receiving the outward seal of the Covenant of Grace, and submitting
externally to those Laws God prescribes, are called Sons. Thus the people of
Israel are often called the sons of God, because of that external adoption, (Of
whom is the Adoption, says Paul:) Even as in the new Testament believers are
called Saints, because of their external profession, though they were not
inwardly holy: Out of Egypt have I called my Son, which though principally
applied to Christ, yet Typically, as learned men think, it was true of the
Israelites called by God out of Egypt. Now this Sonship is also but Nominal and
Titular: To have no more of sons then these outward badges, is but an
aggravation of hell, and eternal torments, Thus Christ says, The children of
the Kingdom shall be cast forth, Mat. 8. 12. Oh the terror of this: Many that
are now called, and reputed so, the sons of God, and the children of the
Kingdom of grace, shall be thrown out from all those hopes and expectations
they had. Even as among the Israelites, though there came so many thousand of
them out of Egypt, and you would have thought that all those who enjoyed such
miraculous mercies from heaven, should have been made happy: yet two only of
all that number entered into Canaan: So of those many that are called, which
have the name and external privileges of the sons of God, even few of them
will be saved,

3. Therefore there are sons by real Sanctification, as well as federal
velation; and 3. As truly sanctified.
these are those whom our Savior means in the Text, and to whom the
inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven is promised. Baptism therefore, and the
Sacraments do not make you sons of God, it is this inward work of a new Nature.

These things presupposed, let us consider as I promised, How the sons of God
are qualified?

1. By Duty. And then 2. By privilege.
By Duty: First, They have the Affections of a son in holy fear and reverence:
If 1. By duty, showing like affections in holy fear.
I be a Father, where is my honor, says God, Mal. 1. 6. If we are to honor
our earthly Parents, who give us only (and that but instrumentally neither) a
bodily being, how much rather ought we with an holy fear to deport our selves
before him, who is such an Omnipotent Father, and has other chastisements even
upon the soul and heart, which earthly Fathers have not. Now this filial fear
is an excellent bridle and check to all that wantonness and insolency we many
times run into, through our Fathers goodness and kindness to us: There is a
servile mercinary fear, and there is a Filial ingenuous fear: the first is
unworthy and unbeseeming the son of God, but the second is a requisite
condition. Observe theu thy self: If thou art a Son of God, What holy trembling
and fear will be upon thee in all thy approaches to him? His Word, his
Ordinances will cause much inward reverence and lowliness of heart in thee:
Earthly parents are not Omnipresent, and so cannot be every where with their
sons, which imboldens them to do many things which they would never do, if
their parents did behold them, nay they would not for a world their father ever
should come to know them. Jacobs children when they had committed that horrible
act on their brother Joseph, all their care was to hide it from their Father:
but now God is a Father every where present; he is all Eye, There is nothing
done in seceret, but thy Father sees it. There is no heart-pride, no
heartearthlynesse, but thy Father sees it. There is never a time thou prayest,
hear the word, but thy Father sees with what frame of Spirit it is. Oh
therefore if thou art a Son of God, thou will discover it in thy whole
carriage: a Son fears the frowns of his Father; I dare not do this; my father
will be offended; and I, Whither shall I go? Thus the Apostle Peter, If ye call
him Father, pass your sojourning here with fear, 1 Pet. 1. 17.

Secondly, The Affections of Sons are seen in a patient submission to all his
chastistisements, 2. In submission to chastisements.
for who may better afflict thee, then a Father? Whom I love, I chasten, says
God: And the Apostle argues strongly from the less to the greater, If we
suffer our earthly Parents after the flesh to chastise, how much rather the
Father of spirits, Heb. 12. 9. He is a Father of our spirits, and so he may
chastise us in them: fill us with darkness, sadness, trouble, and grief of
soul. Now this consideration would greatly quiet the waves and winds which are
ready to rise up in us. What is the ground of all our impatience, discontent,
and trouble against Gods dispensations? Is it not because we look not upon him
as so wise, and so potent a Father? Who can do it better? Can the Artificer
know when his gold has been enough in the furnace, and he will not let it stay
a moment longer: and shall not God know when he has chastised thee enough: If
thou had a Child-like disposition, thou would say, although all I feel be
bitter, yet he is a Father still. I have been an ill Child, and this makes him
a Good Father in chastising.

Thirdly, The affections of a Son are seen in being carried out in all our
obedience to him from an inward sweet principle of love. In this sense they are
said, Because 3. In obedience flowing from love.
they are the sons of God, they are not under the Law. Not as if the Law were
not a rule to them, but only they are carried out to obey it from a fountain
of love: even as a dutiful child will obey his Fathers commands, although he
had no estate, or great inheritance to give him. And thus it is here, Though
there were no Heaven or glory to bestow upon a regenerated person, yet he has
that principle of love which would persuade him to obey God. Thus the Apostle,
As many as are led by the spirit, are the sons of God, Romans 8. 14. Such who
have the spirit of God renewing their natures, and so guiding them by the word
to their duties, these are the sons of God: Not that it is unlawful for a child
of God to have an eye to the reward: for it is said of Moses, He had an eye to
the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 26. The greek word signifies a fixed intent
eye: and every amor mercedis, is not mercenarius, every love of a reward is not
mercenary, unless it be wholly and totally for this, being joined with no love
to God at the same present.

Fourthly, His affections are seen in his joy and delight in all those duties
whereby 4. Joy and delight in duties.
he may have communion with him. John 8. He that is of God, hears his word. A
Son delights to have letters from his Father, to have discourse about him,
especially to enjoy his presence. Truly we have communion with the Father,
says the Apostle John: O^ then, What a discovery is this of thy sonship? How
art thou affected in praying, in hearing, in all religious duties? They are a
constant burden and trouble to thee; this argues thee to be no son of God.
Let not therefore vain delusions carry thee aside: It is not thy coming to
Church, thy standing within Gods Courts, that demonstrates thee to be of God;
but it is an heavenly and spiritual joy in these approaches. Does faith work
strongly in God as a Father? Does that improove with much sweetness this
relation, and hereupon thy soul be enlarged in much fervency of this spirit?
This is to be the Son of God. Even as the Angels which in Job are called, The
Sons of God, with much alacrity and joy delight in Gods presence.

Fifthly, The Son of God manifests himself in his hatred and opposition unto
all sin; For 5. In hatred of sin.
every creature acts according to its kind; the Lamb according to the nature
of a Lamb: and thus because he is born of God, he acts according to a Divine
principle, That as God is a God of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.
so he is of a purer heart then to love and delight in sin. He that is born of
God sineth not, neither indeed can he, because the seed abides in him, 1 John
5. 18. All men are divided into these two rancks (says Austin) they are either
Filii Dei, or Filii Diaboli, The Sons of God, or the Sons of the Devil: Now
their works will manifest them. Art thou a man afraid of sin, carefully
studying to avoid it in thy whole life? Have thou no more accord with it, then
light has with darkness? And so for wicked men; Thou have no love to their
company or council; thou hate them with a perfect hatred; thou can with no
more love and delight be with them, then the Dove among Jays, or the Lamb among
the Wolves, then thou have a sure sign of a Son of God: But if on the contrary,
thou art profane in thy life; thou love those that live dissolutely; men
that damn, swear, and profane the Sabbath; thou art so fat from having thy
righteous soul tormented with hearing and seeing such things, as Lots was, as
that rather thou rejoycest in them, and make much of such: What can be a
greater demonstration that thou art of the Devil then this? If the Devil were
to act visibly in the world, would he not live such a life as this is? Men
therefore need not think it such an hard matter to know what they are: They
need not say, Who will ascend into heaven to let us know how it is with us? For
thy out ward life and way does proclaim to all the world that thou art of the
Devil: And although it would make thy heart swell with rage to be called a
child of the Devil, yet know assuredly by the Scripture rules, we can give
thee no other name. Oh that a multitude of those who call themselves
Christians, should not be astonished at these things: What to be children of
the Devil, to be limbs of Satan? Yet by their works they demonstrate themselves
to be so.

Sixthly, The Sons of God they imitate God their Father in his love and
goodness (...) imitation (...) goodness (...).
to all. Our Savior amplifieth this excellent property of God, That he causes
the Sun to shine upon the good and bad, and hence concludes, Be ye perfect as
your heavenly Father is perfect, Mat. 5. 48. If we consider the matter
precedent, we should have judged the natural consequence to be, Be ye patient
as your heavenly Father is patient; but because goodness even to bad men, to
enemies, is the highest degree of graces, and as it were the perfection of all,
and without which, let a man speak with the tongue of Angels, and work all kind
of Miracles, yea be eminent in all matter of Godliness, yet be without this, he
is not a perfect Christian. Therefore under all the injuries, oppressions, and
desperate persecutions, although revenge, as the heathen said, be sweeter thou
honey it self: yet consider what God thy Father does: How do wicked men provoke
him every day, yet for all that he does not make the earth presently gape to
devour them! He has not put out the glorious light of the Sun: He does not
dissolve the work of the creation, and blast every thing into dust. What an
excellent pattern is this for thee to write after? Especially considering
vengeance is Gods, and does properly belong to him: and as you have God, so
Christ also for an admirable pattern. Father forgive them, they know not what
they do: Though he could have prayed for legions of Angels to deliver him, and
destroy his adversaries, yet he submits to Gods will. The Scripture gives
many signs of Grace, yet none is so remarkable and commended as this, Mat. 5.
And howsoever some Papists think, to love our enemies is a mere counsel for
perfect men, not a duty to all Christians, yet it is plain our Savior presses
it upon all who would be the children of God: and howsoever this be not so much
pressed and preached, we Christians do not among other symptoms of Grace look
after this, yet it is plain the Scripture makes this one of the chiefest, and
is a sign Grace has great dominion over thee when thou art enabled to do this.
Some malicious heathens once met with a Christian, and beat him even unto death
almost, asking him, What great matter ever Christ did? Even this great thing,
replieth the Christian, That I can for give you, though you use me thus
cruelly. I confess many who yet live in their sins, and discover no power of
Grace, will yet proclaim their love to their enemies, and that they forgive
them with all their hearts: but this is easilier said then done; and although
we read of heathens who have been admirable in this way, yet they not doing of
it by the spirit of Christ, but from an humane generosity, obtained thus much
only, That they shall he less punished then malicious revengefull persons.

Seventhly, The Sons of God, being born of him, have a more noble and heavenly
7. In being of a noble and heavenly spirit.
spirit then men of the world. There are men so plunged into earthly affairs;
that you would think that were true of their souls, which the Scriptures says
of their bodies, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. These are worms
(I do not say and no men) but no sons of God. Thou who art born of God,
should do things like God. Fortes creantur fortibus, and thus that new birth
of thine will not only lift thee up above sin, and all such base defilements,
but even above all earthly temptations. And thy body is not made more upright
toward heaven, then thy soul is made that way by grace. Hence we are said, To
sit with Christ in heavenly places: and as pearls and precious stones, though
for the matter of them they be of inferior substance, yet in their color,
luster, and glory, they resemble the heavens, from whom comes the greatest
influence to make them: Or as the Clouds, though generated from Vapors and
exhalations arising from the earth, yet in their motions are wholly carried up
and down according to the heavens; so these men though they have earthly
bodies, live on the same food, breath in the same air as others do, yet are
formed into the glorious likeness of God; and being sons of God, disdain to
ignoble and debase themselves by any filthy lusts: As Jacobs son, because he
was loved had a coat of diverse colors bestowed on him, so God bestows
several graces upon his people. The Queens daughter is in curious needle work,
and for her to go and tumble in the mire, is more beseeming a swine then a
Queens daughter. Oh then that men who by birth or education being above others,
judge it baseness to do servile work, would much more abhor sin as the greatest
vileness of all. It is sin only makes a man like a beast, or a Devil: when
therefore thou art solicited, or tempted to any sin, say, Remember this is not
becoming the son of God: though wicked men, and ungodly ones will do thus and
thus, yet the children of God are better bred.

In the next place let us consider their qualification by way of Privileges,
and By privileges.
they are wonderful, in so much that John by way of admiration, calls upon all
to be astonished at it, Behold what manner of love he has shown, that we
should be called the sons of God, 1 John 3. 1. Let his condition be never ^o
poor and miserable in the world, yet if a Son of God, we may say, Behold Gods
love to such an one! Now their privileges, Are

First, To be made conformable unto Christ in his sufferings. This is a strange
privilege, 1. Conformity to Christ in his sufferings.
yet the Scripture commends it as one, viz. when for his sake we are opposed
and troubled. To you it is given to suffer for his name, Phil 1. ^9. And
blessed are ye when all men speak all manner of evil against you for my names
sake. And so, He has predestined us to be conformable unto the image of his
son, Romans 8. which as the context shows, is sufferings and tribulations, and
we shall reign with him, if so be we suffer with him. Thus they thought it a
privilege, when they glorified God, that they were accounted worthy to suffer
for his names sake.

A second privilege is, The spirit of Adoption, whereby we are enabled to call
2. The spirit of Adoption.
God Father, Rom 8. Gal. 4. Servants might not call their Mal^e^s Father; but
these children may appropriate God unto themselves, saying, Our father: Oh what
a comfortable condition is this, especially in sad times, when we cannot say
any thing is ^u^s, yet upon just grounds to say, God is ours. And having this
spirit of Acopion, we are thereby enabled to go with boldness into the presence
of God. (...) and slavishness, which is like a torment in the soul, is for a
great degree quite cast out. Thou therefore may go with an holy and humble
confidence unto God, (...) say, O Lord, to call thee Father, to be assured of
thy love in particular, this is childrens bread, children are to feed on it:
And what Father when his son asks for bread, will give him a Scorpion? O, my
Father, Why is it that I have asked for bread so long, and yet have a Scorpion?
Do not thou then who expressisn the duties of: Son, question the privileges of
a Son: If thou live like a child of God, believe also, be ^old also like a
son of God.

A third privilege is, The working of all things together for their good, Romans
8. 3. The working of all things for good.
Being the sons of God, they are made coheirs with Christ, and by him have
every good thing promised them, Whether things past, or things present, life or
death, all is yours, 1 Cor. 3. Though men may admire outward honor and dignity
in the world, yet certainly this is the state of glory to be sought for. When
men are put into such a relation to God, that now what ever does befall them
shall turn to their advantage. They have the promise of God, which is better
then the Philosophers stone; for this turns every thing not into gold but
into grace and glory. No marvel though Moses adopted to be a son to Pharaohs
Daughter, yet refuses the pleasures of Egypt, and accepts the reproaches of
Christ before them; for to Phara^h all good things turned to his evil: his
greatness, his power, his pomp, and all the miracles God did to him, but to
Moses all his evil things proved for his great advantage. Oh then, with what
spiritual content, and holy security of soul may the sons of God live in the
most dangerous times.

The last privilege is, Gods care and protection over them. Fathers treasure
up for their children; and thus they being the sons of God. God lays up for
them: Our Savior brings this argument to confirm his Disciples, and in them
all believers, against sinful cares, and worldly thoughts, what to do. Your
heavenly Father knows what you have need of. Oh then in any exigence, in any
great strait, say, O my Father, though I know not what to do, yet thou do:
Though I am unworthy to be a son, yet thou art gracious and good to be a
Father. What encouraged the Prodigal but this, He would go to his Father: that
was a sweet name, and would work sweet things: If ye who are evil know how to
give good things to your children, how much rather shall your Father which is
in heaven? Oh beloved, we need no other fountain to draw out water of
salvation from: we need no other honey comb to suck the sweetness out then
this, God is a Father to his Children.

Use, Are we by regeneration the sons of God, and do the sons of God imitate
and resemble God, holy as he is, pure as he is? Then Who can bewail enough the
Use.
cursed and hopeless estate of most men who live under the Gospel? How are
they affected with this glorious estate of sonship? How careful are men to get
their Leases, their Evidences made sure about earthly advantages, and not in
the least manner careful to make sure this heavenly inheritance? And as for
their lives, their fruits may make you know what they are. Is it for the sons
of God to wallow in their swinish lusts? is it for the sons of God to curse,
swear, and blaspheme the name of their Father? Oh let the heavens be ashamed,
and the sun blush to see the wickedness committed amongst us, who yet would be
all thought the Children of God. Thou call God Father in thy prayer; Oh
blasphemy! Is God the Father of profane wicked men?

SECT. V. Treating of the Nature of Grace under the name New Creature, with the
Counterfeit of it.
SERMON XL.
Showing the Necessity of the New Creature.

GAL. 6. 15. For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision, or Uncircumcision
avails any thing, but a New Creature.
THe Apostle at the 11th Verse concludes this Epistle with a testification of
his love and kindness to them: For his reproofs had bin sharp, yet love caused
them, and that is good of Austins, Dilige, and loquere quod vis, Love, and then
speak what thou will. The Argument of his love is seen in the length of his
Letter; a large Letter argued large affections, and that with his own hand;
whereas many of his other Epistles were written by others. The second
demonstration of his love is in warning them against false Apostles, whom he
describes by their ambition and hypocrisy: Their hypocrisy, they desired
(...), an excellent word, To make a fair show. As strumpets commonly more trim
up themselves than grave Matrons, so falsehood is more varnished and painted
than truth. Then their ambition is described in affecting Disciples, Ambitio
scenam desiderat, Ambition loves to have some look on and applaud. Lastly,
there is the carnal advantage they look at, it is to avoid persecution: For
the Jews being zealous of the Law, and persecuting to the death those that
seemed to take it away; these false Apostles to avoid danger would retain the
Doctrine of Christ, and the Ceremonial Law also: Thus they were as Reeds
shaken with every wind. Now the Apostle to oppose them, instanceth in the
contrary grace in himself, God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross
of Christ, etc. Persecutions for the Gospel I fear not, but glory in them; and
hereupon lays down a general sentence, an excellent practical Aphorism, In
Christ Jesus neither Circumcision, or uncircumcision avails any thing, but a
new Creature. As if he should have said, you are wholly taken up in
disputations about Circumcision and uncircumcision, all your conference, all
your studies run out about this; but the truth of grace lies not in these
things. It is not any Privilege, any Sacrament, any external duty makes us
acceptable to God if we are not new Creatures. The Apostle has a parallel
expression in the Chapter before, Chap 5, 6. 1 Cor. 7. 19.

Before I come to handle the nature of this new Creature, I cannot pass the
pre-eminence and superiority the Apostle gives it to all other privileges and
duties though never so glorious. From whence observe,

That no privilage, or duty in Religion, is acceptable to God, unless a man be
a new Observe. No privilege, etc.
Creature.

Do thou pray? unless a new Creature God owneth it not. Do thou hear?
unless a new Creature God regards thee not: As Joseph said to his Brethren,
Unless bring Benjamin come not in my presence; Unless you come to holy duties
as new Creatures, God loves not to see you. This Doctrine is so necessary, and
so worthy of all acceptance, that the Apostle adds, Whosoever walks after
this rule (that is) as some expound, according to this position, that no
external duties are accepted without a new Creature) peace be on him and
mercy. The receiving of this truth, is opening of the door for the peace of God
to rest on you.

To understand this better, know, That the Apostle does not speak this, as if
external duties were to be omitted or neglected; for he that says here,
Circumcision avails The neglect of duties not hence to be in^erred.
nothing, does in another place say, It profits much every way, Romans 3. 2. and
he calls it, The seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11. Thus the
Ordinances of the New Testament, prayer, hearing, receiving of Sacraments,
though they are nothing without Regeneration, yet they are duties commanded in
their time and order. If a man should say, eyes, and ears, and a head are
nothing without a soul; it does not therefore follow, that they are not to be
prized as mercies, when God gives us to enjoy both soul and body. Though the
Chaff be worth nothing when the Wheat is not, yet it was a great defense and
shelter to the Wheat when it covered it growing in the field. Outward duties
are not to be opposed to the work of grace, but composed; you must not argue
from one, to the destruction, but to the position of the other.

If a man should say, There are so many forms of Church Government, and if a
man be for this form, or the other, it is nothing unless a man be a new
Creature; he says truly: but to infer from thence, that Therefore it is no
matter for that form which has clearest testimony from Scripture, it is a
great inconsequence; and the ground of all this is, Although outward duties,
and the Religious forms God has appointed, be not the essence of grace; yet
being commanded by God, we are to use them, and thereby testify our worship of
him; and withal where true grace is, they do increase grace, and by daily
frequent exercise therein, we come to an higher degree in holiness; for they
are the Pool, in which not an Angel, but God comes in with healing; they are
the Garden, wherein Christ walks; they are the Feast, at which God himself is
present; and for these spiritual effects, the Saints of God have such
admirable ravishing expressions about them. Take heed therefore of that
dangerous Rock on one hand, to neglect the ordinances, expecting immediate
Revelations, and Enthusiasms; or on the other hand, a propliane contempt of
them, even as the Swine does a Pearl.

Now let us consider, Why God cares not for those external duties, without
the work of Regeneration. If thou prayest and hear in that old state thou
were born in, and not renewed, these duties are like wild Grapes. And,

First, Because God does not graciously accept any man, but where he sees his
own likeness, his own similitude. Thus God made man at first after his own
Image, that so Reasons 1. Without Gods likeness (...) acceptance.
he might delight in him, and communicate happiness to him, which Beasts were
not capable of. Now this Regeneration is called, Ephesians. 4. A renewing after the
Image of God. It is a known Rule, That likeness is a cause of love. And this
holds in some proportion between us and God: For although this new Creature
of grace has many imperfections and deformities in it; yet for the substance
and main it is the likeness and Image of God, and so for Christ's sake he
accepts of it.

Is it any wonder then, if the prayer, the hearing of a wicked man be an
abomination? for God sees there the Devils likeness, the resemblance of
Satan, and how can he entertain such? Say then to thy self. I go to pray, I
go to hear to day, but is there any thing of God in me, am I holy, as he is
holy in some degree? If not, God sees nothing but what he hates and abhors
in me. Those outward duties they put not a divine stamp upon us, but this
inward change wrought by God. How then is it, that you are no more sollicitous
in this great matter? why should you not be as much afraid of praying without a
new heart, as not praying at all; of hearing without a new heart, as not
hearing at all?

Secondly, God does not regard outward duties unless we be new Creatures
because 2. We cannot perform duties upon right grounds, unless regenerated
we are not able without this to perform them upon spiritual and supernatural
grounds: And unless all our duties be grafted upon this stock, they are no
more than Brambles and Thorns fit for burning: now the supernatural ground in
praying and hearing is because of God, and in reference to him: Israel was an
empty Vine, in all her duties, because she brought forth fruit for her self,
Hos. 10. 1. she did not turn to God, even unto him. The Motive or Loadstone to
draw our affections in any spiritual exercise, must be Gods goodness,
holiness, and spiritual excellency: The Virgins love thee, because of thy
ointment powered forth, Cant. 1. 2. Christ raxeth his followers because of his
loaves; and the Apostle reckons it as an Argument, That all old things are
passed away, and all things are become new, because, they know no man, no nor
Christ himself after the Flesh, 2 Cor. 5. They do not look for carnal
advantages by Christ, but love him and obey him because of spiritual grounds;
now a stone may as well fly up into the air, as a man without this new
Creature be carried out in Religious duties upon spiritual grounds. A Beast
may as well speak and understand reason as a natural man discern and be
affected with spiritual Motives; and yet if this be not, a man in all
religious duties is like David in Saul's Armor, they are too big and great for
him, he knows not how to manage them: Consider then, How can I pray, or hear
upon those supernatural Motives which God requires, if this new nature be
wanting? How can Im prayer rejoice in the promises of God, mourn because of the
foul and loathsome nature of sin, if there be not this good foundation laid?
This then is all in all, and yet we do not above all attend to this: Therefore
as Paul said, commending the gifts of the Holy Ghost, speaking with tongues,
working of Miracles, etc. Yet I show y^u a more excellent way. So, though ye
do well in praying, in hearing, yet there is a more excellent and more
necessary way, and that is to perform all these by a sanctified, renewed
principle within.

Thirdly, as Religious duties cannot be performed graciously without this, so,
Neither is a man a fit subject to receive those spiritual benefits
communicated by God 3. We are not fit to receive the benefits of duties without
regeneration.
in them, without this. Unless a man be a new Creature he knows not what it
is to have Communion and Fellowship with God in Prayer and Sacraments; He
cannot taste of the comforts and joys in the Holy Ghost; such expressions as
those, I will come and sup with him, and he with me; and my soul pants after
the living God, when shall I come and enjoy him? he is not able to understand:
There is in the spiritual discharge of holy duties, a very heaven, a
comfortable enjoying of Gods presence; I will dwell with them, says God, 2
Cor. 6. and ye are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3. But (alas) these
are unspeakable miseries to an unregenerate man. In all duties they have but
the bone as it were, not the marrow; they stand in the Porch of the Temple,
they do not enter into the Holy of Holies; They do not feel what David and
Paul, and all those holy Servants of God have felt in Gods Word; what should
move you more to seek after this new Creature than this? To think these
Ordinances are but husks to me, and Manna to others; they are but a Wilderness
to me, when a Garden to others; others go home blessing and praising God, as
if they had been in a glorious transfiguration, but I return earthly and
stupid. Oh why is all this, but because I want this new Creature; then it
wouldbe new praying, and new hearing.

Fourthly, therefore no outward Duty or Privilege is accepted without a new 4.
Justification and Regeneration are are inseparably united.
Creation, Because justification and this new Creature are inseparably united
together, and cannot be one moment divided from each other, Romans 8. There is no
condemnation to those who are in Jesus Christ, (there is Justification:) Who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, (there is Sanctification:) Now
seeing that justification is the ground of all acceptance both of our persons
and duties, and this is always concomitant with a new Creature; therefore
without this, that has necessarily adjoined to it a ground of all acceptance,
we can never be regarded by God. Oh therefore think with thy self, The prayer
of a justified person is only approved of, God has first respect to Abel, and
then to his Offering: You must not think by praying and hearing to get your
persons accepted, but they must be first accepted, that your duties may; now
this justification is of none but this regenerated person: Why should ye not
hearken diligently to these things, for if all thy duties hitherto have not
been accepted, thou art to begin anew, to lay a new foundation; and certainly
it is the necessary duty that lies upon many persons, though Christians, to
raze the very foundation they have built all their hopes upon; they have
trodden in a road, judge of acceptance with God according to the principles of
Reason, and the light of Nature, but have not informed themselves out of Gods
Word, for by that we must attain to those two great works of God, Justification
and Sanctification; Justification to reconcile our Persons; Sanctification to
make holy our Natures and spiritualize all our Duties; and if these two be not
in us, God rejects all our Duties, as the Artificer in, his building does
some crooked stone that he cannot make straight.

Fifthly, God does not accept our religious services without this new Creature,
5 Duties are nor in a true sense good without the new Creature.
because they cannot be so much as called good, and holy in a Scripture-sense
without this. God says not unto thee as unto the Centurion, Thy Prayers are
heard; Neither does God, as it is said of Noah's Sacrifice, smell a sweet
savor, till thou art made new, and changed from thy Original estate. For they
are not good or well done, because to have a good action there is required all
the conditions, Bonum est ex integris causis, malum e quolibet defectu, one
defect is enough to make an action evil, but it cannot be good unless all
circumstances are concurrent; now the Scripture, to have it good praying, good
hearing, requires; First, That the man himself be made good: Make the Tree
good, and then the Fruit will be good; Cleanse the inside first: The heart is
the good Treasure; so that a man cannot do any thing after a godly manner but
by a renewed nature, he may do it after a customary and seeming religious
manner, so that men may admire it, but he cannot do it with a gracious
foundation, till his nature be healed: Then as the principle must be good, so
the manner also, that is, after a fervent, zealous and heavenly manner, not
with a mere lip-labor, or bodily presence; there must be motions and earnest
stirrings of heart: Take heed how you hear, and pray with groans unutterable:
and lastly, as you heard all this must be to God, pleasing God, aiming at God,
looking at God, and not at man; so that all our spiritual duties are to be of
him, and by him, and to him; and no wonder if so much be required to the right
discharge of any holy duty, for Aristotle requires as much to any virtuous
action; He says, That only can be called a righteous action which is, justa,
a justo, justa, from a just man, in a just manner; and so that is only a godly
duty, which is done by a godly man, in a godly manner, to a godly end.

Sixthly, This new Creature is looked after, rather than any outward duty,
Because 6. True Christianism consists in the new Creature.
in this true Christianism does consist. A man is not really and properly a
Christian, because Baptixed, because he professes Christ, and worshippeth him,
but because he has this new Creature in him, and this is the scope of Paul in
the Text: So that as in the time of the Old Testament, true Judaism, or the
true being of a Jew did not consist in being outwardly Circumcised, but it was
in that of the heart, and he was a Jew which was so inwardly, Romans 2. Thus he
is a Christian, not who is outwardly baptized, but who is inwardly anointed
with the graces of Christ; for to be a Christian is to be an anointed one; and
then of this inward Jew see what the Apostle says, Whose praise is of God, not
of men. It Is God that is a Father of spirits, that looks to the hearts of men,
that praises this Jew, this Christian. The denomination of every thing is from
its chief and better part. We call a man reasonable, because of his soul the
chief part of him; so a man is called a Christian, not so much because he
prays, hears, comes to Church, which is but like the body; but because
these are done by a renewed nature within, which is like the soul. O then know,
as every Profession has its Art, its Skill, its Mystery, which a stranger has
not; so has Christianity; there is a Mystery of praying, a Mystery of hearing,
which the natural man understands not.

Seventhly, If external duties were enough without this new Creature, then the
way to heaven would be a broad easy way. Whereas the Scripture sets down a
peremptory 7. Otherwise Heaven way would be broader then Scripture allows.
position clean contrary; Straight is the way, and strive to enter into it, and
Few enter in it. But if no more were required to pray and hear then most men
do, it would be a broad way, every man would enter into it. There needs no
striving, no agonies to such duties: A man in prayer must have a broken
contrite heart; it is a Metaphor from a broken bone, which cannot be without
much pain and torment; so a broken heart in a duty cannot be without much sense
of grief, shame and spiritual confusion; and as when any thing is broken, we
see what is in the midst of it, which did not appear before; so in a broken
heart we discover all that foulness, all those loathsome Monsters, all that
horrid impiety, which we had no acquaintance with before. And oh that this
truth had got full possession in your hearts! Every religious duty, if rightly
performed, puts the heart into a great agony: They are but few that can enter
into this straight way: Therefore say, I fear my praying, my hearing, my
walking is too broad a way, too large a way, it does not wound deep enough, or
affect thoroughly.

8. These external duties are nothing without a new Creature, Because while 8.
No faith interresting us in Christ without the new creature.
this is absent there cannot be faith to apply Christ, and bring him to dwell
in the soul who only is the meritorious cause of all acceptance with God.
Without faith its impossible to please God. By faith we are justified, we have
boldness: Now this faith cannot be but in a new nature; yea its made
equivalent to this new Creature; for that which the Apostle calls here a new
Creature, in the Chapter mentioned before he expresses it, By faith working
with love. As in the Holy of Holies every thing was Gold, or covered with Gold;
so all that is accepted with God, is either Christ, or Duties covered with
Christ. Til therefore thou art a new Creature, thou can not put forth an act
of faith, there wants that Hyssop which should sprinkle Christ's blood upon
thee; and howsoever people may think and say they believe in Christ, yet its
impossible for them to do it, till they be born again; for to believe in
Christ is the greatest grace, and so needs the greater power of God.

Ninthly, thereupon it is, that we must be new Creatures in all our duties,
because Gods Promise is only to such duties that flow from such a Fountain.
There is no 9. The promises to duties are only as they come from new Creatures.
promise made singly to bare hearing, and bare praying, but to those that are
done with a godly heart, with the whole heart: To those that are poor in
spirit; to those that turn from their evil ways, and all these properties are
the fruit of the new Creature. If therefore there can be no promise, then there
can be no acceptance: Now what a terrible consideration is this! Thou that
live in thy sins, thou that refusest to be reformed, yet thou prayest, thou
hear, think with thy self what promise is there in all Gods Word, that I may
challenge. What Word of God is there to encourage me to pray in hope, to hear
in hope; so that by this you see the absolute necessity of this point: Well
might the Apostle say, Pace be on all those who walk after this principle, for
to other there can be no just peace in all their prayers, and religious duties.

To conclude all; a new Creature must needs be more then all duties, Because
10. The new creature alone gives life to duties.
this only gives life, vigor, and power to them: they are but dead works; as
a dead eye, or a dead hand without this supernatural life. This new Creature
is the root that communicates all juice, and sap to these branches; This is the
kernel, the other is but the shell: out of this renewed heart come renewed
duties; so that as long as you are defective in this, whatsoever parts,
abilities, inlargements you have in any duty, you are still defective in the
main. All knowledge, all understanding, though it were equal to Angels cannot
make a good prayer without a renewed heart. Bernard said well of Lucifer, the
chief Angel that fell, Bonum erat si fuisset ignitus magis quum Lucifer; He
had better have had the fire of love to God, than the light of knowledge; so it
is here, it is better having a renewed heart, which is full of faith and love of
God, than the greatest parts and assistance that can be.

Use 1. Of Instruction, That there is a just and great reason why men should at
Use 1. Instruction. We ought to be affected with performing duties without a
renewed heart.
well be troubled for not doing of duties with a renewed and regenerated heart,
as for not doing them at all. Thou think, Oh if I should never hear, never
pray, I may justly be accounted an Atheist, one that has no fear of God in my
heart; this is a good thought; but think further, If I do not pray and hear
with a sanctified nature, God casts all my duties away, as so much dung.
Consider, does not the same God that commands thee to pray, to be baptized, to
profess his Name, command thee also to have a new heart and a new spirit. Oh
then sit down and bewail thy self, Lord how have I lived! What shall I do!
whither shall I go that have been careful in the outward work of Religion,
but not in the inward. God forbid that any should think this is to discourage
you in your outward duties, to abate your willingness and diligence. No, these
must also be done; but these are not all that are to be done; remember, God is
a Spirit, and so must be served in Spirit.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, Be at last provoked to pray to God for this new
Creature; Use 2. Exhortation. P^ay for the new Creature.
Think all thy Religion is like an house without a foundation, till this be
accomplished in thee: Oh think God says to thee every Sabbath day after every
duty private or public, What is all this, If I have not your heart? say, I
want the main, the soul, the life of all, while I want this: To pray, to hear,
are duties too high for me to do in a right manner, till God cloth me with
spiritual power from above; Think upon this very ground, so many shall pretend
to heaven, and glory, yet by God will be rejected; for imagine there come men
with parts and abilites, and they say, Lord we have done thus in thy name; but
depart (says God) ye were not new Creatures. The third and fourth kind of
hearers, they knock to have heaven opened to them, but depart, ye were not new
Creatures. The foolish virgin^ came with more hope to speed than any; but
depart ye were not new Creatures. Oh it is this makes a Christian; This makes
us have praise of God.

SERMON XLI.
Showing that the Production of the New Creature is from God alone; and what
Attributes are conspicuous in the Work.

GAL. 6. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision nor uncircumcision
avails any thing, but a New Creature.
THis Text has informed us of that Superiority and Preheminency which the
Apostle gives to the New Creature above all external Privileges or Duties in
Christianity. We therefore come to search out the Nature of this New Creature,
and by the name we shall come to know the nature of the thing. In the Greek it
is (...) Creation or Creature; for the word is used both for the action it
self, and the effect produced by it: Now this phrase to create a thing, is used
of some strange and unwonted work of God. Thus Numb. 16. when God is about to
make the earth swallow up Dathan and Abiram, he is said according to the
Hebrew, to create a Creation. As Gods wonderful judgments are called a
Creation, so his mercies, as in that of Jeremiah, Jer. 31. 22. Behold I create
a new thing, a woman shall compass a man, that is, Israel, weak as a woman,
shall compass about in an hostile manner, and so overcome her most potent
adversaries; and thus here, because God does work upon some men a wonderful and
great alteration by the Word preached, such as cannot be performed by any moral
education; therefore this is called a New Creature, and the expression is
allusive to many passages in the Prophets, where when God intends to make a
glorious Reformation in his Church, by abolishing their former ways of
wickedness, and guiding them into paths of Righteousness; he is said To
create new Heavens, and a new Earth, Isa. 65. 17. and that Old things are
passed away: So that this phrase a New Creature, implies that the work of
Grace, is wrought by the sole power of God only, it comes only from him, and
also, that this being thus wrought in us, it is of a most excellent and
glorious nature: And first I shall speak to the nature of it, it is a creature;
then the qualifying adjunct, it is a new Creature.

That the work of grace in man's heart, whereby he is born again, is a creature
wrought Observe. It is the alone power of God that produces the New Creature.
merely by Gods glorious power.

No Angels, no men are able to work this in a man's heart, but as a man though
he beget the body of his son, yet not the soul, for that is infused by the
Father of spirits. So though men come to Church, and-outwardly hear, and though
the Ministers of God they labor faithfully in preaching, yet it is God only
that makes this light shine in the heart. Paul plants and Apollo waters, but
God gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. The Gardener does only use his outward
means, he does not make the tree, nor can he make any one apple that grows
upon it. I shall not at this time insist upon the nature and operations of this
new creature, that will be proper when we speak of the Adjunct; but of the
efficient cause of this, that so we may know where to have it. As God only
created the world, and all the things therein, so he only does this new world
of grace. Thus Austin defined grace, Bona qualitas facta in nobis, sine nobis,
Wrought in us without our help and power: Now that this work of grace is
wrought in us by God merely, appears:

First, In that it is called a Creation. and God only can create. For to create
there Arguments. 1. God only can create. Requisite to Creation, I. Infinite
power.
are required these particulars:

1. An infinite virtue and power; in so much that the most solid Divines do
hold, That no Creature can be used as an instrument in Creation, much less be
a principal: For seeing it is the giving of a Being to something out of
nothing, no Creature can work but upon some materials provided; But God when
he Created the world, when he made that Chaos, there was nothing pre-existent:
Hence that power of God which turns our hearts unto him, is said to have
(...), Ephesians. 1. 19. an exceeding great strength with it; compared to that
power of raising Christ from the grave. Hence Christ in converting the hearts
of men toward him, making them at his command to follow him, demonstrated his
Divine Power more than in all external miracles. Oh then we need not wonder to
see men love their sins and delight in them, notwithstanding they hear and know
to the contrary. Alas the Ministers are not able, no more than the women at
Christ's Sepulcher were, to remove the stone upon men's hearts, yea this is
heavier than that, for there came an Angel and rolled it away; but here God
only can speak to this Mountain to be removed into the Sea; see we then a man
by nature dead in sin, and by voluntary practice buried in it; if ever this
man came to be holy, and to live in holiness, wonder at it, as if a new world
were made; for only an infinite power could make this alteration, As Divines
to prove that God made the world, it could not be made of it self, give many
fit examples to convince thereof: If a man see a glorious house built up in a
curious and most exact manner, he concludes, That house did not make it self;
or if one have an instrument of music curiously tuned, and excellent Music
played upon it, he concludes, This does not make it self, or its Music; so
the world being so curiously and harmoniously composed, called therefore (...),
did not of a sudden put it self into this excellent glory: As they argue thus
from the world, we may much more argue from the godly life of a Regenerated
man, see such a man leaving off with detestation all his former wickedness,
and that because he loves God, and delights in holiness, see you him acting
above the praises of men from God, and to God; this man could not do this of
himself, but God has changed him. Seeing therefore an infinite power is put
forth by God to make us thus new Creatures, well may we exclude man from being
partner in this work; so that as Austin observes well, We are the Creatures of
God, both qua homines, and qua justi; As a man thou art Gods Creature, as a
renewed man much more Gods Creature.

2. In Creation the Creature is made of nothing; and thus Creation differs from
the works of men, which always suppose matter aforehand to work upon. Thus in
II. The Creature is made of nothing.
this sense, the Chaos, or confused heap, that was properly created, because
made of nothing, yet the works on the other days are said to be created;
because, though they were not made of nothing, as the Sun and Man's Body, yet of
matters altogether indisposed, and unfit; and this some Divines call Creation
mediate, as the former Creation immediate. Now in this sense the work of Grace
is truly called a Creation; for there is nothing in us that did cooperate, or
consent to it; our hearts are dead wombes, till God cause us to live, and in
this respect the Scripture does represent us so full of sin, and all over
corrupted, that thereby the work of grace may be acknowledged only of the
Lord; Those are derogatory Doctrines to the grace of God, that say grace does
only stir up and excite the natural

3. Creation is in an instant, on a sudden; and that is the reason why the
Scripture III. Creation is in an instant.
expressing Gods work in bringing about any sudden mercy, or sudden
judgment, calls it creation, I create light, and I create darkness, Isaiah
47. 7. What a glorious world did God make in six days? Here was a mighty
alteration in a short space of time; and if as some of the Ancients speak, whom
Cajetan pertinaciously argues for, and follows, that God made all in one
day, and that the distinction of six days is but for our capacity; if this
opinion should be true (as I think it far from truth, because so expressly
contradictory to the very letter of the Scripture,) it would much more
demonstate the instantaneous nature of Creation. As Creation is thus suddenly,
so this work of a new Creature is wrought very quickly in the hearts of those,
whom he effectually touches. Thus Paul of a Persecutor, how quickly made a
Prosecutor of the truth and Gospel? Thus Zachaeus the Publican, how immediately
does he leave all and follow Christ? and in all instances of Conversion, we may
wonder to see the strange and admirable alteration on a sudden: that as the
Psalmist cried out, What ailest thou, O Jordan, that thou turnest back? Thus
may we admire, What aile these men that formetly lived in such gross and
profane courses, that now they should love and delight in the contrary? Only
you must know that although it be wrought thus suddenly and from nothing in us,
yet God has ordered that he will dispense this grace no other way ordinarily
than in the preaching of the Word, and the constant waiting thereon. Do not
thou therefore expect this Manna will fall from heaven in what place soever
thou art in; and although thou neglect the public Ordinances, and the means
of grace. No, for although God has not tied himself to means, yet he has tied
us to them; and therefore every time thou do wilfully neglect any one
Sermon, thou know not how much thou have provoked God, what effectual and
IV. The operations of the new Creature are so excellent, that it must needs be
of God only.
gracious operations thou have lost by not being present.

4. This new Creature must needs be wholly of God, Because it is of a
supernatural being, and so the operations of it do exceed the sphere of
natural power; As when the Apostles were enabled to work miracles, it was
plainly a demonstation of Gods power with them, because they did those things
which did wholly transcend any natural power; so when men love God, when they
obey his commands out of upright and sincere motives, they are enabled to do
that which wholly transcends the most refined natural abilities; It is
therefore called, A participation of the divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. whereby
our actions have a divine stamp upon them; and as Sampson when he put forth
those wonderful acts of strength, he did it not by his natural power, but an
extraordinary assistance from God; so in those actions of a new Creature,
whereby we mourn for sin, or delight in God, we have then more then as a man;
for we pray not as a man, we hear not as a man; but God is in us, and with us.

5. This new Creature must needs be of God, if ye do consider, What we are till
V. We are the old Serpents, old Creatures, till thus new created.
made so, even the old Creatures of the Devil; therefore the old man is said
to be in us; and the Devil, that old Serpent, he reigns and rules in our
hearts: This old house must be pulled down, ere a new one can be built. The
making us new Creatures is sometimes called a Resurrection; now as our bodies
cannot be made glorious and happy, till a great and wonderful alteration has
been made in them, so neither can our souls be made those new Creatures, till
God has wholly new molded us, put another stamp upon us, and another life in
us: There cannot any thing be a greater object of horror and terror to us, than
the beholding our selves in the pure glass of Gods Word; for that represents
us so full of loathsomeness and enmity unto God; that we have cause to cry out,
That God would wash us, and make us whiter than snow: Never think with that
natural condition thou art born in, to enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

6. This Creature must rather be made of God solely, than the heavens and
earth; VI. It is a greater work than the Creation of the World.
for although the Scripture does often celebrate the power and wisdom of God,
in founding the earth upon nothing, and stretching out the heavens; yet this
Creation upon a man's heart, and his life, is far more wonderful: Hence it is
ordinarily said, That it is a greater wonder to make a man holy and godly, then
it is to create a world.

For first, it cost God only a word when he made that; Let there be light, and
there was light; but ere this mercy could be purchased for any, Christ was to
become man and dye for us; so that God does not only speak, but in his
manhood suffer; for you must know, as justification and pardon of sin is a
fruit of Christ's blood, so is also this new Creation, and new making of us.

Again the excellency and glory of the heaven and earth is only in a natural
way, this in a moral way, They declare the glory of God, as passive objects,
These as active agents, and understanding instruments. If therefore the Ancient
looking upon the heavens, said, If these be thus beautiful, how beautiful is
God the Maker of them? so may we much rather, beholding the grace and holiness
of this new Creature, cry out and say, He that makes man thus holy, how holy is
he? If this new Creature be so admirable, how wonderful is the Creator of it?
Hence also it is, that the godly are said, to shine as lights, Philip. 2. 15 in
dark places, that so others beholding them, may glorify God in the day of
their visitation. If the world be thought a Book sufficient to convince men of
God, and that they shall be inexcusable, because they did not glorify God as
according to this knowledge; how much rather, that so many godly men as have
lived with you, will be a condemnation to you, if ye have not followed their
examples? you shall not only give an account of that good gotten by the Sermons
we preach; but of the godly life of those new Creatures who have dwelt amongst
you; not only our Sermons, but their conversations should have turned you unto
God.

7. This work of grace must be wholly of God, Because even in Christ's humane
VII. The graces in Christ's humane nature were the gift of God.
nature, where there was a fullness of it, yet it was the gift of God. The
humane Nature of Christ, though infinitely advanced by reason of the
hypostaticall union, yet being not God, but a Creature, could not furnish or
anoint it self with those rich graces he was adorned with; Therefore the
Scripture says, God gives not the Spirit in measure to him, John 3. 34. It
was given him, though it was not in measure; now then if this new Creature of
grace was wrought by God in Christ's humane nature, how much rather must it be
wrought in us, who are altogether polluted, when his humane nature was like the
sun, wholly spotless? This is a clear and an undeniable demonstration, that
God is sole Author of this grace; That as the Sun is like an universal
principle in regard of light, and every thing is enlightened by that, so is God
the universal Fountain of all that holiness which is communicated unto the
godly.

8. This must needs be Gods Creation only, Because he has so absolutely
promised VIII. God has absolutely promised it.
to accomplish it for us. All those expressions, I will give a new heart, and
write my law within thee, Jer. 31. 33. And I will take away the heart of stone,
Ezekiel. 36. necessarily infer that it is Gods peculiar prerogative; for if this
could not be till man had consented, and there could not be any application of
grace till we had given way; Then all those promises of God must be only
conditional, expecting till man will yield also; and thus it would not be
Predestination but Postdestination; and man's will should not follow Gods, but
Gods will lackey it after man's. But this cannot be thought, that God is not sui
juris in his promise, and that he is not able to make good by his hand,
whatsoever is gone out of his mouth. Oh therefore, when thou find thy heart
so greatly assaulted by sin, and thou complainest thy lusts and corruptions
are too strong for thee, remember they are not too strong for God.

9. If this were not Gods Creature merely, Then the greatest glory in a man's
conversion IX. Otherwise the glory of the work would belong to a man's self.
and salvation would belong to himself. Certainly, if a man cannot arrogate
this to himself, that he made himself a Man rather than a Toad, much less can
he glory in any such strength, whereby he should difference himself from other
men wallowing in sin. This differencing work of God, Christ himself resolves
into his Fathers will; Even so Father, for so it pleases thee, Matthew. 11. And
Paul also into the like cause, What have thou that thou have not received? and
Who makes thee to differ from another? 1 Cor. 4. 7. Certainly, it is the
greatest Idolatry which God can be jealous of, to give the glory of thy new
nature unto any other but himself; Thou do not indeed fall down to a stock
and a stone to worship that, but thou do inwardly put confidence, and rely
upon thy own power and abilities, to procure thy own salvation, and inward
peace.

By these Arguments it may appear, that whenever you see a man, of an old
servant to sin and Satan, made the Son of God and a new Creature; you may say,
Verily God was there, these devils and lusts have been cast out only by the
finger of God.

Now in making his Children new Creatures, he demonstrates several properties
God discovers many of his glorious Attributes in forming the new Creature. 1.
Goodness.
of his in their great luster and glory: As

First, His great goodness and pity to us: How often is this called his
grace, and the riches of his grace. It was Gods goodness to make a world, but
this is the riches of his goodness not to throw us away, as refuse, fit fuel
only of everlasting flames; It might have been with all mankind as it was
with the Devils; in their Deluge God did not provide an Ark to save so much as
eight persons, not one Angel had he compassion on. This grace of God is so
deeply apprehended by the partakers thereof, that they rejoice in it, speak of
it all the day long, plead for it, and that they live, or have any outward
comforts is nothing to this wonderful mercy of God to them.

Secondly, He declares his Power; That you have heard sufficiently of, it being
a 2. Power.
Creation, it being the same power that made the World, that raises the dead
out of the grave; and although we do not use to call it a Miracle, yet it is
Mirandum, a wonderful thing; and indeed it being to the hearts of men,
changing them, and new framing them, it must argue an omnipotent power; how
often do we speak to the ear, entreat and invite, but it is God only that can
turn the heart; yea, how many resolutions and desires are sometimes excited in
many men, but they vanish away like a land-floud? How often have they purposed
to leave their sins, to set upon other duties, but sin is too strong for
them. Oh that power of God, which keeps the Sea from overwhelming the banks,
that power of God, which hangs the earth upon nothing: This must be seen to
turn the streams of our corruption backward. Draw me, cries the Church, and I
will run after thee, Cant. 1. 4. No man comes unto me, unless my Father draw
him, John 6. 44.

Thirdly, His Wisdom, That is admirable from many considerations; for if you
3. Wisdom.
do respect the persons whom he does commonly make these new Creatures, they
are for their outward condition, mean and contemptible in the world, Not
manywise, not many noble, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 27. though some of these he chooses,
nor does he approve according to outward appearance: As his wisdom is
remarkable herein, so for their quality; He takes the worst weeds, and makes
them the sweetest flowers, the most crooked pieces in the timber and makes them
a glorious building; thus Paul, Zacheus Publicans and Harlots; his wisdom is
wonderful herein, that so all may be of his grace. Then these are but few in
comparison of those rejected; Ma^y are called, but few are chosen. Hereby his
love to those who partake of it is made more glorious: And lastly, Gods
wisdom is seen in the time of making them new Creatures, wherein so many
concurrences of strange love meet together, that it ravisheth, and over-whelms
them for ever.

Fourthly, His holiness is admirable herein. If a clod of earth, or piece of
muck, 4. Holiness.
should be made a glorious Star in the heavens, it is not more wonderful then
for a man become like a beast in his affections and actions to be made like an
Angel, doing the will of God. We see when God made man with other Creatures at
first, what a signal difference there was in his process about the making of
one above the other: Let us make man after our own Image, Genesis 1. 26. And here
again God does renew, and remake us after his Image: Once God said by way of
scorn, Man is become like one of us; but now in grace and holiness, he says,
Man is become like God. If we admire the skill of Artificers, who of rags and
other base materials can blow up such a curious piece of clear and splendent
glass; how glorious is God, who makes thy earthy and sordid heart, heavenly,
and pure, who makes thy swi^sh desires, Angelical. The Philosophers called the
matter of the heavens Quintestentiall, and this soul is above a sinful
constitution.

Use Of Exhortation: If thou have found any good grounds, that God has made
Use. Exhortation. Bless God for the new Creation if found in our hearts.
thee such a glorious new Creature, let thy heart and mouth be filled with
praises. All the power in heaven and earth, but Gods only, could not make them
such. Oh but this new Creature is a rare Creature; like new and strange sights
brought from remote parts of the world: For if we be new Creatures, how is it
that the old man is so prevalent in thee? how is it that thy old lusts, thy old
conversation is not quite abandoned? Thou would easily call it blasphemy to
say, God makes thee lie, makes thee swear, are such sins of his Creation? O
then wallow in the dust for shame and sorrow, as thou have heretofore wallowed
in lusts and pleasures; let the glory, beauty and loveliness of this new
estate much move thee: This is a commendable new fashion, when thy principles
are new, thy aims and ends are new, thy life and manners are new; How can men
withold from panting and longing after it!

SERMON XLII.
Showing what the New Creature does not imply, and to what it is opposed.

GAL. 6. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision
avails any thing, but a new creature.
THe work of grace regenerating and renewing us, is here called A new Creature,
or Creation (as you have heard:) And this phrase signifies two things.

1. That it is the work solely and wholly of God, for he can only create. If
God should only make thee a man, and thou make thy self righteous, or a new
Creature, thou should do something better then God: For Melius est te esse
juslum, quam te hominem esse, It is better for thee to be a righteous man, then
to be a man, said Austin. Now though this point of Gods sole and irresistible
efficiency in point of grace, be of large and noble concernment both
Doctrinally and Practically, yet I shall say no more of it then what has been
delivered, reserving the residue of that position, to some other opportunity,
and seasonable Text.

I come therefore in the next place to the second thing employed in the adjunct
that qualifieth this Creature, It is a new creature, which denotes the great
excellency, and noble nature of it: for so the word New is used frequently in
Scripture, for that which is excellent and admirable; though here in the Text
it does especially relate to an opposition between the Old things that formerly
were done by this Regenerate person, and the New things he now exercises
himself in.

The Observation from the Text is obvious. The work of grace regenerating maeth
Obs.
us altogether new.

That new and glorious Body which the people of God shall have by their
resurrection, does not more exceed this vile, mortal, and infirm body that we
now bear about with us; then the alteration and change God makes in the soul
when he renews it, causes it for the future to differ from what it was
formerly; then proud, now humble; then earthly, now heavenly. Then it was like
Naaman before his washing, full of a loathsome leprosy; but now like his skin
after his washing, fresh and beautiful. Before it was like a Lazarus, full of
noysom Ulcers and sores; but since it is like Absalom, that was comely from the
head to the foot. This point deserves diligent explication, because it will be
a mirror or glass to see your selves in, as also to know whether you may go on
comfortably in the way you are in, or else wholly begin a new course: for the
Apostle by this supposes, That a man may live many years in the outward
privileges of the Church, and in the discharge of the public duties which
relate to Gods worship, and yet be an old creature, he must begin all anew
again: Do not therefore think it strange, thou who have served God, as thou
think, this fifty or threescore years, if it be told thee that thou art yet
to begin to be a Disciple of Christ. The Apostle in this Text tells us what is
true Christianity, wherein the marrow of Christian Religion consists, viz. Not
in external duties, but in a new sanctification of the whole man: This is the
Holy of Holies, whereas duties are like the outward porch of the Temple: I
shall proceed in this method.

1. I shall inform you what the phrase does not imply. What new creature does
not imply. 1. It does not imply that there was no such work before the times of
the Gospel.
2. What it does oppose.
This expression, A new creature, does not imply

First, As if there never were such a work of God in the world, before the
times of the gospel For although this phrase be used in the new Testament, yet
Shem, Enoch, Adam, after repentance, all these were new creatures. So that this
new creation was as soon as ever there was any godly man in the world: It is
true, the Gospel-administrations have many prerogatives above that of the Law:
hence it is called in a peculiar manner, The Kingdom of Heaven, but yet this
work of God in regenerating and renewing, was in that former dispensation as
well as now, though it may be not so many in number were begotten unto God.
Here Rachel is more fruitful then Leah, as I may so allude. Though God ceased
from this work of Creation on the seventh day in respect of temporal objects,
yet not of spiritual. Nor

Secondly, Is this new creature so to be understood, as if it should always be
suking 2. Not that new faith etc. should be looked after.
after new religion, a new faith, new worship, and so should every day have
some new thing. No, but the Doctrine, the pure worship of Christ, the holy life
commanded in the word, this new creature applies it self to, receives it
without any further change or alteration, though the use and custom of it be
never so old. Indeed when a Church is become like the Chaos at first, darkness
of ignorance and profaneness, spreading it self all over; then as the Apostle
presses, 1 Cor. 3. They are to become a new lump: but when the pure Doctrine
and way of God is received and embraced, there still to affect new things, is
as if a man should not be content with the Sun or Earth, but to desire a new
Sun and a new Earth. Though this new creature is to grow in knowledge, faith,
and other graces, yet they are not to look for new things above what is
written. The Scripture is like the body of the Sun, into which God has put all
light: And says Turtullian well, Hoc primu^ credimus cum credimus, quod nihil
ultra credere debemus, This we first believe, as soon as ever we believe, That
the Scriptures are like Hercules his pillars with this Motto, Ne plus ultra.

Thirdly, This new creature is not so to be understood, as if it did make a man
substantially 3. Not that it makes a man essentially new
and essentially new. For a man might ask, Where is this new creature? Does it
give a new soul? A new body? Another kind of natural life then other men have?
No, this new creation is not in respect of substantials, though the scripture
calls it the New man, but only because of Accidentals. A man by this has a
new faith, new repentance, new affections, new desires, and a new conversation;
and certainly this moral change is of as great efficacy and wonder, as a
natural change. It is not therefore to be expected as if this grace of God
should work bodily changes, though it makes a change of the body. Thy eye is
changed, thy Tongue is changed, for these were instruments of evil, but now of
good.

Fourthly, This new change or creature is not so to be explained, as if it were
only 4. Not that it is in life only.
in the outward lives of men. For though it demonstrate it self there in part,
yet the Choycest, and most Noble operation, is within upon the understanding
heart, and will of a man. This new creation is most potent there, where it is
invisible to the bodily eye. For if this new creature were no more then an
outward change in our lives, then we might find such in Plato's or Socrates,
and Aristotle's School. To define a man to be a godly man by outward duties
only, is to define a man by his body, and not by his soul, which is the main
part: though therefore thou have given over thy former lend and ungodly
practices, yet we cannot presently say, Behold, a new creature; for though all
old outward things are passed away, yet not all old inward. Therefore the
promise of this great work of God is primarily upon the heart, and inward parts
of a man: and David, though totally abdicating his former wickedness, yet
cries out, Create in me a clean heart, Jer. 31. Psalm. 51.

Neither in the Fifth place is this new creature to be understood, as if there
were no relics of the old corruption in such a man. As if in the description
of this work, 5. Not that no relics of the old man remain.
you must all expect to find nothing but what is the mere work of God in you,
not any thing of your old selves, or the old Serpent. No, although Christ when
he cured any man of his bodily disease, did it perfectly and presently, yet the
cure of our souls is by degrees, and has much imperfection cleaving to it.
There are some old dregs in this new wine: yea there is not any one duty, or
act of Grace can be done by this new creature so perfectly and purely, but that
some dross may be found in it. Paul was a new creature, like the sun among the
stars, yet he found Evil present with him when he would do good: And this God
in great wisdom is pleased to do to keep us humble, and low in our selves; to
be always thirsting and panting after Christ's grace: That as long as this flux
of blood runs, thou should always be desirous to touch at least the hem
of his garment. This is necessary to the godly, who many times think this
mountain of grace is so high, that they shall never climb to the top of it.

In the second place, Let us consider the nature of this new creature by what
it opposes: What the new creature is opposed to.
For when the Apostle says, a new creature, he supposes there are some old
things to which this stands diametrically opposite. Therefore the Apostle, 2
Cor. 5. 17. expressly mentions the general of them, when he says, Old things
are passed away, and all things are become New. Let us therefore examine what
those Old things are, in whose room this New Creature comes.

First, There are the old things of sin and ungodliness. The glorious sun and a
1. To the old things of ungodliness.
dark night can as well stand together, as this new Creature; and thy old
swearing, lying, thy old lusts and profaneness: As soon as ever God works this
new work upon thee, presently those old things do not only pass away, but are
thrown away with great detestation: As it is said of Naaman, 2 King. 5. 1. That
he was a great man, a man of much eminency, but he was a leper, and till he was
washed, he was loathsome and unclean. So may we say of many a great man, a rich
man, a learned, but if an ungodly man, He is altogether unclean. The Apostle
speaking of the Corinthians what they were formerly, Riotous, Thieves, Unclean,
Effeminate, but ye are washed, but ye are justified, but ye are sanctified, 1
Cor. 6. 11. Such blackmores must have their skins made white: Oh then, Why is
it that so many who bear the glorious profession of a Christian, should yet
wallow in such mire, and vomit? The Apostle reckons up many gross sins, and
tells them, They should not be so much as named amongst them, much less then,
practiced, and lived in. Oh, what Minister can lift up his voice loud enough,
like a trumpet, to declare unto people their transgressions. Thou art to be a
new creature, a new building, Why then is there that old rubbish in thy life?
Why is not that old house pulled down? Why is it that custom, and the Devil,
and thy wicked heart is stronger to keep thee in these bonds, then Gods word,
and his Ministry are able to unlose thee out of them. In other things, use and
custom brings contempt and weariness, Why should not then daily sinning make
thee weary? Those old lusts, that afford no new comfort, Why do thou not
loath it at last? If the Israelites were weary of Manna, though so sweet and
excellent, Why should not thou say of these husks of sins and swines draff,
thou have enough? It were impossible if this new creation were in thee, thou
could live in, and love those unlawful pleasures thou have been used to.
Calvin well presses that forementioned Text: Old things are passed away, all
things are become new, as (says he) Old leaves in Autumn through dryness they
wither, and fall off from the tree, there is no more sap or juice to maintain
them. Thus when a man is regenerated, those former lusts lose their vigor and
life, they have no more nourishment to support them. Be therefore no more blind
at noon day: those continual and daily lusts which thou frequently practisest,
demonstrate to all the world thou art in thy old state of Gall and Bitterness:
If the fountain were sweet, it could not send forth such bitter streams.

Secondly, That old darkness and blindeness which was upon his mind, is passed
away, 3. To old darkness and blindness.
and new lights in the room thereof. I might instance in every particular of
old corruption in a man, and show you what a new creation there is instead
thereof; but that would be infinite: I shall therefore instance in some
remarkable particulars: And what is more notable then that Chaos, which is on
every man's heart before conversion, Darkness covering the face of his soul, not
able to discern any spiritual thing, yea to judge them folly and madness? What
does a man naturally more scorn and contemn then the practical power, and
precise strictness of Godliness? He sees no loveliness, no Majesty, no beauty
in supernatural things: Aristotle says, That if an old man had the eyes of a
young man, he would see as well as a young man, because the soul in its own
operations does not grow old or weary, but the organ of seeing in an old man is
more indisposed and unfit: And we may say, if a natural man had the eye of a
new creature, he would then see, judge, and discern as a new creature. The
Apostle mentions this great alteration in men converted, Ephesians. 4. Ye were
darkness, in the abstract, but now ye are light in the Lord, yea its called
Mavelous light by Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 9. For certainly that light of knowledge,
faith, and spiritual discerning in a Godly man, is wonderful and admirable. So
then where this new creation is, that old stupiditie, dullness, blindeness,
knowing nothing, and regarding nothing of God, does pals away; and now they
know God, believe his word, and are filled with much delight and comfort
thereby. Therefore how can thou judge thy self to be a new creature, whose
right eye is put out, whose understanding is wholly darkened? Every sermon is a
riddle and parable to thee. The Bible is a book sealed up to thee: Why is it
that thou art no more careful to get light in thy heart? How has nature
defended the eye, by placing it in an hollow place of the head, fortifying it
with skins and an eyelid, and brows, as a threefold wall to keep off any thing
that may hurt it? And wilt not thou be much more desirous to preserve spiritual
sight?

Thirdly, His old confidence and bold presumption concerning his good estate,
and Gods love toward them, that also passes away: And instead thereof
trembling enters 3. To old presumption.
into his bowels, rottenness gets into his very marrow, because he has felt
the terror of the Lord. There is no greater destructive principle of that old
man in us, then that it bewitcheth a man with a self-flattery, self-fulnesse,
and self-righteousness, that God loves him, that he has a good heart, and a
good God: Thus the devil keeps all things in quiet and peace, till Christ a
stronger comes; but when Mary Magdalen feels the burden of her sins, she needs
Christ's comfortable speech to her, That her sins are forgiven. David's heart
roareth like the sea, and the winds and tempests blowing on it, are not still
till God quiet them, She that thought her self full, wanting nothing, now she
knows she is poor, miserable, and naked. What a vast difference between Paul
a Pharisee, and Paul regenerated? Then he was alive, all was well, now he is
dead, and sin kills him. If thou art a New Creature, thou art loathsome, defiled
in thy own eyes. Thou stand like a Leper aloof off from all the mercies and
promises of God. Thus God has ordained, That none should find rest to their
souls, but such who are loaded and burdened, Mat. 11. 22. Now thou have a rest
without any burden, thou have an ease and never did feel a load: This is
much to be suspected.

Fourthly, That old end, aim, and scope, to which he formerly referred all
things, is now changed, and a new white is now set up. Every man has some
ultimate end 4. To his old ends.
to which he does refer all his actions, that is, the center to which he falls.
Now while a man is this old Creature, he looks no further then at earthly
comforts, pleasures, and advantages in this world: Thus they are like bruit
beasts, measuring their happiness by those objects that do please the sense:
and as Eve desired to taste the fruit, Because it was lovely to the eye; so do
they long to taste of that fruit which is pleasing to their corrupt appetites:
But says the Apostle, Whether we live, we live to the Lord, and whether we
dye, we dye to the Lord, Romans 14. 8. Whom have I in heaven but thee, says
David? whereas the property of every natural man is described, Psalm. 4. Many
say, Who will show us any good? and the contrary disposition of the regenerate
shows it self, But Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us:
So that if thou art a new creature, thy end is no longer to grow great in the
world, no longer to fulfill thy brutish lusts, but to glorify God, and save thy
soul: And this end being earnestly and affectionately desired by thee, thou
do diligently practice all those means that obtain this end in praying often,
in examining thy self often, in humiliation, and reformation often. As the
supreme Orb carries all the inferior Orbs about with its own motion, so this
great and noble end wheels about all thy actions; every thing is subservient
thereunto. Now if we would ask men, What is the great aim and end you propound
to your selves in this world? Though with their tongue they would hapily say,
the salvation of their souls; yet with their lives they would deny this: For if
thy end be changed, the means would be changed, the way would be changed thou
did use to live in.

Fifthly, All his former false ways of worship and service of God, they are
renounced, and now he serves God after a new manner. Thus all the heathens
when 5. To old false ways of Worship.
they came under this New Creation, they threw away their Idols, they forsook
their false gods; and if they were not Idolaters, but trained up in
superstitious ways, and a Traditional worship invented by their Forefathers,
as the Jews were, they forsook this also. The Kings daughter is to forget and
forsake her Fathers house. We see Paul spends much in his Epistles to take off
the Godly from those very Ordinances God himself had commanded, when the time
of their abrogation was come. Not but that even this New Creature, may for want
of good light and instruction be far plunged into superstitious and unlawful
worships: But as the Day Star shall arise in their hearts, so by degrees the
night will wear away. What agreement has Christ with Belial? says the
Apostle, handling the case of communicating with Idolaters in their Worship, 1
Cor. 6. Seeing they are the Temple of the Lord. It is worth the observation,
Isa 2. when the people of God by his heavy judgments upon them for their
Idolatry, shall be weary of it, it is said, They shall throw their Idols to the
Bats and Owls, that is into dark corners and holes: A fit expression; for as
their Idols were blind, Eyes they had, but did not see; so they shall cast
them away unto blind creatures. This should make people take heed how they
plead for any old thing in religion, merely because it is old; for then thou
should have continued in thy old popery, in thy old superstition, which many
years ago thou did live in. Remember we are to be new Creatures in the Lord,
and so must leave all old false ways; though there may be the good old paths
also that we must enquire after, Jer. 6. 16. when new errors have overwhelmed
us.

Sixthly, His old animal and natural actions, they pass away, and he is a new
creature 6. To old natural actions.
in them. Not that he does not eat and drink still, as if he did not live after
the natural way of other men: but only a new creature overrules all those
actions after a Godly manner, insomuch that we may say, it is new eating, and
new drinking when this creation takes hold of us. For in that former condition,

1. We did only eat and drink to comfort our selves, to satisfy nature, or to
please our appetite: But when regenerated, we eat and drink thereby to be
enabled in our places to serve him, fulfilling that of the Apostle, Whether ye
eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Oh the
exactness and excellency of this new creature; it makes new eating, new
drinking: now when thou drinkest thy self drunk, Art thou drunk to the glory
of God? If grace were in thee, What an alteration would it make?

2. Natural men, they eat without fear, Jude 12. They do not remember their
Mortality, How quickly Gods judgments may come upon them: Those who were
drowned in the deluge, the old world lived in this old corruption; they did eat
and drink, and gave in marriage: That is, spent their time in the use of the
creatures with much carnal jollity and mirth, and then the flood overwhelmed
them on a sudden. Oh there is a great deal of carnal eating and feasting, a
great deal of carnal mirth in the Creatures. But when a man is made this new
Creature, he uses all these comforts with temperance and an holy fear. I beat
down my body, says Paul: That is, he kept himself in an holy strict way in the
use of all lawful comforts, that no spark of fire might suddenly break out and
set him on fire. Thus Job, He sacrificed unto God, and was afraid, least while
his sons were feasting, they should sin against him. David prays about some,
That their table might become a snare unto them. And certainly this is the
portion of wicked men, their eating, their drinking is a snare to them; their
mirth and jollity is a snare unto them: They marry, they buy houses, oxen, and
these things hinder them from coming to the feast when invited. But this new
Creature is taught otherwise, He marries as if he married not, he buyeth as if
he bought not, he uses the world as not overusing it. And truly this work of
grace is not only seen in casting away the works of darkness, unquestionable
sins; but in a gracious moderating and ordering all lawful comforts.

Seventhly, That old way they were accustomed unto in their civil actions and
7. To old ways in civil actions and relations.
relations, this new creature changes: And indeed this work of grace where it
leaveneth a man, makes an alteration in a man, not only in the general, as a
Christian, but as a Magistrate, a Minister, an Husband, or a servant in any
particular relation. If the Heathen said, He could not be Bonus vir, which was
not bonus civis, not a good man in the general, who is not a good Citizen in
his particular relation; How much more does the Scripture verify this, which
does not only instruct us about our duties, as Christians in the general, but
lays down the several Graces of Husbands, Masters, and Servants? So that as
by it the Minister is Prepared for every good work, 1 Timothy 6. so every relation
also is. If therefore thou art a new Creature, this will make thee a new
Magistrate, a new Minister, a new Husband, a new Wife. A Magistrate who before
looked only to his own greatness and power, Ut praesit, non ut profit: Now he
remembers he is the Minister of God for good to those that do well, and for
terror to those that do ill. He considers that as the sun has its light not
for it self, but the world; so he has not his place and authority for himself,
but for others: He remembers that it is Res publica, not Res propria. Thus
also, if a Husband, if a Master, he observes all those Relation-Duties and
Qualifications commanded by the word, and looks at God in all those things,
which makes them called spiritual men; because their principles, aims, and
whole guidance of their souls in these things is upon higher grounds then
morality can attain unto.

Eighthly, This New Creation opposes also those old religious approaches 8. To
old religious approaches to God.
unto God: They do not pray, hear, as they were wont: Not that they change
these instituted Ordinances of God as they do when they come out of Idolatry
and Superstition: But in these respects there is a great alteration made.

1. Whereas they thought the very external Duties were enough to commend them
to God, and upon this ground they prayed, came to Church, received Sacraments:
Now they see they were deceived, and judge all nothing without an inward change
of the heart, and an outward reformation in the life. Observe the Apostle
Galatians the 5. Where having said the same thing in the Text, That
Circumcision and uncircumcision avails nothing, but Faith working by love, He
presently adds, This persuasion comes not of him that calls you: That is,
this persuasion that external Duties are all the service God requires, that he
looks after no more, this does not come from God who has called us, for he
enlightens our minds, and spiritualizeth our hearts to worship him in spirit
and truth.

2. There is a glorious change also made in manner of these duties: Before he
prayed and heard perfunctorily, he came after a customary manner, doing these
duties without the sense of sin, a broken heart, and groans unutterable: but
now he is fervent in spirit, serving the Lord: so that a new creature leaves
not only his former old Lusts and sins, but his former way of performing all
religious duties.

Use of Instruction, How few are new Creatures? For in how many men's lives do
you see their old sins, their old lusts? Their Duties, and solemn Worship of
God is done with no more fear, inward and spiritual deportment of soul. That
which thou gloriest in, That thou art no changeling, it is thy shame. As this
body must be changed er'e it can inherit immortality, and glory, so thy soul
must be changed er'e it can come to everlasting happiness. What is more
miserable then to see an old man with his old sins upon him, as ignorant as he
was threescore years ago? The same Oaths, the same Curses as he had used fifty
years ago: Oh thou great God of heaven, make this Truth fall like The Coal from
the Altar, to touch Not their Tougnes only, but hearts.

SERMON XLIII.
Concerning the Supernaturality and Excellent Qualities of the New Creature.

GAL. 6. 15. For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision, or Uncircumcision
avails any thing, but a New Creature.
THis new Creature has been discovered as it stands oppositely to those old
things, which the Apostle says, are passed away. We come in the next place to
handle it positively, as it is in sense absolutely considered; and in the
general, when the Apostle calls it a new Creature; the essence or being
thereof is thereby declared to consist in a supernaturality, or way of life,
above that which the power of a mere man can reach unto; so that it is no more
than a supernatural Creature, one, who is acted above the principles and
motives of nature in all the duties he does, so that the best way to discover
this new Creature is, to show wherein it is above the ordinary course of
Nature: And although the Schoolmen dispute, wherein lies the true and proper
notion of supernaturality, or what is that which makes a thing supernatural,
yet I shall not enter into that Labyrinth.

First therefore, this work of grace is a new Creature or supernatural, in
regard of its original and beginning. It does not flow from the principles of
nature: it is The work of grace is a new Creature, or supernatural. 1. In its
Original.
from the power of nature that a man eats, drinks, laugheth or discourses;
but let a man do any thing holily, believe, or repent, to this a special
power from heaven is necessary. Indeed we need the aid and assistance of God,
even to all ordinary actions; Therefore the Scripture says, In him we live,
and move, and have our being; and God is the Author and Actuator of nature, as
well as of grace; but that is a common help, this a special help. God does
more for thee when he gives thee an heart to breath after Christ, then when he
inableth thee to breath the breath of a natural life; and if God be the
Fountain of our natural life, much more of our spiritual life. It is not
enough to call a thing supernatural, in that it is solely of God, for so the
world was created only by him at first; but it must come from him in a
peculiar and special manner, as the author of all grace; thus every where in
the Scripture, faith, repentance, love, joy, and all other graces are made a
fruit of the Spirit, or the gift of God, they are not by humane power; and this
should make us sensible of our own poverty and nothingnesse; for as often as
thou hear the Word calling thee to believe, to repent, it does but put thee
in mind of thy utter impotency. By the Precepts a man may see what he should
do, by the reproofs what he does not, and by the promises what the grace of
God does; from this stock and foundation that Thou art nothing, and Grace is
all, must the new Creature proceed. The beginnings of this is with a deep
poverty of spirit, and apprehension of our inabilities. The great obstruction
in the way why thou do not aspire after this glorious estate, is because thou
find not the need of a power from heaven to lift thee up thither: As those
that were blind and lame; they desired Christ, knowing, he only could give
them their eyes and their limbs again; so do thou; O Lord, I must mourn for,
and turn from my sins upon holy grounds. Oh that I could do it, how often,
Lord, do I resolve to climb up this hill toward heaven, but I presently fall
back again; to thy power therefore, and to thy grace I fly.

2. The supernaturality of this Creature is seen in the Motives, why it sets
upon 2. In the motives which stir it up to duty. Because of God.
any duties, and that is, because of God. Thus faith, part of the new Creature
in a man, believes Gods Word, not from custom and education, or the authority
of the Church, but because of that divine Authority and Revelation which
appears therein: As a man sees the Sun by the light of the Sun shining from
it. Thus the Thessalmians received the Word of God, not as the word of man, but
as of God, 1 These. 2 14. This new Creature believes the principles of
Religion, Quia ipse dixit, because God has said it, not because men say so:
when a man assents unto matters of Religion no further than humane grounds lead
him, it is but an humane faith, and we need not a special gift of God to
believe thus: After the same manner also it is, when a man bewaileth his sins,
and condemns himself for them, merely because of the natural light of
conscience, not from the Word, and because God is offended, but because of
external judgments, this is but to move as a man, to repent as a man; whereas
the Apostle tells us of sorrow after a godly manner, 2 Cor. 7 9. which is,
when a spirit of prayer and supplication, and mourning is upon our souls,
because God is displeased with what we have done; and indeed the greatest, and
the most noble part of the supernaturality of this new Creature lies in this,
That we go to all divine objects upon a divine ground, upon a divine motive;
so that it is acknowledged by all, both Papists and Protestants, that nothing
can be said to be graciously and after a godly manner done, unless it ascend
as high as God, and be terminated on him, as the object: we are not to stay on
Jacobs Ladder, but to go up to him, who sits at the top of it in heaven. Oh
consider, we may believe as men, repent as men, pray as men, hear as men, but
all this while not new Creatures; because these things are not done with a
reference to God, and a complacency in him: and by this we may easily judge,
why it is so possible for a man to be taken from the wedding Feast, and bound
hand and foot, and thrown into utter darkness, I mean to be taken from
religious duties, and damned, because these were not the acts of a new
Creature, but the humane devotions of a moral man. Let not therefore thy heart
be quieted in any holy duties, till it be immediately applied to God himself.
The women that sought for Christ's body were not contented to see the Linen in
which it was wrapped, but they looked still after the body; so neither may we
rest in the expressions of duties, but to go further, even to the Lord himself;
this very point is the hinge of Christianity, get this and you get all: Believe
because of God, mourn because of God, and then you are at the highest of
essential perfection, though not graduall. This is the only, or at least main
specifying difference between Judas his tears and Peter's; this makes Manasses
his humiliation good, and the want of it makes Ahabs bitter. Do not then any
longer like worms crawl on the ground, but like Angels sour up into heaven:
This would make you like the Silkworm, sending forth that which is precious
always from you.

Two ways a man may apply himself to God: either, First, As he may be known A
man applies himself to God; As revealed, I. In the Creature.
by the creatures. Of this the Apostle discourses much Romans 1. for in them he
reveals his wisdom, power and goodness, and so the Gentiles are condemned,
because they did not glorify him as God; they did not go as far as by the
Moonlight of Nature they were guided: But suppose they had glorified God
according to the knowledge they had of him, and did not detain the truth in
unrighteousness; yet in those acts they were not new Creatures, because there
wanted faith in God revealed in his Word, which is the soul to every action,
and the Salt that seasons it. Therefore there is a second way of the souls
tendency to God, and that is, As he is revealed in his Word, and made known in
Christ, being drawn unto him by his II. In his Word.
Spirit, and so lifted up above all his natural abilities, and this is the
expression of of a new Creature; So that what Luther prayed for Melancthon,
Rapiat te Deus, ex humanis in divina, e tuis in sua, is to be powered out in the
behalf of every natural man. If you see a Paul crucified to the world, having
his Conversation in heaven, knowing how to abound, and how to want, enabled to
do all things, through Christ that strengthens him; that his former sins he
once lived in, do not still stick close to him, and damn him; you may as much
wonder as they did, when they saw the Viper upon his hand did not kill him; and
when they said, The gods are come down tous in the likeness of men; and Paul
would return the same answer as then was, Why do you look upon us, as if we
had done these things by our own power? but in the name of Christ are they
wrought. If you see a man walking holily, humbly, reformed from sin, say,
This is the great power of God to salvation.

Thirdly, this supernaturality is seen, In that it is a way of such perfection
and exactness, 3. In that she perfection it leads to is above natures
inclination.
that it is no ways agreeable to our nature; we have nor so much as an
inclination to it; and so supernatural is as much as connaturall; for thus
holiness was not supernatural to Adam, but it was a fit and suitable
qualification, even as rationality and risibility was connaturall to his soul:
so God creating Adam for such a glorious end as to enjoy him, holiness was a
connaturall perfection due to him; but now since our lapsed-and polluted
condition, all holiness is so far supernatural, that it is against our
natures, we have no inclination to that which is holy; yea, the Apostle says,
We have enmity against the way of God, and we neither are, or can be subject to
it, Romans 8. Godliness is a kind of violence to our corrupt natures; and
therefore we are said to crucify, and mortify sin, yea to deny our selves;
all which argues the repugnancy that is in us to that which is holy; wonder
not then, if men be so unwilling, so untoward to be brought to this work of
grace: There is a secret enmity, and antipathy in us to it; we love it no more
than the thief does the light; and upon this is grounded all that rage, hatred
and opposition they have against godly ways: They cannot give you a good
reason why? only their hearts are full of venom against it.

Lastly, this supernaturality may be seen, in that proportion and analogy it
has 4. In its analogy with God.
with God, though with a vast difference. We call Gods Wisdom, power,
holiness supernatural, because it transcends the sphere of the Creature,
though to God it be natural; so Christ's power to work miracles was natural to
him, though supernatural to us: Now in this new Creature there is a rude
draught, and some imperfect lineaments of this; Be ye holy as I am holy; and
he purifieth himself, even as God is pure. As God loves all things, and does
all things to the glory of God, so does this Creature refer all to him, it
lives wholly to him; and as all the streams empty themselves into the sea, so
do they all their glory, welfare and advantage into the honor of God. As all
comes from him, so they return all to him: Thus they also learn of Christ, who
is the treasure of all supernatural perfections, not only his miracles, but
his graces were above our humane strength; His Patience, his meekness, his
humility, his zeal, his obedience to the death: all these demonstrated him to
be the Son of God; and therefore in this we are to show his image and likeness.

In the next place let us consider the qualities and properties of this new
Creature; The Qualities and properties of the New Creature. 1. A participation
of the divine nature.
and first the excellency and perfection of it is very observable, it being a
participation of the divine Nature, as Peter styles it, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and hereby
we are like not Angels but God himself. The Schoolmen do ordinarily determine,
that grace is more noble and perfect than any Creature: neither the Sun, or the
Heavens, or any Creature in the World is comparable to it; for they have only
a natural perfection, this a moral: Yea grace in the soul, they say, is more
excellent and noble than the soul it self; and if the soul of a man be more
worth than a thousand worlds, what is grace in that soul worth; and the reason
why grace is a more noble thing than any other Creature, is, as Austin says
well: In illis tantum sunt opera a Des, in hac est imago dei; look upon the
glorious Sun, in it is only the work of God; but look upon grace, and in it
is the Image of God; so that as we say, Non-potest aliquid esse melius Deo,
Nothing can be better than God, so neither can any thing be better than grace
the image of God. If therefore this be true, that this now creature is more
perfect than any other Creature, no marvail if the wise man say, Riches and
Pearls are not to be compared to it; And although this new Creature be an
accident, and the soul a substance, and so in modo essendi, in the manner of
being, it is more imperfect than the soul; yet because it is an accident that
flows not from the soul, as an effect from the cause, but is caused by an
efficient of a more eminent nature, therefore it is more noble than the soul it
self. As you see the light, though it be an accident, yet is more glorious than
the air in which it is, because it comes from the Sun a more glorious body
than the air: so that the measure of every things perfection, is the near or
remoter participation of God, and this new Creature brings a man to the
nearest participation of God of any Creature. We are not like God in being
Rich, Great, Noble, Honored, but in being holy; and the perfection and
nobleness of this Creature is herein unquestion ably seen; because the promise
of salvation and eternal life is made only to this. An Angel has not
eternal glory because he is an Angel made of such a glorious nature, but
because he is holy. And the soul of a man, though it be immateriall, immortal,
and has many perfections, yet salvation and happiness shall not be given to
it because it is a soul: though it be worth more than a world, yet it is not
worth an heaven, but because it is found in the life of this new Creature,
though even it then be also of grace; because this new Creature is not made
perfect in this life.

Again, this new Creature must be more noble than any other Creature, because
it prepares and fitteth us for a more noble end and being (I speak not of
merit, but of the order God has appointed) so that it does not qualify a man
as a man; in which sense Learning, Prudence, and other political abilities
do, but as one who by it may enjoy and have Communion with God himself; but
though it be thus excellent, we must not lift it so high, as if thereby we were
justified and accepted of God through any inherent worth thereof.

Secondly, from this excellency comes another quality, which is Beauty and
loveliness, to be desired by all. Oh if thy eyes were not blinded, thou
would see 2. Desirable beauty and loveliness.
every thing in the world to be contemned, that this may be obtained. No wonder
if the man in the Parable, sold all he had to get this Pearl: no wonder if
Solomon does so commend this new Creature under the name of Wisdom, and
exhorts to take pains for this rather than for other things. Oh that the
preaching about it might beget love in you to it, desires after it, saying, I
take pains for wealth, to live in this world, but there is a more noble good
than all these things below: Let me not be satisfied till I be made a new
Creature. If duties do not avail without this, can wealth or greatness profit
without it? Shall the devil think, that the showing of the glory of the world
may tempt men to worship him; and shall not the opening of this glory make thee
willing to worship God?

Thirdly, The necessity of this: If thou art not a new Creature, thou art
miserable in all fullness. Thou art not a wise man indeed till thou art a new
Creature. Hence 3. Necessity.
the Scripture commends this under the Title of Wisdom, and calls every wicked
man a fool. Whatsoever parts and abilities thou may have, yet thou art not
wise til thou art thus made new: for a wise man, sapiens sapit res prout sunt,
judges of things as they are. The child thinks Copper is Gold, and thus
while thou art not this new Creature, thou judge earthly temporary comforts,
which are but for a season, which will dye with thee, to be the only good to be
labored for. He is a wise man that judges earthly things as earthly, but
esteems heavenly things as heavenly. Again, he is a wise man that prevents
after-wishes. Non putabam, I did not think it, is the portion of a fool;
therefore God cannot repent, because he fore-seeth always what is to be done.
When Tully saw Pompey was overcome, whose side he favored, and Caesar
prevailing, he cries out, O miseram senectutem, O me nunquam sapientem; He is
now full of miserable wishes, because he did not foresee events. Now this new
Creature, if we always follow the direction and inclination thereof, we should
never cry out, Oh that I had done otherwise, Oh that I had lived another life:
Then shall I not be confounded, when I have respect to all thy Commandments,
Psalm. 1 19. The sweetness of this new Creature will be seen when you come to
dye. Oh how happy will it then be to think, I do not repent of my praying, of
my strict serving of God; though I denied my self much unlawful pleasure, yet
now I am full of lawful and good joy. Again, Wisdom is to lay up to eternity,
when resolutions to alter will be too late. Now only this new Creature lays
up treasure for eternity. Oh if men would look upon sin now, as the damned in
hell look on it; if it were as terrible to you now, as it is to those that are
roaring in Hell, how quickly would men say to their sins, Be gone?

As the new Creature is thus only wise, so this only is true riches, true
wealth; rich in faith, says the Apostle. And Laodicea was poor, though
abounding in outward fullness, Rev. 2. It was the Stoics Position, That the
wise man is only a rich man. To be sure, it is the Scriptures truth, That this
new Creature is only a rich Creature, for he only has God the Fountain, he
only has the promise: all things are his, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3. This
is better than the Philosophers stone, which is said to turn all into Gold.

Again, This only is true peace, happiness and comfort: Thus the Apostle, As
many as walk after the rule, peace on them. Where this new Creature is not,
there is no true peace, no true joy* they may in the midst ^f all their
jollity, read many Texts of Scripture, which will be like the handwriting in
the wall, filling them with terror and horror. If then only wisdom, only
riches, only joy be in this new Creature, how is it, that men seek not after
it in the first place? why is it not the first thing that all people begin with?

Fourthly, As the necessity of it is considerable, so another quality
observable, is, 4. Strictness and Exactness.
the exactness and strictness of it: For you heard that this new Creature
does not only make a man forsake his old sins, and so he is a new man then,
but it new moldeth and stampeth all his lawful actions and comforts; it keeps
a man exactly to his bounds, so that the water does not overflow the banks
lest it get soil; he loves, but not over-loveth; It sets the heart of a man
like a Watch, to strike when, and no more than, it should. Hence the Apostle
calls it, Walking exactly and circumspectly, Ephesians. 5. 14. so that from this
exactness, necessarily flows a singularity, as to the common customs and
ways of the world: you despise men for their strictness, for singularity; this
argues your ignorance of grace, for this new Creature necessarily makes a man
singular; as to wicked and worldly men, Matthew. 5. What singular thing do ye?
Do not even the Heathens and Publicans the same? so that although a vain proud
singularity be a part of the old Creature, and a plain demonstration of pride
and folly, yet a godly singularity is a fruit of this new Creature; he does not
such things, as wicked men do, as natural men do, as he himself once did; so
that every man is bound to be singular in this sense, else he cannot be a new
Creature.

Fifthly, This new Creature is endowed with a fittednesse and preparedness for
every 5. Preparednes for every good work.
good work; so that thereby there is an universal inclination to every good
way: Thus the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 20. We are his workmanship, created to every
good work. As every creature is by Gods providence furnished with powers and
faculties suitable to those actions and operations which belong to them; so is
this new Creature accommodated with all those principles that may induce him to
such a life as is answerable thereunto, so that what is said of Christ, A body
thou have prepared for me, is true, both of soul, and body in this new
creature. Now this preparedness of heart for every duty and grace, is of
infinite concernment; for without this the duty miscarrieth, and the heart is
not easily put into an isntrumental fitness for Gods glory; there must be
much cutting, and sawing, and hammering, ere the heart be a polished stone in
Gods building.

Sixthly, This new Creature being wholly of God, both in the nature and
operations 6. A man needs not bring it down to him, but it elevates a man to it.
of it, does elevate and lift up a man to it, so that a man is not to bring
that down to him; The love of Christ constrains us, says the Apostle; and,
He that is born of God, cannot sin; and hence it is, that Paul, with all new
Creatures does not consult with flesh and blood in their duties, but with Gods
Word, the Law and Rule of this new Creature; so that it is a thing which the
new Creature abhors, to make use either of grace it self, or the opinion of
it, to bring about any wicked thing; for as the Lodestone draws the Iron,
not the Iron the Lodestone, so grace does draw and move the heart of a man
after it, and man is not to make that follow him, grace being a new Creature;
and so of God, it lies not in man's power to make what he will grace. The
Magistrate is called, (...), 1 Pet. 2. 13. an humane Ordinance, or man's
Creature, because he is of man, and to man; but this a divine Creature, and
therefore godliness is the same in all ages; As a man may not make a new rule
of life in stead of the Scripture, so neither a new manner or way of godliness.
Do not thou therefore bring down this new Creature to thy way, and to thy
capacity, which a man is very prone unto, tantum quisque laud^t, quantum se
posse imitari put it, but bring thy self to it; otherwise this is to make the
Sun go by the Clock.

Sevently, Another excellent property, is the immutability and perpetuity of
it; wherein 7. Immutability and Perpetuity.
it far exceeds humane greatness and power; All flesh is grass, and the
flower thereof fades, but this is incorruptible seed; Therefore this new
Creature here is the same in kind with that glorious Creature in heaven; when a
man shall be glorified in heaven, there will come no new thing to him for the
main; God is not a new God to him, he has been acquainted with him, and
enjoyed him in this world; peace and joy will not be new to him, for the main;
I say for the main, otherwise in the manner and degree every thing will be new.

Lastly, This new Creature is wondered at, and despised in the world, As the
shadow always follows the Sun, so do reproaches slander this new Creature:
it is like the speckled bird among the Creatures, as the Scripture describes
the Church; They think it strange, says the Apostle, that they run not into
the same excess of riot with you, for it is a life that is contrary to theirs,
and so cannot stand together any more than the Ark and Dagon; But how
despicable and miserable soever in the eyes of the world, yet of glorious
account with God. It is with this Creature, as with all strangers, hated and
despised; and like Christ himself, not having where to lay his head: but if
thou art a new Creature, though in an old prison, in old rags, and nothing but
outward ruins, thou art indeared to God.

Use. Is this new Creature of so excellent and necessary Use, Then be moved to
Use.
desire after it; Think not it is already well with you; do not say, My old
life shall serve, I will do as I have done: Alas, though thou art confident
and satisfied in thy self and ways, yet remember there is no true wisdom,
riches, or peace without this: Thou art ashamed of old garments, to wear old
rags; why art thou not ashamed to continue in thy old lusts? What can work upon
thee if these things do not? But this new Creature is wholly of spiritual
discerning; and so no wonder, if there be no closing with it: Many times new
things affect us that should not, new fashions, new opinions; but here is a new
way that every one ought to desire, a(...) yet it is not regarded: Nay, do not
your consciences sometimes see the necessity of being new men? how many
resolutions have you taken up to this purpose, and broken them again?

SERMON XLIV.
Answering those Carnal Objections men are apt to make against such a change
in themselves.

GAL. 6. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision
avails any thing, but a new creature.
WE have already declared the nature of this New Creature, Negatively,
Positively and Oppositely to those old things which are passed away: is also
the excellency of this New creature above all other Creatures. I shall now
examine the weakness and insufficiency of those grounds and obstructions which
men's corruptions are prone to make against such a change in themselves; for the
wicked heart of man makes many objections against this new creature; and that
it may not seem to do so unjustly, and unreasonably, it makes many plausible
excuses and fair pretenses: The Apostle James speaking of a man pretending to
the title and name of religion, yet opposite to the reality and power of it.
James 1. 26. says (...), He deceives, he makes a false Syllogism, and so
cousens his own soul. The heart of a man is a cunning Sophister; think not to
say within your selves (says John to the Jews) There are no Auditors; but when
a pricking powerful truth is pressed upon them, they have many things to say
within themselves for their justification.

Let us therefore see those strong reasons they can produce for themselves in
this matter.

And First, It is plausibly Objected if we should become thus new in all
things, in animal, Object.
civil, religious, and moral actions, as is urged, this would bring a necessity
of condemnation upon all our former ways. We shall in effect proclaim to all
the world that we were naught and rotten before; and then we must pull down all
our former building, acknowledge we have prayed in vain, came to the assemblies
in vain, and lastly, it is enough to drive us into despair; for if once we be
persuaded that the condition we are in is damnable, and that the life we live
is abominable and contrary to God, What shall we do? Must we not cry out with
Cain? Our sins are greater then we can bear.

Answ. Thus here is a threefold cord of absurdity which binds them hand and
foot, although if they did judge of things after a spiritual, and a Scripture
manner, Answ.
they would break these bonds asunder as easily as Sampson did his green cords.

For let us consider them in order.

The First grand absurdity is a self-condemnation, and a public manifestation
to all the world that thou wast not in a good way before. Now it is
unreasonable to pretend this.

For 1. This is the very necessary ingredient in our conversion and turning to 1
God: For in that thou art not admitted to pardon and consolation, either God
must be blamed, or thou must be blamed: seeing God was an adversary to thee,
and thou an enemy to him, the fault is somewhere, and either God must
acknowledge (I speak with reverence) that he has done ill to threaten thee, to
afflict thee, to break thee, or thou must confess the blame lies upon thee.
Now it would be blasphemy to charge God so foolishly; but it is piety to charge
thy self heavily; and what do the words (...), Repent, or be wise after the
fact? but imply that thou have been foolish, and out of thy wits all the while
thou livedst in such ungodly courses; so (...), admonition, which the ungodly
man is with all readiness to receive, is as much as putting a mind, an
understanding in a man, as if a man were a beast before, and when he is
converted, God breaths a rational soul into him again, at least gives a
sanctified, and right use of reason. Again the word (...), Conversion, does it
not suppose an aversion, or a turning away from God? So that the reason thou
bring against this change, is most for it. Goliath is cut off with his own
sword: Thou pleadest if thou art a new Creature, thou must condemn all thy
former life, all thy bypast conversation: very good reason; For how is it
repentance else? How is it conversion else? Neither is this such dishonor, for
God only cannot repent because of his infinite perfection, having no ignorance
in his understanding, or mutability in his will, which are the grounds of
repentance: But as for man naturally corrupted and defiled, he is Ad nihil
aliud, quam paenitentiam natus, Born, at least new regenerated to do nothing
but repent of his former conversation. Do not then think with thy self, If I
leave my old life, my former courses, I shall confess a blame upon my self.
Alas, in this very thing lies the great work of a new creature; in this
particular thou art often to exercise thy self.

2. Stick not at this to shame and condemn thy former life: For this is the
only 2.
necessary qualification for thy admssion into grace. Thou must come with a
sacrifice of atonement if thou will be accepted: That is, Christ's blood which
is only shed for those that feel themselves lost. If we confess our sins, is
often the condition expressed, for the Scepter of Grace to be held out to us,
Levit. 5. 5. 1 John 1. 9. And the Apostle Paul, If we would judge our selves,
we should not be judged of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. And David, He confesses and
bewaileth his folly, that God may be justified and cleared when he is judged,
Psalm 51. God will receive a Publican, not a Pharisee. If thou give glory to
God, by judging thy own ways, clearing him, though he should damn thee, this is
the most compendious way to obtain grace. Plutarch says, Some heathens in
their supplications to their gods, would not carry either Gold, or Iron, or a
staff into the Temple with them, but lay all aside when they went to pray, to
signify they did not trust in earthly wealth or greatness, but Gods goodness
and power only. And thus it ought to be in our spiritual supplications to the
true God, we must lay aside our own righteousness, and go to Christ, as the
menstruous woman who had spent all she had upon Physicians, yet could not be
cured: Oh therefore be so far from fearing this duty, that rather thou will
forwardly offer thy self thereunto: say the way to get honor and praise with
God, is to dishonor my self, and magnify him. His mercy in pardoning, his
grace in forgiving, will be so much the more admirable, by how much unworthy
and vile I am in my own eyes.

3. If thou art once sensible of the guilt and filth of thy old ways, thou
can not but 3.
glory in that thou art changed. Paul said, When he was a child, he spoke as a
child, but when a man, as a man. Thou will say, When I was a beast, I lived as
a beast, but since a new creature, as a new Creature. What profit have you of
those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Romans 6. 21. Thus Paul, With what
shame and bitterness does he recall his Blasphemies, and persecutions? 1 Timothy
1. 13. If therefore God has once made thee ashamed of thy old ways, thou will
not fear to acknowledge all thy former life was out of the way: Thou will
remember the days of old and be troubled: See how are Job and David affected
with the sins of their youth; yea godly men are so far from fear of condemning
themselves from former sins, that when their sins have been scandalous to the
Church of God, they have acknowledged, and bewailed them in the public
assemblies: And this was that public confession of sin and penance, which
afterward by popish Doctrines was so corrupted. If any of the Church had been
overtaken by a foul sin, they had no peace in their hearts till they had thrown
themselves down in the public assemblies, crying out with him, Calcate me
insipidum salem, Tread upon me as unsavory salt; No less would thou do, if
the glory of God, and the edification of the Church did require it for thy own
sinful ways. Know therefore, that this excusing thy self, is but so much
accusing of thee with God. Thou art afraid to be thought a new man, that thou
have done amiss heretofore: Oh if thou were truly wrought upon, all the world
could not make thee keep in those accusations and indictments which thou make
against thy self daily at Gods tribunal.

4. A new creature sticks not at this self-condemnation, because those former
ways 4.
repented of, are used as an advantage by him to set up the praise and glory of
God in showing mercy to him. Thus Paul, he is often willing to make mention of
all former impieties, that so the grace of God may be made the more
illustrious; and this is one reason why you have the sins of the Godly recorded
in the Scripture to all eternity as it were. Noah's drunkenness, Moses his
unbelief, Aarons base compliance in Idolatry, David's Adultery and Murder,
Peter's Abjuration of Christ, not to defame them, but to have perpetual
monuments of Gods grace and goodness to them. Thus the Apostle when he would
stir up the Ephesians and others to thankfulness, and to admire the riches of
Gods grace to them, he puts them in mind of their former conversation what
they were once, Ephesians. 2. and this they did not take ill, as a matter of
upbraiding of them, but as a whetstone to sharpen their thankfulness. Why then
should thou be afraid to confess thy self once out of the way? seeing this
will make for Gods grace, which left the ninety nine sheep, and fetched thee
home upon its shoulders who was gone astray.

A second Scarcrow that men pretend against this new creature is, That hereby
they Object.
must begin all anew, and pull down that whole building of religion which they
thought was good and sure.

To Answer this, consider it is no new thing for many men to be such foolish
Ans. 1
master builders in matters of religion, as that all must be taken down again;
there is nothing more ordinary then to have some crack in the foundations: our
Savior does fully clear this, when he speaks of one who built upon the sand,
the winds blew, and tempests arose, and then the fall of that house was great,
Mat. 7. 26. Thus also the Apostle charge the Galatians, Have ye suffered so
many things in vain, Gal. 2. So that it is very ordinary for a people to go on
many years in a rode of religion; and in the practice of holy duties, yet they
do all these things in vain: All must be undone and a better foundation laid.
If thou have built hay and stuble, the fire will consume it all at last: Do not
therefore do in thy spiritual condition, as bankrupts use to do in their
temporal, never care to look to their accounts, afraid to consider of their
debts, but still hope to rub it out, till at last all be too late: So many a
man has inwards thoughts and fears that his estate is not right, that this
will never hold when he comes to account, but he is unwilling to dwell in his
thoughts upon these things.

2. As this is ordinary, so we have plain instances in Scripture of men
accustomed 2.
a long time in the way of religious duties, yet this has been earnestly urged
to them to become New: Nicodemus a teacher in Israel, and so of long standing,
and acquainted with the Scripture, in prayer often, yet unless he be born
again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven, John 3. And thus all those
Jews that were converted by John Baptist, by Christ and the Apostles Ministry,
they were all diligent in that outward worship of God he had commanded, but by
their preaching they saw a necessity of being born again: And this is the most
happy, and necessary lesson thou can learn, to see thou must pray anew, hear
anew, make an universal change in thy life.

3. Thou art the rather to make the more diligent enquiry here, because of all
3.
vanities that is the soarest which is in religion. If it be found that thou
have thus many years come to Church in vain, not laid good foundations, and
right principles, this is the most dangerous vanity of all: for to take pains
in vain about temporal things, is but an outward momentary loss; but to pray
in vain, to hear in vain, is a spiritual and eternal loss: Its an happiness for
a traveller to know betimes that he is out of the way; but if he should travel
the whole day in unseasonable sharp weather, and dangerous rodes, and then at
night be told he is clear out of the way, What sad tidings would it be to him?
And thus it is here: if a man should live forty or threescore years in many sad
exercises, and outward miseries, and when he comes to dye be truly told, Oh
sir, you are quite out of the way to heaven, you have been traveling to hell
this many years: How must he cry out, Oh why did not I think of this before?
Why did I not know it before?

4. Let not the consideration of losing all that is past so much deject thee,
as to 4.
quicken thee up to be the more diligent for the future: As the Travaller goes
the faster when he knows he has been out of the way; thus the Apostle,
redeem the time, Ephesians. 3. Thou must make up all thy former lost duties, by
future fervency, diligence, and fruitfulness: say, Oh Lord, it troubles me that
I loved thee so late, that it was so late e're I could do any duty after a
spiritual godly manner; but now I shall press forward after the mark, I will
labor to do much in a little time: Oh then think, If all my former time has
been lost, I have the greater cause to be up and to be doing.

And as for the Third pretended absurdity, That to question our former
condition, Object.
or to suppose it naught, would plunge us into despair: to that there are
several Answers.

1. It argues ignorance of the breadth, and depth of Original corruption to
Answ.
argue so: Thou forgettest in what state thou art born, and how unclean thou
art by natural propagation; otherwise if this were acknowledged, thou would
easily see that there is a necessity of being born again: What, thou were not
born with the image of God upon thy soul, Thou were not born a Child of Grace,
but of wrath: As this corruptible body must put on incorruption, e're it can be
made glorious, so this defiled soul must put on purity e're it can be made
happy in heaven. So that there is a necessity upon thee to conclude, That thou
art wholly in sin, and shut up under wrath; thou must see thou art undon: And
from hence it is that men desire not more this New Creature: they think their
old life will serve. They perceive not the Ruins that are on their souls, and
by this means rest contented, though in an undone estate.

2. Thou who art afraid of despairing, if all be found naught in thee, consider
that 2.
it is necessary thou should despair and have no hope or stay in thy self, or
any thing thou do. For those laden and burdened ones, who are invited to
come to Christ, Mat. 11. can find no rest or ease in themselves till they come
to him: Insomuch that none are further off from grace and mercy, then those who
justify themselves, as the Pharisees did. It is true, through the sense of sin
to despair of the grace of Christ offered, and to neglect that salvation, is a
crimson sin, and immediately opposite to the Gospel; but to despair of our
selves, and to have no hope in what we do, is a necessary qualification, and
hereby we give glory to God; and therefore if we did despair more in our
selves, our condition would be less desperate: And this is the condemnation of
men, that they presume in the mercy of God, and bless themselves in their
hearts, when yet there is but a step between them and hell.

3. It is better despairing here with hopes, then despairing here after without
any the 3.
least ground of comfort. We had better know the worst here, while it may be
prevented, then hereafter, when it will be in vain, Would not every one damned
in hell be a New Creature upon any terms, whatsoever it cost him, if it were
possible? But we are foolish, like some foolish, infirm, and wounded person,
who will not discover his wounds, nor make known his grief till it be too late:
Lay it therefore home upon thy heart, and say, If I am afraid of the sight of
sin here, What shall I do with it hereafter? If a spark be thus heavy and
scorching, What will the whole flames be? Oh, but men are never wise till it be
too late. Dives when he is in hell, then his eyes are opened, and he bewaileth
his condition. Be assured of this, that God has unchangeably decreed, thy sins
shall be bitter to thee here, or hereafter. The word is gone out of his mouth,
and it cannot be recalled: thou shall either glorify him by a voluntary
confession, or by an extorted and constrained one hereafter: Therefore do not
feed thy self with vain hopes, as if thou should never find sin with a sting:
no, at last it will bite like an Adder, and sting like a Scorpion, if it do not
in this life.

And lastly remember, That trouble and pain which may be for a while in the
pangs of this New creature, will be abundantly recompensed with the after joy
and quietness 4.
thou will have. Rejoice in the Lord, ye upright in heart, and the Godly
rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Thou can not
imagine what sweet peace, and comfort of heart it will bring to thee, to think
that once indeed thou wast captivated to such and such sins, but now thou have
broken those snares. Paul once a bitter adversary to the ways of God, How much
does he rejoice in the change made upon him? How often does this New Creature
cry out with gladness and thanksgiving, he would not for a world be as once he
was? If he might have all the glory on earth, he would not live as he has
lived: And thus we have dispelled that objection, grounded upon a threefold
absurdity.

A Fourth Objection, or Obstruction against this New Creature, Is the
strictness and singular exactness of it. Not only gross sins to be cast away,
but even all lawful affections to be moderated, and dieted: They must not do as
the world, not live as the world: this is to put themselves into a misery, as
he said, Qui medice vivit, misere vivit, because he must be so temperate, and
abstemious in those things to which his appetite carries him. Now this cavil
is wholly unreasonable: for

First, Thy very Christianity, and the profession of it, carries thee not to
do as men of the world does. So that thou must either lay aside thy
christianity, or else be 1.
exact in thy life, and singular to the manners of the world. The Church of God
is compared to a woman clothed with the Sun, and the moon under her feet,
Revel. 12. 7. Does not the Apostle exhort us, Not to be fashioned unto the
world, Romans 12. 1. We are not to have their fashion upon us: And why are we
called a Church, but because we are called out of the world, and so have not
our conversation according to the principles thereof? And the Apostle James
calls it Pure religion, and undefiled, to keep our selves unspotted from the
World, James 1. 17. If therefore drunkenness, lusts, pride, earthlinesse,
immoderate affections to these things below, be things of the world, thou art
no more to conform to them, then light to darkness; and howsoever the world
accounts those men of the best fashion, who are rich, great, and honored, yet
the Scripture says, they are of the best fashion, who are not fashioned to the
manners of the world: by this argument thou should still lie in thy
Paganism, and Heathenisme; For why should thou come out of the world in
respect of thy faith, and not also in respect of thy life? Thou would have a
better faith then infidels, Why not also a better life? Answer that, if thou
can, God has not only called us to embrace his Doctrine, but unto holiness.

2. Thou complainest this is an exact strict way, full of difficulties: Is it
not true this of every good thing? Is there any good thing either natural or
moral to be obtained 2.
without much labor? so that the difficulty makes for the excellency of it:
Strive to enter in at the straight Gate, Luke 13. 14. For the way to
destruction is a broadway. You cannot get so much as the bread and food of your
body without the sweat of your brows: and think you to get the salvation of
your souls so easily: Learning cannot be obtained without great pains and
study: Sudavit and alsit, says he: If therefore this new creature be so
difficult and rare, so hardly to be obtained, then thou have the greater reason
to press the more about it. Thou art to fear the way thou walk in is too
broad a way: Thou must be a Jacob wrestling, before thou can be an Israel
prevailing: You must run in a race, e're you can obtain a Crown: and indeed
that Crown of glory is so rich and glorious, that these are but siliquae
laboris, as Austin called them, the husks of labor in respect of that Manna
hereafter.

3. Thou complainest of labor and pains, if thou do observe it, every man
takes 3.
more pains to go to hell. A servant to sin is a far greater slave and drudge,
then a servant to righteousness. Take the Adulterer, How does he watch for the
twilight? How full of fears and hopes to accomplish his lusts: Take the
Ambitious man, How does he break his sleep, toil his mind, and consumes
himself to accomplish his design? Take the covetous earthly man. How is his
soul pierced through with many cares? And how does he drown himself in thoughts
and fears about his estate? So that thy service in the ways of Godliness would
be far more comfortable, quiet, and profitable, then those of sin and Satan. It
is a known story of Pambo, who seeing a strumpet taking pains about the
dressing her self to please her Mate, cried out and said, He could not take as
much pains to please God; and this will appear true; men take more pains, are
more turmoiled in going to hell, then they may be in going to heaven.

The last impediment I shall insist upon is, The reproach, contempt, and
persecution Object.
that does follow this new creature, even as sharp pricks attend the sweet
roses. Now to Answer this.

1. Our Savior says, Blessed is he that is not offended at me, Mat. 11. 6.
The very Answ.
Doctrine of Christ, and the Christian faith is subject to all manner of
slanders to the enemies thereof: Yet for all that thou art not ashamed of the
Gospel, or the Protestant religion: To believe in a crucified God, What matter
of reproach was it? What names were given Christians by way of contempt? And if
the faith of Christ be subject to persecution, yet thou dare not Apostatize
from that, Why then from the power of Godliness, though subject to troubles?
How often does the Scripture forwarn us in this respect? That we are not to
think the fiery try all strange, 1 Pet. 4. 12. And we are to know that we are
appointed to all afflictions and troubles in this world, 1 These. 3. 3. This
demonstrateth the excellency of a New Creature: For if it were of the world,
the world would love it as his own, John 15. 19.

2. These troubles and persecutions are not a misery, if rightly apprehended,
but 2.
are a blessing. Blessed are ye when men speak all manner of evil against you
for my names sake, Mat. 5. 10, 11. And thus the Apostles when they were
persecuted, went away rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to suffer any
thing for Christ's sake: they are several ways a blessing; for first, The more
they are affl^cted, the more of Gods Grace and support is vouchsafed unto them.
The spirit of Glory rests on them, 1 Pet. 4 14. If they be upon Mount Calvary,
they shall also be upon the Mount of Transfiguration. Nihil crus sentit in
ligno quando animus est in Coelo, said Tertullian. Again they are a blessing,
for they have a blessed operation. This fire is more precious then that which
tries Gold: this is the file to get off the rust: the winnowing to blow away
their chaff: And lastly, they are a blessing in the event, for they work an
everlasting weight of glory, so that these troubles should not be
discouragements to thee.

Use of Exhortation, Not to hearken to any of those cavils, or prejudices thy
heart Use.
may be filled full with, against this New Creature. Say, It is no longer
disputing: shall I become a New creature? Is it wisdom to change my former
life? But follow the Scripture, and do as that directs thee. Oh if there were
nothing but the peace and joy that accompanies this life, that were enough to
set thy heart on edge after it. It will be no grief of heart to thee to think
of thy prayers often, thy frequent exercises of grace. To dye a new Creature,
is the putting of thee into a possession of eternal glory: But who has
believed our report? who begins to feel in himself hungrings and thirstings
after this estate? who says, I will return to God from whom by sin I have
wandered, for so it will be better with me than in all my sins? Alas, It Is this
new creature only which has the promise of this life, and of that to come.

SERMON XLV.
Showing the Counterfeit of the New Creature.

GAL. 6. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision nor uncircumcision
avails any thing, but a New Creature.
I Shall now finish this Discourse about a new Creature: we have handled the
nature of it, and its properties; I shall in the last place show you the
counterfeits of this new Creature, or what that is which seems to be this new
Creature, and yet is not. There is nothing wherein a man does oftener deceive
himself than in this. If the question should be put to every man, Whether he
be a new Creature, or not? He would answer affirmatively, And thank God he is:
It is therefore good to demonstrate it ocularly and palpably, that there are
many things which have the vizar and form of this new Creature, but they want
the power of it; and indeed to have the show, name and title of it, is easy;
but to put forth the powerful operations of it, is burdensome and difficult: In
the number therefore of these Counterfeits, are,

First, All those who have the outward form and shape of godliness, but are
wholly destitute of the inward efficacy and power of it. Thus the Apostle,
Having a form of 1. Who seem to be born again, but are not.
godliness, but denying the power of it, 2 Timothy 3. 5. The Greek word (...) is
rendered by a Form, Image, or Similitude; As if you should say, the Picture or
Statue of a man, it is not a man: Thus it is here, there are many who have the
outward fashion and expression of godliness, but they have not the reality of
it, which is here in the Text called (...), virtue or power, because the true
nature of every thing is discerned by its operations, a picture does not speak,
nor walk, nor grow, because it is only the form of a man. Now this outward
profession might seem to put in fair for this new creature; for look upon him
as a Christian, so he is one who has renounced the Idols of the world; he is
one that comes out of the wilderness he once lived in: If you compare him and
an Heathen together, does not one seem to be a new Creature in respect of the
other? But this external new change is not enough. Why an outward form of
godliness without inward efficacy of it, etc. I.


First, Because as you have heard, The greatest work of this new Creature is in
the heart, called therefore the hidden man, and the inward man. It is not so
much a new Tongue to profess a new worship of God, as a new Mind, a new Will,
new Affections: for look where the old man had his greatest Hold, and his
strongest Fort, there this new man comes and possesses it. Now the strength
of corruption lies in our minds and hearts; there is the Treasury and Shop of
sin: It Is from the heart (says our Savior) that evil Thoughts, Adulteries,
Murders, and all wickedness does flow, Mark 7. 21. Then on the contrary, when
a man is made a new Creature, from his heart come good thoughts, holy
affections, and a godly conversation. Do not then judge according to outward
appearance, thou must not only look to what fruit thy life bears, but what
root that is from whence it grows.

2. This outward form cannot be the new Creature, because the Apostle in the
Text II.
makes it contradistinct, and an opposite; or at least a diverse member to that
of a new Creature. For when he says, Circumcision avails nothing, he means
the whole external form of the service of God in the old Testament, when he
says uncircumcision avails nothing, he means the whole external form of
the worship of God in the new Testament. Now to both these is
contradistinguished this new Creature: so that if a man have all the postures
and outward forms of the Christian Religion, and godliness professed therein,
yet he has not oil, he has only lamps, and when the voice of the Bride-grooms
coming will be heard, he will fall into miserable confusion: Why is it then,
that men rest in forms and external shows, as if that were all God required,
as if there were no further thing requisite?

3. This outward form will not suffice, is not the new Creature, because men
may be III.
rea^^ Heathens, while they are formal and titular Christians. In works they
may deny Christ, while in words they do acknowledge him. and real denying by
actions, is worse than verbal by words. Thus Isaiah calls the Rulers among the
Jews, Isa. 1. Princes of Sodom and Gomorrah, the worst of Heathens, because
their lives were like such: The Apostle instanceth in one sin, and we may say
so of any other gross sin; If any man provide not for his own, he has denied
the faith, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8. As it holds true of that
sin, so we may say; If any man be a drunkard, liar, swearer, Sabbath-breaker,
he has denied his faith, and is worse than an Infidel. But why worse than an
Infidel? Because he sins against more light and knowledge, as also against
more holy obligations and bonds which are in the Christian Religion. Know
therefore that a titular Christian, but a real profane man; a nominall
believer, but a real ungodly person, is like old Sepulchers, with new guilding
and painting over them; like a Statue of earth and dirt, with some glorious
coloring; and as if a man should go to touch and feel what such a Statue is,
it would presently turn to dirt and dust in his hand: so if thou would
seriously lay to heart thy condition, that which thou hopest in, and boastest
of, thou would find to be empty and vain: real ungodliness and
profaneness under the form of Christian profession, is gross and palpable
hypocrisy; and it is a wonder, how that contradiction between thy faith and thy
practice, thy Religion and thy conversation is hid from thy eyes; It Is a
wonder, that thy sins stare thee not in the face, when thou art in thy
Christian duties, like so many devils, asking you what you do there. How does
thy praying and swearing stand together? how does thy hearing and thy contempt
of godliness consist together?

4. This new name thou have got by being a Christian, and a baptized person,
cannot IIII.
be a new Creature, for then every one who is baptized, and of the Orthodox
Religion, should be saved; for every new Creature, whether Jew or Gentile,
bond, or free, shall be saved; there is none that is a new Creature here, that
shall not have new Robes of glory hereafter, but the Scripture does terribly,
yet plainly set down this position, that but few only of those who enjoy the
outward privileges of the Church shall be saved. Many are called; and few are
saved, Mat. 20. 16. it is a sentence, though full of terror, yet worthy to be
written on your Pew doors, or your Chamber doors, yea rather upon your hearts
with a Pen of Iron, to think that few of those who come in our assemblies and
hear, and sit within those walls, shall yet have a Crown of glory upon their
heads; who art thou then that boastest of thy Church Priviledges, of thy
Protestant Profession? Thou art no Atheist, no Papist, but if no new Creature
neither, heaven is not a place prepared for thee. The paucity and little number
of those that shall be saved even of Christians, and baptized persons, should
always make us tremble and quake. O Lord are we in the number of those few or
not! But eight persons in the whole world were preserved in the Ark; but two
persons of those many thousands that came out of Egypt, entered into Canaan. If
the Scripture were not plain in this point, you might cry out, It was an hard
speech, and not to be born. But heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, than
one ^ot or tittle of that sentence: say not then every thing that grows in
Gods garden is a flower, every thing in Christ's field is good seed, every
called man is an elected man, every baptized man a new Creature, for this is
directly repugnant to Gods Word.

A second Counterfeit pretending to this new Creature, may be every one who
formerly being given to some profane and wretched ways is now turned a new
man; for 2. Every man changed from his wicked ways, is not this new creature.
what can be thought the new creature, if this be not? But every man changed
from his former wicked ways is not presently a new Creature, though he be a
new man. Ahab was a new man in his humiliations; he had new affections, new
sorrow, new humiliation, yet not a new Creature; This is diligently to be
considered, that so men may see upon what grounds and motives they set upon a
new course of life. And first, this new man may not be a new Creature for want
of constancy and duration. This new Creature is incorruptible, being born of
the seed of God, and therefore lives and grows under discouragements as well
as encouragements, under temptations and oppositions, as well as fair and
pleasant opportunities; like Camomile it grows the most by treading upon it;
The new Creature has always been in its most spiritual glory when it has been
in greatest outward reproaches. Golden times of peace and plenty made rusty new
Creatures, as I may so aliude; but times of persecution took off all their
rust, and made a luster upon them. This new Creature therefore is unchangable
in all changes, at least for the main substance and root of grace; but there is
many a man became new and wonderfully changed for a fit, for a pang; It Is but a
Land-flood not a Fountain, and so is quickly dried up. The people of Israel in
their afflictions were wonderfully changed, but their hearts were not steadfast
within them; we have a notable instance in one particular, Jer. 34. 15, 16.
where the Prophet Jeremiah warns the people of Israel to let their servants
go free at the time appointed by God, otherwise they should not go free from
judgments: Hereupon they entered into a Covenant, to proclaim liberty to their
servants; but they did not hold long in this new change: Therefore mark that
expression, Ye were turned to day, and had done right; but ye turned again, and
polluted my name: See here how a people may be changed from evil to good, and
then not long after change good unto evil again. Thus the Swine new washed is
all over new for a while, but she returns to her mire again: Thus John's
Hearers did rejoice (...), for an hour, for a season; and afterward they say,
John had a Devil. Oh consider then, whether thy becoming a new man, be not
upon some fits for a little while, and then thou Apostatizest again: Thy
inconstancy is an argument of thy hypocrisy: Thou art but a blazing star that
may make a luster for a while, thou art not fixed in the Orb. Now with what
earnestness should this be pressed upon you? How many men become new for a
day, for a week, but then presently return to their old lusts again? This
argues thy motion is not natural, but violent, otherwise it would hold out.

2. It may be defective in the motives of it; Thou art become a new Creature
upon old grounds, for so it may fall out. Not love to Christ and spiritual
considerations may set thee upon this change, but temporal fears, and love to
outward mercies: When the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 16. would declare, That every man
in Christ is a new Creature, and old things are passed away, he declares this
by instancing in particulars; Henceforth know we no man after the flesh,, no
not Christ himself: A mighty expression. The sense is, That whereas once they
delighted in, and had much comfort by the bodily presence of Christ; he was a
great stay and comfort to them, insomuch that they were exceedingly troubled to
hear of his departure. Now (says the Apostle) we look not after those
corporeal considerations, but know him after, a spiritual manner, we expect
spiritual strength, spiritual privileges, and spiritual consolations by him;
so then if a new Creature, thy humiliations are after the Spirit, not after the
Flesh; all thy religious duties, thou know them not after the flesh: But
there are many men, though changed in their lives, yet it is after the flesh
only they are changed, because Gods judgments were upon their estates, their
bodies, and the outward man. The Prophet Hos. c. 7. does excellently compare
all the Jews Prayers and Fastings, because for their wine and oil only, to
howlings, that as bruit beasts, when they are deprived of their food, and ready
to be starved, make an horrid howling, and yelling. No better did God esteem of
their humiliations, and dejectons before him. Let not then any corrupt worm
breed in thy duties thou do newly set upon, for that may quickly devour all
thy expected fruit.

3. This new man may not be a new Creature, because the change is wrought upon
him by confused principles of the mind, and sudden affections and
resolutions, not by a distinct, clear, and well advised information of
judgment. Those hearers that received the Word with joy, found immediately a
change upon them; but they held out for a season only, because it was not a
deliberate work on them; Therefore our Savior exhorts every one that would
make a change of his life, and become his Disciple, to sit down first and
consider, Luke 14. 28. whether he be able to make such a building as that of
grace is, or whether he can set out strength enough against so many thousand
enemies that will be in the way. Observe it, he compares this undertaking of
Christianity, and his discipleship to two great and chargeable things, which
have exhausted men of great Treasures, building, and waging War; and
therefore our Savior turned back some that came to be Volunteers in his
Service, informing them of the hardship that would accompany his ways; so that
there is no such hopeful way of continuing in a good new change, as when this
is wrought by a sound illumination of the mind, and by strong conviction of the
judgment, through potent Arguments. And what can be thought the reason of so
many Apostates from the hopeful beginnings of grace, which seemed in many, but
this only, Their affections were wrought upon, they had great grief, great
fear and terror upon their consciences, but little or very weak workings upon
their judgments? Therefore we Ministers of God, think not this any such great
matter, to stir up in you, new grief, new sorrow, new fears in you. Alas, this
water will quickly be dried up; but this is the great work, to convince your
judgment with such new light and reason out of Gods Word, and this will stick
like an Arrow in thy heart: Thou will roar out and cry, Oh there are such
arguments from the Scripture, such strong reasons from Gods Word for me to
become a new man, that I am not able to gainsay them. Therefore this new
creature is called Light in the Lord: fear all those affections of grief, and
sorrow, and terror that are in thee, being but affections, and not the fruit of
an enlightened judgment, will quickly vanish away: And as rotten fruit falls to
the ground before it is ripe, so will all these affections decay before they
come to any maturity, that flow not from a sanctified understanding. Divines
say, God begins orderly, he first works in the understanding, and by that
moves and exciteth the affections; but the devil he first moves the
affections, and by them he perverteth and corrupts the understanding. Thus he
propounded to Eve what was good to the eye, and pleasant to the taste, thereby
to ensnare the affections, and by that means blinded her judgment. Therefore
the Apostle commands Timothy, to reprove with all Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4. 2. To
make men afraid and tremble about sin, when by good and sound Doctrine they are
not informed of the foulness and guilt of it will never hold.

4. This new man comes short it may be of a new Creature, because the work of
grace is not deep enough. He is an outward new creature, but not an inward new
creature. That foolish builder our Savior speaks of, who lost all his pains
and cost, miscarried in this, because he did not dig deep enough: Thy heart is
thoroughly wounded for sin, and slightly cured again: It has not been a deep
wound, or a sure cure again: so then as Planters of trees are careful about the
root and builders wary about the foundation; so when thou beginnest to set upon
a new course of life, remember that thou go low enough into thy soul, that it
may take root downward as well as fruit upward. The heart is full of hardness
and stoninesse, and so thou can not get into the bottom of it presently; the
love of God, the fear of God rooted in the heart would make thee hold out a new
man always.

I might now speak of other Counterfeits of this new Creature, As a man
affecting new and strange opinions, he is very prone to judge the better of
himself because of 4. Helps and directions how to become new Creatures.
this; so a man undertaking some new and strict way different from the Word of
God, as the way of Pharisaism: but I have handled these already, when I spoke
of false Signs. I shall therefore conclude this Text and Subject with the
suggestion of some helps and remedies to become new Creatures; for I doubt not
but that many of you, at least in some sad thoughts or other, have resolutions
to become new creatures. The conscience surely is not so stupefied, but it many
times tells thee, O this old life thou live must be altered, it is time to
turn over a new leaf, to learn a new lesson; God forbid I should dye with these
sins upon me! How many times do thou resolve and purpose, I will never be
profane more, My life shall be new, I will set upon a new course in my family;
but these buds are quickly snipt off by some cold frost or other. What
directions then may be given to keep this purpose in our hearts, and to put
these resolutions into practice? for we resolve, and resolve to be new, but we
live and dye in old ways. To help us herein, take these directions following.

First, Let thy resolutions come from solid reasons, not sudden affections.
This I 1.
hinted before; What purpose is taken up by strong demonstrations from
Scripture, they will hold always the same, because the Scripture is the same.
The Scripture does represent sin in a terrible aggravation as well one day as
another; that declares the goodness of God in the same attractive manner as
well one week as another: whereas mere sudden affections they ebb and flow.
If therefore thy resolutions do not hold as firmly against sin in time of
health as well as sickness, if they be not as cordial in thy life time as at
the time of death, quicken thy self up with Scripture-arguments, and say, The
Word of God says the same things still, and why should not my heart be the
same still?

Secondly, Let thy resolutions to become a new man, be made not in thy own
strength, but in the strength of Christ: Thou do resolve in thy own power to
cast out the devils 2.
that possess thee, thou purposest in thy own strength to destroy these
Goliahs. But says Paul, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens
me, Phil. 4. 13. And says Christ, Without me ye can do nothing, John 15. He
does not say, No great thing, but nothing; and he does not say, Ye cannot
perfect, or consummate any thing without me, but ye can do nothing without me,
as Austin well considers the Text; and then it is (...), without me, or
separated from me; As the Branch cut from the Vine cannot bear any fruit: Now
the more sensible and apprehensive thou art of thy own infirmities, and
impotency, the more ready Christ is to help: say, O Lord, though this be too
great a work for me, I cannot throw these mountains into the Sea, yet it is not
too great for thee.

Thirdly, Let these resolutions be accompanied with earnest and fervent prayers
to God. Thou purposest and resolvest, but where are thy lively and powerful
supplications 3.
unto God? There is no such Engine to batter down all the strong holds of
sin, as prayer; see our Saviors encouragement herein, Ask and ye shall
receive, knock and it shall be opened, Mat. 7. 7. Prayer is the key of Heaven,
as the Ancients called it; thy resolutions therefore and desires are like those
of the sluggard, who desires, and desires, but puts not his hands to work,
and so his desires are said to kill him; Thus thou resolvest, and resolvest,
but do not set home, or back these resolutions by earnest and strong prayers;
therefore thy resolutions destroy thee: A man strong in resolutions, and weak
in supplications will presently be foiled upon every temptation, you must not
therefore only resolve, but you must watch, pray, and even yet thy resolutions
take no place, extraordinarily fast, and seek to God; for sins that have been
long upon thee, are like those devils which possessed a man from his youth, and
such could not be cast out, but by prayer and fasting.

Fourthly, If thou would turn these godly resolutions into godly actions,
separate 4.
thy self immediately from all temptations and occasions to sin, from all
evil companions, who are apt to hinder thee in such good purposes; for it is
vain thing to think thy self strong enough to abstain from a sin, when thou
can not withdraw from the occasion of it. The Jews that were to abstain from
leaven in the days of the Passover, that they might be sure not to eat it,
would not so much as have it in their houses: yea, so superstitious were they,
that they would not so much as mention the word Lechem, Bread, lest leaven
should come into a man's mind. The Nazarite that was not to drink wine, would
neither eat Grapes. Therefore bid farewell to all thy old companions, all thy
old temptations, and say as that new Creature once did, who formerly living in
Fornications and the Whore coming to solicit him as she used to do, he cried
out, Ego non sum ego, I am not I: I am another man than I was.

Lastly, Pursue thy resolutions into actions, because of thy mortality and
uncertainty 5.
of life. To day if you will hear, harden not your hearts; Now therefore, or it
may be never: Do not as some Heathens, which Offer their Bee-wax unto their
Gods, and keep the Honey to themselves. Do not thou reserve thy old decrepit
age for this new Creature, and spend the prime and flower of thy time in the
service of sin: Post Genesin sequitur Exodus, as soon as we have a beginning we
are making to an end; Why then art thou still resolving, and resolving, when
thou have no security for thy life? This night, this day, thy soul shall be
taken away from thee. Oh thou mortal man, and lump of clay, thou that art but
so much dust before the wind, how dare thou put off becoming a new man?

Use Of exhortation, Let not this Subject be preached in vain unto you. The
necessity Use.
and excellency of it, might be our constant Theme: we might sit down as soon
as ever we have read the Text, and say, This is the sum of all. Do not
deceive your selves; as if thy old ways thou have lived in will lead thee to
happiness. If these were our inventions, if they were our words and
persuasions only, you might easily reject them, but being the assertions and
plain commands of the Word, how can you but hear and tremble! and above all
motives let this prevail, viz. The wonderful comfort, joy and peace of
conscience you will have in thinking, That I am not as I have been; such and
such sins have been committed: but oh (blessed be God) I have forsaken them:
you would not be what you were once for all Solomon's wealth. Alas! What
torments and hellish pangs did you, while old servants to sin, feel? What
gripes and stings, that thou livedst so, and wast not changed into a new man!

SECT. VI. Handling Grace as Gods workmanship, and Good Works as the end
thereof.
SERMON XLVI.
The New Creature is Gods Workmanship, also its necessity and dignity.

EPHESIANS. 2. 10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God had before ordained, that we should walk in them.
I Have chosen this Text as an additional to the further explication of this
New Creature you have heard so much of: That as continual dropping does at
last make an impression into a very stone, so a constant information, and
application of this Doctrine, may in the close make a powerful change on you.
To understand the Text, we must take notice of the coherence, as the very first
word For, dothadvertise us. In the beginning of this chapter the Apostle after a
most divine and admirable manner, describes the whole nature of our
justification, regeneration, and salvation.

1. From the Efficient cause, God rich in mercy; with the impulsive cause, For
his great love wherewith he loved us.

2. From the Meritorious, or as the Logicians call it, the Procatarcticall
cause, moving God from without, through Christ Jesus.

3. From the Final cause, To show forth the exceeding riches of his Glory. From
this description so magnificent and full of spiritual glory, arises verse 8. a
sure and solid proposition, By grace ye are saved: From the first to the last,
all is of Grace: And grace that is without us, viz. The good love of God, not
any dwelling in us. We are saved: Salvation is here either put for
justification, because by that we are entitled to heaven, or else we are said
to be already saved, because we have the seal and pledge of it here; and it is
begun in us, and also we have a sure right to it: and qui jus habet ad rem, rem
ipsam videtur habere: some understand salvation, as much as a purgation, or
deliverance from sin; for as sin is called death, so freedom from it, may be
called life and salvation: it comes all to one. In the next place we have the
instrumental cause of our salvation, and that is Faith: And lest we should be
thought to have this faith of our selves, as if God indeed gave his mercy and
grace to those that believe, but we did believe by our own power; God gives
the Oil, and we bring the vessel to receive it, he presently adds, and that
not of your selves, it is the gift of God: And as if the spirit of God would
herein expressly provide against all those subtle opinions that craftily
undermine Grace, he further adds by way of opposition, Not of works, giving
also a reason of the whole, lest any man should boast: Whereupon my Text is
brought in as a reason to prove all is of Grace, For we are his workmanship.
The strength of this argument lies upon that rule in Logic, Nothing can be a
cause and effect too, in the same consideration. But our works and holiness,
they are the effects of his grace: We are his workmanship, therefore they
cannot be a cause; and yet lest by magnifying of Grace, and setting up of
faith, excluding all that we do, he might seem to justle out good works, and an
holy life, he says, We are created in Christ to do them, only they are
effects flowing from grace, not causes producing grace. I shall at this time
ouely insist upon the Apostles reason set down generally in the Text. We are
his workmanship, (...), his figment, translate some, his Creature, others; our
translators well, His workmanship. He does not speak of our natural making,
the forming of our bodies in the womb, and infusing a soul, but of our
spiritual renovation. Neither does it signify any kind of workmanship; but a
curious, and exact one: In which sense, verses are called Poems, as consisting
of exact measure, and quantity. It may be an allusion to those expressions the
Old Testament uses about the people of Israel, which God formed a people to
himself, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Isa 43. 21. especially that place, Isa 43. 7. is
remarkable, I have created him for my glory, I have formed him, yea I have made
him: where Mercer observes a gradation; God by degrees did make Israel a
glorious people, as he made the world by degrees, he created them, he formed
them, that was a further work upon them; yea he made them, that was the
fullness and complement of all.

Doct. That all those who are renewed in a spiritual manner by God, are his
workmanship. Doct.


For the opening of this, consider these things as introductory.

First, That we become Gods workmanship, or his people (for it is all one) upon
several grounds and titles: as 1. We become Gods workmanship or people upon
several grounds and titles. I. By conquest.


1. By conquest and victory. Satan is called The prince of the world, John 12.
31. And he rules in the hearts of the disobedient, Ephesians. 2. He kept the whole
world as his own Castle; but when Christ a stronger then he comes, the prince
of this world is judged, and cast out of his possession John 16. 11. And now
Christ having thus conquered, we become wholly his: Even as the people of
Israel are said to be the people that God had made for himself, because he
destroyed all their enemies for them, and delivered them from the hands of
Pharaoh: So it is here, The people of God are his workmanship, because
delivered by the mighty power of God from all their spiritual adversaries, that
we being delivered from our enemies, might serve him without fear all the days
of our life, Luke 1. 74. Therefore never think thou art Gods workmanship, till
thou see thy self set at liberty and freedom from those snares of Satan thou
were held captive in. If God has not subdued those lusts that war against thy
soul, thou art as yet sins and Satan's, not the Lords. Observe that expression
of Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Abstain from lusts which war against the soul: Thy
ungodliness is a warlike adversary against thee: Thou fear the enemy that
may take away thy life, thy goods; but thou fear not thy sins that are in
battle array to deprive thee of God. Oh therefore say unto thy soul, Oh my soul,
Why love thou to be in this dark Dungeon? Why are these cords and chains of
sin so pleasing to thee? Oh pray to God that he would save thee and deliver
thee from those sins, thy deadly enemies.

2. We are Gods people, and so his workmanship in respect of his gracious
Covenant II. By covenant.
and promise, for that is the tenor of the Covenant of Grace so often
mentioned, I will be their God, and they shall be my people Jer. 31. 33. 2 Cor.
6. 16. So that to be Gods workmanship in this sense, is the greatest honor and
privilege we are capable of. Happy is the people whose God is the Lord, Psalm.
144. 15. Yea, happy is the people: the Psalmist speaks it comparatively to all
those outward blessings, that are there reckoned up: And indeed to have God our
God, is the treasure of all happiness and comfort; For then his omnipotency,
his wisdom, his goodness, all his attributes are for thy use and advantage.
It is to have the Fountain, the sum, the Treasury of all good: It is the
Divines rule, That we must not go to an absolute God, but relative one,
considered in the relation of a gracious Covenent: For hereby God has bound
himself; and though we cannot plead our worth, yet we may his fidelity and
truth: Though we cannot urge our works, yet we may his words: So that if we
look into the Original of this workmanship, we shall find it to be the only
Grace of God: Gods word is gone out of his mouth; and so being once passed
under this rod, as the Scripture expresses it, Ezekiel. 20. 37. we may boldly
urge at the throne of Grace, Oh Lord, it was once free to thee whether thou
would own us or no, do good to us or not, but since thou have entered into
promise with us, thou can not deny thy self. So that to be Gods workmanship,
Gods people, is to be had as it were into the mount of Transfiguration, and God
shows thee all the glory of heaven, and says, All this will I give thee.

3. We are his workmanship or people by purchase, and that at a dear rate, even
by the III. By purchase.
blood of Christ. Thus Christ is said, To purchase to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. And herein that holds true which was
told you not long since, That it costs Christ more to make us his people, then
to create the world; for there it was but his word, saying, Let there be light,
and there was light: But here it is his death and sufferings, to redeem us from
our former evil ways. This should make us even startle, and be astonished at
the noisome, and foul guilt of sin, which plungeth us into an irrecoverable
loss, unless by Christ's blood we are set at liberty: Every sin is the price
of Christ's blood. Now herein people do much deceive themselves; they look for
salvation by Christ's blood, but not for a freedom from the power of sin,
whereas the blood of Christ does not only cleanse away guilt, but it also
makes white and fruitful to every good word and work.

Lastly, Which is most proper to this Text, we are his people and workmanship
by a gracious renovasion, and making all things new in us. God once made us
after IV. By renovation.
his image, but we soon defaced that superscription: That therefore we may be
his again, he makes us the second time after his image again; and in this sense
we are here called his workmanship: God takes away our rubbish, and all our
filth, and makes us a fit Temple for the Holy Ghost to dwell in. In this sense
the Psalmist speaking of the Church, says, It is he that has made us, and not
we our selves, Psalm. 100 3. A^ the wilderness does not make it self a Paradise,
nor the weed a flower; no more can a people wallowing in their sin, and
tumbling in their filth, make themselves an holy Temple unto the Lord. This is
the Lords doing, and it must be mavelous in the eyes of all those that behold
it: As God is said to create new heavens, and a new earth, so he sometimes
makes new inhabitants to dwell therein. 2. A woeful thing to be Gods workmanship
by natural creation, and not by gracious renovation.


Secondly, That it is a woeful thing to be the workmanship of God by Natural
creation, and not his workmanship by gracious Renovation. It had been better
for thee never to have been born, never to have been Gods creature in the first
making, if thou art not his creature in the second making. Thus our Savior
said of Judas, It had been better for him he had never been born, Mark 14. 21.
Some Scholastical heads have thought the very natural being of a man, to be so
great a good, as that in reason a man would choose rather to be damned, then not
to be at all: And therefore they expound that speech of our Saviors concerning
Judas, to be true only in regard of the sensitive part of a man, but not his
rational. But this cannot hold: for

1. Damnation is the inflicting of an infinite evil upon a man, so far as he
is capable of it, and the depriving him of an infinite good. Now to be, or to
have a I. Why it were better never to be, then not to be new made.
life, is but finite, limited good: If therefore thou art not Gods gracious
workmanship, it had been better if thou had been a Toad, a Serpent, yea,
nothing at all, then to be a man: And if men in the extremity of their bodily
paio, have curled the day that ever they were born, as we read Job and
Jeremiah, though it was their great sinful impatience to do so: How much rather
must they cry out so in hell, where there is not one drop of honey in all the
gall they have? Not the least drop of water can be had to cool so much as the
top of their tongue. Why then do not your ears tingle while they hear this? Art
thou not a New Creature? Has not God made thee all over anew? Oh miserable
man! Alas that ever thou were born! How often will thou wish in the horror of
thy conscience, thou had never been a man? Why do thou rejoice in thy
wealth, in thy greatness, in thy comforts, and have no true godliness to
rejoice in? If thou had all Solomon's wealth, and Methusalems days to enjoy
it, yet if not Gods workmanship, woe be thee that ever thou were born!

2. Thou had better never have been Gods natural creature, if not this
gracious creature; because this natural life is fraughted with many miseries
and troubles, so II.
that the grief is more then the joy: now to be miserable here, and miserable
for ever hereafter, is misery in its height. Man that is born of a woman is of
few days, and full of trouble, Job 14. 1. But man that is born of God, is
incorruptible, and everlasting, and full of peace and joy in the holy Ghost.
Alas, all thy comforts in this life, which are but few, they hang but upon a
thread of thy uncertain life: so that as the heathen said, when one was
commending the riches, and wealth of merchants, Non amo faelicitatem e funibus
pendentem, I do not love that wealth which hangs upon ropes, if they break the
ship miscarrieth. We may say of all comforts: We love not that profit, that
pleasure which hangs upon thread: Why then do thou not betake thy self to some
solitary and serious contemplation? saying, What is my life worth? wherein am I
more happy then beasts? then that Toad that creeps there, if I be not made a
new Creature?

3. Therefore better never be born, then not be this workmanship of God,
because hereby a man is frustrated of his end, and that true happiness which
ought to be the III.
study and endeavors of all. Man as he was created with more remarkable
excellency then other Creatures, therefore you have the Scripture bringing in
God, as it were, consulting with others, Let us make man after our own image;
so was be ordained to a more sublime and glorious end, which was to enjoy God,
and hate eternal communion with him; and the means to partake of this
beatitude, was the image of God, a pure and holy nature. Now when we lost, or
fell from this means and help, we also Apostatized from that glorious end: And
by this means in stead of everlasting happiness, meet with everlasting horror
and damnation: So that if the blessedness of every thing lie in its proper and
suitable operations after the most perfect manner, to its proper end, then are
we become most miserable, who are turned both out of the way to, and end of all
happiness. Oh that men should not more consider the end why they are made, the
end why God gives them to live and move and have a being, is it to eat and
drink and satisfy thy llsts, and at last go down into hell in a moment? Oh be
not as bruit beasts, that perish without understanding.

In the third place observe this, That as here in the Text we are called in the
3.
general Gods workmanship, so in other places we have the particular kind of
workmanship expressed; For Gods word does use several similitudes to express
our relation to God, that so what one is not emphatical to declare, the other
may do it. Thus we have handled the relation of Sons, which is more then his
workmanship; for an house is the Artificers workmanship, but it is not his
Child, and therefore he has not such endeared affections to it. In other
places they are called, The wife of Christ, to show their intimate conjunction,
That they are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; but in other places the
Workmanship of God, under the instance of an house. As a man dwells in his
house, so God does not only make us his people, but he dwells in us afterward:
Now how rich and glorious must that soul be, who has Christ lodging and
resting in it? He that sits in his Glory at the right hand of God, does also
abide and dwell in thy heart. In other places, this workmanship is not only
called an House, but a Temple, 1 Cor. 3. and that denotes more then an House,
viz. a peculiar destination and consecration of it to God. Thus every godly man
converted is made a Temple of the holy Ghost. Its peculiarly dedicated to God;
so that lusts and Satan have nothing to do there. Thus you see what kind of
Workmanship we are, Gods House, Gods Temple. Oh the mavelous dignity and
purity that ought to be in every New Creature! How comes Owls and Satyrs, lusts
of darkness to be in the Temple of the Lord! sometimes we are his Workmanship
of a Vineyard, or a pleasant Garden, as the book of Canticles signifies,
planted as Eden was by God himself? Now how come briars and brambles up in Gods
Garden? So that the consideration of our being Gods Workmanship should make us
take heed there be nothing of sins, or the Devils workmanship in us.

In the fourth place consider, Wherein Gods Workmanship as we are New
Creatures, 4. Wherein Gods workmanship as we are New Creatures surpasses that
as we are creatures.
surpasses that as we are creatures; And herein we must remove one false
difference that is assigned in Popery, which is this, God indeed (say they)
made us without our selves, there was not our Will or Consent required to it;
but he does not new make us, or cause us to be New Creatures without our Will;
and they bring that old saying of Augustines, Qui fecit te sine te, non
justificabit te sine te. He that made thee without thy own power, he will not
also convert thee without thy own power. But the Scripture makes us wholly
passive in that first work of grace. Although it be also true, That in being
made New Creatures, we are not without understanding and a will at that time,
but there is no natural imbred power in us to turn our selves unto God, as the
very phrase Workmanship and Created do import; and truly this is the end of the
Apostle in this part of the Chapter, to exclude every work of ours; for if it
be never so little, we may boast at least so far, but there is a vast
difference in the original and cause of the one and the other.

First, God made the world, and with other creatures, man as the epitome of
all, I.
out of his general love and goodness. He did not create from natural
necessity, as Bees make their Hives and Honey, or as the Sun communicates
his light, but voluntarily and out of his mere love, Ex indulgentia, not
indigentia. Bernard. So that it was Gods goodness to thee to make thee a man,
and not a toad, or a serpent: But the original of making us New Creatures is a
special and more peculiar love. As Jacob loved Joseph with a special love, and
as a sign thereof, gave him a party-colored Coat: So God with a special favor
is carried out to such whom he converts, and bestows on them the choice
Ornaments of Grace. Hence it is never called Gods Grace, that he made the world;
we do not attribute it to Gods Grace properly that we live and have a being,
but to his Love and Goodness. But the Scripture does peculiarly appropriate it
to the Grace of God, that he elects us, justifies, sanctifies and glorifieth
us.

A second Difference is, In regard of the acts and works of God in his
administration II.
and dispensation toward them; For God deals with man as a Creature in the
way of a general Providence, and so man as a Creature merely is looked unto, as
the Beasts of the field, and the Fowls of the air, only in a more noble Degree,
because he is a more noble Creature: but now Gods dealing to his New Creatures,
is in a way of Predestination, and a Covenant of Grace; so that even the very
outward Mercies that the New Creature has, come from a sweeter and more
comfortable spring, then they do to a mere man; for thy very Food, Health,
Raiment, and all thy daily outward Mercies, they are the fruit of Election, not
of general Providence, and so they come from the same Love, which predestined
thee to glory, and does justify thy person: Oh what a ravishing consideration
is this to every New Creature! How may he triumph with Paul, Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect? That which is but Providence to others is
Predestination to thee.

A third Difference is, In regard of the Comforts, and supports God gives to
III.
the New Creature, above those to the Old Creature. God gives to man as a man,
many outward humane Comforts, otherwise even to live would be an Hell; Insomuch
that all life is for some Delight and Comfort. Thus God has put into all men's
hearts some Delight and Comfort, as a Cordial against those many miseries they
are to grapple with in this world. Hence some men take Comfort in one thing,
some in another, according to their several inclinations; and when these humane
Comforts are taken away, then their hearts break, and they have no more content
in their lives. Thus God has also provided admirable and wonderful Comforts
and Supports for this New Creature, They rejoice with joy unspeakable and full
of glory, and that in the midst of all outward miseries, when all humane
Comforts fail, Romans 5. 1. This is like some Herb that will be green and fresh
in the midst of Winter, when all other are dead or withered: Oh then the folly
of those who cannot part with their pleasures of sin, they think they shall
part with all their joy then, and never have a comfortable day more. Alas, thou
never have true solid joy, till thou leave those sinful pleasures, as the
Israelites had not Manna, till the Egyptian Garlic was gone. Other
differences might be mentioned, but because this is a fruitful point in the use
of it, I come to the practical improvement of it.

And first, Are those who are converted Gods Workmanship, the choice and
excellent work of his hands? then let us Examine our selves, whose Use 1.
works are those we do? Are thy Lies, thy Oaths, thy Lusts Gods Workmanship?
Are these the good works God has ordained thee to walk in? Oh, if thou
pretendest to be Gods Workmanship, why are there so many works of Sin and
Satan in thy life? It is strange that men do not commune with their own
hearts, and consider their lives no more. Where is their Faith? And why is
their Conscience so asleep? for do they not easily see themselves the Devils
Workmanship, and are they not of him as their father? Oh do not think that any
greatness or stoutnesse of stomach will bear thee out against God! When God at
the day of Judgment shall summon thee to his Tribunal, and ask, Whose
workmanship art thou? Whose works have thou done? Will thou not be presently
confounded before God and the whole world, not knowing what to say or do?

Are the people of God his workmanship? then here is ground for many
comfortable considerations. As Use 2.


First, Thou groanest under the defect of grace, thou mournest for thy
imperfect Faith, imperfect Love, imperfect heavenly-mindednesse. Oh consider 1.
thou art Gods Workmanship, and he will make all perfect at last, never fear
that sin, Satan or the world can destroy the work of God; Christ came to
destroy the works of the flesh, and the Devil; The Devil cannot destroy the
works of Christ, Christ did cast out Devils from men, but the Devils cannot
cast Christ out of the heart. Oh then be not cast down and inordinately
dejected with thy rude, confused and disorderly heart, for God will at last put
all into excellent order. Never think that God is like that foolish Builder,
who began to build, and could not make an end; No, God will make every grace in
thee perfect, ere he has done with thee.

Secondly, Its ground of great Comfort in all thy sad temptations and miseries,
Use 2.
whatsoever thy burden be. Thou art Gods Workmanship, and so he cannot but pity
thee. The Psalmist, Psalm. 103. speaks of us as Creatures. He knows what we
are made of, he considers that we are not as brass or iron, but brittle clay,
and he hears the young Ravens when they cry to him; Now if God show such pity
to all things, because his natural Creatures; what compassion will he show to
his gracious Creatures? Oh therefore pray fervently unto God, Lord, are we not
thy Workmanship? Thou that hear the cry of Ravens, will thou not hear the
cry and groans made by thy holy Spirit in us? Even the Sea Monsters draw out
their breasts to their young ones, and Lord, wilt not thou behold us thy
children, and relieve us in our wants? Many other comfortable Meditations might
be sucked out of this Point, sweeter then the honey or the honeycomb.

The last Use of Instruction, to such who are the Workmanship of God, Oh do Use
3.
nothing to blurre and soil this curious work of God in thee. If God has made
thee excellent and holy, will thou with these new clothes upon thee go and
roll in the dirt, when sin or the world tempts thee? Remember that thou art
Gods Workmanship, Shall the Heavens become like a noisome dunghill? Shall the
works of flesh and Satan be found in the Workmanship of God? You that are New
Creatures, as you have exceeding great Privileges, so also great Obligations
to holiness; that wickedness and ungodliness is not to be found in you,
which is seen in the world.

SERMON XLVII.
That God gives Graces to the most indisposed.

EPHESIANS. 2. 10. For we are his workmanship created, etc.
THe first Proposition in this Text, (viz. We are his workmanship) has been
already handled; I now proceed to the further illustration of it in this
present Verse; and there is observable;

First, the manner of this workmanship; Created. Secondly, the meritorious
cause; Through Jesus Christ. Thirdly, the final cause; To goodworks.
My business at this time will be to describe the manner of this workmanship,
Created; And here I shall not touch upon what has already been observed about
this action, but consider it in another distinct notion, which is this;

As God at the Creation made the earth which was without form and void, and so
wholly indisposed, to bring forth fruit, by that word of command and blessing
upon it, when he said, Let the earth bring forth grass and fruit. Even thus of
disorderly, wicked and most indisposed men to any godly actions, he does by his
grace make us prepared and fitted to every good work. Now that it might wholly
appear to be of Gods blessing and power merely, that the earth did bring forth
fruit and grass, observe Gods Providence herein; For he gives this command to
the earth, before he had made a Sun, and before there was any rain, so that all
must acknowledge this fruitful and germinative power in the earth to be merely
of God. There was no more at first in the earth to bear fruit, than in any
stones or dry wood. Even such an admirable work of God is this spiritual
change which he makes upon men. For those who formerly were enemies, and
adversaries unto all godliness, they become lovers and delighters in it. Oh
how necessary and comfortable is it to preach of this mighty work of God? for
hereby we hope, that God may create some such auditors, and make to himself a
holy and godly people out of those who before were profane and ungodly.

Such is the great and mighty work of God, that he makes those, who where
altogether Observe. That God in this work makes those that are unfit and averse
to holiness, to embrace and delight in it.
unfit and averse from what is godly and holy, to embrace and delight in it.
Thus God is said to be able to raise up Children to Abraham out of stones.

Every time thou see an ignorant profane man made a believer and holy, then
is a very stone made Abraham's child; every time you behold a wicked and
wretched sinner, praying, humbling himself, and reforming his life, you may
then wonder and say; Behold how God makes Grapes to grow of Thorns, and Figs on
Thistles; when God makes Matthew a Publican to leave his gainful sins, and
to follow him; when he causes Mary Magdalen to bewail and forsake her former
lusts, God does as he did at first Creation, out of a confused and unformed
heap, make a glorious world. Therefore the Apostle uses that expression, God
who works light out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4. 6. implying that God did not once
only at the Creation, work light of darkness, but still he does it daily. Even
as often as he makes the Word of God to enter into men's hearts. So that we may
say even of the worst and prophanest of people, as the Prophet did to God, when
God asked him, Can these dry bones live? Ezekiel. 37. 3. So, Can such a people, so
stupid, so careless, so rebellious, be prepared to every good work? O Lord
thou know! that is, O Lord, its in thy power, thou can do whatsoever thou
please! A Camel with his big bunch on his back has no disposition or
fitness to enter a needles eye, yet God can make it do so. Though we deny
there is any transubstantiation, God cannot (and Potentissime non potest) or
rather one substance cannot be changed into another, and they retain their
proper dimensions and qualities; Yet in every conversion of a sinner, there is
a soultransmutation in respect of the qualities thereof, darkness is made
light, gall is made honey. This glorious conquest over men's hearts is
prophesied of as the great glory of Christ's Kingdom, Isa. 11. 6. The Wolf and
the Lamb shall lie down together, etc. That cursed enmity shall be removed,
when God shall take away the poisonous nature of evil men. Thus Isai. 29. 18.
The deaf shall hear, and the blinds shall see, and verse. 24. They that erred in
spirit and murmured shall learn Doctrine, who more unlikely to hear then
refractory and rebellious men? yet these shall understand.

To explain this Doctrine, let us view the truth of it in particulars. As The
Point explained in these particulars. 1.


First, God in this spiritual change makes a people unfit, unpolished, and
every ways indisposed, suitable, and enclining to what is holy. Every man
naturally lies like a rude stone in the quarry, it must be polished and come
under much sawing and cutting ere it can be put into the building. Hence an
upright heart sometimes is called by a word that signifies a polished heart,
the roughness and ruggedness of it is taken away. Thus the work of renovation
is expressed by taking away an heart of stone, and giving an heart of flesh.
Take a stone and you can make no impression upon it, whereas flesh is pliable
and tender. Now this ruggedness and unpreparednesse of people to become godly,
how universal is it? Though many John Baptists, are A voice crying, Prepare a
way for the Lord, yet the Mountains are not made low, or the valleys exalted to
make an even and plain way, till God prepare all. That Orphaeus so much
celebrated by the Heathens for his musical Harp, thereby taming the wild and
savage Creatures, as also making Trees and Bushes to run after him as
ravished with his Music, is nothing but a wise Magistrate, by wholesome and
good Laws making a barbarous people, civil and righteous. But how much rather
may the Word of God be called that Harp which changes Beasts into Angels, and
makes rude and sottish people holy? And certainly all people generally are such
a barren wilderness, that if we do look to man's power merely, we should
despair of ever seeing them made pleasant Gardens. And as all new Plantations
finding a people uncivilized, and the ground unhusbanded, need a world of pains
and diligence to bring them into good order; so the several Dispensations of
Gods Word, in diverse places, which are like spiritual Plantations, need much
labor, preaching, instruction and exhortations, ere they are fitted for
heavenly operations. Let us therefore make you look up unto Heaven, imploring
that omnipotent power of God; Oh say, Lord, bid these dry bones live! These
crooked Trees to become straight: say, Lord, I have no fitness in me to pray,
to hear, to do what is godly: O do thou prepare and sit the heart!

Secondly, Of a people wholly impotent and unable, God in this spiritual
Renovatior, he makes able and strong in some measure to do things pleasing to
him. That womb of 2.
the soul which was so barren that no humane power could open it, God makes
fruitful. Our impotency is supposed in that we are dead in sin, and not able
of our selves to think one good thought; What can be less then this, we are
not able of our selves to entertain the least good thought how we may be saved,
how we may leave and forsake our sins. Neither does this discovery of our
impotency excuse us, and make us the less sinful, or to be the less pitied;
for it with us, as with a man, who had a great stock given him, and he has
prodigally spent all. This voluntary inability of his does not excuse him from
paying his debts, but makes him more faulty, who might have done well and would
not. Thus God gave us a rich and plentiful portion, and we quickly spent all;
and now the Law of God calls upon us for good actions, as so many debts we owe,
and we are not able to discharge any. But when this renewing grace of God is
vouchsafed to us, then the lame can walk, the blind can see, the dead Lazarus
can come out of the grave, and have the grave clothes untied, in which he was
bound; So that we Ministers in preaching, and you people in hearing are to call
upon God fervently and earnestly, that he would take away all our inability and
insufficiency. Oh pray that he would give thee good thoughts, good affections,
and so good operations! say, Oh that God who made so many Romans, Corinthians,
Ephesians, of weeds to become flowers, that he would vouchsafe the like
gracious power to us! say, Oh Lord, thy arm is not shortened, our hearts are no
more too strong for thee, then theirs were.

Thirdly, In this spiritual change, God of a froward, contrary and
irreconcilable 3.
people, makes a loving and willing people to what is good. Take all men till
fashioned by grace, they are enemies to God and godliness. The wisdom of the
flesh is not subject to God, neither can it be. As the Wolf cannot love the
Lamb, nor the Hawk the Dove; so neither can wicked men love those things that
are holy. What a woeful experience have all the wicked men in the world in
their several ages, given of their cursed venom, and cankered malice against
godliness, in all the oppositions they have raised against the faithful
Messengers of God, reproving them for sin, and informing them of duty! Oh but
when God makes these waters to go back, when he touches these mountains and
they melt like wax, then what embracing and loving is there of that which once
they could not endure. Thus Psalm. 110. Thy people shall be willing in the day
of thy power; Oh then that we could see God making such a wonderful change upon
us. The time has been, thou wast an enemy to all godly ways, a professed
opposer and scorner of them. No Toad so odious in thy eyes as one who lived
strictly and labored to fear God in all his ways; but now God has made such
a change that they are only thy delight upon the earth. Thy righteous soul is
now like Lots, grieved and tormented to see and hear the evil doings of wicked
men: if thus, thou art then one created to good works.

Fourthly, Where this powerful Renovation is, There God of a people that were
4.
weary of his service, and repining at it, as a burden, do now delight and
rejoice in it, as the greatest happiness they are capable of. Thus Isa. 4. The
Nations shall flow to the mountains of the Lord. Though it be against their
nature and custom, and former advantages of profit and pleasure, yet they
overcome all these temptations, and account nothing so dear, as the
opportunities of enjoying God in his Ordinances. See in what an heavenly manner
David's affections are enflamed, who could live always in the Courts of the
Lords house, and envied the very Sparrows that came so near the Altar. And
certainly if the carnal and worldly heart can rejoice so much in those
advantages, where their lusts are satisfied, how much rather must a spiritual
heart in the midst of all these spiritual applications, because spiritual good
things are unmixed, and have no gall in them at all, as the good things of the
world have?

Fifthly, Of a people inconstant and unsettled in the ways of God, by this new
change 5.
he makes fixed and rooted upon a sure Rock. Observe the people of Israel, they
often cried unto the Lord in their extremities, but their hearts were not
steadfast within them, and so they quickly revolted again, Psalm. 18. 31. But the
people of God are said to be like Mount Sion, that cannot be removed, Psalm.
133. 3. The gates of hell cannot prevail against them. They are an house built
upon a Rock, and so when the winds and tempests arise, they stand fast. As God
is a God that changes not, so they are holy, believing, and change not.
Isreal's righteousness is like a morning Dew, Hos. 13. 2. it quickly dries up,
the Dew falls as Aristotle observes, when the Mornings are neither too hot or
cold; Thus an heart that is lukewarm, and has no real, inward efficacy of
grace, sets upon Duties, but when the Sun arises and scorcheth, presently
the grass withers. Oh its a great Argument of this New Creation, to be
steadfast and immovable in the work of the Lord. Not to change with the times
and seasons; To be one while for the truths and ways of God, and another while
to be against them. Those things that are from a principle of nature are
constant, and always alike, but those things which come about by accident, and
as it happens; they are various and uncertain. See then thou art, as it is said
of Christ, The same Yesterday, and to day, and for ever. As great storms and
tempests discover what rooting the Tree has, so variety of conditions does
manifest what metal we are made of. As therefore David prayed, That God would
always keep up that willingness in the men's hearts, who then offered to God;
so do thou desire that God always would keep thy soul in that tenderness,
love and strong affections which sometimes are kindled in thee. John's hearers
did (...), for an hour, a short season (...), Rejoice exceedingly, as in
triumph, but when his Ministry began to touch them close for their particular
sins, then they said, He had a Devil: Now certainly God is always the same,
that which is good is always as lovely, that which is sin is always as
abominable; Therefore thy affections should be always in the same manner
carried out toward them. I might in many other particulars show you, how God
does create a people unto that which is good? The term from which, and the term
to which, Happy are the people who find such a change. What wondering was
there when the Apostles were filled with the holy Ghost; so that they all spoke
with strange Tongues; No less is it here. Thy tongue praising of, and praying
to God, speaks in a strange tongue to what it did once, when lying and cursing
came as so many sparks of hell out of thy mouth. Oh when will God appear thus
in his power, when will he bow the Heavens and come down?

Now the grounds why God takes such untoward and indisposed materials Gods
reason or end in changing such indisposed people. 1.
to any thing that is good, and makes them complying with, and embracing of his
holiness, are

First, To show forth the Glory of his Power and Grace. That which Paul speaks
concerning himself, whom he makes a monster of men, and styles himself, The
chiefest of all sinners: Now (says he) God converted him, that the exceeding
riches of his grace might be made manifest to the ages to come. Gods Power and
Goodness is wonderfully revealed in this: His Power that he can subdue the
hearts of men so averse, and so oppositely bent: And his goodness, that he
will do it to such enemies to him. That he should surprise Paul in his journey
to persecute the people of God, with so much melting Grace, when he might have
struck him into Hell with the Thunderbolt of his anger, This was unspeakable
Goodness; so that upon this ground, the Ministers of God may earnestly
importune God that he would turn their people from darkness to light, O Lord,
thou do all things for thy Glory! Now the more unwilling, unable and opposite
men are to their own Salvation, the greater will thy glory be in helping of
them; As David uses this as an Argument, that God would have mercy on him for
his sins are very great. Some indeed translate it (Although) Thus we may urge,
O Lord, Pity them and show compassion to them, for they are a people cruel to
their own souls; and therefore God has many times chosen the worst of men,
that so his Goodness may be the more remarkable. Thus (some say) the Jews
were the most brutish and blockish people in the world, yet God chose them
rather then any other to be his people. So the Corinthians, they were noted to
a Proverb for wickedness and uncleanness: They had a Temple dedicated to
Venus, and many Virgins were dedicated to her yearly to make Whores; And Coty's
the Heathen god for uncleanness, was there worshipped, yet God turns these
Beasts into Saints, and sweet Herbs come up where Brambles and Thorns did grow.

Secondly, God has this end in this spiritual Creation, to show his absolute
Dominion, 2.
and free Liberty in exercising his gracious Power upon what Subjects he
pleases. He does not many times vouchsafe his Grace to those that are civil
and of a lovely conversation, nor to men always of wisdom and parts, as our
Savior acknowledges with the admiration of Gods wisdom herein; Thou have hid
those things from the wise, and revealed them to Babes. The Apostle Paul, Romans
11. does professedly dispute Gods Dominion herein, Whom he will he chooses,
and whom he will he hardens: And who are thou, O man, that disputest with
God? Gods Dispensation herein is wholly Arbitrary, and none may say unto God,
Why do thou so? Thus while the Apostles were preaching, it is said, As many
as were ordained to eternal life, believed, Act. 1. 48. And the Election has
obtained, Romans 11. Hereupon it is that the Apostle does so often put the godly
in mind of their election, that hereby their hearts might be stirred up to all
Thankfulness; for what an overwhelming consideration would this be to the
gracious heart, to consider of those many thousands lying in a lump of sin, God
should choose thee among others, and leave the rest in a perishing condition!

A third end, Hereby God will for ever keep his New Creatures in Humility and 3.
self-emptinesse. For when we know, that Justification and Regeneration are
Privileges vouchsafed unto us, not for any Works we have done, for we were
enemies to God; This keeps us in daily humble and low thoughts about our
selves: God has ordained that way to Heaven, wherein he shall have all the
Glory, and man take only shame and confusion to himself. How can Pride and
Vainglory ever lodge in our hearts, when God only makes us to differ from
others, and we have nothing but what we have received? Hence the Apostle does
so often put the converted Saints in mind, what they were once, how they
walked in all their gross ways of sins and heinous crimes, as others did,
till God had mercy on them, and this he does to return all into grace. The
remembrance of what thou were once, how full of sin, what an enemy to that
which is good, may make thee cry out, Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto
thy Name belongs all glory.

The fourth end, Why God makes such a glorious change upon his people, is to
engage them to more Service and Obedience. That as they have yielded themselves
4.
servants to sin, now servants to Righteousness: Men of great sins, when
converted, become men of great services. Thus David, who sinned above others,
how active is he for Gods glory above others? Paul who persecuted the Church
more then all, when converted labors more then they all. This is a sharp good
to be more then an ordinary Saint, when a man has been more then an ordinary
sinner. Peter that three times denied Christ, is three times called upon to
feed Christ's sheep. The ground that was fruitful of weeds, when well ordered,
becomes excellent for corn.

A fifth end is, Hereby God would provoke others to godliness; For when we see
that by Gods grace men of desperate lives, and hopeless conversations, are
become 5.
lovers of God and Godliness, then what a shame will this be to others, who
did not seem far from the Kingdom of Heaven! Thus God is said to provoke the
people of Israel to jealousy, for when they saw the Gentiles, who knew not
God, and lived in all darkness and wickedness, to become imbracers of Gods
Worship; This was enough to stir up Jealousy in them. Thus also the
Pharisees might have blushed to see the Publicans and Harlots entering the
Kingdom of Heaven before them. Oh what a provocation should this be to men,
when they see men who were formerly averse and contrary to what is good, now to
rejoice in it! When a Mary Magdalen forsakes her lusts, and cleaves to
Christ, what Harlots then will any longer stand out? When Paul an enemy makes
much of that way he so hated once, How might this turn all the Pharisees? When
therefore you see God working such great things upon any man, say, The Lord
does this to provoke me, Shall such repent and not I? Shall such amend their
ways, and I stand out still?

Having thus explained the Doctrine, let us consider what use may be made of
this,

And first, Is it thus usual with God, To raise stones to be children to
Abraham, Use.
to make a barren wilderness a pleasant garden? then what Encouragement may
the Ministers of God have, where they see the greatest opposition and
averseness? Alas God does not find men with a natural propensity to good
things, but he creates them. God does not find men Lambs, but he makes Wolves
Lambs; sometimes where Paul had a mind to go, hoping to do good, the Spirit
of God did prohibit him to go, and at other times he is sent to a people, that
was not likely. This made the Prophet say, He was found of those that sought
him not. We are with Abraham not to look to the dead womb of the Creatures, but
to the mighty Power of God, who calls things that are not, as if they were.
It was Moses his sin of unbelief, and for which only he was hindered from
entering in Canaan, that when God bad him strike the Rock, to have water gush
out, he was unwilling, and doubted whether God could do it or no. Let not the
Ministers of God sin through unbelief, as if to God, the conversion of men
were not possible, because its impossible to men. When the Disciples had been
sishing all night, and catched nothing, Christ afterward bids them throw in
their nets, and it was so full of fish that the net was in danger of breaking.
So then let us be encouraged in our work, for all those who are ordained to
life in a Parish, they will believe, they will be converted at one time or
other. And because the Ministers of God know not the secret counsels of God,
therefore are we to preach to all, to wait patiently upon all, as if every one
were to be saved. Therefore the Apostle exhorts us to instruct in patience and
meekness, even those that gainsay, if peradventure God may give them
repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25. Though they are not sure their instruction will do
any good, there be a difficulty in it, yet they must not give over.

Use 2. To humble us under all the works of grace God vouchsafes to us, 2.
for we made not our selves New Creatures: Oh take heed of all those proud
Doctrines that debase Grace, and set up man's Will, as also of all inward pride
of Heart, glorying in any thing thou have. Did God revenge himself so upon
Belshazzar, because in the pride of his heart, he boasted, That that was great
Babel which he had built; How much rather, if a man should say, This is the
Heaven I have merited, This is the eternal Glory I have purchased: Alas look
into thy bypast life, and what was there to move God to show mercy unto thee?
In stead of having God call thee so graciously to him, he might have pronounced
that curse, To depart into everlasting fire. Paul's former wickedness made him
for ever humble and ashamed in himself. And this is the main reason, why the
good Works the godly do cannot justify them, because though they were for the
present perfect, yet they could never absolve from the guilt of our former
sins, we committed in ignorance of God.

Use 3. What cause a people laden with grievous sins, and rooted in them, 3.
have to cry mightily unto God, for his omnipotent power, for nothing can
separate thee and thy lusts, but that strong arm of God which made Heaven and
Earth, and raised Christ from the dead. In natural necessities there they apply
themselves to God, thinking nothing but his power can give rain, can stay the
pestilence, can sheathe the sword; and why then do you not also say, Oh its God
only that can soften this heart of mine! that can humble this proud stomach of
mine! Oh therefore pray unto God! saying, O Lord, Thy arm is not shortened! Art
not thou he, who did turn Manasses his heart? Art not thou he who did
convert so many thousands at one Sermon? Oh put forth the same power, Draw us
and we will run after thee, roll this stone away, and we shall praise thee!

SERMON XLVIII.
Of good works; What to be created unto good works implies, and what works are
good.

EPHESIANS. 2. 10. For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus to good
works.
THe next thing in Order considerable in this Text, is the meritorious cause of
this spiritual workmanship, and that is Christ Jesus. But this particular I
shall pass by, as a subject requiring a more large and distinct discourse of it
self. I proceed therefore to the final cause of this spiritual creation, and
that is, To good works: In the Greek it is Created in good works. The final
cause (says Erasmus) is not here signified, but the effect of grace creating:
so that in his sense the Holy Ghost should not intend the end of creating us
anew, but the effect of his grace, as if that did work all the good in us; and
which is a wonder, Estius a Papist goes this way, quoting Isa 26. that place,
O God thou have wrought all our works in us: It is much for him to do so, for
this seems greatly to exclude the power of free will: But I rather take it
for the final cause, and commend our translators who render it, unto good
works; and it is an Hebraism to use the Preposition in, for unto, although the
Grecians also do so, as (...), for gains sake, for a rewards sake. There (...)
denotes a final cause, though indeed this is so the final cause, as that it is
also the effect.

Obs. That all those who are new creatures, are created unto good works; so
that a Observe. New creatures created unto good works.
godly life is a necessary fruit of their renovation. This new creature can be
no more without an external godly conversation, then fire without heat, or honey
without sweetness. In some sense it is more then the fruit of a tree; for a
tree may live and grow, and yet bear no fruit; but this new creature cannot be,
unless there be also those good and holy works which God requires of us. This
point is of great concernment when so many satisfy themselves with hopes of
this glorious estate, and yet their works are the works of the flesh, and of
darkness: As Christ said of the false Prophets, By their fruit you may know
them; so it is also true of false Christians, by their fruit you may judge what
they are.

For the understanding of this point, let us consider what the phrase implies,
Created to good works; and that comprehends,

First, An inclination and propensity to a godly life. For as God created all
creatures with an inclination to their proper operations, thus this spiritual
man is endued 1. What to be created to good works implies
with a willing tendency unto those actions that are heavenly. Thus as the
sparks fly upward, and the stone falls downward from an inward inclination of
nature, so they are carried out to faith, repentance, holiness, from a free
principle within. Aristotle defines that to be the nature of every thing,
which is the principle of its motion, for its self sake, and not by accident:
And thus natural motions differ from violent, which are from a principle
without, and by accident. Oh its a matter worthy of all your consideration, to
attend to the principle of your motions in holy things, whether it be natural
or violent. You may read of Ahabs good works in some sense, he prayed, and
humbled himself, but he was not created to them, because they were from a
violent principle without, the judgments of God; not a natural principle
within, which is a sanctified and renewed heart: Yea, if you look upon Judas,
you may see in some respects also his good works: there was his contrition, his
confession, and his satisfaction, but he was not created to these good works,
because extracted by slavish horror of conscience, not sweetly inclined
thereunto by faith in God, and love of him. There is a great difference between
the nurses care of the child, and the mothers: The former does it because
hired, and betrusted with it, but the latter from an inward storgy, and
maternal bowels: So then is it thus with thee? do thou pray, hear, live in
all Godliness, as one that is created thereunto? One who has a free voluntary
inclination? in which respect the law of God is said to be written in their in
ward parts.

Secondly, To be created to good works, implies not only an inclination, but
a 2.
readiness, or preparedness, which is a further qualification. The fire has an
inclination to ascend upwards, but yet something may violently keep it down,
that it cannot ascend actually: Inclination to good works implies the remote
power, but readiness supposes the proxime and immediate power. Gods own people
who have the seed of Grace in them, yet how unprepared, and unready many times
to that which is good! Therefore to watch and to be ready, is a duty so often
pressed; Be ready to every good work, and prepared to every good work: To this
is opposite, dullness, sluggishness, listlesnesse, and all kind of wearisomness
in the service of God. But this should quicken us up, That we are created to
Godliness: Therefore the heart should always be swept and ready dressed for
Christ to lodge in: you must have lamps and oil; commonly sin surpriseth us,
because we are not prepared for Godliness: Thus Christ knocked, desirous to
come in, but the Church was unwilling, and so deprived her self of much
comfort. Prayer is the Key of heaven, but if rusty it will not open; and thus
it is of all duties, if thy heart be not prepared for them.

Thirdly, The phrase, created to good works, does denote them to be the
principal and 3.
main end. God has appointed every thing to an end, which holds not only in
moral agents, but also natural: Hence is that rule, Opera naturae sunt opera
intelligentiae, The works of nature are the works of reason and understanding,
because it orders, and wisely directs them to an end. Now as other
creatures have their ends, so this new creature has its, which is to be wholly
employed in those works that are godly. This is his errand, his business and
employment. The Apostles expression is remarkable, Tit. 3. 8, 9. This is a
faithful saying, and which thou art to affirm constantly, What is that? That
those who believe be careful to maintain good works: Two Greek words are
observable (...), that it be their care and study, and all their wisdom, and
then (...), to maintain, or rather to be an example, and a president. The
Apostle his scope is, that all Christians should make their houses and families
a school-house, as it were, of a godly life, that there should be no
profaneness, no filthy lusts, no scandals. That which the Apostle speaks to
Timothy, belongs to all, (...), to exercise himself unto Godliness; as he that
is to run in a race, gives himself wholly to that: so that hell is not more
opposite to heaven, then their lives are to this new creature, who live in a
constant way of impiety and manifest wickedness. The fruits of the flesh are
manifest, says the Apostle, Every man that lives in obedience thereunto, may
presently discern he is not a new creature. Oh then, when thou art overtaken
with any evil ungodly way, say, Is this the good work God created me unto? Is
this the Godly action he made me for? God did not make thee to eat and drink,
much less to riot and revel it, but to walk holily, righteously, and soberly;
and let the Godly when at any time unwilling, and indisposed to that which is
good, stir up themselves to all cheerfulness, saying, For this end God created
me anew; for this end I came into the world, How can I neglect the main
business I have to do?

Fourthly, It implies constancy and perpetuity. That which we are created
unto, is not once or twice to be thought on, or practiced; but it is the
constant employment of a man. All natural actions are constant; The fire does
always ascend, the stone does always descend: and thus he that is righteous,
does righteousness, 1 John 2. 29. says the Apostle: This discovers the
hypocrisy of those who are uncertain, and in some fits only for good actions.
In time of fear and danger, then they will do good, bewail their sins, promise
reformation; but this bulrush that hangs down its head for a while, because of
some storm falling upon it, after a fair day does presently perk up again, Gal.
6. 9. Let us not be weary in well doing; let us not faint or swound by any
discouragements or oppositions, but remember a good action will always meet
with a good reward, which grace will Crown it with. How many are almost
persuaded to take up a godly and holy life, but presently return to their vomit
again!

Fifthly, Here is universality of good works. The Apostle speaks indefinitely,
created to good works, and that is equivalent to an universal where the matter
is necessary: He does not say, created to some good works, or this and that
good work, but good works in the general. If a man be studious for all the good
works of the second Table that relate to man, as the works of righteousness,
liberality, humility, and love, etc. if negligent in the good works that relate
to the first Table, of piety, worship of God in Truth and sincerity, keeping
his Sabbath, zealous for his glory, fearing an Oath; this man is but for some
good works, and so not created by God, which is universal. Again, if a man be
zealous for the works of piety and religion, but careless in the duties of
justice, equity, truth to men, of brotherly love and liberality to those that
are in necessities, as far as it is his duty, he also is to doubt whether he be
created to good works; for Gods grace creates to one as well as to another.

Sixthly, It does not only suppose us inclining and ready to them, but
zealously to pursue them. Thus they are called a peculiar people, zealous of
good works; zeal is an hot burning affection, compounded partly of grief,
because we are hindered in what we would do; partly of anger against that which
opposes us; and partly of vehement love, which carries us out to that we
desire. Thus the godly are greatly grieved, because of that relic and
remainder of corruption which makes them not to do the good they would, as Paul
bitterly complains. They are also angry at those lusts which have the
greatest power over them: And lastly, hot burning love to the glory of God,
whom they do honor, and desire to exalt continually. And as zeal breeds
jealousy, so it does also in the godly breast: Their zeal to that which is
holy makes them jealous, lest at any time sin should deceive them, or Satan
seduce them. Thus Job made a covenant with his eyes, and David set a watch
before his mouth, and Paul kept down his body, and all out of a godly
jealousy, lest though they had gone so far in the way of holiness, their feet
at last should be turned out of the way.

Having thus explained the phrase, Created to good works, let us consider what
they are; For there is a woe to him that calls evil good, and good evil. Jonah
thought he did well to be angry: it is a great degree to do good works, when we
know what they are: And

First, Those only are good works which are commanded by God, and conformable
1. What works are good works
to the rule laid down in the Scripture. So that as the definition of sin is,
That it is the transgression of the law, thus the definition of a good work is,
That it is a conformity to the law of God. The word of God is the Rule, the
Canon; and as the Artificer can draw no good line which is not commensurate to
the rule, so whatsoever thou do which is not agreeable to Scripture, which is
not answerable to that pattern, it is not good a work how glorious soever it
be. This is an excellent truth to be insisted on: As that only is true
Doctrine which is agreeable to the Scriptures, so that only is a good work
which is answerable to the same rule. The Scriptures are a rule of faith, and
of manners also: and as we say in matters of religion, Non credo, quia non
lego, I do not believe it, because I do not read it in Gods word, so Non ago,
quia non lego praeceptum, I do it not, because not commanded. And this cuts off
most of those works from being good works, which are so magnified in popery.
what are their good works, for which they call a man a religious man, a
spiritual man, a perfect man? Are they not vowed poverty, chastity, and blind
obedience, with many other superstitious usages? Now as the Pharisees thought
their washings, and humane commandments in religion good and glorious works,
when yet our Savior disdaineth them upon this reason, Who has required these
things at your hands? Even so all those good works of superstition,
will worship, traditional customs, though dignified with the title of good
works, yet are to be rejected, because not required: So that as counterfeit
coin is so far from being owned as current money, that he who is found guilty of
the making of it, is adjudged to death. So all counterfeit worship and service
of God which has not the stamp of the Word upon it, is so far from being
acceptable with God, that such without repentance and reformation are condemned
to eternal death. Herein certainly people foully mistake; they judge things to
be good by the custom of them, by the pleasure and profit of them, and not by
the rule of goodness. How could vain, and profane sports be accounted good
works, if men did look into the Scripture for their goodness? Thou say, It
is good for me to do thus, to live thus, to take up such a course of life, but
does the Scripture say, it is also good? Thus as for want of this rule we take
up many things for good, which are not good; so again, we reject many good
works as folly, needless, not requisite, because we do not study herein. To
live strictly, to be singular to the common ways of the world; to keep up holy
family duties, these things we look not upon as good works, because they are
contrary to our corrupt affections and lusts: Especially how hardly can we be
persuaded that it is a good work to confess Christ in the midst of a crooked
Generation; that it is good for us to love Christ more then Father, or Mother,
or life it self, that it is good to take up the Cross and follow him. How
hardly do we persuade our selves these are good works? That may be a good work
which is grievous and evil to flesh and blood: In matters to be done, How often
do we judge the goodness of them, by the safety and advantage? If Paul had
thus consulted with flesh and blood, he would not have thought it a good work
to preach up that to his great danger, which once he so vehemently opposed.

Secondly, Good works are such actions as we are enabled to by the grace of
God. 2. Such actions as we are enabled unto by the grace of God.
God is said to be the Author of every good, and perfect gift, James 1. No man
unless enabled and sanctified by the spirit of God can do the least good work;
as a beast is not able to act the things of reason: For the imaginations of a
man's heart are only evil, and that continually, Genesis 6. so that there is not
room for the least good therein. How then must man plunged in sin say, he is
not good, neither can do good? The tree must be good, else the fruit cannot be
good; and thus a man must be ingraffed in Christ, and partake of his fatness,
else all is but a wild Olive, and wild Grapes. And upon this ground it is,
that the Orthodox maintain that position against Papists, That all the works of
unregenerate men are sins, as they come from them. Though Amasiah and Jehu do
those things which are right in Gods eyes for the matter of them, yet in
respect of circumstances, they exceedingly fail, and so they are made sins to
them. Whereupon is that necessary distinction, That an action may be said to be
good materially for the matter of it: Thus when a wicked man prays, hears,
he does that which is good for the matter; or formally, that is, when they are
done upon such principles, in such a manner, and to such an end as God
requires: So that to do a good work there is requisite the help of Gods spirit
to lift us up. As Zacheus was too low of himself to see Jesus, he was fain to
go up into a tree; so we are too too short to reach unto any good work; it is
above our reach till the spirit of God lift us up. Oh that unregenerate men did
receive this Truth as ingraffed in their souls; I have lived thus long and have
not done one good work, yet I have been without Christ, destitute of his
spirit, and so a branch separated from the vine: Oh how little, or no hope at
all have I! What shall I do? Have pity upon me all ye that know me, and pray
for me: not one good work in all my life time! but a continual sinning has run
through my conversation. And this every unregenerate man must say, though not
profane, but very civil and ingenuous, yet if not a new creature, he is not
created to any good work. We are created to it: our free will or moral
education cannot prepare us for them; so that though the name of good works be
often in our mouths, yet the actions themselves are rarely performed, because
few are endued with the spirit of God. Hence that is called the holy Spirit,
because without it there is no holiness; as there is no light from the heavens
but by the sun, the stars shining, as they say, by its light.

Thirdly, Good works are such which have the concurrence of all circumstances:
3. And that have the concurrence of all circumstances.
There must be a good cause, a good manner, a good end, and if any one of these
be wanting, it is not a good work. Bonum est ex integra causa: Uzzah did not a
good work, for God was so displeased, that he struck him dead suddenly for it,
though he had a very good intention, and all because the manner was not good.
Cains Sacrifice was not doing well, for then he had been accepted, as God told
him, because his person was not good: So that it is easy to commit evil, but
difficult to do that which is good, because a man must every time hit the mark;
if he fails in one circumstance, if one string be broken, the musical harmony
is spoiled. Oh what a rousing Truth is this? How should this chase away all
security, all trusting in thy good heart, and good works? For where are they?
God indeed looked on all he did, and saw they were exceeding good; but may
not thou look over all thou did ever since thou wast born, and see all
exceeding evil? You think you do good works, but it is ignorance; you know not
how many things are required to a good action, and one dead fly spoileth the
whole box of ointment. This bitter herb makes death in the duty, which
otherwise would bring life. This made the Psalmist pronounce of every man by
nature, There is none that does good, no not one. What an uncharitable censure
does this seem to be in humane reason? Psalm. 14. 3.
None does good, not one in all mankind till quickened and enlivened by grace.
I beseech you lay this deep in your hearts; I am good for no good work: I am
wholly evil, and all that I do is wholly evil. Paul that had some good in him,
because of the mixture of evil, cried out, O miserable man that I am, Who will
deliver me? how much rather have I cause to bid all comforts stand aloof off,
and to be alone, crying out, Who will deliver me? seeing I am nothing but evil,
nothing but ulcers and sores all over me. There is nothing will sooner drive
you out of self-love, make you amazed at your selves, and cause you to cry out,
Help Lord, else we perish, as to think, not one good work has ever been done
by us yet.

Fourthly, Good works must flow from a good heart within. From a purified
Fountain 4. A good work must flow from a good heart.
and sweet, do issue sweet streams: When Moses vehemently required of the
people of Israel, to obey the commands of God, which was nothing but to do good
works; the people presently made a ready promise, that they would do all: But
mark what Moses replyeth, Oh that there were such an heart in them; this is
all: It is not for thee to say and promise, I will set upon a good life, I will
be diligent in good duties: But oh that there were such an heart in you. Hence
our Savior compares the good heart of a man to a good treasure from whence
all things flow. Thus that great promise of regeneration first begins with the
heart, I will take away the heart of stone and give an heart of flesh; and I
will write my law in the inward parts, Ezekiel. 36. and what then? Then I will
make them to walk in my commandments: Thus also the commandment, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and soul, etc. As the wickedness of
an evil man lies most in his heart, so the goodness of a good man is most in
the heart. Now this particular also is not attended to; men never looking any
further then the work they do, Is that a Duty? Is that commanded? but not
attend to, with what inward rectitude and purity of spirit they do these
things. The difference of the third and fourth hearers, lay not in externals at
first, but that one had a good and honest heart, which the other wanted; and
although men look to the outward good works, yet God looks most to the inward
good heart: Therefore the hypocrite does no good work, though he seems to the
world full of good works, because his heart is not good. Our Savior instanced
in this, and pressed it much upon the Pharisees, saying, They were wolves
within, and noisome sepulchers within, though painted without. Think therefore
thou hear God speaking unto thee that of Solomon, My son, give me thy heart,
Prove. 23. 26. thy good heart, else those good works are but a blaze, there is
no good foundation.

Fifthly, Good works are those, and those only which are done for the glory of
God. 5. And be done to the glory of God.
Let any action be in it self never so necessary, so glorious, so profitable to
others, yet if it be not for Gods glory, there is a woe to such good works
instead of an Euge, or well done. The Pharisees prayers, fastings, and alms,
have a woe and threatening annexed to them in stead of a promise. Whatsoever ye
do, do all to the glory of God: now vain glory and self-applause, is a worm
that quickly breeds in the best fruit, in the choycest actions: The godly at
the day of judgment do not know the good works they did; as the silkworm
hides it self within the curious silk it works, whence was that Motto upon it,
Operitur dum operatur, She is all over covered whilst she works: The same ought
we to be in all the holy duties, and most heavenly actions we perform; Operimur
dum operamur: upon this reason Austin said, All the glorious actions of the
heathens were but splendida peccata, glistring sins, because they corrupted
their love to their country by vain glory, and so they did, as he said, Unam
cupiditatem alia sanare, Heal one sin by another.

Use of Exhortation, To take up that of the Apostle, Let every man try his own
Use.
work. The word signifies such a trial as the Goldsmith uses about his Gold,
whether it be right or no: He has his Touchstone to discover it. Let this be
your care; thousands and millions of works you have done in your life time,
bring them all to the Touchstone, the Scripture, the rule of goodness. It is
not an easy matter to be found doing but one good work: Inform and instruct
your self better about the Doctrine of a good work, how much the Scripture
requires; and certainly if there be any sparklings of conscience, it will make
thee fear all the works thou have done. For what? do thou call thy
ungodliness, thy profane courses, good works? Does Gods word command these?
Does Gods Spirit enable thee to do these? Oh blind man, hood winked by the
devil, that do not see thy self all over plunged into evil! But it may be
thou think thy prayers, thy duties, thy civility, thy charity, good works,
and indeed these are good for the matter of them, but as thou do them who art
not regenerated, who have not the spirit of Christ dwelling in thee, who have
corrupt and sinful ends, they all are thy evil works, and come in the catalogue
of thy other sins. Thy duties not done by a gracious heart, through gracious
power, to a gracious end, in a gracious manner, are sins to thee as well as thy
other ungodly ways. I know the proud and self-flattering heart of man loves
not to hear this, cannot endure that all its gold should be discovered to be
dross. But it is not what thou think, and what others think about thy good
works, but what Gods spirit pronounces in his word: how great will thy
confusion be, if that which thou call a good heart, a good life, and good
works, all good, God shall discover to be an evil heart, an evil life, all
evil! God cannot be deceived, but thou art easily.

SERMON XLIX.
Setting forth diverse distinctions, and Axioms to clear the Doctrine of good
works.

EPHESIANS. 2. 10. [For we are his workmanship created to good works.
GOod works (you have heard) are the inseparable and necessary fruit of this
Diverse explanatory rules to be considered of about good works. 1. The Scripture
speaks sometimes in dispraise of them.
New creature. It has also been informed you, what a good work is. I shall at
this time lay down some distinctions, or necessary Axioms to clear this
Doctrine about Good works, and so proceed to application.

And first, This is worth your observation, That the Scripture speaks
sometimes in praise and worth of them, sometimes again by way of diminution,
and debasing of them. When good works are compared with the righteousness of
Christ, or have relation to justification, then they are rejected as unable for
any such use. Thus the Prophet says, Our righteousness is like a menstruous
cloth, Isa. 30. 22. How loathsome is that? and so are our holy duties if God
should enter into judgment with us. Justitia nostra est indulgentia tua
Domine, O Lord, our righteousness is thy indulgence: Our justification consists
in pardon; therefore we have no perfection to justify us, but imperfection to
be forgiven us. Thus the Apostle also, He does account (and that is an act of
judgment and deliberation) all things but dung and dross in comparison of the
righteousness by faith in Christ, Phil. 3. 8. So then when the best works we do
are considered in the Court of justification, there they are damnable, and have
so much dross in them, that God does reject them as insufficient. They are not
good, but bad works in that sense. Therefore a man in justification is looked
upon as a sinner, without a righteousness answering the Law, though at that
time also he does repent and believe. But then at other times the Scripture
speaks of good works in respect of sanctification, and as they relate to the
glory of God, and are an ornament to our holy profession. And in this sense the
word of God does often commend them, and exhort to them. So that if thou have
got so much skill as to know in what sense the Scripture debaseth them, and in
what sense it commends them, bless God for that knowledge, and look upon it as
a star to guide thee. The Apostle in this Chapter, attributing our whole
salvation to grace, lest he should be thought therefore to exclude good works,
and it were all one whether we were profane or godly, he adds, That we are
created to good works. Take heed of Popery to make thy good works a ground of
justification; take heed of Antinomianism, to deny the presence of them.

A second rule is, That good works are not to be limited to one kind, but are
to be 2. Good works are to be extended as far as Gods commands.
extended as far as the Law of Gods commands. Thus the Obedience to the first
commandment is a good work, to the second, and so to every one; for the Law is
a rule of good works, and as the Logicians say, There is no created being, but
it is reduced into one of the ten predicaments: So there is no duty or good
work commanded of us, but it is contained in one of those Ten words, as Moses
calls them: A word is there used for a Precept, as often in the Hebrew. This is
good to be observed, that so we may be conscionable and abounding in every good
work. Good works are works of piety, works of righteousness, works of charity:
Every work that comes from a good cause, commanded by the rule of goodness,
performed in a good manner, to a good end, is a good work, whether the object
matter be God or man; and howsoever use has almost appropriated the phrase
Good works, to those of charity, yet the Scripture extends it to all the good
fruits of a godly life: And in the Scripture sense, no man can do one good
work, which has not a principle to do all. Godly obedience is copulative, and
he that does a good work, because God commands it, will do all because God
commands it. This consideration would make us not like Herod, to do many
things, but like Zachary and Elizabeth, To walk in all the commandments of God,
Luke 1. 6. Thou prayest and hear, because this good work God commands: Oh
thou, fool, Does not God also command thee to be chaste, to be sober, to be
heavenly minded? The graces of God are chained together; he that has one, has
all: and therefore it is to be wondered at, to see what hypocrisy may be in a
man's heart to be affected with some good works; he could have no peace in his
conscience if he should omit them, and yet can totally neglect others without
any remorse at all: If thou had committed murder, the guilt of blood would
torment thy conscience, torture thy soul. Why should not uncleanness, cursing,
do the like? Does not the same God that says, Thou shall not Kill, say also,
Thou shall not commit Adultery?

Thirdly, Another rule about works is that of Austins, founded also upon the 3.
They go not before justified persons but follow after.
Scripture, good works do not go before a justified person, but follow after,
Bona opera non praecedunt justificationem, sed sequuntur. This Text does
clearly assert this Truth, We are saved of Grace, not by works, because we are
Created to them, being his Workmanship. It is not in Divinity, as the
Philosophers say in Morality, Bona agendo sumus boni, By doing good works, we
are made good; No, we are by grace made good, then we do good: As the Fountain
must be before the stream, and the root or tree before the fruit. Thus our
Savior, Make the tree good, and then the fruit will be good. Thus Abels person
is first accepted, then his performances: This Truth is of great concernment,
it being inbred in men to look more to an outward good work, then the goodness
of their persons and natures. They do not imitate God, who is good in his
nature, and then does good in his Actions; so ought we to be good, and then to
do good. Therefore by this rule thus settled upon Scripture, it is an undoubted
Truth, That no man till justified and regenerated, is able to do any good work:
He is a leper, all is unclean, and every thing he touches he makes unclean to
himself. This should make us sit down on the dunghill with Job, abhorring our
selves, when there is none of all mankind of himself can do good, no, not one.
What Doctrine may make us loath our selves, and seek out for a new creation,
and ingraffing into Christ, if this does not?

Fourthly, The next rule is, That then in Scripture things are said to be, 4.
In Scripture things are said to be when they are made manifest.
when they are made manifest, and apparent. And this rule will open the sense
of all that discourse in the Apostle James, where he disputes it by several
arguments, That we are justified by works. In so much that it has much
exercised the learned, how Paul and James are to be reconciled; For Paul, he
expressly proves that justification is without works; and that Abraham was
justified by faith only: and James he says, Abraham was not justified by
faith only, but by works: Now two things reconcile these brethren that seem to
differ. First Paul, He proves that faith only justifies; and James, That
this faith which justifies is not alone, separated from Good works. Paul
proves what it is that justifies, Uiz. Faith; and James, what kind of Faith,
Uiz. a working lively faith. Paul argues against a Pharisee that thought his
works would justify him, and James against a Carnal Gospeller that thought
faith alone, in the mere profession of it, was enough to save, without a godly
life. And secondly, it may be thus composed; Paul speaks of the nature of
justification in it self, and James of the manifestation of it. A thing in
Scripture being said to be then done, when it is discovered to be so: And thus
when you read in James in several places, That a man is justified by Good
works, that is, he is manifested to be so. As the Apostles similitude evinceth,
when he says, As the body without the soul is dead, so is faith without works.
Now as the body does not give life to the soul, but fetches all from it, and
does outwardly declare what the soul does; so does a Godly life manifest and
declare who are justified, and who not. So that it is in vain to pretend a good
heart, where there is not a good life. And this is the reason why God in the
Commandments requires the outward work, because that does demonstrate to the
world the frame of the heart.

Fifthly, We are always to distinguish between good works, in the truth of 5.
We must distinguish between good works in the truth of them and in the
perfection of them
them, and in the perfection of them. The Godly are created to the Truth of
Good works in this life, but to the perfection of them in the life to come. As
he said, I believe, Lord help my unbelief: So it is true of every other Grace;
Lord, I love thee, help my want of love: Lord, I am humble, help my want of
humility. No man goes beyond Paul, who when he would do good, found evil
present with him. And the Apostle declares a perpetual opposition and conflict
between the flesh and the spirit: So that the Godly cannot do the good things
they would; so that this Truth will direct two sorts of persons, First those
that are ignorant, full of self-flattery, and self-righteousnesse; they are apt
to take a shadow for the substance: every thing that glisters for Gold,
whatsoever is good for the matter of it, to take it for good in all the
circumstances of it. And then secondly, There are the Godly ones who are ready
to conclude nothing is good in them, because not perfectly good. They think
this action comes short of that perfect rule; and is not answerable to the
glorious Majesty of God: and therefore they do not own that goodness in them
which God owneth in them, and hereby walk not in that thankfulness,
cheerfulness, and exemplary joy as they ought to do.

Lastly, This is the true character of a new creature, That he is as zealous
and diligent 6. The New Creature is as diligent as if works would save him, and
yet as fully relies on Christ as if there were not the least good in him.
of good works, as if they were to save him, as if there were no Christ, no
grace to rely upon: and yet on the other side he does as fully and really rely
upon Christ, and his grace, as if there were not the least spark of any
goodness in him. This is a Scripture and admirable temperament, To join those
places of Scripture together, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling;
and yet when you have done all, say, Ye are unprofitable servants. When ye have
done all, if that were possible, how much rather must we say so, when we come
far short of all! That which does so puzzle corrupt and erroneous heads, he can
practically reconcile, viz. Gods promise to give, and man's duty to do. He so
believes in Christ, that yet he is not barren of Godly and holy works; and he
so practices these, that his faith is not taken off from making Christ all in
all. To some men we may say that of Luther, Take heed not only of thy evil
works, but of thy good also, Uiz. do not trust in them, be not proud of them;
To others, that of John Husse, Ubi opera non apparent ad extra, ibi non est
fides ad intra, Where Godliness is not in the fruit, there faith is not in the
root; where the body does not move or stir, there is no soul within.

Now because I did not intend to dwell long on this part of the Text, and
because the comfort and profit of a good work, lies not in the Doctrine and
knowledge of it, but in the practice and exercise, I shall therefore be large
in the Use, and so conclude this point.

Use. First, Is it a necessary fruit of a new creature to walk in good works?
then the evil and ungodly deeds of most in the Christian world, shows that
they are in that old damnable condition they were born in. If we consider the
general conversation of most men, What deeds of darkness, and of sin and Satan
may be found in them? That which Salvian complained of the lives of Christians
in his days, may not we also take up? Praeter paucissimos quosdam, quid est
aliud omnis catus Christianorum, quam sentina vitiorum? Besides a very few that
fly sins, and endeavor to keep themselves unspotted from the world, What is
the whole company of Christians, but a sink of all vices? You may sooner find
men reos malorum omnium, quam non omnium, You may sooner find men guilty of
all sins, then of some only, And Facilius majorum criminum, quam minorum, And
sooner men guilty of the greater crimes, then of the less; yea, he adds,
almost all the whole Church is brought to such a reproach and scandal of
manners, ut incuncto populo Chrrstiano genus quoddam sanctitatis sit, minus
esse vitiosum, That in all the Christian world it is a kind of holiness to be
less vicious. Does he not speak as if he lived in our times? For except some
few in every Congregation, which are like the Gleanings to the harvest; are not
people generally ignorant, profane, ungodly, so that it is a kind of great
holiness to be less wicked then others? His Oaths not so dreadful, his malice
not so rancorous, his drunkenness not so beastly: If men be less wicked, we
are apt to judge them virtuous men, such a deluge of sin does overflow: But oh
the patience of God who beholds and sees all this ingratitude, rebellion, and
hostility against his Majesty, yet forbeareth to take present vengeance.

Now there are many arguments why you should take heed of these evil works.

First, Thy evil deeds of sin, brings Gods evil work of punishment. Is there
evil 1. Why we should take heed of evil works.
in the City, or in the Land, says the godly Prophet, and I have not done it?
Amos 3. 6. viz. an evil of punishment: But why? Because men have first done
their evil works. Thou that think Gods judgments of Plague, Famine, and the
devouring sword to be very grievous and evil; Why do thou not consider thy
evil ways, which have procured these things? Your iniquities withold good
things from you. And the Prophets are always diligent in the midst of Gods
judgments brought upon a people, still to remember them of those iniquities,
which have been like the vapors mounted up to the heavens, and afterward
congealed, fall down in terrible Thunder and lightening: Oh therefore if thou
find not God so good to thee or the public, as thou desire, consider it
is the evil of thy ways that brings all calamities.

Secondly, Therefore let thy life be free from all evil works, because thy
profession of Christianity obliges thee to it. How can an holy profession, and
an unholy life 2.
accord together? How can darkness and light be reconciled? When God whom thou
servest is holy, Christ by whose name thou art called is holy, the Ordinances
whereby thou drawest high him are holy; when all this is holy, How is thy
conversation so wicked and unholy? For a profane man full of evil deeds, to
pray, and hear, is as loathsome as for the sow wallowing in its mire, to come
and roll it self in a pleasant garden. That place is observable, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
where the Apostle having spoken of some wretched Apostates from the Truth of
Christ, he adds, Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure. As men who
build glorious palaces lay a sure foundation, so God being to build an eternal
City, he lays a deep and firm foundation. Now as their custom was to write
some short and select sentences upon their foundation stones, as appears out
of Zachary; so says he, God has set two Sentences upon his foundation: The
one is, The Lord knows those that are his, i. e. he will effectually preserve
them from falling away. And the other is, Let every one that names the name of
Christ, depart from iniquity. Observe this, This sentence is one of the choice
ones that God will have inscribed: Let every one that names Christ, takes his
profession on him, depart from iniquity. Take heed then of being Thistles in
Christ's garden: of being Tares in his wheat: This is to mingle heaven and
earth, yea heaven and hell together: either therefore lay aside the name of a
Christian, or the works of an Heathen, and one who knows not God. Quid in meo
estis, non mei? What do you who are not Gods, in Gods vineyard? Why are you
that are Goats, among Christ's sheep? Oh consider what reproach ye are to the
holy name of Christ.

Thirdly, Consider the Titles which the Scripture gives evil works, and those
titles 3.
will demonstrate the nature of them. They are called The works of the Devil,
What can be a more horrid aggravation then to say, Thy lusts, thy ungodliness,
they are of thy self, and they are of the Devil too? It is the Devil in thee,
and by thee, who provokes thee to such ways. Thus our Savior bid Peter, Get
thee behind me Satan, get thee behind me Devil, Mat. 16. 23. Why? was Peter a
Devil? No, but because what he did came by the Devils instigation and
temptation; therefore he uses that phrase. Thus Peter says to Ananias and
Saphira, Why has Satan filled thy heart, to lie against the holy Ghost? Act.
5. 3. and the Jews or Pharisees are said to be of their Father the Devil, for
his works they do: and Christ is said to come into the world to destroy the
works of the Devil. Oh then remember thy self, by whom, and from whom is it
that thou art so profane and ungodly? Is it not from the Devil? Does not that
unclean spirit ruling in thee, provoke thee to all uncleanness? Thou would
judge it an uncharitable censure to be called as Simon Magus was, Thou child of
the Devil; but yet every man living in that ungodly and unholy way, is so.
Neither does this excuse them, as if they were justified, and all the blame to
be laid on the Devil, no, for he works upon thy corrupt disposition within. If
thou were not first tempted by thy own lust, the devil could not be a tempter
to thee: If thou were not stubble, his fiery darts would not inflame thee.
Consider then all this, you who wallow in all mire and filth of sin. If the
Devils were to act visibly upon the earth, and had bodily members to work
withal, they would do as thou do: And further also remember that he who thus
enticeth thee to all sin, will be a tormenter afterward unto thee, and will be
an accuser unto God against thee, for that which he has excused unto thee;
throw them then away, they are the Devils works.

Fourthly, Again they are the works of darkness, as good works are the works of
the light. A wicked man is in darkness, and knows not whither he goes. They
are 4.
works of Darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. partly because it is for want of light and
knowledge that they are committed. If thou did know what the Scripture
commands, if thou did know the will of God, and the happiness promised to
the contrary thou do, thou would never live as thou live. Again they are
works of darkness, because committed without fear and shame, men do not think
God sees them, that the revengeful eye of God is upon them. Oh the horror and
confusion that would be on their souls if this were attended to. And lastly
they are works of darkness, because they will be rewarded with utter
darkness. Thy sin and thy punishment will be proportionable. Thou lovedst
darkness, and therefore thou shall be thrown into utter darkness. Oh that
wicked and ungodly men should be no more amazed at their dreadful estate. In
the next place, they are called the works of the flesh, as good works the works
of the spirit, Gal. 5. Of the flesh, because they come wholly from us corrupt
and carnal; there is nothing of the Spirit of God in them: they are sparks from
that fire and brimstone in thy bowels: they are so many drops of poison vented
from thy venomous nature: and as they are thus works of the flesh, so they work
corruption as the flesh it self is corruptible. They that sow to the flesh,
shall of the flesh reap corruption, Gal. 6. 8. Again they are vain works, as
the scripture calls them, 1 Pet. 1. 18. They are empty of that they promise:
thou look for pleasure, profit, advantage by them, but they bring the clean
contrary: they have a glistering skin, but a sting in the tail of them. With
what curses and indignation will thou bid them be gone, which now thou do so
embrace? All that momentany pleasure, What is become of it? What is that drop
of honey to that Ocean of Gall thou must for ever drink in hell?

Use 2. Are new Creatures created thus unto good works? then exercise thy self
to them, be frequent in them. Is it good that I do? Is it according to
Scripture that I live? Is my life good, according to the rule of goodness? and
when you would make inquisition into your selves, and pronounce a sentence
accordingly, take heed of self flattery, security and ease; but arraign thy
self at Gods Tribunal; compare thy life and the word together: That says,
such a life is good, such actions are good: Is it thus with thee, or the clean
contrary? Oh consider, That God judges not as man judges. He judges
according to the inwards; he tries the heart and reins, and accordingly
judges thy actions which come thence. All the Titles you have, Christians,
Believers, Saints, Do not these engage to a godly life? These show what you
should be, else you are trees without fruit, and so to be cut down for the
fire. Now be moved hereunto, First, because good works have a great deal of
present comfort and ease with them. If thou do well, there is joy and
sweetness in the conscience: But to evil deeds there is joined a sting of the
Conscience, horror of soul, fear of damnation; and though that may please for a
while, yet all thy sins lie at the door like a band dog, ready to rise up and
tear in pieces; whereas there is much joy and peace to him, that lives a godly
life.

2. Godly and holy works are a necessary effect of inward grace and a testimony
of thy Predestination. In whose life you see nothing but wickedness, there for
the present, till a change be, appears nothing but tokens of damnation: It is
not being an Orthodox man, it is not being a sound Protestant, without a ^ure
and heavenly life, that does avail to happiness. Aristotle made happiness to
consist in action, and so does the excellency and perfection of Christianity.
Oh then see what evidences, what marks there are in thy life for thy eternal
blessedneste. This subject may be concluded with those two verses, Rom 2. 9, 10
that are like so much thunder and lightning from Paul tribulation and anguish
(such as a man knows not what to do in) upon the soul (not body only) and
upon every soul, no man by his greatness may look to escape that does evil, of
the Jew first, and also of the Gentile. We may say, of the Christian first, and
then the Heathen, because the Christian sins against clearer knowledge and
revelation of a command, and so does not only that which is malum, but also
what is vetitum: but how precious is the 10. verse, to him that does well.

SECT. VII. Of the sanctifying Work of the Spirit under the Notion of Grace.
SERMON L.
Of the Hearts being established with Grace, and in what sense it is so.

HEB. 13. 9. For it is a good thing that the heart be established with Grace,
not with meats, that have not profited them that have been occupied therein.
IN the former part of this Epistle, Paul (for we take him to be the Author of
it) does like a kind father crack the shell of those Jewish Ceremonies, and
give the kernel to believers; he opens the spiritual sense and meaning of all
those typical prefigurations, making them shadows only of Christ to come; so
that as the blossom falls when the fruit comes, thus they vanished, when
Christ arose: and because they were only shadows, he thereupon argues their
insufficiency for any spiritual effect, making Moses in all his
administrations, no more then the Prophets servant with his Masters staff, that
could not raise the dead man. But in the later part of the Epistle, he
enjoyneth many practical and plain Duties; as in this Chapter verse. 7. he
exhorts them to follow the faith of their spiritual Governors and Teachers,
which is to be supposed, as Paul in the like case, while they follow Christ.
This duty he enforces from a twofold Argument.

1. The joyful and profitable end of their Pastors conversation.

2. That Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Christ
that helped his servants in former times, will still help them. Christ is still
the same, though we be not those worthies that went before us: an excellent
point of comfort.

In the next place he dehorts from the contrary sin. Be not carried about
with diverse and strange Doctrines; carried about, as light, empty chaff is with
every wind; diverse, that is, different Doctrines one with another, for all
errors disagree among themselves, as well as with the truth; strange
Doctrines, because brought in against the sense and meaning of the Scripture:
now to make this Dehortation prevalent, he declares that grace in the heart is
far better then any learning in the head, by the Proposition in the Text, it
is good, the positive is for the comparative, it is better to establish, or
have the heart established (the word is in the middle voice) by grace, that is,
the inward works and gifts of Gods sanctifying Spirit, then with meats, that
is, dispute and controversies about the difference of meats: you know how that
Question troubled the Church of God in her infancy. Some indeed expound meats
of the Legal Sacrifices, for the Jews thought themselves made more holy by
eating thereof. Insomuch that some are brought in pleading this at the day of
Judgment, Have we not eat in thy presence? Others relate it to those banquets,
and dainty feastings, the Nicolaitans entertained their Disciples with: but the
first exposition is to be preferred. By grace also some understand the Doctrine
of faith; others the grace of the Gospel, and the sense of it in our hearts.
But the phrase, Establish the heart with grace, does carry it for some gift of
God wrought in the soul, confirming and settling it in the truths and
commandments of God, by says and obedience, which we call sanctifying grace;
so that as I have handled the work of godliness, under the notions of
regeneration and a New Creature; so I shall out of this Text speak of it, under
that usual and frequent name of grace, the work of grace in a man's heart; but
there is one profitable and necessary Doctrine lies in the way, before we
enter into the bowels of that Point. That whereas the Apostle dehorting from
following strange and diverse Doctrines, does urge as a special help and remedy
hereunto, to get grace in our hearts, whereas in probability we should have
thought, he would have prescribed, to study controversies, to spend our time in
Disputes, that so we may find out the truth, he advises not to such a course,
but to study the exercise of grace, and to have our hearts established with
practical godliness, as if an heart bu^^ed and diligent in the practical power
of grace, were the best bulwark in the world against all false Doctrines.
Observe then,

That its far better to have the heart filled with the power of grace, then the
head with disputes and controversies in Religion.

Its better to have faith settling thy heart upon Christ, then to dispute
whether faith justify. Its more comfortable to be a Saint, then to argue,
Whether Saints only are members of a visible Church.

For opening this, I shall first show, What it is to have grace establish the
heart, and then give the grounds of the Point. Only you must know, that as
grace is here said to establish the heart; so in other places this effect is
attributed to God, 1 Pet. 5. 10. The Apostle there prays that God would
stablish, strengthen, settle them: there God does it, and here Grace; for its
usual in Scripture to attribute the same effect to the instrumental and
principal cause; Grace does only establish the (...) of a man formally, as the
instrument of Gods Spirit; and indeed grace in the heart being also a creature,
though of a supernatural excellency, needs it self a daily strengthening and
preservation from God. Hence the Apostle when he exhorts us to put on the
whole armor of Christ; when all this is done, he concludes, Praying always,
Ephesians. 6. 18. A Christian in all his spiritual strength must pray as earnestly,
and depend as solely upon the power and might of God, as if he had no grace at
all. In what sense inherent grace establishes the ^eare.


This premised, let us consider in what sense inherent grace may be said to
stablish and settle the heart: And this it does several ways:

1. By rooting us upon Christ, and building us upon him; by which means the 1.
By Rooting us upon Christ.
gates of hell cannot prevail against such an one: Where grace is in the heart,
there also Christ dwells, and grace is but the fruit, Christ is the root, Col.
2. 7. Grace is like the navel string, especially faith, whereby the soul is
united to Christ, and fetches nourishment from him. Our Savior makes a
difference of two builders in Christianity, both raise up and edify, have a
profession, an outward from of Religion, but one builds upon sands, and
another upon the rock. Now he builds on sands, whosoever takes up the way of
Religion upon any worldly, carnal or corrupt principle: If it be built upon
education, custom, formality, this is like a stone not fastened to the corner
stone, and so a sudden tempest will hurl it down; therefore Ephesians. 3. when the
Apostle had prayed, that they might be strengthened in the inward man (the
words spoken of in my Text) he adds, Rooted and grounded in love, in the love
of Christ; till therefore thou art homogeneous with Christ, as it were, and
do love him because of holiness and godliness sake, thy heart is loose and
uncertain: If the tree had no rooting in the earth, it would be as subject to
fall as any leaf it bears: If the ship be not anchored, its carried with
every wind; so unless grace settle thee upon Christ, and thou cleave to him,
there is no temptation but will hurry thee this way and that way: Even a reed
that is apt to be shaken with every wind, if tied to a rock, stands unmovable;
so thy heart naturally false, deceitful, inconstant, and full of treachery to
God, if fastened to Christ, then as Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, so
art thou; As the times did not, nor have not changed Christ, so neither will
they thee, when grounded on him; if therefore you see men leaner in the ways of
godliness then before, not so much in the practical exercise of Grace, it is
because they run as sheep among the brambles and briars of disputes, and lose
their wool, they do not keep close by faith to the live Tree, which would
convey sweet fullness: Happy therefore is that Christian, who daily goes out
like that woman to touch Christ, that so he may find virtue come from him to
heal him: If thou have bottomed thy self upon any thing but Christ, thou art
not a pillar in the temple of the Lord, which cannot be removed, as is promised
to the godly Revel. 3. 12.

2. Grace establishes the heart, by fixing it to one object, so that the main
stream 2. By fixing the heart to one object.
and current of his heart runs that way: Its the great corruption in our
natures, that we would serve two Masters, God and the Creature: we are divided
between these two, and sometimes God and Religion has our heart, and sometimes
the world and earthly comforts have our hearts: Now grace comes and fixes the
heart upon God; whereas before the scales were even, or rather that toward the
world did weigh down, now grace weighs heaviest: This the Scripture calls
halting between two, and the Apostle James (...) a double minded man, Jam. 1.
or a man with two souls, he is even sorry he has not a soul for God, and a
soul for the world also: But this is a notable effect of grace, to make the
heart cleave to the Lord; as the Scripture often calls it, even as glue makes
things to adhere to one another, so that they become one. A man of Disputes and
Notions merely in Religion, is like a ship tossed in the sea, without Pilot or
Anchor; whereas a man ballassed with Grace, and anchored on Christ, is not in
danger of shipwreck: Oh then let not thy soul be like a Meteor, tossed up and
down, but like a fixed Star in its Orb; choose Christ for thy portion so as to
leave the world, take up David's disposition, My heart is fixed, my heart is
fixed: Hence the godly soul is said to be married unto Christ, because it
leaves all other objects, and chooses him only.

3. Grace does establish the heart, because it removes inconstancy, and
enableth the soul to persevere: Its not so much grace, as perseverance in grace
that crowns 3. By removing inconstancy.
a man. Adam, though he had all good things bestowed on him, yet because he did
not persevere, he lost all his happiness: Now this is a distinct work of grace,
establishing the soul, from the former, because here the soul does for a while
cleave to God, but then loses its hold again: The Israelites are a pertual
instance herein, who humbled themselves, and turned unto the Lord, but their
hearts were not steadfast within them, and their righteousness was like a
morning dew, which made Moses say, upon their good promises they made, O that
there were such an heart within them; thus also the temporary Believer in the
parable, who received with joy the word of God, and believed for a while,
Matthew. 13. presently revolted: The reason why men have a flux and a reflux of
their faith and repentance, is because (as they say of the motions of the sea)
they follow the moon that is subject to change; they are carried out to good
things, not from an enduring principle, nor has grace taken deep root in their
souls; Therefore Modo aiunt, modo negant; sometimes they affirm, and sometimes
they deny. This inconstancy, is a fruit of the former uncertainty, and want of
fixation upon God; as the Apostle James' shows, A double minded man is
inconstant in all his ways; therefore compared to the waves of the sea, that
sometimes are mounted up to heaven, and then presently vanish down again
toward the earth. Stedfastness and constant evenness in the ways of God,
breeds much joy, and is many times accompanied with comfortable assurance;
whereas an heart sometimes up, and then down, in the ways of grace and duty, is
also inconstant in his comforts, so that hereby he doubts of himself, and
knows not what will become of him. If thy righteousness be but a morning dew,
so is also thy consolation, it will quickly vanish: Oh then how comfortable is
it for grace so to settle thy heart, that thou art not subject to such changes
and variations as others are!

4. Grace does in this respect establish the heart, because it makes the heart
sincere 4. By making the heart sincere and upright.
and upright, in all its endeavors and addresses to God. The hypocrite who is
moved to duties from false and carnal grounds, he is up and down, and turns
as the wind of his own interest drives him. Those that make gain godliness,
they must wind and turn as gain moves them. Judas not having a sincere heart,
betrayeth Christ and his soul, for worldly advantages: Oh then how much better
were it, while thou art thinking of this, and disputing of that, to labor for
integrity, uprightness, to see thy soul be carried out to godliness for
godliness sake. Hypocrisy will make thee a Camelion, turn into the likeness of
every object thou come nigh: And as Aristotle says, It is fear that makes it
subject to such changes; so in an hypocrite fear of the loss of some worldly
comforts and contents, makes him become any thing to every body; so that this
is the best study and conference, this is the best question, how I may get an
unfeigned heart, an heart without guil or false and self-seeking ends. If thou
had the tongue and parts of men and Angels, it would not afford thee so much
comfort as a plain, simple and single heart toward God; to be able when thou
dyest to say with Hezekiah, Remember how I have walked before thee in a true
and faithful heart, 2 King. 20. 3. is of more consequence then those who said,
Remember we have prophesied in thy name, and wrought miracles in thy name: It
is good then, when the Professors of the Gospel meet together, and consider,
How may we be true Israelites in whom there is no guil? we have much a do with
our hearts, they are so apt to deceive, to supplant, to make false Syllogisms,
as the Apostle says, that we can never be wary enough: A clear conscience full
of sincerity, is dulcis nutricula senectutis; a sweet nurse in old age, like
young Abishag put into old David to keep health and life in him.

5. Grace does establish the heart, in that it uniteth all the powers and
faculties together 5. In uniting all the powers and faculties.
in the service of God: That as it makes the heart choose one object only, so
it conjoyneth all the strength of the soul one way, to cleave to it: Thus love
is with all the heart, all the soul, all the mind, and all the strength, and
David prays earnestly for this, Unite my heart to fear thy name, Psalm. 86.
11. All distractions and divisions, weaken not only in a Kingdom, and in the
Church, but in a man's duties and approaches to God; therefore says the
Apostle, I would have you serve the Lord without destruction; see how divinely
the Apostle presses that point, 1 Cor. 7. (...). I would have you (...) be
without dividing cares: The heart must not be like the Levites wise, cut in
many pieces; and verse. 35. That you may attend upon the Lord without
destruction, (...) an excellent word, it signifies leaving all things, and
seeting our selves only to this business, and (...) not to be distracted and
violently taken off from it. The Heathens custom was to say, Hoc age, in their
sacrifices; and it is a proverbial speech, Liberet me deus ab homine (...)
tantum negotii, deliver me (...) that has but one business in hand, for he is
likely to be a desperate enemy: Herein then is the admirable power of grace
seen, that the heart is (...) and united, all his Love, all his Faith, all his
joy runs the (...) he follows his worldly employments, but with (...) them
comparatively, as if he did them not. This is the Work (...) this God has
called them to.

6. Grace does therefore establish and (...) the heart, (...) 6. ^
forward on(...), and to get up into an higher pitch of (...) ^uch remedy
against unstedfastness, as to (...) in grave. (...) when he bids believers take
^eed of falling from their (...) them to this as a special Antidote, But grow
in grace, and (...) Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. Its a necessary thing in
Christianity, (...) with low principles, but to (...) our selves the (...)
degrees of grace: Thus Paul (...) all behind, and did (...) stretch out
himself to reach and lay hold upon (...) ^.
Grace is so exact, has so great a latitude, that there (...) thyself therein
all thy life time, and yet at (...) paratively, to the Giant thou should be;
why then art art thou (...) and negligens? Have thou all the faith thou can
have? All the heavenly minedness thou may have? Can thou go no further in
godliness? look upon David and Paul in their course of godliness, and thou will
cry out, Oh draw me, I am but the shadow of a godly man: There is so much
perfection in the way of holiness, that I tremble at my imperfections.

7. Grace does establish and settle the heart, by the joy and heavenly (...)
which many times flow from it: That as bread is called the staff of a man, it
nourishes 7. By Joy and Consolation.
and maintains him in strength, and wine makes glad the heart of men, all
which produce much natural strength; so grace accompanied with the sense of
Gods love in the Gospel, and joy therein, does very much confirm a man. Hence
the joy of the Lord is said to be the godlies strength, (...) 8 10 and where
grief and a wounded spirit is, there are weak hands and (...)'s a piece of
timber while moist and full of sap, is not able to bear up (...); thus a godly
man devoid of comfort and spiritual joy, is like fru^t (...) many worms, every
blow will make it fall to the ground; but (...) with the comforts attending it,
do revive and keep up the spirits of men, (...) that grace put strength into
the Martyrs, and enabled them to conflict with all miseries; and it may justly
be thought, that the want of the experience of this solid and unspeakable joy
in the Holy Ghost, makes men seek out for comfort in other things, for all life
is for some pleasure and joy, and if it has it not one way, it will try
another way: Now thou takes so much delight in Disputing, in Questions, in
Controversies, because, it may be, thou have not the solid experience of the
best joy, which is, in the spiritual exercise of godliness: So also another he
takes no delight but in the increase of wealth and temporal greatness, because
he cannot say with David, Lord, thou have put more comfort in my heart, then
they had when their wine and oil increases, Psalm. 4. Oh then when a Christian
can say to every temptation, that would draw him off from minding the savoury
things of godliness, Why do ye tempt me to my loss? I cannot be better. No
exercise can equalize this, then is he excellently settled in Godliness.

8. Grace does establish and confirm the heart, by preparing and fitting it for
every 8. By preparing it for every good work.
good work: For the same Hebrew word signifies both to prepare and establish
or fasten. Hence the Characteristical difference between the good Kings indeed,
and those that appeared so, and were hopeful only, lay in this, that the one
prepared or settled his heart to seek the Lord, and not the other. The Apostle
Heb. 13. 21. prays, That God would make them perfect to every good work; the
Greek word signifies, to set their joints together, as it were. That as in a
man whose arms or legs have their bones displaced or broken, there is no
strength for their proper office, till healed and joynted again: Thus a man
destitute of the help of grace, is wholly luxated, all his bones are
disjoynted, and grace that repaireth him and confirms him, by fitting every
part and faculty of the soul, for its proper operation. How much better then
were it, in stead of whetting thy wits, and preparing thy self to argue and
dispute, thou were furbishing thy heart, and making it ready to every gracious
performance.

9. Grace does confirm and settle the soul, in that it is both defensive and
offensive. 9. By being defensive and offensive.
Defensive, against all that outward strength which combineth against grace in
the heart: The Apostle says, We wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with
principalities and powers in high places, Ephesians. 6. 12. implying, that the
greatest strength in hell and earth is employed against the godly; now grace
only conquers this. Resist, stedsast in the faith, says the Apostle; and
Ephesians. 6. you may see how particular graces, are compared to particular
defensive weapons, some to an Helmet, some to a Breast Plate: That as sin is
said to make a man naked in the Scripture, Exodus 32. 15, it exposes him to all
judgments, and he has not so much as one goard to keep him from the scorching
heat of the Sun. So there is a (...), an universal Armor to cover all the
parts of a man by grace; therefore our graces are called The weapons of Light,
Romans 13. 12. and take we head, lest as Saul in his sleep had his weapons of war
taken from him, so thou by carelessness and negligence do not dull and blunt
the edge of thy graces. As they are defensive, so they are Offensive also:
Hence the Scripture commands us to kill, to mortify and crucify sin, which is
done by grace within us. The people of God are in a continual combat and
conflict, an humble heart with a proud, and a dull heart with a willing
quickened heart: Here is fire and water together, Twins struggling in his womb, 1
John 1. 4. Whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the world; Grace therefore
being the seed of God in the heart, does at last conquer all adverse power of
sin and Satan; so that Sampsons strength in subduing enemies is not so
wonderful, as the gracious strength of a godly man, in conflicting with lusts.
Hebr. 11. The people of God are said of weak to become strong; and indeed if
you consider the inward temptations from Satan, and the outward persecutions in
the world, you would think that they were made of brass and iron, that they can
endure so much: O the spiritual fortitude and courage of the Martyrs,
transceuding all the humane valor and gallantry of the Romans, that it should
not be any longer said, Agere and pati fortia Romanum est, but Christianum.

Lastly, As all grace does strengthen and confirm the soul, so especially
faith, that 10. By faith.
is most admirable to this purpose; therefore faith is called the substance or
subsistence of things, Heb. 11. and its called resting and rolling thy self
upon some prop and stay, when otherwise we would fall to the ground: Thus of
Abraham it is said, (...) he waxed strong and mighty in faith, and this made
him not to consider difficulties, but Gods promise; he considered not his dead
body, and Sarahs dead womb, as (...), he did not dwell in his considerations
upon it, otherwise he thought of it in his mind, as appears Genesis 17. 17. see
the word, Heb. 3. 1. Take it in those two acts of assenting to the truth, and
applying Christ, or relying on him, how does it stay and support the soul! Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, Isa. 26. 3.
therefore the Apostle says, Above all take the shield of faith; above all
graces, nourish and quicken faith. The Scripture says, unbelief, diffidence
and distrust, does make a man (...), to be carried up and down like a Meteor,
to (...) to be like a man, where two ways are and knows not what to do, Math.
14. 31. and (...) Romans 4. 20. Now to both these, faith is prescribed as the
only remedy that strengthens the soul; give me a man with sound faith in the
Doctrine of Christ, and a strong faith in the promises, and this man will stand
like a rock in the sea, when all errors and sins will be dashed in pieces.

Use 1. Is grace the only setler of the heart? then marvel not if men without
grace, be carried up and down as so much thistle-down and chaff when the wind
blows, that they change according to all occasions, self-interest, particular
profits, that they have as many colors as the Peacocks tails. Alas, here is no
foundation laid, he is a man without a bottom, he is a cloud without water, he
is a Land-flood without a fountain; he is a Cistern, only having what is
outwardly put into him, there do not rivers of living water flow from his
belly; only rooted grace, only establishing grace will avail a man: This is
the oil: profession, parts and outward duties are but the Lamps. Take the
sweetest flowers from the root, it dies presently; pull off the fruitfullest
branch from the stock, it withers presently; and all thy glorious parts and
abilities without this foundation of Grace will quickly dye.

Use 2. To humble the best of Gods children, for how much weakness, diffidence,
inconstancy, hypocrisy and pusillanimity is in them? Oh if thy heart were
always established and confirmed by grace, then what were able to hurt thee; to
discourage a Christian in the power of his grace, is like Noah in his A^k, a
Beast in his Den, a Dove in the Rock, sure and safe enough: Oh thou therefore
who art so subject to convulsion fits in Christianity, subject to swoons and
qualms; think not that riches, honors, greatness, can be a staff sure enough to
lie on, it must be only Christ received and dwelling in our hearts by grace;
all sin in thee is thy weakness, thy imbecility; thou should be ashamed thou
have showed thy self no more like one that is born of God. The Romans had a
Temple dedicated to Fortitude, they made that a Goddess, so that the Heathen
Historian observed, that was destroyed before Rome was taken (that is his
superstitious Idolatry) but we Christians have strength in God; Be strong in
the power of his might, which is stronger then all.

SERMON LI.
Showing why Grace in the heart, is better then unnecessary Disputes in the
head; together with Rules how to manage Disputes and Controversies, without
prejudice to Grace.

HEBREVVS 13. 9. For it is good to have the heart established with grace, and
not with meats, etc.
THis Text has already informed us of this necessary truth, in these times
especially, wherein men desire to dispute subtly, more then to live exactly;
viz. That it is better to have the heart established with Grace, then the head
with unnecessary Disputes in Religion: Having therefore manifested what it is
for Grace to establish the heart, let us proceed to give the reasons of this
Doctrine. The Corinthians were very zealous of those gifts and abilities, which
brought them applause and esteem among others, but negligent about love to God
and men's souls, which is an effect of sanctifying Grace; therefore says the
Apostle, I will show you a more excellent way, 1 Cor. 12. 5. And certainly,
though it be laudable to inquire and try all things in the matter of Religion,
yet there is a more excellent way, which is to hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. These and the like ensuing particulars, are the grounds and
reasons of the Doctrine.

First, Because the proper end and use of all Doctrinal Principles, is to lead
and Reas. 1:
guide the heart into a practical exercise of Grace: Therefore all the while a
man does employ his head, and his heart not sanctified, he falls short of the
end of all Religious principles; If ye know these things, says our Savior,
happy are ye if ye do them, John 13. 17. Happiness lies not in the knowing of
them, but doing of them. Divinity is practical, even as the art of Medicine;
for a man does not attain health by reading Galen, or knowing Hippocrates his
Aphorisms, but by the practical application of them to remove his diseases:
Hence you have that notable expression, The acknowledgement of the truth, which
is after godliness, Tit. 1. 1, If thou do not acknowledge God, Christ, and
all other matters of Religion after godliness, thou missest the mark: But yet
we see this vanity upon men, that they know only to know, as it is said of one
people, that they had money only to tell it, they made no other use of it. To
eat meat, and not to digest it, is like getting knowledge, and not follow it
into practice. Knowledge is so ordained for, and relating to practice, that all
wicked men are said not to know God, because though they have a general
knowledge, yet they improve it not in a particular application. If then Solomon
observed it as a great vanity in the world, that God gave some men riches, and
yet they had no power to use them, Eccles. 5. 19. how much more is it to have
great intellectual abilities, and continual exercises of the understanding, and
in the mean while to have no power to make use of them for the good of their
souls: To be often eating of the tree of knowledge, but never to taste of the
tree of life. The very Heathens, though they had but some few sparks of a true
knowledge about God, having no other Book but that of nature to learn by, yet
in how grievous a measure are they punished by God, because they did not live
according to their knowledge, neither did they glorify God as they knew him,
Romans 1. So then, though thou show thy self a rational man, and not a beast,
in that thou searchest into the grounds and reasons of thy Divine hope, yet it
is but labor in vain. if these eyes to see, be not also accompanied with feet
to walk in the Commandments of God.

Secondly, It is far better to establish the heart with Grace, then reason with
Disputes, because the more quick and apprehensive a man's understanding is, if
his heart 2.
be not ballasted with godliness, its the greater enemy and froward adversary
unto God. The Apostle calls the wisdom of the flesh, enmity to God, Romans 8. 7.
such as is not or cannot be subject to the will or truths of God: Thus the wise
of this world, have the mysteries of Religion hid from them, and they are
revealed to babes: A working head, without a working heart and hand in the ways
of God, is like a sword in a mad man's hand. The greatest opposition to
Christianity, was from Philosophers, which made Tertullian call Philosophers
the Patriarchs of Heretics: Therefore the first thing the Gospel does, is to
captivate the understanding, and to bring down every high thing that exalts it
self against God, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Oh then, thou do not choose the better part
in Religion, when thy intellectuals are continually exercised and whetted, but
thy heart and life is barren of all goodness: Its true, nothing revealed in
Scripture is contrary to right reason, though it be much above it; but corrupt
and carnal reason can no more receive the things of God, then a Dwarf can
measure the Pyramides: So all the while thou art increasing knowledge, if Grace
be not accompanying, thou art but nourishing an enemy against God; corrupt
understandings have prejudiced men's Salvations, as much as loose and dissolute
lives; therefore says John Baptist to the Pharisees, Think not to say in your
hearts, etc. Their reasonings and disputes within, kept off the power of Gods
word upon them; What brought in all that Angel Worship, and desertion of Christ
as the head, but that men were puffed up in their filthy minds? Col. 2. 18.

Thirdly, Therefore its better to get Grace in the heart, then Notions in the
head, 3.
because all brain-Knowledge and Disputes may be perverted to an ill and
ungodly end; only Grace in the heart cannot be abused: Its true, the
profession of Grace, and the outward appearance of it may be abused to ungodly
designs: The name and reputation of piety, may be a color for iniquity; but
real piety it self can never be overruled for any sinful end, because its the
nature of Grace to make a man refer all things to God. Jehu had but the outward
body of Religion, not the soul, therefore his intentions were carnal and
earthly, while his pretentions were spiritual and heavenly: But where true
Grace is, there is not diverse seeds sown together, but his inward and outward
man are both alike; but it is not thus with Knowledge, Opinions and Disputes in
Religion. This light may be like that of a blazing Star, which is nourished
only by slimy and loathsome exhalations. Several ways, and to several corrupt
ends may all this Disputing be abused; As

First, To gain applause and esteem, to be admired by some followers: Thus the
I. How Disputes may be abused to corrupt ends
Pharisees, they did all to be seen of men; this the Apostle calls Puffing up
in their filthy minds: This the Apostle expresses, when he says, Knowledge
puffs up, but charity edifieth, 1 Cor. 8. 7. Its a very hard thing if God
has given a man golden Talents, not to fall down and worship them: If
therefore these Opinions and Disputes are fit fuel, to beget pride and vain
glory, and to make men look after victory over others, more then the truth; how
much better had it been for thee to be exercising thy self in godliness, and to
walk humbly with God! The pride of parts and Opinions, is far greater then that
of Clothes or Beauty, or any other earthly thing, because we judge those
excellencies of the mind, above any temporal excellency; therefore consider
with thy self, what is the issue of all thy inquisitions and debates into
Religious truths, is it to make thee more self-conceited, more boasting, and
confident in thy self? The ignorance of a simple man, will not be so great a
damnation, as the pride of a knowing man. Labor then for that which will keep
thee low, humble and self-debased, and this Grace only in the heart will
accomplish: Worms do not sooner breed in ripe and sweet fruit, then Pride and
Self-confidence does in knowledge and intellectual abilities.

Secondly, Another corrupt end of Parts and Disputes in Religion, is to be
self-willed, II.
and stiff-necked, not willing to yield to any; like the Motto upon the Roman
god Terminus, Cedo nulli; and this is that which makes a man an Heretic, when
a man after several admonitions, does obstinately and wilfully adhere to that
opinion which he has chosen, and will not, as Religion which is from above,
would incline, Be pure, peaceable, and easily to be entreated, James 3. 17. The
Pharisees they were frequent in Disputes with Christ, and despised the people,
as those that knew not the Law, when they had nothing to say, and their mouths
were stopped, yet they would adhere to their former way. Its true indeed,
constancy and stedfastness in the truths of God is necessary: Herein (says
Luther) we ought to be more Pertinacious then Stoics; and it was a Proverbial
speech in Galen, when men would express a difficulty, You may sooner change a
Christian from Christ, they were such holdfast men: But this does no ways
excuse erroneous pertinacy, or self-willed obstinacy in false ways, or in
doubtful disputations: Its like removing a mountain out of his place, when we
would persuade a man against that Tenet or Opinion he is engaged in.

Thirdly. Those Disputations and Opinions may be carried on, for carnal and
temporal advantages, for covetousness and filthy lucre; as we may see it was in
the Pharisees: III.
And the Apostle discovers the ends of the false Apostles, that they thought
gain was godliness, 1 Timothy 5. 6. and the love of money made many suffer
shipwreck in their faith: How then can that be best, which may be prostituted
to the worst and most ignoble respects? It was Paul's comfortable Protestation,
That he had not used a cloak of Covetousness, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. The reason why the
false Apostles vented their vain Opinions was, that they might not suffer
persecution for the Gospel of Christ. And thus Austin defined an Heretic, one
that took up any false way, Alicujus temporalis commodi gratia, for any
temporal advantage and profit. How then can the quintessence and safety of
Religion be laid in that, which may be subservient to such sinful lusts of the
soul.

Fourthly, Its better to get Grace, then to be exercised in these Disputes,
because many times head-Disputations are used for to make Parties and Schisms
in the Church; IV.
To draw many Disciples after them, and so to stand a divided body from others.
The Apostle, how careful was he to prevent schisms and divisions? therefore he
daily pressed love, and to think the same thing, and to speak the same thing,
commanding all things to be done in charity, and nothing through contention and
vain glory. It would be a sad story, to tell you what rents the Leaders of any
false Opinions have made, which could not be cured in some hundreds of years
afterward; and which is the greater wonder, while the Apostles were alive, who
were infallible Judges, and could have determined any doubt of Religion, yet in
their days weeds did come up in Christ's Garden, and the envious one did sow
tares amongst the good wheat.

Fifthly, Therefore it is better to exercise our selves in Grace then in Parts,
because V.
a man may take a great deal of delight in his Opinions and Notions, and be as
inordinately in love with them, as the Adulterer is with his unlawful object.
The Scripture many times uses this expression, To go a whoring after the
imaginations of their own hearts: When the false Phophets and seduced people
committed any Idolatry, they took a great deal of pleasure and content in their
imaginations and carnal reasonings, so that there may be contemplative
fornication, as well as real. Men may fall into inordinate love with the
conceits of their own brain, as unclean men with a beautiful face; or as
Pigmalion, grow inamoured with his own face; so that a man may think he
preaches for God, lives and dies for God, when all the while, its but for
the apprehension of his own mind, which is like a Dalilah to him: A fearful
thing its thus to be deluded, but its a judgment foretold that shall befall
those, who receive not the truth in the love of it, That they shall be
delivered up to believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. 4.


Fourthly, A fourth general ground, Why its better to mind Godliness then
Disputes, is because at the day of Judgment, God will proceed according to our
works we have done; not so much the knowledge and parts we have had: It will
not be, what have thou known? chiefly, but how have thou lived? Thus the
Scripture says, We must be all manifested at the tribunal, to give an account
for what has been done in the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 11. Oh then, how should thou
spend thy time most about that, where in the great question will be at the day
of Judgment: God will then make inquiry how fruitful thy life has been, of
Love, Humility, Temperance, Sobriety, and other good fruits of the Spirit.
Would it not be a vain thing in a servant, who expects his Masters coming
daily, that will call him to give an account of his Stewardship, and he should
all the while employ himself in bables, and unnecessary employments, not at all
tending to that work which his Master does most expect, what stripes may he
justly look for? Seeing then the end of thy calling is holiness, and thou art
created to a godly life: Oh look to have this Oil, besides the Lamp of
knowledge, lest thou art surprised by horrible confusion, when the Bridegroom
comes.

Fifthly, In Knowledge and Parts there is not a true satisfying, and filling of
the 5.
heart with spiritual content; but Grace only brings Christ into the heart,
and makes God our portion and inheritance, in having of whom there is only
happiness. He that drinks of me, says Christ, shall never thirst more. John 4.
14. Eating and drinking of Christ, is more then to dispute about him, to make
controversies in Religion about him: Its by saving Grace to be incorporated
into him, and to receive Vivifical influence from him. Solomon does not only
discover vanity in riches, and temporal advantages, that they give no true
content to the soul, but also in knowledge and learning, that has a greater
vexation with it; therefore he concludes, Of making Books there is no end: The
sum or perfection of all is, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, Eccles. 12.
13. Of Controversies and Disputes there is no end, there comes jars and
contentions endless about them, but the sum of all is, to get the fear of God
in our hearts, and to keep our selves unspotted from the sins of the world:
This has made even some Papists who have employed their whole time in
Controversal Divinity, to cry out of it as an heavy burden, thinking they have
lost the sweetness of Religion thereby: As Suarez, who wrote so many Tomes of
Disputes; yet said, He prized that time which was set apart for the searching
and examination of his Conscience, in relation toward God, above all the other
time he spent. It was a witty allusion, of Isidorus Pelusiota, As the
Israelites, who did gather Manna, were to go out of the Camp where war was, for
the Manna did not fall within the Camp; so those that would gather the Manna
and Sweetness of Religion, must go out of the Camp, where spiritual war is, by
Religious Disputes. As in eating of the Paschal Lambs, they took the flesh, and
feasted on that, but threw away the bones; so thou art to take that in
Religion, which will feed and nourish thy soul, but cast away hard,
unprofitable Controversies.

But you will say, Is it unlawful to inquire and Dispute in matters of
Religion? Is not this to plead with the Papists for ignorance, and to make that
the Quest.
Mother of Devotion? Does not the Apostle bid us Try all things? Are we not to
search the Scriptures? Are we not forbid to believe every spirit, but to try
it? 1 John 4. 1. Must we not grow in Knowledge as well as Grate? If the Heathen
make no search, how can he turn Christian? If the Papist do not enquire, how
can he become Protestant? Why are Reformations so much magnified, if so be we
must lie down in an old ignorance, or take all things upon trust? Is not this
to make blind men lead blind, and so both to fall into the ditch?

I shall therefore handle this case only, and so make application: And first,
It Answ.
cannot be denied, but that its a duty not only upon Ministers and learned
men, but all Christians, men and women, to read and search the Scriptures, and
not to take any Doctrine upon the Authority of men, and because the State is of
that Religion, or because our Ancestors and Forefathers did so, and believed
so, Qui descrit (...)mpropter authoritatum humanum, inciditin insipientiam
bestialem. said Durand: this must be acknowledged, and the ignorance, lesiness
and sottishness of most people is to be sharply reproved, who see with other
men's eyes, believe with men's faith, and do not rest assured in matters of
Religion, because God says so, the word delivers so, but because men say so.
Are not those Bereans said to be more notable then others, Acts 17. 11. because
they examined the Apostles Doctrine, and looked whether it was consonant to the
Scripture or not, and yet this is the general ignorance and stupidity of the
whole body of Christianity; If they should be required to give an account of
their faith, or their Worship of God, they could give no better answer, then
that ignorant woman did to Christ, Our fathers worshipped here, and art thou
better then they (...) John 4. Our fathers believed thus, and are we wiser and
holier then they: This is not faith, for-faith is a gift of God, wrought by his
spirit in our bearts, whereby we believe matters of Religion, for a Divine
Motive and Authority, even because God has revealed it in his word; But woe be
to us, because of that supine and damnable ignorance which is in most men: This
therefore must be granted, that its our duty to grow more in knowledge, and not
to rest as babes in the principles of Religion, as the Apostle presses, but to
grow and be strong men, and to have our senses exercised to discern between
good and evil, Heb. 6. but here is the difficulty, and the great wisdom
required, how to use our parts in sinding out truth, so as not to prejudice
Grace in our hearts; for the Apostle, when he says in the Text, Its good or
better to have the heart establised with Grace, then with Doctrines about
meats; he does not absolutely forbid the Disputes about them, for we know this
controversy was much disputed about, and even in the Council at Jerusalem,
after there was much dispute, there was a determination of it for all Churches:
Therefore take these Rules:

First, Labor to know and improve thy parts, but still in reference to Grace;
Let all knowledge tend to practice; count all that knowledge and Dispute barren
and 1. Rules how to dispute about Religion, without (...)(...) to Grace in the
heart.
unprofitable, which does not leave thee in a better frame of heart, more
godly, more humble, more zealous: When we know truths, as they are in Jesus
Christ, then they make us to put off the old man, and so be renewed more and
more in our spirits, Ephesians. 41. Do not then start questions, as children many
times strick (...), to see how the sparks fly out, but they make no fire to
warm them with: Thou startest questions, but they do not kindle a fire in thy
bosom.

2. Begin in a right manner: First possess thy self well, and be rightly
instructed in the first principles and fundamental points of Religion. The
Apostle to the 2.
Hebrens, though he would not have them stay in the first principles, yet he
supposes they had not fully learned them: This has made many miscarry in
their disputes about truth, they took upon them to teach others, before they
were well taught themselves: They never were well catechized and instructed in
the fundamental points of Religion, and so they build an honfe without a
foundation. And therefore instruction in the rudiments and first principles of
Religion, is very necessary for all; do not then affect high and sublime
things, before thou have attained to the main and necessary ones; and its Gods
goodness that those points which are absolutely necessary to salvation, be
plainly and clearly revealed in the word of God.

3. When thou art gone beyond principles, and endeavorest to improve thy
talents, 3.
then study not curious, sublime and impertinent questions, but such as tend to
edification, of thy self and others. There came a man and propounded this
question to Christ, Whether many should be saved; This was a curious question,
for what was Luke 13. 23.
that to him? let him look to his own salvation; therefore our Savior did not
directly answer him, nor directly repel him, but said, Strive to enter in at
the straight gate, for many shall seek, and not be able to enter. The Soldiers
showed their goodness, when they came to John Baptist, and instead of
impeitment questions, asked this, What they should do in their particular
calling to be saved; so that instead of many general or sublime questions, be
thou inquiring, what thou art to do as a husband, or a wife, or a servant in
thy relation to glorify God.

4. While thou tryest all things, labor to be humble, and meek, and practice so
far as 4.
thou have attained unto. The humble and meek he will teach his way: And he
that does my fathers will, shall know whether the doctrine be of God or not,
John. 7. 17. If therefore thou do not love that truth, which already thou art
convinced of, but keep it as a prisoner, within thy breast, fear least God
give thee up to blindeness of mind, and hardness of heart.

5. Do not lean to thy own understanding, but honor and esteem those helps and
5.
guides God has appointed in his Church: It was Hieroms speech, Nunquam me
ipsum habui magistrum, I never taught my own self: And the Rabbis say, He that
is a scholar to himself, has a fool for his master. The Apostle gives many
exhortations to this purpose; and therefore bids them obey those Guides and
Pastors God has appointed in his Church, which he therefore dignifieth with
the title of Lights; Although they are not infallible, yet God has appointed
this method for our teaching and instruction, and therefore at the very same
time, when he gives a command To try all things, he says, Despise not
prophesying.

Lastly, Consider thy own strength, If thou art weak in faith, and subject to 6.
mistakes, then do thou of all men take heed of Disputes: Its the Apostles
advice, Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak in faith, do not receive to doubtful
disputations. These things deserve a larger handling, but I press to the Use;
And

First, Its of caution and admiration; do not thou from hence, because Grace is
better then parts, sit down in thy ignorance, and never make inquiry and search
into matters of Religion: This is an universal disease; How few are asking
about the principles of Religion? seeking for more knowledge, but as bi^de men,
swallow flies; so they believe any Doctrine propounded to them: This argues,
many Christians have nothing but an Humane faith, for a Divine faith has
knowledge for one main act of it. Oh the ignorance that covers the face of the
Christian world, as the waters do the sea! whereas the promise is, that in
times of the Gospel knowledge should abound.

Use. 2. If Grace be better then Knowledge, then let this exhort you, not for
to rest in your parts, in being a Protestant, and you are able in some measure
to defend the truth of it against the Papists, but see above all things, how
grace and godliness is in thy life: What if thou can tell what Sanctification
and Regeneration is, if thou thy self art not Regenerated? What if thou can
read many Chapters in the Bible, but thou do not live according to the
Commands therein? and certainly, if godliness be thus better then knowledge,
how much rather is it better then wealth, or outward honor and greatness? O
then, seeing Grace is the only necessary thing, why is it looked upon as the
only superfluous thing? Its according to thy godliness that thou will find
death and the day of judgment comfortable to thee. Now thou have thy hearts
desire, take content in worldly comforts, but this will not be always; thou will have other thoughts when arraigned at Gods Tribunal.

SERMON LII.
That there is a Work of God upon a man's heart which is called Grace, and why
inward holiness is called Grace.

HEB. 13. 9. For it is good to have the heart established with Grace, and not
with meats, etc.
THe former Doctrine being dispatched, we now come to treat upon that which I
chiefly intended this Text for: viz. That subject matter which does establish
and confirm the heart: For Grace here is made the ballast, the pondus, the
weight that does establish and settle the soul. Now howsoever the word grace be
of diverse significations in the Scripture, and it is very necessary to
understand it aright, because mistakes in this, have caused all those dangerous
errors in Popery: For wheresoever we read that justification and salvation is
by grace, they understand it presently of some good thing in us, and so take us
off from looking on Christ, to rest in our selves; but we are justified as some
Philosophers say we see, intus recipiendo, non extra mittendo, By receiving
from God, not giving any thing to God.

Briefly therefore to inform you, take notice that Grace has its less
principal, and more principal or noble significations; less principal, as when
it is used for the external glory, comeliness, or loveliness of a thing. In
which sense it is said, The grace The signification of the word Grace.
of the flower perishes, or for thankfulness and gratitude, 1 Cor. 14. as the
Latinists say, Habere gratias, the Alms and Charity also of Believers, is
styled (...), Grace. But the more noble significations are for Active Grace, or
Passive Grace: active Grace, I call that love, and free mercy of God without
us, whereby we are justified and accepted to salvation: In this sense Grace is
said to justify, and we have remission of sins by grace, i. e. by the favor
and love of God only, not any thing that we have done. This true explication
overthrows the main pillars of Popery: and in this sense where you read of
grace in the New Testament it is most frequently used.

2. There is Passive Grace, and that two fold, either for to be accepted of
God, to be in Grace and favor with him, as the phrase is often, to find grace
in a man's eyes. And thus the Virgin Mary is saluted, (...), Greatly favored
and beloved, not full of inherent Grace, as the popish writers grossly pervert
this place. Or secondly and lastly, Grace is used for those holy qualities
infused into the soul, and that heavenly help God vouchsafes to us in our way
to heaven. Thus faith is a Grace, repentance is a Grace, zeal is a Grace, etc.
The Papist takes the word Grace in this sense altogether; but we say, this is
not the most noble use of the word; and the Grace of the Gospel so often
magnified, is not any thing within us, but Gods favor and love without us: Yet
we deny not, but those holy qualities within us are called grace sometimes in
the Scripture. Indeed there are Diverse too rigid, who contend that the word
Grace, when it relates toward a heavenly sense, is always taken for the
favor of God, and that it never signifies godliness which is in us, or done
by us. But there are some places, though not many, wherein is clearly
demonstrated this use of the word as it beto kens something inhering, and
abiding in us, as 2 Pet. 2. ult. Grow in grace, and the knowledge of Jesus
Christ. To grow in grace musts needs be understood of those holy gifts of Gods
Spirit in us, which are daily to be improved: so Sing with grace in your
hearts, Col. 3. 16. And again, Let your speech administer grace to the hearers,
Col. 4. 6. And if it be acknowledged by all, that the common gifts of Gods
Spirit, such as prophesying, working of miracles, yea, and offices in the
Church, are called (...), and (...), why should it be thought hard those
sanctifying gifts may be also named Graces? And in this sense Grace is taken in
this Text: for that holy work of God upon the heart, whereby he does establish
and confirm it in godly ways. From this sense we observe, That there is a work
of God upon a man's heart, which is called Grace. Obs.



This point is of admirable use; For without grace here, there can be no glory
hereafter. And this grace of God is rarely to be found: there go many
counterfeits for this precious jewel: we are apt to call any moral virtue, any
ingenuous and civil conversation, with the excellent Title of Grace. It is
therefore a subject worth the treating on, to show what are the effects and
symptoms of this Grace upon a man; for nothing in the whole world is so
desirable as Grace: no created excellency comes near to grace. A rich man
without grace, is like a dead carcass with glorious garments upon it. A
learned man without grace, is also like a dead corpse with sweet flowers strewed
over it. It is the absence, or presence of Grace that makes a man happy or
miserable: Oh therefore that before this subject be ended, it might turn you
all into the likeness thereof; That as fire turns every object it works
upon into its own nature, so grace might make every hearer gracious. That the
word might be the seal, and your hearts the wax to receive that Divine
impression: That so ye may be as Paul says, An Epistle to be seen and read of
all men; that all men may behold and admire the grace of your lives, which is
wrought by the word of Grace. To imprint this upon you. I shall discover first
the proper Grounds and Reasons why it is called Grace, with the noble effects
thereof.

Only in the first place I must necessarily remove a false ground, or effect
attributed to it, and that by all Papist Writers, who say, Therefore this
inward holiness in us is called Grace, because it makes us perfectly accepted,
and gracious with God. so that thereby we have a right to eternal happiness.
Hereupon they speak most of Grace as that which does Gratum facere, Make a man
accepted unto God from the inward condignity and worth of it. This is to take
away the true child, and to put a dead one in the room: to take away Gospel
grace, evangelical grace, and to put something done by us in the room of it.
For although it be true, that the godly actions we do are above humane
strength, and we are enabled thereunto by the power of God only; and are
therefore called Grace; Yet they are not done so perfectly and purely, as
thereby to make us accepted with God. This is good to know, that so we might
give all glory to Christ, and be debased in our selves. It is a great piece of
wisdom in Christianity not to confound grace justifying, and grace
sanctifying: Grace justifying is an action of God, grace sanctifying is a
quality wrought in us: Grace justifying is perfect, grace sanctifying has much
imperfection cleaving to it. Now that no grace in any godly man does make
accepted to eternal life, appears

First, From the relics of corruption in every man, though regenerated, as we
see 1 Why grace within us cannot justify us.
in Paul, whereby he dare not trust in himself, but in Christ only. He finds
evil when he would do good; for which reason the best Saints have begged
earnestly for pardon, and have been afraid with David, lest God should enter
into judgment with them, and so they not be justified, Psalm, 143. 2. Nehemiah
when he mentioned those high acts of grace which he did, yet prays often,
Remember me O Lord, and spare me, Neh. 13.

Secondly, Grace within us cannot justify us, because the Scripture lays
that 2.
wholly on God and Christ. God the Fathers grace, as the efficient cause of it;
and God the Sons merits, as the ground of it; and by faith we are to put it on
as a garment: so that we are still in a passive sense said to be justified, and
not in an active to justify our selves, unless in that ill sense as the
Pharisee is said to justify himself. None does so Divinely, and admirably
prove this point by several arguments, as Paul in his Epistles does, insomuch
that one would wonder how any Popish writer can make Commentaries upon his
Epistles, and not be convinced of their error. So that our happiness, and the
ground of all our peace, lies not in what we have done, but what we have
received, and in what Christ has done for us. This doctrine is like the honey
Sampson found in the dead Lion, in Christ crucified, which we are to instruct
all burdened sinners in. Bellarmine comes off at last with his Tutissimum est,
It is most safe to rest wholly upon Christ, not our righteousness. I know it
is hard to call godliness grace, and not to think that it must be all in all;
and how prone we are to leave the fountain, Christ, and to run to the Cisterns,
our own graces, every man's heart can easily suggest. This stumbling-stone being
removed out of the way.

Let us in the next place take a view of the true reasons why it is called
Grace, as also the properties of it.

And first, It is called grace, because it comes freely from the grace of God.
The 1. Why inward holiness is called Grace.
effect is dignified with the Title of the cause; it is called grace, because
it comes of grace. It is true, all good things come from God: Every good and
perfect gift is from him, the Father of lights; as all light is from the sun
mediately, or immediately: yet we do not call the good things of nature, Grace,
as Pelagius did, because they come from God in a general way, as the Author of
nature, this in a more special and appropriated way, as the Author of Grace: So
that if thou have grace in thy heart and life, the very name of grace should
make thee humble, thankful, lowly in thy own eyes. If it be grace, then it is
not by thy natural strength and power: If it be Gods gift, it is not thy
ability. Oh then admire the goodness of God: If thou have an heart to love
God, to believe in a promise, to mind heavenly things, say, This is grace. It
is not nature, nature has no power to do thus, nor no will to do thus: No
power, for godly actions are wholly above the sphere of humane power; humane
power and humane actions are commensurate, but a humane strength, and Divine
actions have no congruity. And as nature has no power, so also no will, or
inclination to it, but rather delights in the clean contrary.

Secondly, Godliness in the heart and life is called grace, not only because
it is bestowed freely by God upon us, but because we were unworthy, and
deserved the clean 2.
contrary. It is the judgment of Pareus a learned Divine, that the image of
God stamped on Adam, though it was the systeme of all Godliness, yet it could
not be called grace; and therefore reproves Bellarmine for stiling his book,
De gratia primi hominis, Of the grace of the first man. It was indeed
godliness, and holiness (says he) but it was not grace; because though it
was freely bestowed on Adam, yet he being not in a sinful condition, but that
original righteousness was a perfection due to him (as the Orthodox in a sound
sense maintain against the Papists,) therefore it could not be called grace. I
will not determine this; but to be sure, now since man has fallen, that work
of God sanctifying our natures, healing our corruptions, is grace, because it
is vouchsafed unto us, lying in a clean contrary, and opposite condition. Thus
not only grace justifying and evangelical was admirable to Paul, when he had
been the chiefest of many sinners, but grace sanctifying also. That God should
make such a blackmore white, such a noisome weed a pleasant flower, How great
was that regenerating grace which made such a change? Lie down then in
spiritual shame and confusion, Oh thou godly soul, and say, Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy grace let all glory be given: For what was
there in thy former life time, that should merit at Gods hand to make such a
change? Wast thou not ignorant as others, it may be, profane as others,
seeking for happiness in the bowels of the Creatures as others? How often does
Paul mind converted persons, with their former vain conversations, that so the
remarkable change made by grace upon their souls might be the more welcome?

Thirdly, This work of godliness is called grace, because it is arbitrarily
bestowed by God upon whom he pleases, and when he pleases: Whom he will he
calls. Paul 3.
is ravished with the unsearchable depths of Gods wisdom in dispensing his
grace, especially God uses not to give his grace, where there might any
outward excellency seem to deserve it, for that grace might appear out of
measure gracious: He selects those objects, that have the least show, and that
are most contemptible in the eyes of men. Therefore says the Apostle, He has
not called many noble, many wise, many learned; For if he had taken that
method, men would have thought God had been affected with such humane
excellencies, and therefore received the rich rather then poor, the learned
rather then ignorant; this also is an overwhelming consideration of Gods love.
Who art thou that God has given grace to thee, and not to many thousand
others? It may be God has chosen thee, one out of all the family, all thy
kindred, yea all the town where thou live. Did God lay Angels aside, one
whereof was able to do more service to God, then millions of men, and take
thee? Oh grace! Again, has God laid many noble men, many great men aside, and
given grace to thee a poor mean man? Oh unsearchable riches of grace! Further,
has God laid many men aside, who by their Sex could have been more active and
vigorous for God, and bestowed grace on thee a poor weak woman? Oh admirable
grace! The Pharisee thanked God that he was not like other men; but he did it
from a principle of presumption and arrogance: But thou may with humble
thankfulness, and great fear and trembling, acknowledge the mercy of God, that
he has not left thee in thy filthy lusts, as he has done other men. Christ
aggravated Gods providence and care to the widow of Sarepta, that there were
many widows in that place besides her, yet the Prophet was sent to her only.
But here is a greater aggravation, how many men and widows are there in the
place where thou live, yet grace is vouchsafed to thee rather then others?
This should put fire in thy bones and bowels, it should make thee active for
God; for thou should est think if God had called others, given grace to others,
they would have been busy and fervent men; they would have been zealous for
his glory. Oh let me not requite the goodness of God after so ill a manner: by
giving grace to me, and denying it to another of more learning, parts,
boldness, and courage, he seems to lose by it; others would have improved
his Talents better then I have done: Certainly this consideration should be a
goad in thy side, thou should say, Lord, it is fit that I should do thee all
that service which others would have done, if converted, in my room. It is not
fit thou should be a loser by me.

Fourthly, It is called Grace, because it enableth a man to do those things
which exceed 4.
all humane power. In this sense grace and nature are always immediately
opposite; for as those common gifts of Gods spirit, working of miracles,
speaking with tongues, and prophesying, are called grace, because not procured
by humane industry, but vouchsafed by Gods benevolence; so much more the
enabling of us weak and impotent sinners, to do that which is holy and
heavenly, may much rather be called grace. This point, if rightly considered,
would make men look upon grace as a more rare and admirable thing then men
generally account it to be. Alas, thou live as thou have been trained up;
thou walk according to thy education, thou come to holy Duties as the
custom and manner is, but never think until a man be prepared by grace from
above, he can no more do any thing holily then a poisonous serpent can vent
honey. Grace therefore is that, which if once infused into a man, so far as that
is operative, makes him live not as a man, much less as a beast, but upon
Divine and heavenly principles; hence it is that the godly are said to be
partakers of the divine nature, and Christ is said to live in them, Ephesians. 3.
Oh the heavenly Metamorphosis and change which is wrought on a man by grace:
For how is it possible that a man should love the glory of God, more then his
own comforts, wealth, or life it self, if a Divine power did not enable him?
How could it be that a man should find more joy in God, then they have had
when their wine and oil increases, did not grace work thus mightily? All
civility, morality, ingenuity, and humane piety, or devotion, is but a
ridiculous Ape to true grace.

Fifthly, It is called grace, because it is the most choice and excellent
perfection of a man in relation to his ultimate end, which is the enjoyment of
God. The glory, beauty, 5.
and excellency of any thing, is called the grace of it: and we in English say,
such a thing is the grace of a man: Now nothing may be so well said the grace
of a man, as grace or godliness. It is not wealth, honor, greatness sets out
a man, so much as grace: there is scarce any perfection of sense, but the bruit
beasts do in some sense or other exceed a man; and as for intellectual
abilities, the Devils do far transcend man; only grace puts a man in an higher
degree then these can attain unto: only there is required a spiritual eye and
judgment, to judge grace the most excellent thing. Certainly if solid reason
might take place, thou would quickly be convinced that grace is the choycest
perfection by this Argument; That is the choysest qualification which disposes
a man to his choyeest end: now wealth, health, and such sensible mercies, they
only prepare for a sensible, and animal good: Parts, learning, and political
wisdom, they only fit for a civil good; but grace and godliness, they
dispose for a spiritual good, though not perfectly, much less meritoriously.
If therefore every thing be prized for its instrumental use and service, Why
are not all things neglected to obtain grace? And howsoever with Heathens and
Pagans this Doctrine may not be acknowledged, yet with you Christians who
receive the word of God, and profess a subjection to it, How can it be denied?
Oh then think not thy self better for any outward temporal mercy, but by his
grace. Let that be thy first question, Am I godly? You do not judge of an horse
by his outward trappings, and goodly ornaments said the Heathen: so neither may
we esteem of a man by the many outward mercies he enjoys, but the work of God
upon his soul.

Sixthly, Grace in the heart, is nothing but glory begun. Grace is glory begun
6.
here, as glory is grace perfected hereafter, and this does wonderfully extol
the work of grace. Indeed here it is imperfect, and accompanied with many
defects; there are worms in the best fruit, and so an unlovelinesse in us, as
well as a comeliness; and therefore though it be present in the hearts of Gods
people, yet they dare not appeal unto Gods justice, nor can they endure his
tribunal. Now we believe in part, love in part, and we may say of all our
graces, as the Heathen of his knowledge, His knowledge was not so much
knowledge, as ignorance; so neither are our graces so much graces as
infirmities: but yet in time this imperfection will be abolished, God will make
thy love a glorious love, thy godliness glorious, when he shall add his
ultimate perfection to it. Grace here is like a child in its infancy, and we
speak and know as children, but in Heaven we become like men.

Lastly, The nature of grace inherent in us, lies in an irreconcilable
opposition with sin; they are contrary one to another, as light and darkness,
bitter and 7.
sweet.

A threefold contrariety we may acknowledge in them.

1. An effective opposition, as between fire and water. Thus the spirit lusts
against the flesh; as the spirit of wine and poison conflict together.
Therefore I.
when sin is at quiet in a man's life, and thou art ungodly, profane, and there
is no reluctance, no opposition; this is an argument of little or no grace in
thee. Oh consider this all ye who lie down in sin with security; there is no
complaining in thy heart, no trouble in thy conscience, no struglings in thy
breast, no stirrings in fervent prayer, Lord help me else I am overcom. Truly
as the psalmist says of some wicked men's death, They have no bonds, they are
not in pain as other men, so also in their life time they are not in that
shame, grief, and trouble about sin, as the godly sometimes are.

2. There is a formal opposition. They are two immediate forms, (as it were) in
II.
the soul as health and sickness, white and black: and howsoever it is a rule,
that two contraries cannot be in the same subject, yet that is to be understood
in the intense degree, otherwise as there is a crepusculum, when its partly
night, and partly day, so there is such a temperament in every godly man, a
twilight; some sin and some godliness.

Lastly, There is a moral opposition. Where sin does abound, there it procures
III.
at Gods hand either the denial, or withdrawing of some measure of grace
already bestowed; and thus where grace is improved, there God has made a
promise to subdue sin, to overcome those rebellious Jebusites that yet lurk in
our land: so that if grace be in a man, it lies not idle: This will quickly be
discovering it self, by crucifying and mortifying of sin. Therefore the next
thing to be done, is to show the characters of a gracious man: in the mean
while make this use: If grace be of this nature, then it plainly discovers
those to be graceless men that live in the wilful committing of gross sins,
without repentance or reformation. Oh thou of no grace, How is it that thou art
not afraid, and ashamed of thy self? If grace were in thy heart, would it not
be in thy tongue, in thy life, in thy conversation? If grace be the chiefest
excellency of a man, sets a man above all other creatures; then sin which is
the immediate contrary, must needs be the greatest debasement of a man: all
wickedness is a shame, a reproach; it makes a man like a beast, like a devil.
Oh then let all sinners tremble, and be confounded at their woeful estate; when
God comes in glory to judge thee for thy life, What grace shall he find in
thee? Thou have desired wealth, but not grace; thou have desired to be great,
but not gracious.

Use 2. How vain a thing it is to hope for the grace of God, and his favor
without us, if we have not grace within us. You heard godliness is called
grace, because it comes from Gods grace; it comes from his love: so that when
he loves graciously, he makes gracious: sin shall not have dominion over you,
because you are under grace. In vain therefore do men hope for grace
justifying, where they do not find it sanctifying: In vain do they presume
that Gods grace will pardon their sins, when it does not deliver them from
the power and dominion of it. Oh then, that men would not wilfully destroy
their own souls by damnable presumption. Thou hopest in Gods grace who art an
inordinate liver, a profane swearer, and riotous person: No, show me the grace
that sanctifyeth thee, and then I dare promise thee (the grace that will
justify thee.

SERMON LIII.
Characters and Properties of a Gracious Man.

HEB. 13. 9. For it is a good thing that the heart be established with Grace,
not with meats, that have not profited them that have been occupied therein.
THere is a choice and noble work of God called Grace, as you have heard: The
next thing to be insisted upon, is, What are the Characters and Properties of a
man who has grace. For as all causes do manifest themselves by some effects,
so grace in the hearts and lives of men will discover it self quickly by its
operations. Think it not therefore too much, if we come twice or thrice in
words of instruction, and exhortation, about this subject of grace: for as its
not one shower of Rain that is enough to satisfy the parched earth after a
great drought, but there must be continual droppings; so neither is one Sermon
sufficient to inform and reform you in this matter, but there must be a
frequent and vigorous application of this truth to your hearts.

The first Character of grace in a man, is, To elevate and lift up his heart,
so that The Character of grace in a man. 1.
in all his Actions, Religious, Civil or Natural, he relates to God as his
chief and ultimate end. For grace being of a superior, and more exalted nature
than humane strength and abilities, it does thereby lift up a man to an higher
end than otherwise he would aim at. Whatsoever ye do, whether eat or drink
says the Apostle, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. As the superior
Orb carries all the inferior Orbs away in its own motion, contrary to their
particular inclinations; so grace infused into the heart overcomes all those
sinful and selfish inclinations which are in us, and makes us more through God,
to God. Grace in a man is like fire, which being of an active nature, does
change and assimilate every thing, turning it into fire, or very like it:
Therefore even hard and cold Iron put into the fire looks like fire, and
seems to be made fire: Thus godliness in the heart of a man, torneth every
thing toward God; Whereas before his Conversion God was not in his thoughts,
his intentions, his desires and affections, but he lived wholly of himself, and
to himself: Now his eyes, his aims, his resolutions are fixed principally upon
God and his glory. Thus Paul testifies about the work of his Ministry, the
discharge whereof might be subject to many corrupt and carnal intentions, that
he performed it in godly simplicity, as of God, and to God, 2 Cor. 2. 17. Hence
are those expressions, to acquaint our selves with God, in all our ways to
aknowledge him: and a godly life is described to be a walking with God; so that
as the herb Heliotropium does turn about and open it self according to the
motion of the Sun; thus where Gods commands are, Gods will is manifested, or
his glory interested, there a godly man does apply himself. Oh what a precious
temper is this in all religious actions, not to be carried by vainglory, and
applause of men, but to eye God solely! Well did the Father call vainglory,
The sweet spoiler of spiritual excellencies, and a pleasant thief, for so
indeed it is. The Pharisees were not godly, though in prayers and alms often,
because these things were not done to God, but for humane applause: This is the
Pirate, that many times robs us of our rich Merchandise, our spiritual
traffic with God: Insomuch that a man may be serving himself and his corrupt
ends, when to the world he seems to be serving of God. As in religious
actions, so even in humane and civil actions, the glory of God is the aim
propounded; what the Apostle would have servants do, not to eye their Master,
but to do it as unto Christ; the same is required of us in all our civil
employments: Art thou a Magistrate? Are thy employments in civil
considerations? consider not men, regard not merit; but as he which shoots that
he may hit the mark, takes a little time to unite his force, and fix his aim;
so do thou gather thy affections together, and set thy self on purpose to
remember, that this is for God, and to God. Thou desire to look further than
humane Arguments would suggest; this one Scripture discovers few men have
grace: for take them in religious Duties, there Custom, Education, or Pride,
are the principles that set them on work, or in their civil employments, and
then self-advantage, earthly greatness, temporal preferments are the Fountain
to these streams; But a gracious man is filled with a divine Spirit,
over-looking those inferior respects, his end being spiritual, and so raised
above all earthly temptations; this being the proper work of grace, to put a
man into such a disposition, as that he may have communion with, and enjoyment
of God; for as a Beast is no ways fit for any commerce with a man, till he be
made a man; so a man while without grace, has no disposition, or qualification
in him whereby he may draw nigh to God.

Secondly, A gracious man has an high esteem and prize of the things of 2.
grace. The Gospel is the Gospel of grace, Acts 20. 24. The Word is the Word of
grace, Acts 14. 3. God is the God of grace, 1 Pet. 1. 11. The Ordinances are
means of Grace, Romans 3. 24. Justification and Salvation are the effects of
Grace, Ephesians. 2. 5. Now a man of grace does mightily desire these things of
grace; and it is an evident argument of one without grace, when he has no dear
esteem, no precious delight in these spiritual things. When David makes so many
sweet ravishing expressions about God being his Portion, his inheritance, all
in heaven and earth to him; when he does so admire the Ordinances, and the
worship of God. What are these but the honey of a sweet Be, the manifestations
of a gracious spirit? So those divine strains of Paul, Ephesians. 1. and alibi,
admiring the grace of God in spiritual mercies, do tell all, what a gracious
heart Paul has within, that can adore such privileges. Whereas now come to an
unregenerate man, he can no more esteem these things than the Swine does Pearl,
or sweet Flowers. The man in the Parable when he had found this Pearl, he sold
all he had to be owner of it: And thus it is with a godly man, when once he
has tasted of the power of grace, he loves his lusts no more, his sins no
more: As when a man has tasted Honey, all other things seem unsavory; thus
after he is godly, all his former wicked and worldly ways seem like Garlic
and Onions to this heavenly Manna; how devoid then of all grace do men
generally demonstrate themselves? where is their high esteem of God and
Ordinances, of all spiritual privileges? Alas, Preach of these things, and
they say, Who will show us some other good thing? Thus to the distemperate
palate of a sinful man, the sweetest objects give no relish at all.

Thirdly, Its a sure Character of grace to make a man hunger and thirst still
after more degrees of grace. Therefore the godly man is described by seeking,
Romans 3.
2. 3. by desiring, Neh. 1. 11. by hungring and thirsting, Matthew. 5. 6. because
his soul is never satisfied in the way of grace, but he has an holy dropsy on
him, the more he drinks of this water the more he thirsts after it: Objects
that are pleasing to sense, they glut the Faculty at last; so that an
honeycomb is sometimes loathed; but spiritual objects are so far from
burthening the heart, and causing a disdain, that the more they are enjoyed,
the more they are desired, and longed after. Every Christian is compared to a
Merchant, whose scope is to increase and advance his estate; to a Travailer,
who considers not so much how many miles he has gone, as how much of his
journey is still behind. Thus Paul he forgets that which is behind, Phil. 3.
and presses forward to the mark before him; so that it is an evident sign of a
man in grace, when he goes on to perfection, and thinks not, I will live as
the most do, I will not be singular, or go further than the multitude does:
Its a sign thou have not tasted how good grace and holiness is, and therefore
thou desire not more of it; and certainly, if grace to such a degree be so
good and comfortable, how much more is it to an higher degree! As the dog is
sluggish until he has got the sent of his game, and then he pursues it
violently; so it is here: A man that has not apprehended the powerful
excellency, and sweetness of grace, he is very remiss and negligent in all
endeavors after it; but he that has once felt this fire in his bosom,
desires to make it seven times hotter. Oh then, if a drop of this grace be so
precious, what is an Ocean of it?

Fourthly, Grace does especially, and in the first place cleanse away the
filthiness of the Spirit, and Heart pollution. Thus the Apostle puts these
two together, 4.
Perfecting holiness, and cleansing our selves from all filthiness of the
spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. For grace (you heard) was the immediate contrary and
opposite to sin, seeing therefore the main strength of sin lies in the
heart, and a man is not according to his actions, but his heart; so the chief
power of grace is in the heart; So that as the Apostle says, Sing with grace
in your heart: Thus pray and hear with grace in your hearts. The Pharisees that
were so admirable for external Religion, or Superstition, rather wholly
neglected the work of grace in their hearts; and therefore contrary to nature,
when their Streams seemed clear, the Fountain was all muddy. When the fruit
looked like sweet fruit, the root was altogether bitter. The heart of a man is
the Fountain, from whence issues either ^^e, or death; Its the souls
Privy-Chamber, and the proper Throne for Christ to sit upon. How uncomely were
it in an house, to have all the out-rooms and entrance ly^ garnished, and ready
swept, but the inmost places altogether foul and ruinous: no less folly is it,
to look to thy external conversation, that it be clean and unblameable before
men, but the inward frame of thy heart to be like a noisome Sepulcher. He
therefore that is gracious is afraid of sin in his heart; If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66. 18. Though all the
world cannot judge him for outward impieties, yet because God sees the
unbelief, pride and unsave urinesse of his heart, this does exceedingly afflict
him. But oh what strangers are men to their own hearts! who take the Psalmists
Counsel, to commune with their hearts, and be still? who embraces that duty
so often commanded, To search and try the heart? Never call that grace in thy
life, which is not first rooted in thy heart. Oh say then, O Lord, all the work
lies within, help against inward lusts, against inward distempers.

Fifthly, Grace does there especially enable a man to do those duties, where
flesh and blood would soonest contradict. When we are commanded to deny our
selves, and 5.
take up the Cross to follow him, when commanded to cut off our right hand,
and to pull out our right eye; these things are paradoxall to flesh and blood;
they cry out, These are hard speeches, who can bear them? But grace, that is
seen especially in curing and healing such weaknesses; for where Nature is
stopped, and can go no further, there grace does properly discover it self; Where
nature suggests this to be done as safe and good: Grace advises, But this is a
sin, this is against Gods glory. When Joseph was in that enticing temptation,
had he attended to the allurements of the flesh, he had been overwhelmed: but
grace suggesting the fear of God, and his presence, and how great a sin it
would be against him, that preserved him as admirably as the three Worthies in
the fiery Furnace, who were not so much as scorched. We may see an excellent
instance of nature and grace in Abraham's obedience, and his faith; his
obedience, when God commanded him to take his only Son Isaac, and offer him a
Sacrifice: Every word was enough to make Nature resist and gainsay; His Son,
only Son, Isaac, whom thou love, to offer a Sacrifice. Oh what violence is
here to nature! but see how potent grace is, which no doubt checked all the
reasonings of nature, as Job did his wife for speaking foolishly. Again, in
matter of faith in the promise of God, there its said, He considered not the
deadwomb of Sarah, Romans 4. nor his own body, as good as dead, but rested on the
Promise, and therefore had hope against hope, hope in the Promise, against hope
in Nature. Thus when as nature has its fear, grace has its fear above that;
where nature has its hope, grace has hope above it: and how prevalent grace
is above nature, is apparent in that necessary qualification in every Disciple;
He that loves not Father or Mother more than me, cannot be my Disciple; and
thereupon when one desired to bury his Father, before he followed Christ; which
seemed to be a request of Civility, and natural affection; should he suffer
his Father to stink, and rot above ground? is it not against nature to leave
him unburied? yet our Savior rejects him with this, Let the dead bury the
dead, Matthew. 8. 22. So then where grace is in a man, there it conquers natural
inclinations, affections and desires; insomuch that he puts off a man, when he
puts on a Christian. Oh then do not think, that when once made gracious, such
humane natural Obligations will be such snares to thee, as they have been: It
will not be graces excuse to say, I have bought a Farm, or married a wife, and
so cannot come; but therefore the rather come.

Sixthly, Where grace is, there it does not despise little sins, but is afraid
to commit them. 6.
Its far from saying, as he of Zoar, Is it not a little one? He dares not
swear petty Oaths, nor use idle words; for to grace no sin is little,
because its against that great God of heaven, who has severely punished even
little sins. Adams first sin, which has involved all the world in so much
misery, and made the first spark to kindle hell, was but little for the matter
of it. Moses his sin, for which God kept him out of Canaan, seemed very
little comparatively: and Elies sin, was only in the defect of grace, he did
his duty, but not with such Zeal as he should have done; yet for this Gods
judgments were so great upon him, and his Family, that it made the ears of
those tingle who heard it. And as for Saul, he committed many grievous sins,
but that for which God took occasion to deprive him of his Kingdom, and to
cast him off, was but the not staying long enough till Samuel came; and
therefore setting upon the Sacrifice to satisfy the people who were impatient.
Therefore where grace is, there cannot but be preciseness, exactness, they
cannot swallow a Gnat, much less a Camel: It makes the heart tender, ^like
the eye, which the least crum of dust does greatly offend: As for that
Pharisaical hypocrisy, to make conscience about less things, and to neglect
great, grace does also abhor; for if a little sin not regarded, or slighted
by worldly men, be so grievous to it, how much rather that which is of a more
bloody nature? and if sin cannot compel him to go on a mile, how shall it
do two or three? Therefore both sin and nature are rectified by grace.

Seventhly, A gracious man is full of humility, lowliness of mind, and
thankfulness. Where there is gratia, there is gratitudo; hence you heard the
same word signifies 7.
both, God resists the proud, but he gives grace to the humble, James 4. 6.
so that lowliness of spirit is both an evidence of grace, and a means to
preserve and increase grace. The very name grace puts them in mind of their
unworthiness, that they did nothing to cause God to do it for them rather than
others; insomuch as no Doctrines are more contrary to the work of grace in a
man's heart, than those of Pelagians and Arminians, who make the efficacy of
grace suspended upon the cooperation of our will. Oh! how can they dispute
against, or write against that grace of God which they have sound so omnipotent
upon themselves, making them of unwilling willing, and of enemies friends to
him? If therefore thou art a man of pride, scorn and vainglory, know these are
surer demonstrations of the Devil reigning in thee, than Christ by grace.
Observe Paul, a man induced with much grace, and who so magnifying grace as he?
All the streams of his sanctifying grace run back again, and empty themselves
into justifying grace, the Ocean and Fountain whence they flow.

Eighthly, Grace, where it is, makes a man diligent, fervent and conscientious
in all the 8.
means of grace. God knows that grace in our hearts is like smoking flax
quickly put out; he therefore has appointed several Ordinances to quicken and
inflame us thereunto, such as prayer, hearing of the Word, and Sabbaths: now a
gracious heart makes much of these, they are food and nourishment of the soul;
how does David long for them? Therefore men that live without the public
Ordinances, or private and family duties, what argument can they have to
conclude for grace in their hearts? for if that were in them and abounded, oh
the zeal in all holy duties that would discover it self, knowing that the heart
would grow cold, if these coals of (...) were not powered on it. Those Plants
would not grow, if there were not continual watering.

In the next place, consider the excellent, and precious advantages or
properties of grace. As, The precious advantages or properties of grace. 1.


First, It is the only true nobility and perfection of the soul. If the Poet
said of Moral virtue, that it was sola and unica nobilitas animi, the sole
nobility of the mind: how much more must grace be? for this is indoles divina
non humana. We are by it born of God, and so resemble not man but God. The
Bereans for searching into matters of Religion are said to be more noble than
others: for as sin makes a man base, unworthy, and therefore like unto the
bruit beasts, so grace innobles a man, exalts him, and makes him like an
Angel, yea like God. The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor, says
Solomon, Pro. 12. 26. wherefore the godly are compared to vessels of honor in
the house, and the wicked to vessels of dishonor, 2 Timothy 2. 20. Oh then why do
men esteem themselves according to their birth, greatness, worldly advantages:
Alas, its grace that is the glory of a man: wickedness in great men, honored
men, rich men, is but a noisome dunghill covered with Scarlet.

Secondly, Grace only has the promises of this life, and the life to come
made to it. So says the the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Heaven and Salvation is
promised not to 2.
men of parts, morality; but to men of grace. Look over any promise in the
Scripture for pardon of sin, for joy and happiness, this is given only to
those that have grace in them. Now to be a man without a promise, is to be like
one in the old world, without an Ark, when the Deluge did overflow: Let thy
sins lie like so many mountains upon thee, thou have no encouragement to call
God Father, till this grace has made thee a child to him. Why is it, that men
do not consider this now? Who can tell thee all the woe and misery that
belongs to thee, while God sets a fiery sword to keep thee from every promise,
as once he did Adam from the Tree of life? and for the things of this life,
they are promised only to grace by way of mercy. Wicked men they have
temporal, worldly mercies, but it is by Gods Providence, not by his promise;
and therefore they are not mercies to them, but instruments to draw out and
exercise their impieties the more: wicked men, if they have health and
strength, they are more imboldened in their wickedness; if they have riches
and large revenues, their lusts are thereby more active; so that to the
gracious man only they become a mercy; so what can more induce thee to get
grace than this, To consider that hereby every thing will be a mercy to thee,
all comforts, all afflictions, all relations; this grace turns all waters
into wine, this is the true Philosophers stone, that makes every thing gold; so
that we are to call things good or bad according to their operations in a way
of grace, or sin. If the great things of this world make thee more vain,
sinful, dissolute, then they are bad things; if the sad and miserable things
of this world make thee full of faith, heavenly-mindednesse and zeal, then they
are good things; if thou art gracious, God will withold no good thing from
thee; All things are thine, whether life, or death, things present, or things
to come.

Thirdly, Grace will enable a man to all conditions, to go through variety and
changes 3.
of all temptations; for they being gold can endure the sire, when the dross
melts, they being corn bear the winnowing, when the chaff blows away. Thus
Paul knows how to abound, and how to want, Phil. 4. 12. Grace makes a man of
that strong constitution, that he can endure extreme colds, and extreme heats,
as you see in David and others.

Lastly, Grace is the great comfort to a man in time of distress, dangers, and
fear 4.
of death. Not that a man may put trust in it, so he is to worship God only,
but as a testimony of his interest in Gods grace and favor: Thus Paul at his
death is comforted from his grace, That he had fought a good fight: So Hezekiah
when in those public straits, and private sentence of death upon him, what
bears him up, but that he had lived a gracious life? and thus did Nehemiah
also. Oh beloved, think not to be always merry, jocund; know, one time or other
distresses will seize you, howsoever you cannot escape the pangs of death: what
then will wealth, friends, carnal pomp and greatness avail thee? Oh the
testimony of thy heart upon good ground, that thou have lived graciously, been
afraid of sin, walked according to the Rule, will be more joy to thee then
all the world; whereas on the other side, at the time of death, to have thy
heart tell thee, Thou have lived a Swearer, Drunkard, profane Person,
negligent of all good things, and now art falling into hell, and the hands of
the Devil whom thou have served, and whose work thou have done all thy life
time: What horror and terror must this fill thee with?

Use. Is grace thus excellent? Then oh, that you might be transformed into the
likeness of it! What will other things avail thee without this, if God has
given thee health, but no grace, riches, but no grace? Be no longer like Swine,
to refuse the Pearl for mire and filth: Have such thoughts and esteem of Grace,
as if thou were a dying, and presently to give up the ghost. If it be worth the
having then, its worth the enjoying now. And woe, again woe to thee, who have
mocked at grace as the greatest folly, and counted the gracious man a mad man,
because he would not run into the like excess as thou do: Thou will at last
see him the happy man. These things in general you will acknowledge; but why
do ye not apply them in particular?

SERMON LIVE.
Of the counterfeit of inherent Grace, viz. Natural honesty; and why God has
continued in wicked men the use of Conscience.

ROMANS 2. 15. Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, etc.
HAving dispatched the nature, properties, and effects of inherent grace, I
come (according to my Method) to detect two counterfeits of this, and they are
Natural Honesty, and Moral virtue; for these two make a glorious show, and seem
to be like the two great lights in the world, if humane reason may be judge,
and I begin with natural honesty out of this Text.

The Apostle in this Chapter brings in an heavy indictment and charge, both
against Jew and Gentile, wrapping up all mankind in their winding sheet, as
being dead in sin and iniquity; and whereas it might be objected verse 14. That
the Gentiles cannot be found sinners, because where no law is, there is no
transgression: He answers this objection, informing us, That though the
Gentiles were without a Law in some sense, yet not without it in another: They
were without a Law written and promulged, as the Jews had, but not without a
Law ingraffed in their conscience, whereby they had common dictates about good
and evil: Which Natural honesty was a Law to them in many things; And therefore
they not having a Law, are a Law to themselves. This being the sum of the
Answer, he illustrates this work of God in men's hearts naturally,

1. By the Title, The work of the Law, i. e. The substance of the ten
Commandments, which do summarily comprehend all duties to be done, and all sins
to be avoided.

2. By the manner, It is written in their hearts. Though it be implanted, and
ingraffed, yet the Apostle uses this expression of Writing, because the Moral
Law was written on Two Tables; only you must not take this expression like
that of Jeremy, Jer. 31. as Pelagius, and others have done, where God makes a
Covenant, To write his Law in their hearts; for that is a gracious writing de
novo, whereby God insuseth grace into his Children, enabling them to walk in
his Commandments with all propensity and delight, from sanctified principles
within. But here he speaks of that natural ingraffing which God has made upon
the consciences of men, whereby they judge good to be embraced, and evil to be
abhorred. It is true, there are learned men, and most of the Ancients go that
ways also, who expound this of Gentiles, but believers and converted; for it
may seem to attribute too much to Nature, to say, That Heathens do by nature
the things of the Law: but when you hear in what sense they are said to do it,
you will quickly perceive that to be no such great matter, as may put them in a
capacity of salvation. I shall not trouble you with the interpretation of
Flaccius Illyricus, much toyling about the sense of this place, which makes so
directly against his opinion about Original sin.

Lastly, This Natural honesty imprinted in men's consciences, is described by an
external effect, They show it, viz. in the actions of their lives, abstaining
from whoredom, injustice, and murder. 2. By Internal effects, The witness and
workings of Conscience, sometimes by accusation upon things ill done, sometimes
by excuse and approbation, when well done. Interpreters find some difficulty
about the sense of the greek words (...), In the mean while accusing, or
excusing one another. That is, as some expound it, They condemn one and
another, by reason of the natural light of conscience left in them about ill
doing, or well doing. But others, as it is in the Margent, render it between
themselves, in this sense, Every man has a court within in his own heart,
where there are accusations or defenses according to the nature of the works we
do, Every one has a judge in his breast, and a Tribunal or terrible Bar in his
Conscience within, by which he is condemned or acquicted. This exposition I
like best; only I would render (...), not between, or the mean while, but
Alternatim, By change and vicissitude, as the Greek word is sometimes used: So
that the Apostles meaning is, That there is such a Law about good and evil in
men's hearts, appears, in that all Heathens have had their Consciences one
while accusing them, and at another time excusing them; one while they have
been terrified, and another time comforted and quieted in their Consciences,
according as they have deported themselves. Now to the whole exposition of this
Text in the sense declared, may be objected all those places of Scripture which
say, We are dead in sin: And Chap. 3. 10, 11, 12. etc. that long description of
man's Natural filthiness, where none, no not one is said to understand, or to be
righteous; especially that famous place seems directly to thwart this, where it
is said, That the imaginations of the thoughts of a man's heart are only evil,
and that continually. But here may be easily an happy accord found out; for
those natural impressions and inclinations, which are about good and evil, are
imperfect and insufficient to enable us to do that which is every way good in
every circumstance; and it is only of some particular notorious things, and it
is only for the matter done, not the manner of it. Therefore though Heathens
have done good things, yet they never did them well; and though they have
abstained from sins, yet they never did it from pure and right grounds. Thus
while they did the works of the Law, and their Consciencies were thus busy and
active within them, yet they were corrupted and defiled; And therefore as the
Apostle argues, Their very minds and Consciences were defiled also, Tit. 1.
15.

This may suffice for explication at this time; more may be added hereafter:
for this Text does contain admirable practical matter, being fruitful, and
bearing twins as it were.

1. That there is naturally implanted in men's consciences, such common notions
Obs. 1.
and apprehensions about God, and that which is good and evil; that thereby
their consciences are very active within them; and they forbear some sins, and
do some good things in their outward conversation.

2. Though these principles and dictates of conscience within, carry men out to
never Obs. 2. The works of the Law in a man's conscience, may be considered
according to a man's threefold estate.
so much natural honesty, yet it is not Grace.

I shall begin with the first: And for the understanding of it consider, That
we may speak of the work of the Law in a man's conscience, according to a man's
threefold estate.

First, That of Perfection and innocence, wherein God made Adam before his
Apostasy: And thus the work of the Law was perfectly engraven in Adams heart,
both for knowledge to discern, and power to perform. This was a Star sure
enough to guide Adam to eternal happiness: Adams soul was not made like a
blank paper, for Virtue or Vice to be written on it, in a mere indifferency;
but he was made after the image of God, which was righteousness, and true
holiness. It was an Image, the whole and universal resemblance of God, and
every Lineament was curiously, and accurately drawn. By reason of this, there
was no duty to be done, but Adam knew it, there being no ignorance, imprudence,
blindeness, or folly in his mind; and hereby he had a propension, inclination,
facility, and delight in what God commanded, no commandment being an heavy yoke
to him.

But Secondly, If we speak of man turned an Apostate, and become a wretched
prodigal, losing that stock God set him up with; Then though nothing of that
holy image be left in him, yet his understanding and conscience being faculties
of his reasonable soul, they abide still, else he could not be a man. And
although these are wholly corrupted, as to do any thing that is truly good,
yet there remains in man fallen, common notions and principles about religion
and honestly, which serve for many special uses hereafter to be mentioned: And
although in some these have been defaced, and they have grown past feeling, and
their sense of God almost extinct, yet for the general these principles have
been active in all men.

And Lastly, We may speak of these Divine relics in man, as reformed and
enlightened by Gods word, and furbished by supernatural directions: And herein
they are wonderfully furthering godliness; for grace does not put out those
little sparks, but enkindleth them to a flame: So that natural principles
elevated and perfected by supernatural, carry a man forward to all real
godliness. Now my discourse shall be limited to natural light and power, while
we are corrupted in our sinful estate; and in the examination of this, we may
see discovered, that though nature has many things laudable and commendable,
yet she is not to sit in the Throne of Grace; but Why God has left the notions
of conscience in man fallen. 1. That God might be known and acknowledged in all
the world.
rather nature is graces footstool.

In the next place let us consider why God has left these notions (as so many
sparks of fire raked up in ashes) in our hearts.

And first, That hereby God might be known and acknowledged in all the world:
That though men by nature did but grope in the dark, when they enquired what
God was, yet it was clear to them there was a God, whom they conceived supreme,
and then whom nothing could be better. This the Apostle calls, (...), That
which may be known of God, Romans 1. 19. Indeed this natural knowledge of God is
so confuse, uncertain, and corrupted through carnal imaginations, that in the
Scripture phrase they are said to be ignorant of God, and to be without God,
and that God is only known in his Church: But yet that they attain to some
kind of apprehension of him, is plain by Romans 1. where they are condemned
because they did not glorify God, as they knew God. This is a sure Axiom.
That there is no mere natural Atheist in judgment; there may be an Atheist in
affection and desire, wishing there were no God to govern and order all things,
punishing men for their wickedness; in which sense the Psalmist says, The
fool has said in his heart, there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. But to be persuaded
in judgment, there are none so by nature, or very rare: God has set this
Candle in the dark places of the belly, to keep men in aw, and to acknowledge a
power above them. Men that have not had the glorious Sun of the word to walk
by, yet they have had this Torch to go by in the night. And truly the
improvement of this natural principle, that there is a God, might make every
wicked man's joints to tremble; for if thou can not raze it out of thy heart,
Why do thou not glorify him as God? Why art thou not afraid of him as a God?
2 That we may be the more inexcusable.


Secondly, Therefore these practical principles of good and evil abide in us,
that so we might be the more inexcusable: For when men have not lived according
to that which the light of nature would have directed them to, their
condemnation will be very just, themselves being Judges, and their own
consciences bearing witness to it. When therefore men live in such sins as
Nature condemns, such are uncleanness, unjust dealings, lying and
forswearing; they do not need Moses his Law, nor Paul's Gospel to condemn them;
they have that in their own hearts which will accuse and overthrow them. The
Apostle many times provokes to Duty by this, 1. Cor. 11. 14. Does not even
nature teach thee? Oh how often may even Christians be severely rebuked? Does
not even Nature teach thee, that to Lie, Steal, commit Adultery, are horrid
sins? How then can thou break this strong bond in which Natural light has
tied thee? To be condemned, because we do not believe in Christ, would not be
unless Christ had been propounded to us: we need supernatural revelation to
some duties; but the Duties enjoined by Nature, they oblige us, though no
Scripture had been written, no Ministers did inform us; though none should bid
us fulfill them. Thou have a Doctor or Teacher in thy own breast, which
condemns thee for what thou do, therefore art thou greatly inexcusable.

Thirdly, God leaves these practical impressions upon us, that so what is good
3. That what is good may be honored.
may be honored and praised, what is evil may be matter of shame and
reproach. It is an excellent thing to consider, That the things of piety, and
justice, and all goodness, have a remarkable reverence in the hearts of all
men. Who would not be thought to be pious, to be just, to be righteous? Now how
could these come to have such Authority amongst men, if there were not
something in Nature to approve it? So wickedness, that is condemned and
censured by all mankind: Now no man is willing to be thought an ungodly man,
an unjust man; and whence is all this, but still from this work of the Law
written in men's hearts? Hence are those rules, Omnis peccans est ignorans, and
Nemo potest velle malum, qua malum, Evil is forward to come in Goodnesses
clothes, else it could not be embraced by any man. This makes much to justify
the nature of what is good and right; for all men, though never so savage or
barbarous, they do adore it in the general, though in the particular they have
greatly mistaken.

Fourthly, This Law is written in men's hearts, that so kingdoms and
commonwealths, 4. That kingdoms and Commonwealths may be preserved.
and all humane societies may be preserved: For if there were not Dictates
about God and righteousness, Kingdoms would presently be turned into
robberies, and horrid confusions. We admire, and that justly, the providence of
God in bounding the waters, that they do not overwhelm the earth: but much more
admirable is Gods power in preserving humane societies, that men are not Wolves
and Tigers, committing all bloody outrages. What is the cause of this? No
outward power or strength so much, as an inbred apprehension about a God, and a
strong conviction of the conscience, what is righteous and just to be done; And
therefore whenever this hedge is broken down, the very floodgates of all
wickedness is presently set open; and blessed be God, that has put such a
bridle in the mouth of Man, who by sin has made himself so brutish.

Fifthly, God has left these sacred remnants in us, that there might be a
ground 5. That there might be a ground of conversion.
of conversion and regeneration: For howsoever we are said to be dead in sin,
and our hearts are compared to stones, and we resembled to bruit beasts; yet
that is in respect of any active capacity or ability to do what is good,
otherwise God deals with us in a way of reason and argument, answerable to
those Natural Dictates within. Thus when Paul preached of Temperance,
righteousness, and the world to come, Felix trembled, because there were some
principles of reason within him assenting to those Truths which Paul preached.
Indeed the Papists foully mistake, who make regeneration to be nothing but the
actuating and exciting of those inward principles by grace: As if a man should
blow up and inflame some little sparks of fire covered under ashes: and by this
means they make Nature cooperate with Grace; this contradicts those
expressions where God is said to make an heart of flesh, and write his Law in
us; for by these Texts it is apparent, That God infuseth the first power into
us, and puts in a Divine strength, and does not excite, or stir up our Natural
strength: So that besides this Natural writing, there must be a Gracious
writing, else we certainly perish. But yet these natural principles of religion
and honesty, are good foundations to work upon; to preach to men and not to
beasts. I speak (says Paul) to wise men, 1 Cor 10. 15. judge what I say. We
preach to men that should have Reason, and Natural Conscience working in them:
Now if so, How is it that thou art not converted? That thou have not left thy
sins? Set upon a way of strict Godliness? for let thy Natural conscience
work; give it leave to argue; hear it say what it can; Does not that close with
the holy Truths we preach to you? Your affections (happily) do not your love
and desire do not, but your Natural conscience, that is terrified; that says,
this is religion, this is just; therefore it must be done: That says, thy
ungodliness, thy lusts are sins, and therefore to be avoided. Oh hear what
that preacher in thy breast preaches to thee sometimes: And (beloved) this is
the great advantage that the Ministers of the Word have while they rebuke sin,
exhort to Duties: Though we make men our enemies, yet their consciences are our
friends: While your corrupt affections make you rage and sret at what is good,
yet your consciences they speak for it, and approve it. That therefore the word
of God might have a subject to work upon, something to close with, there are
these fiery sparks of light and Truth burning in men's breasts: So that there is
no man we preach unto, but if he would let his Natural Conscience be judge, and
determine about his leaving sin, and doing good, the Verdict would be on the
Ministers side. Here is the controversy, the word of God commands thee to cast
away those sins thou live in, it threatens thee with all the Curses in the
Law. Well, thy corrupt heart pleads to the contrary, these lusts are sweet, are
profitable, thou art accustomed to them; and then thou have many carnal
prejudices; To do so, would be to live strictly, precisely, singularly; and
what repute that has with the multitude, all know: So that it is against their
good name and their credit, they conceive, to be so wary about sin; thus thy
corrupt affections plead. Well then, put the issue of this debate to the
Natural light of Conscience, hear what that will say, and presently that will
conclude, That which is good and righteous, is to be preferred before what is
pleasant and profitable: That will say, God is to be obeyed before man: if you
will go on, and live thus, and do thus, I must do my duty; I cannot but accuse
you, terrify you, arraign you: I cannot but give you many sharp wounds: And
howsoever you may for a while through pleasure, and pride, and earthly
affections stop my cry, and stifle my voice, yet one day I shall roar so in thy
ears, that for horror thou will not be able to endure it. This is the very
(...) about every wicked man; and therefore think not to bear it out against
the word; do not go about to stop the mouth of Natural conscience. Thou may
for a while ^rown the noise of it, and study diversions; but Oh woe, and
thousand tin; a woe when it shall tear and devour, and none be able to deliver.

Sixthly, God has imprinted these principles in us, That so Men might abound
in civil honesty, and Moral virtues; which although they are not true grace,
they 6. That so men might abound in civil honesty and virtue.
are but copper, and not gold, yet hereby men are less wicked, and so God is
not so much dishonored, Camillus is better then Verres: Fabricius then
Cataline: Men's lives are not so much to the reproach of Gods name, and his
exceeding great dishonor; for howsoever it be true, That these principles of
Nature do not incline us to good truly, and upon a right ground, yet by them
we are curbed from acting all the wickedness our hearts would accomplish; and
so are thereby as Wolves and Tygars tied up in chains. The Apostle supposes
this, when he says of the Heathens, Romans 1. That they detain the truth in
unrighteousness; That is, the natural knowledge which they had of God and
righteousness, would have provoked them to what is holy and good; but they
violently detained this Truth; they kept it from being active, and bursting out
like fire in their lives. Is not Medeas case, the case of many men, They see
better things, and approve them, but they follow the worst. Oh consider thy
self, Do not thou inwardly think there is a better life to be lived then I
live; a better course to be taken for Heaven then I take: But still thy sins
and corruptions turn thee out of the way. Oh it is to be feared that this is a
reigning universal sin; for Men having lived so long under the Gospel, cannot
become so brutish and stupid in their imaginations, but that they know when
they sin, and when they do well, How then can they endure to live against
Conscience.

The causes of the Senselessness, Silence, and Stupidity of the Consciences of
most Men.
BUt you will say, If God has left these principles in us, How comes it about
that in many men they are asleep? Do not all Men almost run into those sins
which the Law of Nature forbids? How is it that Men swear; lie, commit
whoredoms, and do injustice, if they have such a Schoolmaster within to teach
them? Who would not say by the lives of most men, That these are overwhelmed
and quite buried? and if it were among Heathens, it were no great wonder; but
that it should be amongst Christians, is the great amazement: For they have not
only this Natural light inbred in them, but supernatural light also revealed
unto them. So that for men under the Gospel, to become so sottish and
senseless about what is good, and what is sin, is beyond all expression
intolerable.

The grounds of this senselessness and stupifaction of Conscience may be these.

First, Ill education, and long continued custom in evil, for these things
become Ill education and custom in sin.
a second nature quickly; and the first Nature is obliterated as it were. Men
that live constantly by great Noyses, they regard them not; but strangers are
much disquieted with them: So what men have been brought up in; they saw
nothing but wickedness and prophannesse in their parents lives, and in the
families where they were taught; this takes away the horror of sin: They see
their Ancestors, and learned men, and great men, they have made no matter of
Godliness, but sinned as they pleased; this roots out all aw of sin in the
Conscience: Some Heathens banished out all Poets, and Comedies, and Tragoedies
upon this ground, because their Gods were brought in, doing some wickedness or
other: Now they well argued, That men would be much more hardened in their
impieties, when they had their Gods for a pattern.

And thus it is here, Children, for the most part, and servants, they have no
other God then their Parents or Masters; and if they observe them to drink, and
swear, and be naught, they immediately conclude, they may do it also: so that
if you ask, How is it that so many men live without any sense of a God, or
Conscience about sin, enquire into their Education; ask how they have been
brought up: Did not their Parents, their Ancestors, did not their Families they
lived in abound in sin; and then without Gods miraculous grace upon them, they
cannot come to be of another judgment: and this is the reason, Why the
Scripture does so often call upon Parents to teach their Children the fear of
God, and to bring them up in his knowledge; for if that be neglected, those
natural sparks of honesty will quickly be put out. And much like to Education
is Custom, men habituated in evil ways are past all feeling presently. Those
who at first had some checks of Conscience, and akings of heart, when once
plunged into sin, they fear nothing, they feel nothing, they apprehend
neither heaven or hell; but as the Salt water of the Sea when it has
over-flowed the Banks, and covered some grounds, leaves such a saltish,
brackish disposition in the ground, that it can never be got out again, or
return to its former nature. Thus Custom in any profane way takes away all
sense and feeling, so far, that they never come to that ingenuity and
tenderness of conscience which once they had. How is it that once thou daredst
not omit prayer, private, or in family? That once thou could not give way to
unchaste company? Thou could not endure the company of ungodly men: But now
these things are never any trouble to thee; they are no torment to thee. This
is a custom, this is a profane use upon thy spirit: Oh then put out the
sparks of fire before it be kindled; stop the leak at first, before the ship be
filled with water; resist the principles of sin: Of all sorts of people we
have least hope of doing good unto them, who are settled in a sinful way; that
can sin without fear, or any regret of Conscience: For these men have not
that foundation in them, which we should work upon: For our preaching does good
to those who set Conscience a work, that let Natural light close with what is
delivered.

SERMON LV.
Showing more Causes of the Senselesness, Silence and Stupidity of the
Consciences of most Men.

ROMANS 2. 15. Which declare the work of the Law written in their hearrs, their
Consciences also accusing, or excusing one another.
THe last day we delivered one main cause of the silencing, or stupifying those
Dictates and Principles of natural light, which provoke to that which is good,
though very imperfectly and detectively. We now proceed to a second ground; and
that may be an imprudent and sinful consideration of the government and
administration of things below. That it has fared ill with those that have
done 2. A sinful consideration of the Government of the world.
well; and on the contrary, that those who have been very heinous in
wickedness, have yet prospered, and had great abundance; has been a great
tempest to put out that little spark in men's hearts: which consideration made
the Poet say, Solicitor nullos, saepe putare Deos, He was tempted to think
there was no God, when he looked upon the administration of things below. This
sat heavy on the heathens spirits, whereupon they have made Tractates upon
this question, Why it sometimes falls ill to a good man, and well to a wicked,
as Seneca and Plutarch, wherein they have behaved themselves in some measure
well, gravely acquitting Gods providence; and had they enjoyed Scripture Light,
they had easily waded through that deep: And it is no wonder that these blasts
have made Heathens stagger and reele too and fio, for we have the eminent
Cedars in Gods Church almost overturned by it. David, a godly man, greatly
exercised in several conditions, though always finding God turning stone into
bread for him, when he was in any wilderness, yet how pitifully does he toil
and labor under this temptation? Psalm. 73. that those who were wicked, they
prospered, they had their hearts desire; they had no pangs, nor troubles; and
this did so far prevail, that in a sudden passion, he speaks like an Atheist,
Verily, I have washed my hands in innocence and have cleansed my heart in vain.
On monstrous speech, and dreadful to come out of a godly man's mouth: to say,
it was a vain thing to fear God, a vain thing to walk justly and innocently, if
he had done wickedly, he should have prospered better. But this was only a
sudden motion, an imperfect suggestion of the flesh, not a settled deliberate
principle; therefore he quickly recovers, calls himself a foolish and ignorant
beast, goes into the Sanctuary of God, and there understands aright; yea, and
as a man in a great inward heat and agony, but getting some ease and respite,
says, Truly God is good to israel, even to the clean in heart; so that this
generous wine does at ^ast expel that noxious venom in it. In like manner we
see Jeremiah, chap. 12 1. staggering under this divine dispensation, though
acquitting God: So that we see its a great part of wisdom to behold the
mavelous doings of God on the earth, with a wi^e and pure eye; not to turn
Atneistical, careless, and profane, concluding it is all one, whether a man
be godly, or ungodly, just, or unjust. The Psalmist says, The fool has said
in his heart, there is no God, Psalm 14. 1. It Is not Jehovah, in the
original, but Elohim, none that judges, or governs the world, taking notice
of things done here below; and how great an encouragement this is to go on in
wickedness, appears by that of Solomon, Because judgment is not speedily
executed upon the wicked, therefore is the heart of a man within him set upon
folly, Eccles. 7. 8, 11. Oh then if thou would have these principles of
conscience quick and active within thee, then do thou by Scripture
information, consider of all Gods administrations here below, knowing that even
what is most crooked to thy apprehension is yet straight: as the stick in the
water, though straight, yet seems crooked, because the water is not a fit
medium to see by: So thou art astonished at many Providence of God in this
world, and thou ask, Where is the Justice, the Wisdom, the Equality of
these things? but thou look through an unfit medium, and so they seem
crooked to thee. Alas, the Scripture does evidently inform us of just, and
wise ends, why God sometimes suffered his enemies to prosper, and godliness to
be persecuted, and his Saints made Martyrs for his Name sake; so that the Word
of God is the truest Glass to represent the face of all things here below,
especially that is satisfactory, that God has appointed a day of judgment for
the whole world, when all shall appear, and be judged for what is done in the
earth; and as here below they do not complain that Malefactors are not executed
before the Assizes, but patiently expect that time: So are we quietly to wait
that great day, wherein God will settle all things according to their nature
and deserts. Let no man therefore harden himself in impiety, thinking I have
been thus long a profane, unjust, ungodly man, and I am well and lusty,
nothing aileth, or troubles me: Let not this cauterize thy Conscience, for
thou art but as the beast fatted for the Shambles.

A third way to ch^ak this work of nature, is plunging and drowning our selves
into earthly things, or voluptuous courses. 3. Immoderate love of the world, or
voluptuous courses. I.


First, Earthly things: There are none scarce have less conscience about good
and evil, less apprehension about God, than those that like Moles are always
digging in the earth. Judas from a covetous principle within, betrayeth and
sells innocent blood. How could he commit such an unnatural sin, do that
which the natural light of Conscience would so condemn? It was Covetousness.
Which made the Apostle call the love of money, the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.
10. as that which would put out all divine and humane light in a man. The
Pharisees who were covetous derided and scorned Christ; these Terrae filii are
never Caeli fil^i, These Children or Sons of the earth, are never capacious of
heavenly light. Its the punishment upon many a man which it was on the Serpent,
to lick the dust of the earth, and to live upon that; so many men go to bed,
rise and walk wholly with earthly and worldly affections, into these they are
even transformed, and made like clods of earth. Now such men have very little
apprehension upon sin, or godliness; were it not for the shape of their
bodies, you might judge them beasts, for they regard only the things of sense.
Thus as the glorious Sun is eclipsed by the interposition of the Moon; so do
arthy thoughts, and earthy affections obscure that petry light, which shines
in a man's breast; and certainly, if love of the world has put out the Gospel,
and Scripture light that shined in some men's breasts, as the Scripture gives
pregnant proofs of it; no wonder if it do wholly extinguish the light of
nature. Take heed then of Corah's judgment or a worse, he was bodily swallowed
up in the earth, but thou in thy soul and spirit. Is it not with thee as the
barren heath, that brings forth nothing but Briars and Thorns fit for burning;
so thy life produces nothing but damnable matter, and what makes for eternal
destruction. Be not therefore in this sense, a worm and no man, one that is
wholly bred of the earth, and lives in it: Though nature and grace preach to
such; though the Word of God cry aloud to such, yet they have no ears to hear.

Secondly, men plunged in voluptuous riotous courses, living in beastly lusts,
II.
either of uncleanness, drunkenness, or such deceitful pleasures: Th^se
muddy streams do quickly put out that candle in the inward parts: Those that
are drunk, are drunk in the night, says the Apostle; sins of pleasures and
inte(...)ance they are committed when men have put out all knowledge, that so
they may neither be ashamed or afraid of what they have done. As muddy Bogs
breed Toads and Frogs; so loose and dissolute lives breed all poisonous and
loathsome imaginations in a man: Therefore says the Prophet, Wine, and strong
drink, and Whoredom take away the heart, Hos. 4. 11. How many men by debauched
and luxurious courses have made themselves at the same time sots in their
bodily parts, and in their natural conscience; and by their loosnesse have
spent their consciences, as well as their estates; and as they have scarce one
penny left to maintain themselves or children; so not one good thought left in
their consciences, to accuse and condemn them for what they have done! Oh
therefore who can complain bitterly enough of that bruitishnesse and
beastliness, many men are plunged in by their loose and intemperate lives, and
even under judgments, and not so much awakened as Balaams Ass was, under her
Masters blows. Oh that this sottishness were only in Sodom, not in
Jerusalem, in Gomorrah, not in Sion. If then you see many men living without
any dictatings of Conscience about God, if you see them committing all manner
of evil, so that they plainly declare they have no love of God written in
their hearts, but of sin and the Devil: Marvail not at this, but consider,
Are they not men wholly plunged in worldly things? or are they not confirmed in
lusts and Pleasures of the flesh; if so; you may as soon expect a Star in a
loathsome dunghill, as any right principles in such corrupt conversations; so
that these are scarce to be reckoned in the number of men.

The fourth cause which over-whelmeth these Dictates of nature, is frequent and
habituated living against them. Constant Rebellion against the light, at last
puts it 4. Frequent and habituated living against the dictates of Conscience.
out: Men by use are not afraid of it, Econsuetis non fit passio, says the
Philosopher; ordinary things we are accustomed unto, breed no extraordinary
passion, or affection in us. As it is with supernatural light revealed unto us
by the Word and the Prophets, a daily living under it made the Jews despise
it; and they did the more vehemently resist it, by how much the more common it
was; insomuch that both the Prophet Ezekiel, and our Savior Christ tells them,
that if strangers had enjoyed such means of grace, they would have been wrought
upon. As (I say) it is in supernatural light, thus it fares with natural,
the continual accusations, and smitings of Conscience, through custom men
harden themselves against, and at last contemn them. Take heed therefore how
thou do those things that thy heart condemns thee for: for after thou art
used to such obstinacy, though God should raise Thunder and Lightning in thy
breast, it would not at all amaze thee: As those that are Witches and W^zzards,
at the first apparition of the Devil to them, may have some trembling and
fear; but after they have given up themselves familiarly to him, there is no
amazement or horror at all. At first to do and live against the convictions of
Conscience, is a doleful and dreadful thing, but after they have once used to
kick against this prick, they come to such a dedolency, that they feel nothing
at all. If the Apostle Romans 14. makes it such a grievous and heinous sin to
eat any meat doubting, or to do any thing doubting, whether it be a sin or
not; then how grievous a thing is it to do those things, about which thou have
no doubts, but clear convictions that they are sins: As for example, take the
unjust, deceitful man in his trade, Do thou doubt whether thou sinnest in
lying, cozening, and overreaching? Do thou scruple whether it be a sin?
No, but thy Conscience plainly tells thee, This was not lawful, this was not
just. So instance in any gross profaneness, Do you commit these things,
doubting whether they be sins? or do thou not plainly accuse thy self in
what thou do? Oh then think with your selves, if I did but doubt whether
these things were sins, I ought not to do them; but when I know they are
sins, when I see as clear as the Sun, that they are iniquities forbidden by
the Law of Nature, then how presumptuously wicked must I needs be? Thou
therefore who do constantly walk in ungodly, profane courses, thou art a
shame and reproach to heaven and earth; God from heaven, and God by all the
Creatures does condemn thee herein. This stupidity of Conscience the Scriptures
calls (...), which is, when men through much labor and manual exercise have
brought such a callousnesse and senselessness upon the palms of their hands,
that they feel no pain at all. Thus men by frequent repressions of the beams of
this light, do at last become altogether stupid; as the Dogs that lie by the
Smiths Forge, through custom, fear not those sparks of fire that fly about
them.

We may conclude, A fifth cause of the suffocating of these natural Dictates
tobe 5.
a just judgment of God upon men, because of the abuse of Natural light: when
men have not lived as they have known, nor walked as they have known, God as a
just judge has delivered them up to their own unnatural lusts, which has
been more grievous than to be delivered up to Lions and Bears, and to be torn
in pieces by them. This is evidently set down, Romans 1. at large; where the
Heathens, not walking according to those implanted principles within them, but
breaking the bounds that nature had set them, God gave them up to all manner of
^usts, whereby they committed most unnatural crimes, which the Apostle there
reckons up. Marvail not then to see men become like bruit beasts; say not, How
can men be thus unnatural? How can they choke that light in their hearts? Think
not much at these things, for many men live under Gods spiritual curse upon
them; he has delivered them up to their lusts and sins, to do all manner of
wickedness without fear and trembling: a judgment of all judgments most
terrible, yet it is often seen in the world: for were they not given up to such
a spirit of slumber and security, they would be like so many Cains and Judas's
after their abominable iniquities, so many Magor-missabibs, whom fear would
incompas^e round about.

Sixthly, Another cause that will dull, if not extinguish those principles of
conscience, is a wilful turning away our thoughts and considerations from what
they speak within 6. A turning away from what conscience speaks.
us. Men study diversions, and for fear of such sad melancholy thoughts as they
term them, they will go into merry company, take great employments upon them,
that will busy their heads so much, that they never hear what Conscience
speaks within, because of the crowd of employments without. Thus Cain full of
trembling, to shake this off, he travaileth, and builds Cities, and all to
have a quiet mind. Thus as when the Prophets of God called to mourning and
sackcloth, there was gladness, and making of all melody: so when Conscience
accuses, condemns, calls for repentance and reformation, they labor to make
a greater noise that may drown this. It Is true the acts and dictates of
Conscience are not subject to our wills, Quoad specificationem, as they say. A
man cannot think that to be good which he desires, nor that to be evil which
he would not; but against and contrary to men's wills and affections they say,
This is good, and this evil: but quoad exercitium, in respect of the exercise
of it; So they may wilfully turn away their thoughts from considering what is
said to them. Thus as the thief hareth the light, because his deeds are
discovered thereby; so a wicked man dares not give heed to what conscience
says, he runs from it as much as he can, because it is wholly against the
course of his life; so that if you never mind or consider, what that law of
God in thy heart speaks to thee: it is no wonder if thou art never reformed: But
if thou would commune with thy own heart, and search it, bid all other things
stand aloof off, thou and conscience will consider together, thou and
conscience will examine together; if this were done, thy sins should not lodge
a night longer with thee.

Seventhly, A prephane jollity, and a carnal merriment, this also weakens the
voice of natural Conscience; some men are as afraid of any serious sober
thoughts 7. Profane jollity.
about God, and the day of judgment, as children are of the dark. This was
their disposition, who said, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.
Oh profaneness, rather let us repent and mourn, and forsake our sins, for to
morrow we shall dye; but these swinish Epicures, they made the clean contrary
use, We have but a short time to live, we may not hold out till to morrow,
therefore let us be merry while we may, when we are gone, all is gone; we will
take our pleasures while we may have them. This jolly profaneness, puts out
all the eyes of Conscience; now all his care and thought is, but how he may be
merry, how he may be glutting and satisfying his lusts; as for the day of
judgment, or those sad Sermons which his conscience may preach to him, he
desires to hear no more of them, he will make much of one while he may. But Oh!
what is this making much? Its making up much wrath, much misery, and much
horror for thy self: That which thou said is making mirth, is indeed making
nothing for thee, its the eternal perdition of thy soul and body.

Eighthly, Neglect to stir up and quicken these natural Dictates, by all those
special and supernatural helps which God has appointed; not that these can
ever 8. A neglect to stir them up by the helps appointed.
be polished or made grace, for that is a new creation, as you heard, and comes
into the soul wholly from above; but diligence and attendance upon the means,
would make these more tender and vigorous within us: This may be amplified by
the parallel of supernatural light; for if when God has graciously engraven
this heart in his people, so that the Law of God becomes a delight unto them;
yet even this work of grace may seem to be quite overwhelmed, so that there do
not for the present appear any motions or breathings of Gods spirit in them, no
wonder if in natural men, all things lie so hushed and quiet, that nothing of
this natural Law is declared. For an instance of the former defection, take
David and others; Who could think that ever they should commit such bloody and
hideous sins as they did? Where was their grace? Where were the fiery darts of
Gods spirit in their hearts inflaming them? Nothing but sin and the flesh
appears in them, they are like a tree in winter, that discovers no sap or
life; like a man in a dead Lethargy, that manifests no breath: Now then, if the
supernatural work of grace in a godly man, may be so stupefied and
overwhelmed, is it any wonder if these dictates of nature be silent? But as in
the godly, these things are overtopt by their sluggishness, and careless
walking; so in natural men, whatsoever dictate may be to good, it wholly dies,
as sparks of fire dye, because there is nothing to blow on them, and inkindle
them.

Lastly, Therefore may there be no declaring of this Law in men's hearts,
because 9. An inordinate desire to live without control.
they do inordinately desire to live without any control or check: Now these
natural principles, they are a Schoolmaster to keep men in awe; they are a
judge to terrify and keep men in fear. And as the Malefactor would willingly
kill the Judge, if it were in his power, that so the Judge may not condemn him;
thus the corrupt lusts and affections of men, make them desirous to stifle
conscience, that so conscience may not condemn or accuse them. There is nothing
that a wicked man is so afraid of, as to be disquieted in his sins: Our tongues
are ours (say those profane men) who shall control us? Therefore that they may
not stand in awe, and so be kept from sin, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 4. 4.
they labor to muzzle the mouth of conscience, that it bite not: A vain and
foolish attempt indeed, for when God makes this roar and rage in a man, all the
pleasures, sports and pastimes in the world, cannot allay the noise of it; but
yet men will attempt these vain things: Fear of natural light, makes men hate
it, and the hatred of it, makes men put it out if they can.

Use of Instruction, How inexcusable all men are, who live in the committing of
gross sins, such as natural light forbids: Who can plead for thee? What can
Use.
thou say for thy self? Its no excuse to say, I am no scholar, I am not
Book-learned: Alas! thou art new born with these principles, that To do
unjustly, to live intemperately, are not lawful to be done: Think not to say, I
cannot read, I am not able to peruse the Bible, for if there were no Bible, no
Ministry, these sins are condemned by a Judge in thy own breast. You would
think it impossible that even among Heathens any such impiety should be found,
but among Christians to have it, who would not cry out, Be astonished O
Heavens, and blush O Sun, that in the Church of God men should lie, forswear,
be unclean, and walk in the bidden ways of dishonesty. These go against natural
and supernatural light, against the Bible the Book of God, and against their
conscience that Viceroy God has placed in their hearts: Think then how
speechless thou will presently be stricken, when God shall inquire about these
things.

SERMON. LVI.
Showing how prevalent Natural Conscience has been in Heathens, in reference
to good Laws, Books, Affections, Lives; And how it should stir up Christians to
jealousy.

ROMANS 2. 15. Which declare the Law written in their hearts, their consciences
also excusing or accusing one another.
WE have instanced in many grounds, which may justly be thought to blu^, if
not quite race out, that Law of Nature in us. The next thing to be undertaken
is, to show wherein men do demonstrate these 6
dictates of Conscience, and how far they have been prevalent upon them to that
which is good: And the discovery of these things, is an excellent way to raise
blushing in the faces of many Christians, and to provoke them to jealousy,
when they see that done in Athens or Ethnical Rome, which is scarce done in
Jerusalem; especially those who are the people of God, and pretend to an higher
and supernatural light, must diligently beware, lest they be outstript in those
moral honest things, which the very light of nature teaches some men. To the
work therefore in hand; And

First, This Law of God in men's hearts, is demonstrated by these excellent
Tractates and discourses, which many by the help of natural light only have
written; wherein Wherein the Law of God in men's hearts is demonstrated. 1. By
the Books that Heathens have written.
although they are as blind as Bats and Owls, in the Sunshine of the Gospel,
in respect of any true gracious thing, yet they do wonderfully approve that
which is good and righteous in the general, condemning and dissuading from that
which is evil. Thus the Moral discourses of Seneca, Plutarch, Plato, and some
of the Stoics, speak very high things about that which is virtuous, and that
which is vicious; insomuch that many men's Divinity in their Sermons, or
Contemplations and Devotions, have been nothing but the choice flowers pulled
out of their garden. This (I confess) is justly to be blamed, and severely
reproved: for Scripture matter, either in things of faith, or things to be
done, does as much excel all those Notions, either in majesty or purity, as
the Sun does an Ignis Fatuus, or any Ignited Meteore: But I know not how it
falls out, whether of the witty invention in them, or eloquent expressions,
those Heathen Authors have delighted some, more then David's Psalms, or Paul's
Epistles; especially many of the Jesuits in their Religious Tractates, stuff
their discourses with Seneca's Contemplations, or Moral Inventions. Now
although it be true, that it were a great error to take John Baptist, though a
great Prophet, for Christ, much more a Seneca or a Plato (though styled Divine)
for a Christ; yet if we speak of the sphaere of nature, how far she has been
able to accuse vice, and plead for virtue, herein they have been wonderful;
take Tullies Book De Ossiciis: If men and their public conversation, did keep
to that fidelity in words, righteousness in deeds, and love to the public
against all particular profit, it would make the lives of men very admirable,
though not godly: And it is a great honor to those Books of the Heathens, that
the Apostle himself does sometimes allege verses out of such Authors, and that
for morality also; witness that sentence, Evil words corrupt good manners; which
is sanctified (says Tertullian) or made Ecclesiastical, as Hierom, by Paul, it
being a verse of the Comedian Menander; and it is true by experience, that evil
words and discourses, such as some Corinthians had, which did privately, by
some reasonings fetched from Philosophy, endeavor to weaken the Christian faith
about the Resurrection, do quickly infect men's lives: and as the Apostles, so
ministers may sometimes upon fit occasions, use sentences out of those Authors,
so that they do it not too frequently, or with affectation, or thereby
disparaging the powerful simplicity and divine Plainness of the Scripture. The
many Books therefore and Discourses, which men by the help of natural
Conscience have made, to the ordering of men's lives in a virtuous way, are a
sure demonstration of this Law written in their hearts.

Secondly, The wise, just and righteous Laws which many of their Lawgivers 3.
By the Laws they have made.
have made, when they settled a Political Government, do plainly declare also
this work of God in them. Its true, that such Lawgivers, besides their
inplanted reason, had also acquired much experimental prudence, and happily some
of them at least, had by hearsay, the Divine Polity and Government which Moses
appointed the people of Israel: But with these, they had also those sparkling
notions, of differencing justice from injustice, good from evil, else they
could never have made such wholesome Laws; especially the Laws and Manners of
the Lacedaemonians, are much commended for Sobriety, Moderation, and Abstinence
from all intemperate and luxurious courses; insomuch that Erasm^s says,
Diceres Germane Christianos, si pro Lycurgo Christum nacti fuissent legum
latorem, one would have thought them true Christians, if they had had Christ a
Lawgiver for their Lycurgus, though herein Erasmus, as in other places, is too
bold: Howsoever, this comes wholly from that Divine impression men have left in
their consciences, whereby they punish sin and exorbitancies, but reward
virtuous employments. It is true, in some things their wisest Lawgivers have
established notorious wickedness, but that does not hinder the acknowledgement
of their many other good Laws. If then Heathens have such thoughts about wicked
actions, that they deem them worthy to be punished with all disgrace, contempt
and reproach, yea some of them with death it self, and that in the most cruel
manner. This does evidently declare, that they had inbred principles about good
and evil; and upon this ground it is, that the Apostle speaking of Magistrates,
even Paganish, says, They are the Ministers of God, to thee for good, Romans 13.
That they are a terror to the evil, and not to the good; if thou do well, be
not afraid, but if thou do ill, fear, because he does not bear the sword in
vain: So that this is a manifest conviction of the Conscience of every wicked
man. If thou art a profane, unjust, intemperate man, why art thou afraid the
Magistrate should see? Thou fear his eyes, Is it not because of an implanted
principle, That good is to be encouraged, and evil to be avoided? and the very
fear of the Magistrates sword, keeps a world of people from that actual
wickedness, which otherwise they would be plunged into: So that if you look
over all the Societies of men in the world, that have a Government, wherein
some command, and some obey, you will conclude, All this proclaims to the
world, men have thoughts there is a God, and that wicked actions deserve just
punishments.

3. This Law is declared by an acknowledgement of a God, and the solemn
worshipping 3. By their acknowledgement of God.
of him. Their Polytheism or multitude of gods, though it discovers horrible
blindeness and ignorance upon them, yet withal it argues, a sense of Deity.
The Romans had a (...), a Temple for all gods, thinking themselves herein
Religious, that they did not refuse the Religion of any nation: Their Temples,
their Altars, their Sacrifices, their Reverence to their Priests, the excessive
charge and cost they were at in keeping up their Religious Worship, though they
bespake miserable madness and confusion upon their spirits; yet they also
demonstrate innate apprehensions about a God, and that Divine homage we owe to
him. And as for some, who were called Atheists, its thought therefore they had
that brand on them, not that they were against a God, but because they derided
the multitude, and the superstitious observations of the gods then worshipped.
Its plain, Seneca thought the Romans guilty of much ridiculousness in their
Divine Worship, and wrote a Book about it, as Austin says, which is lost; and
although he thus was convinced of their vanity, yet he diligently performed
that external Worship, Tanquam legibus jussam, non Diis gratam; As a thing
commanded by the Laws and Customs of men, not at all acceptable to the gods. As
they were frequent thus in Adoration, so they performed it after a grave and
solemn manner; witness that cry of the Priests, Hoc age, mind this only: and
certainly the reverence, attention and diligence of Heathens to their Idols,
will condemn the sluggishness, dullness and drowsy irreverence, which
Christians show to the true God, in their Worship of him.

4. They declare this Law written in them, by the work of conscience terrifying
them upon any evil actions: What fear and horror has been upon heathens
consciences, 4. The terror of Conscience upon sin committed.
though they have had no Scripture to accuse them! Histories declare, upon
unjust, unclean and injurious acts, they have not been able to rest or sleep,
and eat: Why is all this? but because of their judge within; which has made
even Heathens, so much admire a good conscience, and set out the misery of an
evil one. Alas, we would think such things should be spoken of only among
Christians, and where the word that is preached, is the discerner and
discoverer of the thoughts and actions of all men; but even among them that
never saw this Sun, there are diverse sayings, commending and admiring the
blessedness of living so, as not being conscious to our selves of any gross
sinful ways: Nil conscire sibi, etc. To be conscious unto a man's self of no
evil, or unjust action, is that only thing which may make a man happy: Hic
murus aheneus esto; that is a brazen wall to beat back all darts; As the sweet
nurse in old age, as Pindar calls it. Oh that Christians should do so many
things, that raise up conscience like a Lion and Bear, to roar within them;
when even Heathens have been afraid to make their conscience their enemy and
adversary. If the fire has so quickly burned the green tree, how will the dry
tree endure? Oh think not these phrases of Conscience, and trouble for sin,
unquietness and terror in a man's breast, to be fictions and vain scare-Crows:
No, men have had them, that have lived only in a wilderness, that had no other
Book to read then that of the Creature; they have feared a terrible just God,
ready to be revenged on them whithersoever they went: And do thou lie, and
steal, and commit whoredom, and think not that God beholds thee, with a
sparkling eye, full of vengeance?

Lastly, They declare this Law written, in that they have improved these
natural 5. By the improvement of their Natural parts to admirable commendations.
sparks, and have attained to admirable commendations, for many things done by
them: They did not all of them detain the truth in unrighteousness, but did
admit of all the Culture and Tillage they could meet with, to perfect those
virtuous principles as they thought of. Hence some of them have thrown away all
the wealth they had, that they might the better attend to Philosophy; yea,
Socrates would never dispute about the Heavens or Stars, or other Skeptical
matter, but wholly manners, how to rectify them, and to make young men leave:
their vices; especially we might give you instances of their great improvements
in these things:

First, Their hearty love to the public, preferring it above all particular
respects and advantages. Tully would not have immortality it self, to hurt the
I. Their Love.
Commonwealth: Another said, he had rather be poor, so as the Commonwealth were
rich, then he rich, and that thereby made more poor. They conclude, Justice and
Righteousness, were the only walls and defense of a Kingdom. Some of them,
devoted themselves to present death, as the Decii and Curtii, to prevent
judgments to the public. Oh what a shame may many Heathens, upon record in
History, be to those who style themselves Christians!

Secondly, In Fidelity and Righteousness, both of words and promises, and all
II. Fidelity.
their contracts. Romana fides was a proverb, because they faithfully would do
what they had promised; their words were as good as oaths. One prisoner, a
captive, had given his word, that if he might go to dispatch his business, and
get some way or other to redeem himself, he would faithfully return again, in
case he could not; and not being able to effect it, he returns again to his
enemies, though he knew he was to be put to all cruelty. Aristides was called
the just, because of his righteousness and faithfulness in all his dealings.
But of how many may we say, even that are called Christians, in stead of Such
an one the just, such an one the false and unrighteous man.

Thirdly, In all moderation and sobriety, abstaining from those things that
were III. Sobriety.
fit objects for their lusts. Alexander kept himself from Darius his Virgins,
when he had conquered him by War: They were temperate in their dyets, avoiding
occasions of gluttony and drunkenness. The Lacedaemonians would have their
children see a drunken man, that beholding his madness and beastliness, they
might take heed of it: And as for the passions of anger and malice, how lowly
in refraining of them, patiently bearing all contumelies and reproaches! I
would, said an Heathen, to one who reviled on him, that this man could rule his
tongue, as well as I can my ears. I would beat and punish thee, said another to
his servant, but that I am angry. Thus we might go even into the wilderness,
and gather many sweet flowers there: We might tell you of wise and sage
Apophthegmes, of virtuous and noble actions, and all this while they had no
hopes of an Heaven, or Eternal Glory to encourage them. Many of them, after
their noble Achievements for the public, returned home again without any
wealth or advance, but only glory; yea, and one or two of them contemned that
also: But though they have done thus worthily, yet you must take heed of two
errors, magnifying these their actions too high.

First, Some have thought, and that both of the ancients and latter sort of
Cautions.
Writers, that many of these Heathens have been saved; that men who in their
generation did thus wonderfully, could not be damned. Though these Teachers are
divided among themselves; some say, the Law of Nature saved them, as Christ
does Christians, so that they say, they were saved without Christ: Others say,
Christ was immediately and extraordinarily revealed to them: but neither of
these opinions have any ground in Scripture, which attributes no salvation but
unto Christ, and the calling upon his name, which they did not. No ground in
Scripture for Heathens Salvation.


Secondly, The other Error is, that natural men by improving their naturals,
are thereby disposed and prepared for supernaturals; that a man by well using
of this natural light, God will give him supernatural light: But God has made
no such promise in the Scripture, and the falsness of it is declared in this.
That we never read yet of any Heathen, who upon the good improvement of those
natural abilities, had grace vouchsafed to him. I shall in the next place come
to the Use of this point; And

First, Have Heathens without the Scripture, without the knowledge of Use.
Christ and his Word, done many things righteously and soberly? Then what shame
and reproach is it to Christians, if any among them be found unjust, ungodly,
and living in all intemperance? Yet is not the greater number of those that
profess the Christian Religion, infected with some erroneous and gross vices or
other, which the Gentiles have abhorred? As Christ said of the Centurion a
stranger, He had not seen such faith in Israel; and truly, we may say, That
there is not to be seen such faithfulness in men's words, such temperance in
their lives, no not among many Christians, as have been among many Gentiles.
Who can plead for such who deal unjustly, speak falsely, overreach in their
contracts? when men without the true knowledge of a true God, have been afraid
to do it. You could not among all the Lacedaemonians have seen one drunken man,
unless it was their slaves, their Helotae, as they called them; and now it is
hard to find a sober, temperate man among many Protestants. Some of the
Heathens have been so Religious about an oath, and fearful about swearing, that
they never would use it upon any humane or earthly business; yet he is
accounted a man now not of any spirit or gallantry, that does not imbroider his
Language with several Oaths. Basil the Ancient, objected to Christians in his
time, that accustomed themselves to swearing, the example of one Clinias a
Pythagorean, who having a great fine laid upon him, to pay a great sum of
money, the which he might have escaped by taking an oath, yet he would not
swear, but rather pay that money: Certainly, if God does sometime send his own
people to the very irrational creatures to learn, to the Ox and Ant, no wonder,
if they may sometimes be taught by those who have not such means of holiness as
they have. Civility and Moral honesty, these are to be found among the Pagans,
and sometimes we cannot find it among Christians; especially the Heathens have
condemned a man of a false heart, that will speak one thing with his mouth, and
intend another thing: (...), etc. I hate him even to hell, that says one thing
with his mouth, and thinks another thing in his heart, says he in Homer:
They loved a candid and sincere spirit, as he that wished there was a glass in
his breast, that all the world might see what was in his heart: But O the
hypocrisy, double tongue, double heart that many baptized persons have. Why do
not such leave Christ's Sheepfold, and go rather into the Dens and Holes of
subtle Foxes? And so for intemperate, dissolute men, Why do not they forsake
Christ's Fold, and go to the Sty of Swine, wallowing there in all mire and
filth? Now consider how many horrid and grievous accusations the committing of
such sins is subject unto:

First, There is less excuse and plea to be made for thee: Happily at the day of
Judgment, Heathens will plead, Why? they did not believe in Christ; Why? they
did not receive the Gospel, that it never sounded in their ears, there was no
preaching to them; or if so, the matter was supernatural, such as flesh and
blood could not close with, there was no proportion between that glorious
object and the faculty: But what can you say? who have and do live in such
sins, which the very children of Pagans would condemn: Can you say, Lord we did
not know that to speak falsely, do unjustly, live intemperately, were sins? We
had none to tell us, that these were unlawful ways? No such thing can be
pleaded by you; O therefore be at last awakened from this security; remember
you are men, and not beasts; remember God has placed a conscience, to be a
Judge in you: Oh do not such things! thus all without thee, and all within thee
will condemn.

2. As there is less excuse, so they are a greater reproach and scandal to that
glorious Gospel which we receive: What? shall not the Gospel of Christ, and the
word of God teach us more holiness, then the Turks Alcoran? Shall not the ten
Commandments of God, oblige us to more purity, then the twelve Tables of the
Romans: O what a sad dishonor is this to the truth and knowledge of God, that
among his people, shall be found doers of those things, which natural light
would abhor. Such are indeed spots and blemishes in our Congregations; such are
foul and deformed Monsters: Let every one that names Christ, depart from
iniquity. What do such weeds among his flowers? such wolfs among his sheep? If
thou will be drunk, be so in the night among Pagans, not in the day among
Christians. The Church of God is not a fit place to vent such unnatural
impieties in; With what zeal and holy violence should we persuade these things
in your hearts? As long as there are any profane men, any unjust men, any
gross impieties committed by you, which nature would forbid, we shall not cease
to call on heaven and earth to be witnesses against you; nay, every stone in
the wall, and the timber in your houses, shall speak against you: Why do such
unclean Lepers come near where any holy duty or ordinances are to be performed?
As they call an Ague, Ludibrium medicorum, the reproach of Physicians, because
they know not how to cure it; So let not that obstinate senseless disposition
in gross sins, be any more Ludibrium Theologorum, that with all our vehement
exhortations we cannot heal thee of.

3. Sins committed against natural conscience, make the more noise and terror
in a man's conscience, we do the more difficulty obtain a pardon of them; you
see in Cain, upon his murder; in Judas, upon betraying innocent blood; and in
David, Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, Psalm. 51. These are deep and
sore wounds, which will molest a long season, and when healed, will yet leave a
scar. O think not that merry pastimes, and jolly company will eat out this
dart, when once mortally and deadly shot in thy heart: sins against
supernatural light, such as unbelief, diffidence in the promise, make not such
an horrid noise and tumult in thy soul, as these do: None can still the roaring
of these waves but God alone.

4. There is more ingratitude and rebellion in thee who do thus, because God
has vouchsafed greater light, given greater help and support against these
sins, then the Nations of the world receive, insomuch that thy condemnation
will be far greater, then of those who were brought up in Natures School only.

Have Pagans and Heathens done admirable things? then what glorious and Use 2.
commendable things should Christians do, let not them outreach us: As the
Apostle reckons up a catalogue of worthy Saints, who by faith wrought great and
holy things, Heb. 11. so we may put in a scroul of the names of many Heathens,
who without faith, and without the knowledge of God, have done admirable
exploits within the sphere of Nature: Be thou exhorted to wash out those black
spots in thy life; Consider that of the Apostle, Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things
are pure, holy, righteous, of good report: If there be any virtue, any praise,
think of these things. We are not now pressing you to be like Angels in heaven,
doing Gods will, but that you would not be outstripped by Gentiles, which know
not Gods will. If any man among you be found profane, unjust, intemperate, let
him cry out, I am unclean, I am unclean, what have I to do, to take Gods word
in my mouth, and hate to be reformed?

SERMON LVII.
Demonstratingthat Natural Piety, Honesty and Sobriety, which is in Heathens
or any others, is not Grace.

ROMANS 2. 15. Which declare the Law of God written in their hearts, etc.
THis Text (as you heard) was fruitful in bringing forth twins, two practical
observations. The first, That God has implanted in men's hearts naturally some
principles about a God, and the approbation of what is good, and also the
rejection of what is evil., has at large been handled. We come to the second,
which is, That all the worth and excellency which men by these natural
principles, though improved to the utmost, can attain unto, is not grace. The
Scripture requiring Regeneration, and a new Creation, does still intend a
further, excellency than natural honesty, or natural devotion can carry us
unto; for as we told you, though men are here said by nature to have Gods Law
written in their hearts; yet that is far different from that gracious promise
in Jeremiah, where God is said to write his Law, and put his fear into their
hearts, Jer. 31. For that is a writing of the Law, after the natural
stoninesse is taken away, and a tender fleshly pliable heart given unto them;
so that should God write no more graciously in us, than what is at first
naturally engraven in us, it would argue no more that we had grace, than that
the Devils and damned in hell have grace; for you must know these Dictates
about God, and a Conscience about evil, is so inseparably engraven in our
hearts, that it is not taken out, no not from the damned in hell; but the great
cause of all their torment and misery is, because that work of conscience is so
quick and sensible in them, that being the gnawing worm which never dies: so
then howsoever the last day, you heard the Heathens described in their glory,
and many admirable things done by them; yet now you shall hear their glory
stained, their Sun in an Eclipse, many dead flies that do wholly mar their
Box of ointments. Indeed as Austin observes, A man that reads what excellent
things they have done, cannot but have a kind of pity of them, and a secret
desire that they might be saved, which (no question) were the grounds that made
some positively assert their salvation; but in matters of Religion, not humane
pity or affections, but divine Authority must be the star to guide us, and
where we are unable to find out the justice, or mercy of God, there yet to
adore them, it being as impossible for us to comprehend the wise and deep
things of God, as a worm to understand the counsels, and wise purposes of men:
Come we therefore to prove and illustrate our Doctrine, viz.

That whatsoever goodness, devotion or honesty, a man by natural principles
obtains, it is not Grace. Observe.


The work of godliness in a man, is of an higher sphere, and there is as great
a difference between them, as between true Pearls and counterfeit. Only I must
remove one Objection, before I proceed to the point: for you may readily
demand, Object. What is this doctrine (...) Righteou(...) of Heath(...) to us
Ch(...) ans.
What is all this Doctrine to us? What does it concern us, to hear that
Heathens may, or have done such righteous things? Are we Pagans, and Gentiles?
We are Baptized, and have given up our names to Christ, and therefore doubt
not, but that our condition is far better than theirs: we believe in Christ, we
^est on him for salvation, we receive the Sacraments. Therefore this discourse
about natural light, and natural power, seems altogether impertinent to us;
the least dwarf in Christianity being higher than the tallest Giant in
Heathenism: What do you tell us of nature, who live under grace?

To answer this, First, it may be charitably and justly asserted, that there
are many Answ. 1
who have the titles of Christians, that yet in knowledge and lives differ
nothing at all from Heathens. They know no more than a very Pagan does, and
their lives are far worse than many Gentiles. There are men among us that
seldom or never frequent Church Assemblies, that if they be questioned about
God, or Christ, or the Holy Ghost, can give no better account, than if they had
lived among the Indians, only they have heard of a Christ; but what he is, and
to what purpose appointed by God, they know not the least iota or tittle of it:
Its not any knowledge or faith they have about the Christian Religion, rather
than any other in the World, but only the Kingdom wherein they live, and the
Authority under which they are, enjoyneth such things to be received, with the
example of other their neighbors, especially the imitation of their parents,
and this is all that moves them to the owning of Christ. Certainly, the
faithful Ministers of God, may, or ought to say, Rivers of water run down
our eyes, because many understand not the very foundation and first principles
of Religion. They are but mock-Christians, they have a name and a badge of
Christianity upon them, but their ignorance and sottishness is so great, that
it would make a man to be amazed at it. Do not therefore say, What is this to
us? Oh it is too much to too many, who have scarce learned, whether there be a
Christ, or an holy Ghost, or no.

Secondly, This Discourse is pertinent, because though there may be many
amongst us, who have the knowledge of Christ, and understand the true Religion;
yet they have not powerful efficacy, or operation upon their hearts or lives.
The Word of God does not direct, correct, or mold their lives, they attend not
to that, but what good they do, or evil they avoid, is wholly from those
Relics and remnants which God has left in them. This is a chief point in
Christianity, to consider, whether it be a natural principle only that
carries thee to what is good, or a supernatural; whether it be the Law
written in us by God the Author of nature, or the Law written in us by God the
Author of grace. The Apostle speaks of the acknowledgement of the truth after
Godliness, Titus 1. 1. the knowing of truths as they are in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians 4 and Colossians 1. 6. The knowing of the grace of God in truth. All
which is, when men living under the Gospel, are by the power of it so changed
and altered, that whatever good they do, or evil they avoid, they are in all
enabled by a supernatural strength vouchsafed unto them. Now it is too apparent,
that most men's Religion, Affections, Conversations, are wholly built upon a
natural Devotion, and a natural righteousness: they would have been such
devout men and so just men, if they had never heard of Christ; if they lived
among the Heathens they would have been no better or worse. I entreat you
therefore to consider what divine impressions the Christian Religion has made
upon you. Art thou any more in all the duties thou do, than what thy
mother-Piety, (as we say mother-wit) or thy mother-Righteousnesse inableth thee
to. Thou worshippest God and Christ with the same humane affections and
devotions as the Romans their Jupiter, or the Ephesians their Diana, only thou
have the true object of worship, and they have not. When our Savior preached,
that he was the true bread which came down from heaven, presently some hearers
cried out, Lord give us evermore of this bread, John 6. 34. Here were humane
affections, and a natural devotion; they did not understand, or graciously
discern, what this bread of life was. It may be justly feared, that the Gospel
or Word of God has little power over men's lives, only an humane, or natural
piety leads on men to do what they do; For if they were sanctified and
molded by the word, then that would carry them to all Gods commandments, they
would have a respect to every duty; besides they would in a spiritual and
heavenly manner be affected, and in a constant persevering manner: Whereas
natural Piety is seen only in some straits and extraordinary difficulties; as
the Heathens, who carried Jonas in their Ship, sought all to their gods, when
they were in extreme danger by a violent tempest. Therefore neither Sun or
Water is so necessary (as they say) as this truth is; for this will only teach
thee the true Characteristical difference between that which is humane and
divine in thee. This will discover Sibboleth or Shibboleth.

Thirdly, We have just cause to preach of this even to Christians, because they
are out-stripped in many things by the heathens. They observed their Idols and
false Gods with more fear and care, than thou do the true. What a wonderful
speech was that of Antoninus Pius, and Eugenius, who being very clement, and
excessive in forgiving those enemies that made war against him, and being
admonished that this clemency of his would undo him, and imbolden adversaries
the more against him, we read this Answer, Nos non sic colimus Deos, etc. We
do not so serve or worship the gods, that our enemies should overcome us.
Alas, what Christians may truly say so? How many times have the Barbarians,
the savage and fierce nations of the world overcome the Church, and destroyed
Christians, because they have served God loosly and negligently, Vitis nostris
barbari fiunt fortes: Our wickedness and sins made the adversaries strong;
so that here is great cause to hear these things with attention, knowing we
have too much Heathenism in us, we have little of the Gospel mould in us.

These things laid down, we come to demonstate that no natural excellency
deserves to be called grace; and for the more orderly proceeding; as the
Apostle divides Demonstrations that no natural excellency deserves to be
called Grace.
the whole work of a man in reference to salvation, into these three parts,
Tit. 2. To live righteously, in respect of others; soberly. in regard of our
selves; and Godly, in respect of God, I shall first detect the insufficiency of
Natural piety, then Natural Honesty, and lastly, Natural Sobriety and
temperance: wherein we shall wholly reject that position of some, making a
threefold Piety, Judaica, of the Jews, Ethnica, of the Heathens, and
Christiana, of the Christians; for as Extra Ecclesiam non est salus; so it must
needs follow, non est Pietas, without faith, it being impossible to please God,
Hebr. 11. For their Piety and Devotion to God.

First, How far soever it may carry a man, yet it is accompanied with great
blindness, ignorance, and confusion of mind; that whatsoever reverence, or
affections I. Natural Piety and Devotion not grace. For, 1. Its blind.
they have toward God, yet such a darkness is upon a man, that he can do
nothing acceptably. The Apostle Paul does notably confirm this, by that
Discourse he had, when at Athens, Acts 17. 22. etc. I found an Altar with this
Inscription, To the unknown God: whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him I
declare unto you. They did ignorantly worship God, even those Athenians, that
were renowned for learning, and intellectual abilities; and verse 27. That
they should seek after the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find
him. Its a full expression, to show that all men naturally are like the
Egyptians in a thick darkness, that are forced to grope and feel with their
hands, not knowing what to do: and thus it is with every man, though a
Christian, if he order not his steps according to the supernatural light of
the Word; he does but grope, and is in great confusion about God, and Christ;
not only upon the Heathens Altars, but upon some Christians solemn worship may
be this Inscription, To the unknown God. Thou prayest to an unknown Christ; it
is an unknown Holy Ghost unto thee: Regeneration is an unknown privilege;
faith is an unknown Grace; so that this natural light about a God, is so
confused, so darkened, that thereby he cannot any ways expedite himself, or
direct his ways to please God.

Secondly, This natural piety and devotion, is exceedingly stained and
beblurred by carnal and vain imaginations, whereby they have been guilty of
horrible and gross 2.
Idolatry; so that their Piety has been the greatest abomination, and that
commonly wherein men naturally judge themselves most holy and religious in
serving of God, there they have most dishonored him. Thus the Apostle, Romans 1.
shows of the wise Grecians, that they became vain in their imaginations
turning the glory of the incorruptible and immortal God into an image of an Ox
that eats hay. The Egyptians, that were most famous for knowledge and
learning, were the most abominable in their religious worships; so that all the
Idol worship in the world came from that confused darkness in men's thoughts
about a God. And the same corrupted principle in Popery, yea, and in common
Christians, is still most vigorous to have images and some corporal
resemblances of him we do worship. Thus we judge of God like a man, like our
selves, and therefore attribute that to him, which we see is pleasing to our
fancies. Therefore know thou, that all that desire which is in thee after a
carnal and sensible worship of God by images and such representations, is but
Heathenism in thee: Such kind of worship was brought in at first from the
custom of the Heathens; and the best pretense the introducers had for it, was,
that thereby they might win the Gentiles the more easily to them. Oh then think
not, this Sermon belongs to those who live in the remote places of the world,
who worship the Sun and Moon and Stars. No, it is very proper for many among
us still, who delight in, and love all outward pompous and sensible Ceremonies,
whereby the Heathens were wont to worship their gods.

Thirdly, This light and devotion men had in them by nature, was so far from
being 3.
gracious, that none were so bitter and malicious against the pure and
spiritual Worshippers of God and Christ, as they were. Thus there are certain
devout Jews, so called, yet they stirred up persecution against Paul, Acts 13.
50. 17. 17. They were exceedingly affectionate and devout in their traditionall
worship they had of God; and so none greater enemies to spiritual worship than
they: So true is that of the Apostle; The wisdom of the flesh is enmity to
God; and it is not, nor can be subject to him, Romans 8. 7. No greater adversary
in the world to the pure worship of God, than a man's natural reason, and carnal
apprehensions, destitute of Scripture-directions; all the false and
superstitious worship which ever came into the Church (and she was scarce ever
free) did flow from this Fountain, a carnal and humane judgment, what was fit
and orderly, what was pleasing to God, and what was displeasing. Austin
observed this long ago; and certainly, the simplicity, and pure spiritual
worship of God is very offensive and troublesome to carnal apprehensions. When
therefore thou art to judge, what is the best worship pleasing to God, and
wherein he does most delight, do not consult with thy own Methinks, or what
Custom and Education has engaged thee too, but to what the Scripture informs
therein. The manner of Gods worship in public we see, has become the matter
of sad contentions for a long while. The Protestants calling that Reformation
which the Papists abhorred, as deformation. Now certainly, if men would, as
Constantine did in the Council of Nice, cause the Bible to be the judge of the
Controversies, and not to go beyond, or on this side that direction, laying
aside all carnal prejudices and suggestions, etc. the spiritual worship of
God would be readily embraced. Austin admired Socrates his Speech, that God
must be worshipped only that way, which he has appointed. Oh therefore labor
to subdue that remnant of Heathenism in thee, which is to adore God and worship
him by carnal imaginations, light of reason, and not supernatural Revelation of
Gods will: for still we see how bitter natural devotion is to true piety: none
so cruel and bloody as they who are carried out against the true worshippers of
God: witness the Antichristian party, who like Wolves have accounted the
Sheeps blood sweetest.

Fourthly, Although natural light has attributed unto God, a Government in
this world, punishing the wicked, and absolving the righteous, yet they have
done this 4.
with many doubtings, and much weakness, often speaking of Fortune and Chance,
which they thought moderated every thing in the world. That God has a
revengefull eye upon sinners, see how the Barbarians did acknowledge, Acts 28.
For when Paul had a Viper fastened on his hand, they concluded after this
manner, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom though he has escaped the Sea,
yet vengeance suffers not to live. And so Jonas Mariners, when they were in
extreme danger of Shipwreck, they thought it was, because some heinous Offender
was among them, with whom God was angry. Thus it was implanted in them, that
there was a God who did behold and take notice of wicked men, and would
accordingly bring them to judgment. Though they were thus at sometimes, yet at
other times they spoke much of a goddess Fortune, to whom they gave the reins
of the government of the World; and therefore the Emperors had a golden Ball,
which was Fortune, that was kept successively, as if the keeping of that would
preserve their Empire: and they sacrificed to Fortunae Viscosae, Fortune
Bird-limed, that she might not leave them, but make them always prosperous. Now
this corrupt opinion, that Chance ordered all things, could not but strike out
all true fear of God, and obedience to him.

Lastly, Their Religion was nothing but Superstition, their (...) was (...), a
sinful and wicked fear, after a slavish manner about God. God would be
worshipped 5.
as a Father, in a Filial fear, John 4. not like a Tyrant, after a slavish
manner: As some Heathens sacrificed to the Devils, Ut ne noceant, That they
should not hurt them. The Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 10. excellently describes
this superstition, Learn not the way of the Heathen, nor be dismayed at the
Signs of Heaven, for the customs of the people are vain. We have many
Heathenish fears still among us, as the meeting of an Hare, the falling of
Salt, etc. all which were customs among Pagans, yet among ignorant people
retained with a superstitious fear.

The second thing is their natural honesty and righteousness, which was
indeed the chiefest flower in their Garden, wherein they seemed in their
greatest glory. Siverus II. Natural honesty not Grace.
the Emperor did most admire that rule, which he said he learned from
Christians, That which thou would not have done to thy self, do not to
another. An excellent particular rule in all commerce between man and man: And
although many of them did walk up to this rule, yet this natural righteousness
was not grace, because the end of all their actions was not the glory of God,
and the salvation of their souls, but either vainglory, or at best only the
public good, or comfort and ease in their Consciences, which unjust acts would
disquiet: and therefore as the light of the Moon and the Stars is not able to
dispell the night, but the light of the Sun only; so neither is the power of
nature able to rectify that crookedness and perverseness which is in all our
ways; its the proper work of Grace only to do that: And the like we may say
of all their actions of frugality, temperance, and sobriety; these all, like
their acts of righteousness, had but humane ends, the aim they shot at, was
far lower than heaven; and therefore were not grace, because that does lift us
up to God, aiming at, and beholding his Glory in all that we do. But because
the next thing I shall speak of, is, their moral virtues, a step higher than
those natural Dictates remaining in us, and am there to show their
insufficiency, I shall desist, and come to the Use, which is of Examination.

Is it so, that Heathens have done thus gloriously, though their glory be much
stained? Use.
then try, whether we be not out-stripped by them, or no: Do not they serve
their false gods more than we the true? Because we are Christians, is therefore
all Paganism banished from us? No, for there are these Heathenish things among
us; First, profane and stupid ignorance: How many people worship they know not
what, believe they know not what? having minds as blind about any Religious
things, as Bats and Owls: Who can bewail this darkness enough.

Secondly, If thou live in profaneness, in unjust and unrighteous ways, here
thou art worse then an Heathen, they will rise up and condemn thee; neither
will the privilege of Baptism or the title of Christianity be a protection to
thee, from that wrath which is due to thy enormous ways.

Thirdly, Our Savior speaks of some Heathens, that if the Gospel were preached
to them, they would be more affected, and testify better signs of their love
of it, and reverence to it, then those who enjoy the means of Grace: If the
things had been done in Tire and Sidon, says our Savior, which were Heathenish
places, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes, Mat. 11. 10.
O it is a dreadful and terrible thing to consider, that even Pagans and
Gentiles would manifest better affections, and more real respects to the word
preached, then many of those do, who yet have the clear day of the Gospel! O
that God should deny it to them, and vouchsafe it to thee, who make no better
use of it.

SERMON LVIII.
Of Ethics or Moral Philosophy, that it leads not to Salvation; And that the
Moral Virtues of Temperance, Fortitude, Justice, Liberality, etc. are not Grace.

ROMANS 2. 15. Which declare the Law of God written in their hearts, etc.
I Shall at this time finish the matter I intended out of this Text, which was
to show, That all the Moral excellency and worth, a man by nature can attain
unto, deserves not to be called Grace and Godliness. The only thing
considerable, that remains to be discussed, is, Whether those Moral Virtues,
the choicest Heathens are so exact in describing of, and pressing to, are
Grace: For there is nothing seems to be so like godliness, as those Moral
Virtues, Fortitude, Temperance, Justice, Liberality, etc. and seeing the
Scripture commands the same things, that those Authors do so commend, it may
justly be doubted, whether to have those Moral Virtues that do so excellently
civilize a man, and orderly regulate all his actions, that the Church and
Commonwealth where he lives, receives much good by him, be not enough to
Salvation. This is a point of great concernment, for who does not think, if he
attain to such a well-tempered life, that he is in the necessary way to
salvation? For the better discovery of the truth in this point, consider these
things:

First, That the Heathens were right in this, in commending Moral Philosophy
above all other Arts, because the end of it was to make men civilly good, and
orderly to govern their actions: Therefore Seneca said well, The other Arts are
called Liberal, because they are worth the study of a free and ingenuous man;
but this is called Liberal, because it makes a man free, and sets him at
liberty from his passions and vices. All the Sciences lie in Contemplation and
Speculation, but this endeavoreth to bring a man to the enjoyment of some good,
which is his end. The former were only invented Ut. Exercitia ingenii, not
Remedia animi, but this to be a medicine and cure of the soul. Hence when they
compared all the Arts together, sometimes they resembled them to a field;
Natural Philosophy they made the plants and roots that grew therein; Logic the
hedge that enclosed the field; but Moral Virtue was the fruit growing thereon:
At other times they compared them to an Egg; the yolk or substance, was Moral
Philosophy; the shell was Logic. Thus far they did well, that they thought it
more excellent to reform a man's manners, to better his conversation, then to
know the Motions of the Heavens, or to dispute subtly: Therefore they called
it the music of the soul, as that which did tame and quiet men's unruly
passions, and regulate their crooked lives; and herein they will certainly at
the day of judgment condemn many Christians, who labor more for knowledge, and
how to get skill and understanding in those matters which have applause in the
world, then to live soberly and righteously.

Secondly, Howsoever Plato and other Heathens, have labored much in laying down
Doctrines and Precepts to cure men's lives, yet Aristotle has the more general
approbation, for describing of Ethical Doctrine; Indeed Plato has more Divine
matter in his works, but Aristotle methodizeth it; therefore one said, That all
things lay confused, till Aristotle came, who put them unto order. As the great
Army of the M^des was confused and tumultuous, till Cyoxares their General
regulated them. Yet the Fathers, they generally were most addicted to Plato,
from whom also they sucked in some corrupt opinions, which their Christianity
did not quite wash away; and because of their former life and opinions, it is
an usual thing with them to call the Christian Doctrine, and the Christian
Religion, Philosophy: But afterward Aristotle began to be admired, whom
Averroes called the Rule and Example, which Nature had found out, to
demonstrate the ultimate perfection of a man; yea, some Popish Writers have
thought him a glorified Saint in Heaven: But whatsoever excellent Doctrine he
might propound to make men civil, and externally virtuous, yet the Christian
Religion does reveal a far more excellent and noble way; and therefore if we
take Solomon's Proverbs, which we may call Solomon's Ethics; how infinitely does
he transcend Aristotle, for though both may prescribe the same Moral duty, yet
Solomon still carries us out to God, and sets up a sure light to direct our
feet in a good and upright way.

Thirdly, That which we call Ethics, or moral Philosophy, is a doctrine
informing us how to regulate our actions, according to honesty and
righteousness, that so we might be happy: For although Heathens miserably
erred, and were confounded, about what happiness was, and the chiefest good,
yet they all concluded, there was such a thing, and that the way thereunto was
only by virtuous actions: The nature of which they described to be in keeping
of an excellent Mean, so that a man do not fail in excess or defect; and all
this was to be done for virtues sake, out of love to it; as for example, they
made Temperance a virtue, but when and how? even when a man had got an habit of
this sobriety rooted in him; not excessive in any things of pleasure, nor yet
defective in things convenient and necessary; and all this he does not for
applause sake, or to preserve his health, but out of a love to virtue: This
therefore they press, that he who would be happy, he must be a virtuous man;
and certainly, this may seem an high point, that they held none virtuous, but
such who did virtuous actions, for virtues sake: This laid down, it will be
very profitable to know whether this be not Grace: whether any men need to do
any more: would it not be well, if many amongst us were thus far moralized? The
answer is negative, All such virtues, let men attain to never so much
loveliness and comeliness in them, yet are not the Grace God requires of those
who would be saved: Their Temperance, their Meekness, their Justice, is far
different from that Temperance, Meekness and Righteousness, which the spirit of
God works in us; therefore there are some Divines that say, The Scripture never
uses virtue in that sense, as the Philosophers do; neither (say they) is Grace
ever called virtue: But I cannot say this latter is true, for the Scripture
says, A virtuous woman, Prove. 30. 10. that is, A gracious godly woman; and the
Apostle speaking of the chain of Graces, says, Add to faith, virtue; and to
virtue knowledge, 1 Pet. 1. 5. It is true, to deliver such matter as this, as
to love a good and honest action for honesties sake, seems to be very high,
and we may justly question, whether ever any Heathen was so virtuous in that
respect; they were only notions, delivered by men in Books, not realities
practiced in men's lives; but grant all this were so, and we have many men
amongst us, who are admirably moralized, prudence and reason has wonderfully
civilized them, that they abhor any gross sins, as that which is against the
nature of a man, and makes him become brutish; but yet none of these are yet
in a state of Grace. And consider well the grounds of this point, that at last
thou may be provoked to true godliness:

First, This civilized Virtue falls short, because it has not been built upon
a sure, deep and humble foundation; which is, the acknowledgement of our
natural corruption 1. Natural s^briety and temperance, with other natural
habits, not Grace.
and the horrible stain that is now throughout the whole man: They were also
ignorant of the sinfulness of those inward motions, and first suggestions to
sin, which Paul does so bemoan and bewail himself for, as a miserable captive.
Now if a man build never so fair an Edifice, upon a slighty and weak
foundation, when any storm arises, all will fall presently to the ground. All
men indeed, have acknowledged virtue hard and difficult to flesh and blood,
they placed it upon an high hill, to which it was hard climbing, but yet they
did not make it impossible to flesh and blood. Some of the Heathens conceived,
the seeds and foundations of virtue were in our nature, as sparks of fire are
in a flint stone, which are stricken out, though with an hard blow; but man is
said To be dead, not asleep in sin, Ephesians. 2. and our Regeneration is called a
Resurrection, not an awakning from evil ways. Grace is not sowed in an heart,
as seed in the ground, which the earth brings forth by a natural power, and
inbred strength; but as Sarah did conceive, wholly by the power of God: Thus
does the heart of a man bring forth the fruits of righteousness. Here then is
the certain ground of men's mistakes, they lay not a sure foundation at first;
they think not sin has made such a deep and inward wound upon a man's soul, and
therefore they seek not out for such a deep and inward cure: Oh know then! that
although thy life be never so externally virtuous, yet if thou have not begun
with this principle of Debasement, all the work of grace is to begin a new in
thee.

Secondly, This Moral Virtue is not Godliness, because they erred in the manner
2.
also of obtaining it: They looked upon virtue, as that which was acquired by
their own industry and customary actions; they call them acquired habits, not
infused: They thought by often actions of Temperance, Meekness and
Righteousness, to get the habits of them; but in Christianity it is far
otherwise, God first makes the tree good, then the fruit will be good: First he
infuseth into our souls supernatural principles, inabling us to walk holily,
and then we walk in his Commandments; this is called, The taking away of an
heart of stone, and giving an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 32. and Writing his Law in
our hearts, Jer. 31. so that when we are righteous, temperate, in a Christian
way, it is not because we often accustomed our selves to such actions before,
but because God first sanctified our natures thereunto; whereas all Moral
Virtue is obtained by a studious and diligent exercise of our selves in such
ways; therefore they called this Art or Doctrine, Ethics, from (...), Custom,
because they did frequently use themselves to such manners; And how common is
this amongst us? Have men been formerly given to such and such vicious and
sinful courses? if they recover out of these, they do it by an humane power,
they stint themselves in such and such a manner: All this is well done, but
still they must look higher, they must expect and beg for grace, to be infused
in their hearts by Gods spirit, not obtained by their own labors: Therefore men
thus moralized, and no more, are never zealously affected with the Grace of God
converting them; they never are admiring, as you see Paul is, sometimes to
ravishment, of the riches of Gods grace, and his unspeakable love to them: Nor
have they such discovery of Grace in them, as to be often speaking of, and
affected with the original of it.

Thirdly, This Moral Virtue is therefore insufficient, because it is not guided
by a sure and standing rule, which is the word of God: For seeing that is true,
which is affirmed 2.
by them, That virtue is in a golden Mediocrity, moderating against excess and
defect; there must be some standard or immovable rule to go by, that we err
neither on the right hand or the left. Now that which they prescribed, was
only the dictate and resolution of a prudent man; Sicut vir prudens judicabit,
As a prudent man shall judge: But alas? no man can be a rule to a virtue, but
virtue must regulate him: This were to have the Sun follow the Clock, as they
say; therefore these did only grope in the dark, not knowing how to order
their steps; they were like ships in the sea, without any Pilot. But to that
which is truly grace and godliness, the word of God is a sure rule; that only
regulateth our actions, that informs us how to moderate our passions, how to
bound and limit our affections; as also, what motives and attractives should
enlarge our desires to what is good: Therefore the Word of God is so often
called a Light and a Lamp, Psalm. 119. and the Apostle calls it the Rule, Gal.
6. 16. according to which we must direct and order our steps: That is not
grace, which the thoughts of a wise man shall determine, but what Christ and
the Word of God shall conclude; and indeed, hence arise all mistakes about
Godliness, that the Scripture is not made the Judge of it. That which to our
apprehensions, to our prudential thoughts, we think to be right and Religious,
that presently we embrace, and go no further: But the nature of true godliness,
is as much above thy thoughts, and beyond thy expectation, as any mystery of
Faith. A man would as hardly believe, that Grace is such a supernatural
mysterious work, as the Doctrine of the Trinity, or Christ's Incarnation is
incredible to a Natural man: Look therefore to have true Grace, a far other
thing, then thy Natural Prudence would conclude.

Fourthly, This Moral Virtue is not Grace, because suppose the utmost and
highest which they attained in this way, viz. To love a virtuous action, for
virtues 4.
sake, not for vain glory, or self ends, but merely because virtue is lovely,
and comely, and consonant to right reason: Yet because they staid in this, and
did not refer all to God, placed their trust and happiness in this, and not in
God; therefore these Virtues were indeed Vices. Hence the Apostle, 1 Corinthians.
6. 1. calls all their Magistrates and Governors in their Public Courts,
unjust: Do any of you go to Law before the unjust, and not before the Saints:
Though they had a Civil Justice, and were a terror to the wicked; yet because
this was not referred to Gods glory, the Scripture calls them unjust. But you
see, the godly who have true Grace in them, and the fruits of Gods Spirit, yet
rest not in this, look not to be justified or made happy hereby, but go out of
them all to the favor of God through Christ: Thus Paul accounts his
Righteousness dung and dross, in comparison of the Righteousness by Faith,
Philip. 3. 8. Paul, furnished with so many gracious abilities, yet as a mere
Beggar, runs to Gods Grace for covering, lest his nakedness appear: So that if
our Graces, which yet are wrought in us by Gods Spirit, may have no confidence
put in them; much less may those Civil Virtues: And for this reason, Austin
puts those glorious Virtues in the Catalogue of Vices. Those virtues, says he,
which a man seems to himself to have, by which he has power and dominion
over vices, unless they be referred to God, they are vices rather then virtues;
for although of some they are then thought to be true and honest virtues, when
they are referred to themselves, and not desired for any thing else, yet even
then they are swelling and proud, and therefore are not virtues but vices: For
as that is not flesh, but above flesh, which makes flesh live, so that is not
of a man, but above man, which makes man to live happily: thus Austin. So then
this Civil virtue can make none godly, because it makes a man stay in himself,
and rest in those apprehended perfections, not at all going out to God; whereas
Grace in its proper effects, still makes us to eye God, and look out to him.

Fifthly, As a Consectary from the former, therefore this Moral Virtue 5.
is not godliness, because it is not a life of faith, which yet is the soul and
heart of all godliness. The just shall live by faith, Romans 1. 17. Now this
life of faith is not only in Justification, whereby we lay hold upon Christ
for his Righteousness, that so Christ may be all in all; but also in
Sanctification, whereby Christ dwelling in our hearts, we receive Power, Life
and Motion from him, to walk in all godliness: Thus Romans 11. By faith we
stand as branches in the Olive Tree, and receive of its fatness: The life of
Grace in a godly man is not an entire independent and absolute life of it self,
but a partial dependent one, such as the branch is of a tree; or a member of
the body; or the childs life in the womb. As therefore when the root is
withered, the branches must; or as sweet flowers, pulled off their root,
presently lose their life and fragrancy; so does a godly man, if he could be
separated from Christ: But civil virtue is not a life of faith, depending upon
another; its a life of works, wherein we are a kind of absolute Lords, not
fetching power from without us. Hence it is, that these moralists are never
much in prayer, earnest in supplications; they please themselves with custom
and formality, and lasie devotions, not feeling the constant need of Christ,
and the daily supply which they should have from him; yea, they are wholly
strangers to the life of faith, they know not what it means; they have no
exercises or temptations in it: Therefore do not thou judge of thy good
condition by thy Morality, by thy external Righteousness, but by thy faith;
Do thou know what it is to believe? to lie sucking at the breasts of Gods
promise daily? to be drawing out of the wells of Salvation continually? This is
the great part of Grace.

Sixthly, This Moral life is not a gracious life, because here is nothing of
Christ in it; who yet inableth only to what is godly, and makes that godliness
acceptable: 6.
There is no other name to be saved by, but by Christ; and no other way, but by
faith in that Name, Acts 4. 12. Therefore Christ calls himself The Way, the
Truth and the Life, John 14. 6. The way, so that whatsoever glory and dignity
any action may have, yet if it be not through him, its out of the way; and the
faster a man runs, if it be out of the way, the greater loss it is. Then he is
the Truth, all actions not done in his name, are but lies and vanities: Thy
Religion is a lie, thy Righteonsness is a lie, if it be not done in and through
him. And then he is the Life, let thy conversation be never so resplendent, so
glorious, yet it is but a dead glory; there is no supernatural life of grace,
but where Christ is. Now a Moral man, if a Christian, though he may in
profession acknowledge Christ, yet he does not live as one that daily receives
influence from him: Christ is not really in his thoughts, in his duties, in his
affections; he does not pathetically and heartily, cry out, How vain are all
these duties without Christ? How undone were I, if not for Christ?

Seventhly, This Moral Virtue is not a life of Grace, because it is many times
a dreadful opposer, and a cursed enemy to it. Those Stoics, which were the
chiefest 7.
of Heathens, and had the sublimest notions about virtue, That would not have a
man love virtue, not for the sweetness and delight it brings, they thought that
too base, and an unworthy respect, but only for virtues sake; yet how
desperately did they set against Paul, Acts 17. 18. like loves its like; and
therefore if Moral virtue were grace, it would love, respect and honor it
wheresoever it finds it: Those only should be chief in our affections, who
are in piety.

But you may say, What? is there no difference then to be made between a
vicious man, and a civilized man; between these outwardvertuous actions, and
gross profaneness? Quest.


Yes, very much; for First, God has commanded the profane, gross man to be
cast out of the Church Assemblies, till he be reformed: If one that Answ. 1.
is a brother, be a fornicator, drunkard, etc. not to eat with such an one; and
cast out from among you that wicked person, 1 Cor. 5. such gross sinners are no
more to be suffered in holy Assemblies, then Swine in your garden, then Toades
in your dishes, then dead Flies in a box of ointment; but a Christian
civilized, though not regenerated, has no such censure to be inflicted upon
him; and although this Morality be no qualification for heaven, yet it keeps
men from being spots and blemishes, reproaches and scandals to that holy name
which is called upon by us: Therefore its great matter of praise and blessing
of God, if these restraints are put upon men, and they do not like Swine wallow
in all mire and filth.

2. This Moral virtue is profitable both to others, and to themselves also. To
2.
others; Thus the Righteousness, Fortitude, and other noble Qualifications
among the Romans, were a great advantage to the public, and while those
humane virtues flourished, Rome was the Queen and Head of the world; but (as
their own Authors observe) when that strictness and justice was dissolved, and
in the room thereof Avarice, Pleasures, and all corrupt administrations, then
she became so sick, that she could neither endure her diseases, nor yet her
remedies: And then they are profitable to those that do them, partly because
their condemnation will be lesser, their punishments more mitigated; and partly
because God does bestow many outward temporal rewards upon them. Ahab for
external humiliation, had the public judgments of the Land removed for that
season; and industry, frugality and righteous dealings, have temporal blessings
following them.

Use. To inform how far they are off from all grace, and so all hopes of glory,
who live in gross and profane ways: What? if such Righteousness does not
avail? shall thy unrighteousness? If such temperance and sobriety? shall thy
voluptuous and unclean courses? If copper be not found to be gold? shall dung
be thought to be gold? Therefore let such be ashamed and confounded, and never
open their mouths with any confidence. But

2. This shows the excellency of the word of God, which discovers those
things as contemptible and unworthy, which among men are so admired: What is
more amiable? then to see a man of a sober, temperate, chaste and just
conversation? yet the Scripture shows a more excellent way; not that it takes
these away, but lifts them up to an higher nature. It makes a man go further,
and do those things upon spiritual and supernatural grounds, which were done
upon humane and inferior motives before.

SECT. VIII. Treats of the Nature of Converting Grace, under the Notion of
Washing, or Sanctifying.
SERMON LIX.
To undeceive Men that think, Though they live Wickedly, yet they shall dye
Happily. And how it comes to pass that men are so prone to Deceive themselves.

1 COR. 6. 11. And such were some of you; but ye are Washed, but ye are
Sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by
the Spirit of our God.
THE first words of the Text cause us to look back to the Verses before it. The
Apostle in the beginning of the Chapter, reproves a sinful and unwarrantable
practice among the Corinthians of going to Law one with another. Not that it is
absolutely a sin to demand our right before a Magistrate; as the Anabaptists
would inset from hence; for then the Apostle would not have permitted them to
use such judicial decisions among themselves, to which he directs them; but the
grounds of this prohibition are, partly because they impleaded one another
before Heathen Magistrates; and so Christianity was made a reproach; partly
they wanted a preparation of mind to suffer wrong, rather than sinfully contest
in inferior matters; partly because they did wrong, and were full of injurious
carriages, and that to their brethren: from which wickedness he deterreth them
by that thireatning; Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of heaven? and to confirm this the more, he lays down a more
general proposition, enumerating several kinds of sins; and least they
should think their Christian faith would save them, though they had wicked
lives, he advises them, not to err, or, be not deceived, either by false
Teachers, broaching such Doctrines, or by their own corrupt hearts, suggesting
such false delusions: He does also dehort them from such wickedness, because
that was their course of life formerly, while unconverted, but now they are
washed and sanctified. Before I come to the main scope I intend out of these
words, (which is to explain the nature of converting grace, under the notion of
Washing and Sanctifying,) let me consider that Phrase, verse 9. Be not
deceived, and the beginning of this verse 11. And such were some of you. For
the former, although it was as plain as the Sunshine at Noonday, that all who
live in gross sins should be damned, yet there were Corinthians who deceived
their own souls, thinking they might be saved, although they lived in all
profaneness. Therefore to prevent this the Apostle says, Be not deceived.
C(...) uses such a Preface, Luke 21. 8. and Paul, Gal. 6. 7. James also 1. 16.
when they are to speak that thing, which unknown, or unobserved, would bring a
man much evil; and truly there cannot be a greater cause to prefix such an
Antidote than in this matter of the Text: For how notoriously universal is
this contagious and infectious Principle, that the profession of the truth of
Christ, and a general formal invocation upon his Name will bring a man to
heaven, though his life be nothing but a preparation for hell. Learned men say,
that Simon Magus taught this Doctrine, That a bare profession of faith, without
a reformation of men's lives, is enough to salvation: whether this be men's
Doctrine, or opinion, I know not; to be sure, its too much their practice; and
it may justly be thought, as Austin did, that one main reason, why James does
so much prefer good works, and a godly life, informing that faith alone without
these did not justify was, because some corrupted and perverted these places
in Paul's Epistles, where he sets up faith as the only instrument of
justification.

Obs. That men are very prone generally to deceive themselves in this, that
though Observe.
they live wickedly, yet they shall dye happily, and be saved gloriously.
Though they have lived enemies and adversaries to God, yet they think to have
the Kingdom of glory, as children and heirs of God. O monstrous folly and
madness to imagine such things! But what is more frequently acted in the whole
world than this? Is not profaneness and impiety as common among us as dirt in
the highway, or weeds in Summer; yet which one of these men, that live in such
ways, does not promise himself heaven? So that if we could remove this pillar,
that so many lean upon, I see no obstruction, or impediment in their way to
salvation. If our hearers were driven out of this refuge, and were convinced;
this is but a delusion, and it will do them no good, how many would come to us
as they did to John Baptist, What shall we do to be saved?

For the further pressing of this point, it is worth the consideration What are
those causes that make men of great impieties thus foolishly persuaded; and
first, Non-attendance to the Scripture; not observing the threatenings and
curses so peremptorily delivered there against all ungodliness. Men judge of
their salvation, Why men of great impiety have strong persuasions of their
happy Condition. 1.
and have hopes according to the principles of the world, and humane
persuasions: They think God like themselves, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 50.
They do not go to be informed out of the Word, how it will be with them at the
latter end. Oh know then, though thy own heart, and though all the men in the
world should acquit thee, yet that is nothing, as long as the Word binds thee
fast in those chains of condemnation. Thou therefore that live in all gross
profaneness, promising thy self heaven and happiness, look into the
Scripture and tremble, take the Bible and read, see if that do not make it as
impossible for thee a profane man, abiding so without Repentance and
Reformation, to be saved, as it is for fire to be without heat, or the Sun
without light: Who would think, that thou who read and hear so much every
day, should be thus deceived? Know ye not, says the Apostle, that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven? Know ye not! Is there any
such a Babe, or an Infant in Christianity that is not acquainted with this?
Come then and hear the Conclusion of all, let the Scripture at last put the
period to thy vain hopes: unless thou have a new Bible, or new Scriptures,
there can be no encouragement; for this which we read to you, and out of which
we preach to you every day, makes it one main business thereof to persuade the
wicked it shall go ill with him. Oh then say, Here is no hope for me such a
sinner, here is no encouragement till I become another man. They are the
bewitchings, and deceitfulness of my own ignorant corrupt heart, that tells
me of other things.

Secondly, Therefore are many deceived in this plain point; because though they
2.
acknowledge damnation in the general to sinners, yet they never make
particular application to themselves; they do not say, This threatening, this
curse belongs to me. God gave the Commandments in the singular number, Thou
shall do no Murder, Thou shall not commit Adultery; to teach every man to
reflect upon himself, and say, Thou do thus; and thou do thus. The Prophet
complains, No wicked Psalm. 4. Lam. 3 40.
man said, What have I done? Jer. 8. 6. Hence are those commands, To commune
with our own hearts, and be still, To search and try our ways. It would make a
man wonder, and say, How can this be? A man will acknowledge a Drunkard cannot
inherit the Kingdom of heaven, and yet that man will be drunk; and so of all
other sins. Now how came the general and the particular to be thus opposites?
merely because men came not to particular conviction; they do not make
home-application; they say not, Is not this I Lord? Even godly men have been
senseless of grievous sins, as David of Murder and Adultery, till Nathan
says, Thou art the man. Oh let thy Conscience take Nathans language, and say,
Thou art the man. The Scripture speaks to me, the Minister preaches to me, as
if there were no other sin in the world: But this undoeth you, you go on in
foul and ungodly ways, not so much as thinking what you are, not minding you
are such and such a sinner. To reflect upon your own selves is a peculiar effect
of reason, beasts cannot do it; and the more thou art sensible this way, the
more reason thou have in thee. Be not then as the Swine that never reflects
upon her self; thinking I am a Swine, I love to wallow in the Mire, I am no
Sheep. As that Beast can never have such thoughts, so be not thou as brutish,
never to consider, How plain is my wickedness? it cannot be hid from my eyes,
I love not, or delight not in that which is good.

Thirdly, Therefore are men deceived, because they represent Gods mercy and
grace in such an universal and unlimited way, that they bound it not to faith
and repentance, 3.
and a godly life. God indeed is an Ocean of mercy, an inexhausted Fountain of
all grace and goodness. When we have thought the highest we can, yet still
there is more mercy in him than we can comprehend: but to whom is all this? who
may plead this, and claim this in prayer? Even the humble, the broken and
contrite heart. David may well cry out, Have mercy according to the multitude
of mercies, Psalm. 51. 1. because his heart is wounded, and bones are broken
through Gods displeasure at sin. If therefore thou will comfort thy self with
Gods mercy, and with his grace, be such a qualified Subject as that requires,
lie like that man of Jericho, not only half dead, but half damned in thy own
sense, and then the good Samaritane will pour Oil into thy wounds. Does God
any where proclaim pardon and forgiveness to the unhumbled sinner? Does Christ
say, Come to me ye jolly and merry sinners, who never felt sin a burden. No,
but all the mercy he speaks, it is to those, who being burdened with sin,
desire nothing more than to throw away that load. Do not then as the Be is
sometimes drowned in Honey, so thou drown thy self in the sweet apprehensions
of Gods mercies, without Gods ways. As a Beast might not touch the Mountain,
so neither may a foul wretched sinner come near the promise to lay hold on it.
Why might not the Devils and damned in hell comfort themselves with this, That
God is merciful, he is full of pity, and therefore will not let us lie always
roaring in these eternal flames? Oh you would say, this would be a vain mad
thing, because God has decreed otherwise, And is it not thus also in our case?
God is merciful, but he has decreed otherwise, then that thou who love and
live in sins, should ever be refreshed with this mercy. The damned in
hell may have it as soon as thou wilfully abiding in thy wickedness; only God
may give thee Repentance, and so fit thee for mercy, which he will not do for
Devils.

Fourthly, That wherein they wilfully deceive themselves, is also about Christ,
the Mediator and Savior. This they build upon; Christ came to save sinners, he
is a 4.
Mediator to make up our peace. Now they make no question, but this being true,
they are sure to be saved: Thus they build upon a good foundation, hay and
stubble; for Christ is not a Savior to any, but those who receive him also as
a Lord and a King, and so proffer subjection to all his laws: He is not only
a Jesus, a Savior, but he is also a Lord and a King, and he never communicates
his benefits, where he does not bestow his graces. It Is true he came to save
sinners, he dyed for this end, but he also dyed to ransom us from our lusts,
and to make us a people zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. The grace of God
(which is that of the Gospel in Christ) has appeared, teaching us to deny all
ungodliness: So then as Christ's body was not laid any where but in a new
Sepulcher, whereno man else lay; so Christ the Mediator is not received into
every man's heart, but where no lust, or other gross sin is suffered to
abide: If Christ be a Savior to thee from hell hereafter, he is also a Savior
from present lusts and transgressions; and indeed this is the greatest
salvation of all, by how much the evil of sin is above the evil of the
greatest punishment. Therefore the truly godly, and such as indeed have
propriety in Christ, they look upon this as the principal and chief end of our
redemption by Christ, to have our active evils subdued, rather than our
passive. They thank God for sending Christ into the world, to take away proud
hearts, earthly hearts, disobedient lives. In this they rejoice, that there is
virtue and efficacy in Christ's death, to kill those burdensome lusts and sins
which they lie under. Know therefore, that if Christ purpose to do you any
good hereafter, he will do some to thee in this life. It Is as great a mercy,
and thou need it as much, that he should deliver thee from those present
evil ways thou walk in, as if thou were in hell flames to be saved from
them: And never did Dives more importunately desire a drop of Water in Hell to
cool his scorched Tongue, than thou ought for the present to desire the
blood of Christ, and the Spirit of God, which is like Water, to extinguish that
immoderate thirst and desire after sin.

Fifthly, Men do so easily deceive themselves, because they put too much worth
and efficacy in the Sacraments, and external profession of the true Religion.
In being a 5.
Protestant, in participation of the Sacraments, they think there is so much
piety and Religion, that though their lives be foul and noisome, yet they hope
for salvation. This was a great delusion of old in the Jews; what
controversies had the Prophets, and expostulations with them in this matter!
The Jews they pretended their new Moons, their Sabbaths, their Sacrifices, and
would not be driven from this refuge: But say the Prophets, W^sh ye, make ye
clean, Isaiah 1. execute judgment and justice, let every wicked man forsake
his evil way. Otherwise the Prophet declares, that God hatteh their solemn
Assemblies. The Apostle James would not have used so many Arguments to prove
that faith without the godly effects of it could not justify, if so be men had
not been too prone to suck in this Principle; and as I told you not long since,
This Opinion was so generally and universally received (viz. That if a man did
believe Orthodoxly, though he lived wickedly) in Austins time, That he did with
fear and modesty oppose it. But observe our Saviors ground of his refusal of
all those who enjoy many privileges, yet live ungodly; Depart from me ye
workers of iniquity, Mat. 7. Because they were workers of iniquity, therefore
God rejects them. Hence the Scripture complains of those, who have the form and
professions of the faith of Christ, but in works they deny him, Tit. 1. 16.
Thou abhorrest the Socinian and other Heretics, because by their opinions they
deny Christ to be God; but thou by thy ungodly actions do also deny his
Godhead. Thou abhorrest the Atheist, who says, There is no God: yet all the
wickedness thou committest does really say, There is no God: Therefore what
do we regard thy words, and thy Sacraments, or thy profession, when we see thy
deeds? Make thy life clean, wash thy foul conversation, and then make thy
religious approaches to God. If I regard iniquity in my heart (says David) the
Lord will not hear my prayer. The cry of thy sins will be above the cry of
thy prayers; know then, as every tree is tried by its fruit, so thy actions
discern what thou art. Make never so many zealous prayers, come never so
frequently to Church, yet if in the week day God finds Oaths, Drunkenness,
Profaneness in thy life; this is a real denying of him.

Sixthly, Therefore they delude themselves in this weighty business, because
they understand 6.
not the nature of faith and trusting in God. Come unto the vilest of men, when
deaths stroke is upon them, when the fear of that surrounds them, even then
though full of their sins, yet will say, They trust in Christ Jesus, they
believe in him. But oh thou ignorant man; what is it to believe, and to trust
in him? Is it not out of the sense of the bitterness of sin, and a deliberate
forsaking of it, obedientially resigning up our selves to Christ's commands, and
therewith relying on Christ the Mediator, is not this to believe? Does not the
same faith, which with one hand receives Christ, with another purify the
soul, and carry it out to all the fruits of righteousness: presumption indeed
that is easy; to lay hold upon Christ for pardon, with an hand full of
wickedness this is ordinary: but to trust in him according to Scripture
direction, and that order which God has inviolably prescribed men, that is
rare. Faith therefore is the gift of God, and it is wrought by his Spirit in
us; we can no more close with Christ, in a true Scripture-manner, as a Savior,
or the Promises revealed by God, than we can join with him as a Lawgiver, or
obey his Precepts. If therefore thou understoodst the Nature of trusting in
God, and what it is to believe, thou would not so easily persuade thy self
thou do trust in him, when thy Conscience tells thee of thy manifold sins.
Hence the godly have found it so difficult to believe: they have been almost
overwhelmed with doubts and fears; though Christ has held out the Scepter of
grace to them, yet they have even fainted through fear and shame, when they
came into his presence. How frequently does David call upon his soul, to trust
in God, and w^it on him? Psalm. 42. 5. Whereas this carnal presumption finds no
opposition at all. Consider of all these grounds which do so often delude
thee, and they may do thee infinite good.

Use of Admonition, To call your selves to a strict account; consider how your
Use 1.
Christian faith and unchristian practices can stand together, how your
Religion and your conversation can accord: The one is Honey, the other is Gall,
the one is Light, the other is Darkness. How is it possible you should fall
into such palpable and absurd contradictions. O deceive not your selves any
longer, think not it will be well as long as those sins are unrepented, and
unreformed. Be not deceived, says the Apostle to all such, when you have to
do with men; if they profess much kindness and observance of you, yet in all
their actions they work you all the despite and mischief they can. Do ye not
call them Hypocrites, and say, Quid verba? What are words; when I see your
deeds to the contrary? Does not God from heaven say the same things to you; To
what purpose is your hearing, and praying, your profession of love to me, when
all your deeds savor of hatred and rebellion against me? Now to quicken thee
against this self delusion and self destruction, consider;

First, That God will not be mocked; for so says the Apostle, Be not deceived,
God will not be mocked, Gal. 6. 7. All thy Religion, all thy holy duties,
without a sanctification of thy life, is but a mere mockery of God; for what
can be a greater mockery than this, to cry out of thy sins here, and to
commit them when thou come home? To say here, Lord set thy will be done, even
as Angels in heaven do it, and then at home to obey it no more than Devils in
Hell, Oh consider, this is mocking of God, and of this sin thou have been
guilty many years. Was not that plain mockery of Christ, when they called him
King in scorn, and yet at the same time crucified him. No less is it here,
when thou drawest nigh to God, as if thou worshippedst him, as if thou would
love and obey him, and afterward live to his great dishonor.

Secondly, Consider, that what a man does in his actions, is in some sense a
more real demonstration of a man then any words or professions. He is the
greatest and most real enemy to God, whose life is so, let his outward
profession be what it can be. Therefore God at the great day of judgment will
proceed according to the works of men. The Lord heretofore complained of those
that drawed nigh to him with their lips, Isa. 29. 13. but their hearts were far
from him; and that did appear by their lives. Do thou think the words of
prayer will help thee, when the actions of sin are ready to damn thee?
Wherein can you more really show what you are, than by your constant life and
conversation? O more blind than Moles or Bats, that see not themselves for the
present the firebrarnds of Hell. What can hide this from thy Conscience? Is it
not too plain, that thy life is the fruit, thy duties are but leaves and
blossoms. Does not the Husbandman cut down that tree for burning which bears
not fruit, though many leaves.

Thirdly, As it is mockery of God, so its plain, gross, and palpable
hypocrisy. Profane men are apt to censure those who live more strictly, and
accurately than themselves as Hypocrites, not considering in the mean while,
that heaven and earth cannot but take notice of their Hypocrisy: for what is
more palpable than this, in thy words and Christian Religion to acknowledge
Christ a Lord and King, but in all thy actions to rebel against him: On the
Sabbath day to come and outwardly to be wail thy sins; and the very next day,
or hour, to commit those very sins again. How can you so soon forget what you
were about? How is it that you so quickly cross your prayers and holy duties?
May not Heathens and Pagans deride you, when they see your ungodly lives? May
not they say, Lo, there is a Christian who worshippeth Christ, that commands
him not to swear, but he will do it all the day long? lo, there is a
Christian, whom Christ commands, that their hearts should not be overcharged
with Drunkenness and the cares of this world, but they will do the clean
contrary: What do you think God has forgotten your Religious approaches and
engagements, because you have forgotten them?

Fourthly, Remember thou can not always live in this fools paradise. Thou
can not always be in this fond dream of happiness and felicity; but God at
last will bring thee to the touchstone, and thy reward shall be according as
thou art. Thus he that does wickedly may for a while account himself happy; yet
this will quickly melt, when death comes, when the day of judgment comes, then
it will be fully discovered, that those sins and heaven can no more stand
together, than light and darkness. Then God will tell you, Depart you workers
of iniquity; there is a great gulf between mercy and you. Oh then reflect upon
thy self and say, Why do I all this? I live thus against Gods Law, and yet
please my self with thoughts of peace and happiness, how can it be? you must
have another way to heaven, then ever the Bible has yet discovered.

Use a. Use 2.
of Instruction, That nothing in all the Christian Religion, if duly
considered, does at all encourage to any sin. If any thing might imbolden a
man, it might be thought the mercy and goodness of God, the freeness and
fullness of Grace: but as for the former, There is forgiveness with thee, that
thou may be feared, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 130. 4. and as for the latter,
with what holy indignation does the Apostle argue against those that from the
freeness of grace, would argue a liberty to sin, as if the plenty of the one
would encourage to multiply the other, Romans 6. 1. If then every thing in the
Bible, if every thing in the true Christian Religion, be thus an antidote
against sin, a preservative from it, How incurably wicked must they needs be,
that by those holy motives are yet not made holy: From which principle in
Religion, art thou emboldened to thy lusts and sins? from what duty or
Ordinance do thou gather comfort in thy wickedness? If all these things are
hand-writings against thy sins, why do thou not tremble to commit them?

SERMON. LX.
That Gods Grace of Conversion, is sometimes vouchsafed to the worst of men.

1 COR. 6. 11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, etc.
WE are now to consider a second kind of Argument, the Apostle uses to dehort
them from all gross wickedness, and that is the admirable and wonderful change
that is now made upon them by converting Grace: They are not Swine any more,
but sheep, and therefore must not wallow in the mire and filth of sin as
formerly: So that the scope of the Apostle is, to compare their former black
and foul life, with the present glorious light they are now translated into.
And such were some of you. He had reckoned up beasts rather then men, monsters
rather then men of reason; and yet, Such were some of you. He says (...), Some
of you, to show, that every one of them had not all those filthy sores: Every
one was not guilty of all the enumerated sins (except idolatry, which all were
guilty of) unless in the seed and root, which is original corruption; but it is
to be understood distributively, some were fornicators, some effeminate, some
drunkards, some extortioners. Corinth was wicked, even to a proverbial speech,
It seemed an hospital of diseased sick men, in respect of their moralities. And
further, the Apostle says in the neuter gender, (...), not (...), not such
persons, but such sins, emphatically demonstrating their wickedness, that they
were not so much Peccatores, as ipsa peccata, sinners, as the very sins
themselves: We may then stand and behold the wonderful work of Grace, that
raises children up to Abraham out of stones; that makes Blackamores to change
their skins. The Corinthians, while Idolaters, changed the image of God, into
the likeness of an Ox, or any other beast; but now God changes these who were
become like bruit beasts, into the image of the holy and pure God.

That the grace of God converting, is sometimes vouchsafed even to the worst
and Observe. 3.
vilest of men. God many times takes the most crooked trees, and makes them
pillars in his Temple; the most rugged and unpolished stones, and pollisheth
them for his building; even as Christ while he was upon the earth, for the most
part cured those diseases which were desperate, that no art, nor no Physicians
could cure: So many times, the grace of God changes those who are hopeless
men, upon whom no art can do any good, upon whom spiritual Physicians for a
great while have lost all their labor. This is much prophesied of as the fruit
of the Gospel, that the savage, cruel and poisonous natures of wicked men,
shall be strangely taken away, Isa. 35. 5, 6, 7. The eyes of the blind shall
be opened, etc. No Lion shall be there, etc. Isa. 55. 11. 13. Instead of the
bryar shall come up the mirt le tree.

Let us observe the grounds, why the grade of Conversion is sometimes
vouchsafed to these incurable men, in all humane apprehensions, such as
Manasseth, Paul, Mary Magdalen, with many others: And

First, It is to demanstrate the power of the word of God, animated and
inlivened Reas 1.
by the spirit, above all H^mane Eloquence, or Moral Philosophy; wherein men
have much labored to make men better; but those endeavors did prove like the
washing of a brick, which did not cleanse, but more defile. The Scripture does
often take notice of this peculiar effect of Gods word, that by it We are
sorewarned from sin, Psalm. 19. the simple receive understanding, Psalm 119. By
it we are be go(...) again, 1 Pet: 1. That is the sword which enters into the
secret thoughts and imaginations of men's hearts, That captivateth and beats
down all the strong holds of sin and Satan, and dispossesseth Satan out of his
strongest Castles: Now this fiery virtue of the word preached, is never more
manifested, then when it meets with such moist, green wood, such indisposed
materials, as gross, profane men are. The Apostle calls the word preached, The
power of God to salvation, 1 Cor. 1. when the G^ecians, men of parts and
learning, judged it foolishness; and the same Apostle says, He came not in the
intising words of humane eloquence, lest the power of Christ should be
obsoured, 1. Corinthians 2. 4. When therefore by the simple, plain and pure
demonstration of Divine truths, and of Gods Word, you see the hearts and
consciences of flagitious men awakened; you see them changed into holy, godly,
heavenly men, of profane, foul and ungodly. What glorious praite does hereby
redound to the word preached? This is like David's little stone, slung into the
head of great Goliath. If men of wisdom, eloquence, ingenuity, and excellent
Morality, if these only were the men converted? it would quickly be thought
that it was some excellency in them, rather then the power of Gods word
without; but in these gross livers it cannot be attributed to any thing in the
world, but the word preached: Despise not therefore the plain and powerful
preaching of Gods word; for that is the mustard seed, which though little in
quantity, is in operation mighty: You see twelve men endued with ability to
preach this, did quickly leaven this whole world.

Secondly, God makes his grace to come to such great sinners sometimes, that
his 2.
tender mercies and compassions may be made the more illustrious: As it was
Christ's pity to cure that cripple, that lay thirty years by the pools side,
and had no man to help him; so these sinners that are bound in stronger chains
then others, whom the Devil detaineth in surer chains then others, its a
greater act of pity and grace to rescue them: Thus Paul being sensible of
himself, as the greatest of all sinners, how passionately does he break out to
admire the mercy and grace of God to him: So that when we see a wretched
obstinate sinner, who cares for nothing, fears nothing, is not able to pity
himself, converted and enlightened by the grace of God; here are tender bowels,
God pittieth him more then man does himself. As Hierom said of the poor dumb
man that cannot speak or beg for an alms, Maxim rogat, dum non potest rogare,
The more unable he is to speak, the more he does speak, moving compassion and
pity. Thus a wicked man, who is indeed dumb spiritually, cannot speak, cannot
pray, cannot utter any one word in his behalf, is thereby an object of pity
with God, because so miserable: If then you ask, Why are such men's eyes opened?
why do such men understand what they did not? Christ in mercy has said unto
them, Arise and walk.

Thirdly, Grace converts sometimes notorious sinners, to confound the pride and
swelling thoughts of self-righteous men. There are a generation of men, whose
ways 3.
are clean in their own eyes, Prove. 16. 1. men who justify themselves,
blessing God they are not like other men; now when the grace of God comes and
works upon the most profligate sinners, leaving others to their own pride and
conceited righteousness, hereby they are confounded and ashamed: Thus it was
discovered by our Savior, he tells the Pharisees, That the publicans and
harlots should go into the kingdom of heaven before them; and, He came not to
call such righteous as they were, but sinners to repentance; Mat. 9. 13. There
are none commonly further off true grace, then those who please themselves with
the conceit of their own goodness and righteousness. The emptiest ear of corn
grows up highest, and holds its head above others; but those who have true
grace, are deeply sensible of their own insufficiency and imperfections; their
righteousness, is to bewail their own unrighteousness: It falls out therefore,
that there is sometimes more hope of a gross sinner, then a civilized Pharisee;
for the one is sooner convinced, his conscience is easier awakened; but the
other being already falsely persuaded of his own worth, can hardly be changed:
Ille morbus vix est sanabilis qui sanitatem imitatur, That disease which is
like health, is hardly cured; and thus a man living a life like godliness, when
it is not so indeed, is seldom truly reformed.

Fourthly, God will have some of the worst of men sometimes converted, that the
Ministers of God, who are sometimes cast upon such a people, might not sow
without 4.
hope, nor preach without hope: Even a wilderness may become a pleasant river,
even a Mary Magdalene, a Publican, may be converted by preaching; What then may
not the Ministers of God expect? though their soul (as David says) lies down
among Lions: We may not always say, Woe be to us, because we live in the tents
of Kedar, for God may make that like Jerusalem. A place where nothing but
briars and thorns came up, may be made a pleasant garden: Christ told his
Disciples, He sent them like sheep amongst wolves, Mat. 10. 16. and yet these
sheep made many wolves sheep like themselves: Though therefore we catch
nothing, when we cast our nets; yea, though we catch scorpions instead of
fishes, yet these scorpions may be made fishes: With God all things are
possible, says our Savior, Mat. 19. 26. speaking of this very thing, to
convert men, which is to make a Camel go through the eye of a needle: Though
therefore humane reason may tell a man, there is no success to be expected, no
good to be done, because a people so and so vicious; yet we must not regard the
dead womb, but the power of God: Its he that opens the barren womb, and makes
those that were fruitless to bring forth.

Fifthly, Therefore God will have some of these Beelzebub sinners converted,
that so grace may be acknowledged to be a real, manifest, powerful work, and
that in the 5.
eyes of all the world: Men are prone to judge godliness, nothing but the
Melancholy, and the tender constitution of some men's bodies, or their black
imaginations or fancies which arise within; but now when such, who have been so
long, so continual in evil and ungodly ways, they shall love and delight in
what they once loathed: This makes godliness a palpable visible thing: When
Paul a blasphemer, a cursed opposer of the ways of Christ, is converted, and
sets up that which he once pulled down, this makes all men see Gods Grace is
not a notion, but a real lively work upon a man. That as the whole world
wondered, when they saw Christ work such palpable miracles, making the blind
to see, the deaf to hear, the dead torise, they concluded he was God; here
could be no imposture or deceit, the things were so manifest: Thus when God
calls some wicked men, and makes them forsake all the pleasures and profits,
leave the custom receipt immediately, deny their parents, friends, and all that
might work upon natural affections; all the profane and carnal company to whom
their souls was once glewed; this must make every man say, Here is more then
notions, here is a real fire. The Poets taught much of Circe's cup, which
turned men into beasts, but here is a change of beasts into men, yea into
Angels; and we may say, This work of the Lord is mavelous in our eyes.

Of encouragement to the spiritual husbandman, though he sow even upon the
hardest Us(...)
rocks, and preach to beasts rather then men; For who knows but that God may
turn a noysom dunghill, into a mine of gold. That of our Saviors should be
wings to us in our race, With God all things are possible; and that of God, I
will take away the heart of stone, and give an heart of flesh: Oh that we might
say of all wicked men, that which the Apostle speaks here in the Text, And
such Ezekiel. 32.
were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified: God will not have
any wicked man despair in himself, that he is so wicked that God cannot or will
not ever give him a better heart; nor yet the minister to despair, though there
be no visible hopes of ever doing good upon such unworthy men. Only you may
have this objection in your hearts:

Why do we not see God working thus as wonderfully to the change of men, Quest.
as he has done heretofore? there the Corinthians, the Ephesians, and other
Heathens, wallowing in Idolatry, and all moral vices, yet found the word of God
assimilating them to its own nature; it made men leave their corrupt and
defiled natures, and come to embrace that which formerly was so contrary to
them: But now we see no such things done, no not among Christians; in those
days an Heathen Adulterer, an Heathen a Drunkard, became washed and cleansed by
the word; but now a Christian thus polluted, notwithstanding his Christianity,
and the word frequently preached unto him, does not reform and make him leave
his former impieties.

To this the answer may be, That wicked men living in their sins, under the
daily Answ.
exercise of the word, quickly provoke a spiritual censure and judgment to be
inflicted upon them; by which means, as the clay under the Sun, they become
more obdurate; wonder not then, if as miracles, so this wonderful work of
conversion cease (at least its not so frequent) for rebellion and
unfruitfulness under the means of grace, enjoyed so long a time, has deserved
this: but I added (not so frequently) because even to this day in several
places, God still goes out with this Omnipotent power upon some few, some
firebrands there are pulled out of the fire, some Tigers are made Lambs,
although this is very rare in comparison of what has been formerly; not but
that Gods arm is as strong, and the word we preach as powerful, but as it is
said of one place, Christ could do no miracles there, because of their
unbelief, Mat. 6. 6. He conld not (that is) he would not, because he saw their
unbelief made them so wretched a people; so it is here, our ministry can do no
good, our preaching cannot convert; not that men's lusts are stronger then Gods
grace, but because they put such bol^s and bars, such obstructions in the way
of grace, that thereby God will not make it effectual to them. O then be
afraid, if thou, though still before this fire of the word, yet art always cold
and chill, feeling no spiritual heat at all.

In the next place, let us observe from the words of opposition, And such were
some of you, but ye are washed: They are not the same they were once.

That where converting grace is vouchsafed to a man, it makes a great change,
he is not the man he was once. Observe.


We may say of every regenerate man, Such wicked men you were once, profane as
others, negligent as others, senseless of sin and Gods wrath as others, but now
this dark night is turned into a glorious day. The Prophet spoke of some, Amos
6. 12. That they turned righteousness into hemlock and wormwood: That was a
wicked turning, but this turns hemlock into righteousness. The Prophet
complained of Jerusalem, fallen from her mercies, That her gold was become
dross, and her wine water, Lam. 4. but here is the contrary, dross is become
gold, and water wine. Ego non sum ego, said an unclean person once converted,
to the whore that solicited him to the same courses still: So do thou say to
all thy former wickedness, catching hold on thee as Joseph's mistress did on
him; I am not I, I have not the same judgment, the same affections, the same
desires that once I had, and therefore cannot embrace what I once so dearly
loved. The exact handling of this point will be, when we come to those Texts
that call it conversion, or a change, or a turning to God; then the term from
which, and the term to which, may more largely be considered: Only I shall now
give you some qualities of this turning, and change from our evil ways, truly
to stir you up immediately to the practice thereof. We see God has wrought
many changings and turnings of things in our days: O how happy, if in all
these, we might see this spiritual change, men formerly profane, now holy; men
heretofore guilty of notorious sins, now as exemplary and zealous of what is
godly.

And first, Therefore this change is a necessary one: It must be said of every
one 1. The qualities of a gracious change or turning from our evil ways.
that would be saved, Such an one thou once wast, but now thou art sanctified.
Even the man who has always lived civilly and unblameably, that has no gross
sin to be turned from, yet he has the soul-uncleanness, and the heart-^eprosie
upon him, from which he must be washed; so that this turning from what once we
were, is indispensibly necessary in young and old, in rich and poor, either
inwardly or outwardly: Consider of this therefore, you whose Motto is, Semper
idem; though that be a glory in a good thing, yet for a man to be always the
same he was from the womb, is certain and irrecoverable death; When then will
you bethink your selves? when shall the time be, that thou will become another
man? think not that flesh and blood can inherit the Kingdom of heaven: This
undoeth many, that as they never dream of a change, which death will one day
make upon them, so they never desire a change, that Grace in this present life
should work on them: Therefore as Job said of the change by death, He would
every day wait till his change came, Job 14. 14. (as some expound it:) do thou
say of this change by grace, I will every day pray, hear, read, meditate, mourn
and roar out before God all the day long, till this spiritual change come.

Scondly, Its a rational change: Its the highest act of reason, for a man to 2.
become another man: For seeing the Scripture, which cannot lie, informs us
both of original and actual pollution, whereby we become no more qualified for
heaven, then Toades to be made Angels: This being granted, its the greatest
reason in the world, that thou should immediately arise, and go out from thy
own self; For how will thou, who art but stubble and dry wood, be able to
endure this consuming fire of Gods wrath? Again, its rational, because its for
the better: Though men do not love to change, yet when its for the better, then
they are glad; How do men thus change, in all their outward affairs? but herein
turning from sinto grace, we transcendently have the advantage; we change
corruption for glory, coals for gold, lust and sin, for the enjoyment of God,
and communion with him: So that if men would set judgment on work, and
consider what that is they were once; and what that is to which God now calls
them, they would make no delay, but rise up and be doing. Again, its the
greatest reason thus to change, because we our selves are subject to a total
change by death: We cannot always live and abound in our pleasures, and our
jollities, but death will at last come and make a wonderful change: Oh
therefore be changed spiritually, before thou art changed corporally; the time
will come, when it will be said of thee, Thou livedst in such advantages, in
such comforts, but now thou art not, death has swallowed up all thy temporal
joy, and life it self: Oh let it be for the present said, Thou did live once
in such wickedness, in such impieties, but now all is altered: I beseech you as
pilgrims, abstain from the lusts of the flesh, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Remember you are
pilgrims and travelers, you have no abiding place in this world.

Thirdly, Its a profitable change: What profit have you of those things,
whereof 3.
you now are ashamed, Romans 6. 1. Alas, thy sins are no ways profitable to thee,
for all the curses of God both temporal and spiritual do accompany them; but
godliness is profitable for all things: Though it would not profit a man, to
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul, yet it would exceedingly profit a
man, to gain his soul, though he lost all the world: Though he said, Miserum
est illud verbum fuisse, yet here, Faelix and beatum verbum est fuisse: Its a
blessed and happy word, to say, Such an ungodly man once, but now not at all;
such an one that scorned and despised the ways of God, but now he loves and
rejoices in them; even as the Prodigals Father rejoiced over his repenting
son, He was dead, but now is alive; he was lost, but now is found: Thus may
thou, with joy and thanksgiving, say, I was lost, but grace has found me; I
was dead, but grace has inlivened me.

Fourthly, Its an honorable change: For those that honor God, God will honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30. As those that serve base and vile lusts, the Lord gives them 4
upto contempt and scorn before others. Its true, in the eyes of the world, to
set upon this change, its many times object of disdain, To leave thy lusts, thy
wantonness, thy pride, thy jolly companions, and to betake thy self to a more
accurate and exact way of godliness, makes a man the drunkards song, Psalm. 69.
12. as David complained he was: But as David was then more honorable, when he
danced so Religiously before the Ark, then when he conquered and subdued so
many Philistims, although Michal despised him and scorned him at her very
heart: Thus it is here, since thou have forsaken thy sins, feared an oath,
been constant in Private and Family Prayer, zealously sanctifying Gods
Sabbaths, which he has commanded: Since this (I say) thou art become truly
honorable, and art born of God.

Use of Exhortation, To raise and awaken your selves out of your former
impieties: Use.
Oh that once we might say, You were dead, but now are made alive: Oh that at
last we might say this Text, Such and such heinous offenders some of you have
been; but now ye are washed, now ye are sanctified through the blood of Christ.
Call thy self to an account, say, Oh my soul, do thou mind to be thus
always? Are there no purposes or resolutions to become another man? Why does
not he that used to swear, swear no more? Why does not he that used to be
lustful, be lustful no more? Let him that stole (says the Apostle) steal no
more, Ephesians. 4. 28. Oh that God would make this blessed change in your lives!
What should hinder it? Can your sins be better then GOD to you? Can your
lusts be more then Heaven to you?

SERMON LXI.
Of the washing and cleansing of a Sinner.

1 COR. 6. 11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed.
WE have already considered the Corinthians, according to what they were by
their own voluntary corruption, Let us now take notice of them, as what they
are by grace. They were black and uncomely of themselves, but sanctified and
made beautiful by the grace of God. Now this grace of God vouchsafed unto them
is expressed in three particulars, Ye are Washed, Ye are Sanctified, Ye are
Justified. Some make this difference between them, That the first privilege,
Ye are washed, is a general comprehending both Sanctification and
Justification; as if the Apostle had first expressed himself in the general,
and then distributed this general into two famous branches thereof: and indeed
washing or cleansing is sometimes used for the taking away of the guilt of sin,
and then it is the same with justification; as when David prays God would
wash him and make him clean, Psa. 51. and sometimes its used for the cleansing
from the filth and power of sin, in which sense its the same with
sanctification: and in this respect, Isaiah 1. God calls upon Jerusalem to wash
her, and to make her clean: This may well be received: But I (...) go with
other Expositors, that make the Apostle use a gradation, naming those
privileges in the order God bestowed them upon them: and the first is Washing,
that is Regeneration; the Type whereof and Seal is Baptism; which was the first
thing done to them, when received into the Church: so that the meaning is; But
ye are spirituallly washed and cleansed from the filth and dominion of these
sins, a Seal whereof was your Baptism.

Then the second degree is Sanctified, which is a further grace of God, not
only regenerating, but making us holy unto the Lord, and causing us to walk as
those that are set apart for God, from all common and profane use. Lastly,
they are Justified. Now although it be seriously disputed, whether
Justification or Sanctification go before one another; and generally it is
asserted, that in priority of nature a man is justified before he be
sanctified, though they be both together in time; yet withal they acknowledge,
that according to our sense and feeling, and the Method we must take for
comfort, we apprehend our Sanctification before our Justification; and no man
may persuade himself, that he is justified, who does not discover in himself
the fruits of Sanctification. The one is the fruit, the other is the tree: so
that the Apostle may very well put sanctification first, because to our sense
and apprehension it is so. As for that interpretation of Papists and others,
that make justified, to be the obtaining of a further degree of righteousness,
and increasing in holiness, we reject as erroneous. Now this threefold mercy
is amplified by the meritorious cause, In the Name of the Lord Jesus. That is
by Jesus Christ known and believed on; as also by the efficient cause, the
Spirit of our God, which is therefore called the holy Spirit, as being in an
appropriated manner, the Author of our Sanctification. Thus the Text is opened.
I begin with the first, Ye are washed; and observe,

That Regeneration, or the renewing of sinners is a washing or cleansing of
them. Sin Obs.
has two things in it, Filthand Pollution, and so Sanctification cures it;
guilt and merit of condemnation, so justification takes it away. We are upon
the first work of grace, that which takes away the noisomnes, and pollution of
sin, with the dominion and power of it, which is here called Washing and
Sanctifying. The Corinthians like Swine had been wallowing in their Mire, and
grace did not only wash their outsides, but their in-sides, their very
natures away, and make them sheep. Thus God speaks of a clear Fountain he
will set open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in. Zach. 13. 1. For the
discovery of this point, consider,

First, That the Title of Regeneration, under the notion of washing, does
suppose that sin is of a defiling polluting nature, making the persons
unclean and loathsome, 1. Sin of a defiling nature.
where it is. Its therefore compared to Spots, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. and Blemishes,
Ephesians. 5. 27, to Mire, to Vomit, 2 Pet. 2. 22. Such names does the Scripture
give sin: to teach men, How they should look upon themselves, when sinners?
Ezekiel. 16. you have there the Prophet excellently describing every man's natural
condition, by an infant new born, tumbling in its blood, not washed, or
cleansed. Men make sin the matter of their boast, and their glory; but it is
indeed matter of shame and loathing. Thou art ashamed of thy rags, and thy
spotted garments: But oh what blushing should be at thy wicked and ungodly
actions. Thou should sit down like a Job upon his Dunghill, abhorring thy
self; like a Lazarus full of sores; like an unclean Leaper, crying out, Thou
art unclean, unclean. The Scripture speaking of wicked men, says, They are
become filthy and abominable in their doings, Psalm 14. and it calls them
Vile persons, Psalm. 15. 4. Whatsoever esteem and glory ungodly men may have in
this world, yet they are with God vile persons, and therefore called by the
name of such Beasts as are odious to men. Whereas on the contrary, Grace is the
life, the beauty, the honor and glory of a man, compared to excellent and
precious ornaments.

Secondly, This apprehension that sin makes men unclean and defiled, has
been 2. Superstitious bodily-washings.
so engraven in the hearts of all men by nature, that therefore they have used
superstitiously many external bodily washings: as if that would take away
their pollution, and make them more acceptable to God. Thus the Heathens used
to wash themselves, before they entered into their Temples, to sacrifice to
their Gods, and they had water pots, or stones of water stood at the entrance
into the Temple, wherein thy purified themselves; confessing hereby, that sin
made them so beastly and unclean, that they were no ways fit or decent to
perform any Religious action: and thus the Jews they brought in many
superstitious Washings: When they came from Market, when they had been about
any employment, they would come home and wash themselves, yea they washed their
Beds, their Pots, their Dishes, Mark 7. 4 l^st they should get any defilement.
Thus Pilate did wash his hands, to denote thereby his Innocence; and Tertullian
speaks of the superstition of some Christians in his days, That they would
never go to prayer, till they had washed themselves. Now our Saviors Doctrine
is a good Antidote to all such superstitious thoughts: Not that which goes
into a man does defile him, but that which comes out. Its not a bodily
filthiness, or uncleanness, but a soul-filthinesse, which is so displeasing
to God. The Papists they attribute much to Mar. 7. 15, 16.
their Holy Water, as if the sprinkling of that would cleanse away the stone of
the soul, but this is the peculiar effect of Christ's blood only.

Thirdly, That we might be fully convinced of our native filthiness, and the
nature of Gods Spirit in renewing us, God appointed external Ordinances and
Rites of bodily 3. The use of external Ordinances and Rites.
washing, hereby to make us understand spiritual things. Thus in the Old
Testament, God commanded several washings of the body: The Priest was to wash
himself before he sacrificed; and several other cleansings there were; by all
which God did inform them of their vileness and loathsomeness; as also thereby
to look to Christ's blood, of which these were Types: As the Apostle argues at
large to the Hebrews. In the New Testament also, although the external Rites
are but few in number, which Christ appointed under the Gospel, his Church
being now out of her Infancy, and so more enabled to discern spiritual things
of themselves. Yet one of the two Sacraments, viz. Baptism, God has appointed
for this end, to signify our natural pollution, and the renewing operation of
Gods Spirit: Thus Baptizing is as much as Washing. All that are made Christ's
Disciples he would have washed, to show that they had noysomnesse upon them;
and that the Spirit of God must cleanse their souls. John 3. 5. Unless a man
be born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven;
He does not speak of Baptism there; for Christ had not at that time appointed
Baptism (though John Baptized) and to be sure it was not appointed then
universally to all Nations, as appears by the Commission afterward; Go,
Baptize all Nations. This is confessed by Bellarmine himself: I rather
therefore take water for the Spirit of God, as afterward it is compared to
fire; so that the sense is, Unless a Man be born of the Spirit of God, which
is like water, cleansing, healing, quenching, Sanctifying, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. But though this place carry it not, yet many other
places speak of this Baptism, and the signification thereof: so that the
foulness of sin, and the nature of Regeneration is excellently decyphered by
the Sacrament of Baptism. Do not thou then rest in thy Baptism, do not
presume upon that; for unless thereby thou art taught to loath thy self for
sin: unless thou art washed from filthy sins and lustful ways, this
washing is no more to thee, than the washing of a Blackamoor, which leaves him
as deformed as he was. Oh that Baptized men, washed men should yet be so foul
and noisome in their lives, unclean bodies, foul tongues, earthly hearts; all
these defile.

Consider that place, Hebr. 10. 22. where the Apostle shows the duty, and the
privilege of of the people of God; they may come with boldness unto God, he
has held out the Scepter of Grace to invite them. But who are those whom God
will thus honor?

First, Such as are washed from an evil Conscience; all those who wash
themselves from all known evils; who avoid inward sins, pride, hypocrisy,
earthly Who God honors with bold access unto him.
and immoderate affections, Oh thou can have no boldness to pray, or to call
on God, whose Conscience tells thee of such defilement and wickedness thou
live in: And,

Secondly, Their bodies washed with pure water. This is an allusion either to
the legal washings, or to Baptism; and implies, that not only the soul, but
the body also must be washed from all its bodily filthiness, as 2 Cor. 7. Let
us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit; so that
soul-wickedness, and bodily wickedness must be washed away,

Fourthly, Therefore the Scripture speaks of a two fold subject to be washed.
First, the heart; thus as in the place mentioned, having your hearts sprinkled
4. Of the washing of the heart.
and cleansed from all filthiness of spirit. This heart-washing is first to be
set upon, as being the root, principle, and foundation. Thus purify your
hearts, ye double minded, Jam. 4. 8. If the Fountain be not cleansed, all the
streams must needs be muddy. Now although most men neglect this Duty, yet this
is the main of all. A bad heart is an ill Treasury: out of the heart proceed
evil thoughts, and all manner of actual evil. This point our Savior pressed
much upon the Pharisees, who had cleansed their lives from outward wickedness,
but their inwards were full of all foul and noisome lusts: and the necessity of
this appears, in that God accepts of no external religious Duty, no
Praying, no Hearing, no Charity, no Humility, except they be first washed in
their hearts; There lies the greatest filthiness, though you must take the
candle of the Scripture, if you would find out the Dust there, and sweep it
away.

The second kind of washing the Scripture speaks of, is the washing of our
hands, which is the cleansing of us from all actions of Wickedness; as
Injustice, Oppression, Uncleanness, and all manner of unlawful and sinful
doings. The washing of our hands.
Thus James adds, Cleanse your hands, and Purify your hearts: He says,
first Cleanse your hands, and then Purify your hearts. Not that the washing of
the hands is to be done before the washing of the heart; but because our
Actions they are most manifest and sensible to the world; and therefore we
ought to declare our selves clear in that respect. So then, no man may comfort
himself, as if Regenerated or renewed, if so be his Actions are ^oul and
sinful: If thy hands be not clean, thou may not take hold of any holy thing.
Consider David's Expression, I will wash my hands in innocence, so will I
compass thy Altar, Psalm. 26. 2. David will not come to worship God, till he
has washed his hands in innocence. Oh consider this excellent and holy pattern
which David has left for you. Say, I will wash my life, my hands, my eyes, my
body from all its former wickedness, and so will I pray, so will I go to
hear. Lay aside all superfluity of naughtiness, says the Apostle, Jam. 1. 21.
He calls sin (...), Sordes, filth and loathsome matter, and then hear the Word
of God. As those that made the Garland of Roses and other Flowers, for those
that conquered in the Race, they were to have clean and washed hands; so all
those who meddle in any holy duty, praying, or hearing, they must have cleansed
lives: when God gave the Law, he would have the people of Israel cleanse
themselves three days before they heard it; and the women who were to come
into Ahasuerus his presence, were several days purifying, and dressing
themselves. How much more then, when we come into the presence of an holy God,
ought we to cleanse our selves, and to shake off all that which may be
displeasing in his eyes.

Fifthly, To be spiritually washed and cleansed there are these things
required: 5. What is required to spiritual washing. I.


First, a loathing and abhorring of our selves; looking upon our selves as so
many brutish beasts, and so many abominable Monsters, fit for nothing but to
be cast upon the Dunghill, because we have lost all our Savor. Thus Job
abhorred himself in dust and ashes, under the apprehension of Gods glorious
Majesty. Ezekiel. ^0. 43. The Promise of grace made to the people of Israel is,
That they should remember their wicked doings, wherein they have been defiled,
and they should loath themselves in their own sight. We blush, says Daniel and
Ezra, and are ashamed. Thus the P(...)can stood aloof often, as deeply sensible
of his uncleanenesse. Oh then, how far are most men from this washing in the
Text; when did they ever loath themselves? when were they abominable in their
own eyes? when did they humble themselves in the dust, crying out they were
noisome Dung-hills, and not men. They could not endure their own selves: The
very memory and thoughts of all their ways were grievous and tedious to them.
Till men come thus to be ashamed and confounded in themselves, they cannot be
so much as in a preparation to be made clean. Oh tremble then, you who applaud
your selves, who love and please your selves in your wicked ways, like the
Horse-Beetle, that delights to live in the Dung; like Vermin, that love to be
in Muck-hils. Oh why are ye not ashamed that God should see you, that good
Angels and men should behold you. It will never be well with thee, nor will thou ever be put into any hopes of salvation, till thou beginnest to be odious
in thy own eyes, till thou can not abide and indurethy self.

Secondly, To be washed, is required godly sorrow, and morning for sin. David
washed his Bed with tears, and so he did his soul also. Not that our tears or
sorrow II.
can wash away the guilt of sin. No, there can be no remission without blood,
Heb 9. 22. and the blood of Christ; but they may in some sense wash the filth
and defilements of sin away. Therefore there is Gods washing, which the
Scripture speaks much of, and that is the remission of the guilt of sin; and
there is our washing, which is the godly, sorrow and mourning for the
iniquities we have committed: so then if thou would be a man washed from thy
sinful pollutions, consider, That thy head must be like a fountain of tears,
thy eyes must be (...) the Pool of Bethesda in this sense, that thy filthiness
may be washed away. How then can thou persuade thy self, that thou have
received this privilege, when thy heart was never melted for thy sins: Godly
sorrow is wholly a strange thing to thee, thou do not know what it means.
Alas! those sudden exclamations, The Lord forgive me, God pardon me, I should
not have said so, or done so: This is not the godly sorrow commanded in the
Scripture; why then do thou lie with thy filth and unclean abominations upon
thee? why do thou not mourn and lament over thy wretched condition? What have
thou tears for the loss of wife, children, goods and estate, but none for the
loss of God? Tears in thy eyes are better Jewels than those on thy ears.

Thirdly, To be washed, there is also required a spiritual pain and trouble of
the III.
soul. For this washing of a sinner, is like the washing of pu^rified old sores
which cannot but administer great grief and aches, as when the ^ailor washed
Peter's sores: Therefore David expresses his Repentance by broken bones, Psalm
51. which declares the holy pain and trouble of soul he had within him,
because of his iniquities. Hence it is also called pricking and wounding at
heart. Go to therefore you sinners, who live heart-whole, and heart-sound, as
you call it, you never have any pangs, any travail of soul for your iniquities,
you never are in labor or pain; know, that you are not washed from your
impieties: why do thou not take up the Prophet Micah's expression, Mich. 1.
8. I will wail and houl, I will go stripped and naked, I will make a mourning
like the Dragons, and wailing like the Owls, because of the anguish of mind,
and trouble of soul upon me for my iniquities. Never think it will be well,
till those sins which have been so sweet and pleasant to thee, be like Gall
and Wormwood, biting like a Serpent, and stinging like an Adder. It cannot be,
but that these lusts for a season so delightful, will afterward become like so
many devils tormenting thy conscience. Be not afraid to be sick and troubled
for sin now, it may be medicinal and helpful now, but it will be paenal and
eternally torturing hereafter.

Fourthly, To be cleansed, there is required a constant and daily applying of
those IIII.
remedies, which are appointed by God to make us clean; and that is ^aith in
Christ's blood, and faith receiving the Word of God. The blood of Christ and the
Word of God are both cleansers. Thus Acts 15. Faith is said to purify the
heart; and David prays, Psalm 51. That God would wash him with Hyssop, and
make him clean, so he should be whiter than Snow: an allusive exposition to the
Jewish Custom of besprinkling the Posts of the door with the blood of the
Sacrifice, which signified the blood of Christ sprinkled upon the soul, and
faith that is like the bunch of Hyssop, which though low and contemptible, yet
was instrumental to that glorious effect. Thus also the garments of the Saints
are said to be made white in the blood of the Lamb; though it be red, yet it
makes them white: Therefore faith in Christ is mighty in operation to get out
all the spots and defilements that are upon our lives.

The other cleansing Instrument is the word of God, cleansing his Church
through his Word; and Psalm 119. Wherewith shall a young man make clean his
ways? even by attending to thy Word. A young man most prone to foul and
noisome lusts, even he may quickly by the Word be washed and cleansed. Come
then often in this Bath, wash thy self often in the waters of the Scripture,
and then thou will become white and lovely.

Lastly, This washing is a continual work. Though the Apostle says, They are
washed, in the bypast time; yet because man in his journey to heaven, gets
much V.
soil and filth; therefore he must be washing himself every day, John 13. 9.
10. Peter did not understand that our Savior taught this, by his action of
washing their feet; but when he did, he cries out, Not my feet only, but also
my hands and head. Now that the most godly themselves do need a continual
washing, appears by that: He that is washed, needs not, save to wash his
feet. The meaning of this difficult place seems to be, That though they were
cleansed by Regeneration, yet in their travel toward heaven, they got filth
upon their feet, which they ought every day to wash off; so that as thou
gettest pollution upon thy soul daily, so thou must cleanse daily: Where then
are those deluded persons, who think themselves without sin, that they need no
cleansing? even therefore they have the more sin, because they think they have
no sin.

Use of Exhortation, To all profane and ungodly persons, that they would
abominate and loath themselves, be in their own eyes as they are in Gods Use.
sight, hated and abhorred. How can you but consider and be afraid under these
things: Thy actions, are foul actions; thy life, a noisome life; thy words,
loathsome communication: Thou art like a dead carcass, like an open Sepulcher,
full of abomination: Oh that thou can abide thy self! Thou should be as some
miserable wretch, that has the members of his body rotting away, and yet he
lives, how loathsome is such a man to himself? he cannot endure his own smell:
Thus it should be to thee, who live in thy gross wickedness.

SERMON LXII.
Of the Grace of God sanctifying a Sinner.

1 COR. 6. 11. And such were some of you, but you are washed, but you are
sanctified, etc.
THe Apostle (as you heard) is now describing what the Corinthians are by the
grace of God; which is threefold, Washing (and that is dispatched;)
Sanctifying, and that is the work now in hand. As for Illyricus his opinion,
that takes these three things for the same, making them only words Synonymous,
there is no color for it; come we therefore to handle the nature of this
gracious work of God, and the word has many and several acceptions, in the
Scripture, which are necessary to be known.

The first and ordinary use of the word, is for the external celebrating and
acknowledging The word sanctified its several acceptions.
the Name and Ordinances of God as holy: Thus we pray, Sanctified be thy name;
and very often we are commanded To sanctify the Lord; which is then done, when
we do with all holy fear and reverence make mention of him, and acknowledge his
Majesty; the contrary whereunto, is to defile, to pollute and to blaspheme his
holy name.

Secondly, To Sanctify, is often used in Scripture, for the separating any
thing from profane and common use, as holy unto God: Thus all the vessels in
the Temple were sanctified, and the Priests were sanctified; and in this sense
Christ says, He sanctified himself, viz. He prepared himself to be an
expiatory Sacrifice for John 17. 1.
our sins.

Thirdly, There are some who say the word to Sanctify, is as much as to
justify, and to make holy and righteous through Christ's Righteousness; and
therefore they speak of an imputative Sanctification (which is the same with
Justification) and is really inherent, but inchoate in this life. Thus they say
Sanctification is taken for Justification, frequently in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Heb. 10. By which will we are sanstified; and Heb. 3. Christ that he
might sanctify his people, suffered without the gate; and thus Christ is said
To be made unto us, Wisdom and Sanctification; But this sense of the word is
not so generally acknowledged.

Fourthly, To sanctify, is sometimes used for the preparing and designing of
any to some great work and exploit; so Isa. 13. The Medes are said to be
sanctified, for the destruction of Babylon: I have commanded my sanctified
ones; yea, in the Scripture commonly the judgments of God upon the wicked, by
way of war and slaughter, are compared to Sacrifices, and so those that are
instruments to execute them, in that sense are sanctified; yea, it signifies
to prepare or endeavor any thing, Jer. 6. Sanctify a war, Mich. 3. If they do
not give in their mouth, they prepare a war.

Fifthly, The word is sometimes used antiphrastically, for the clear contrary,
to sanctify, is then as much as to pollute, and to be unclean; thus Exodus 19.
Lev.. 8. Those that did after an unclean manner draw nigh to holy things, they
are said to be sanctified, that is, unclean: And thus whores in the Hebrew are
called Holy, that is, polluted and vile; and thus Sacrum among the Latihs is
used.

Sixthly, There is a passive Sanctification, or a Work of God, whereby he
changes us, and makes us of unholy, holy; and this is the grace intended in
the Text: I pray God ye be sanctified throughout, 1 Thessalonians. ult. 1 Pet. 1. 1.
Through the Sanctification of the Spirit to obedience.

Seventhly, There is an active Sanctification, whereby in the progress of
holiness, we daily purify our selves, growing more and more holy, 2 Cor. 7. 7.
1 John 3. He that has this hope purifyeth or sanctifies himself, as God is
holy: These two latter senses of the word, may be here chiefly intended.

That those who are renewed by the Grace of God, they are sanctified ones; they
are Observe.
made holy, and purified from the filth and dross that was in them.

Let us first observe how the several senses of the word Sanctified, formerly
related, is aptly applicable to them: And 1. Wherein the people of God are
sanctified.


First, They are Segregated from the world; They are chosen from that profane
and common course of life they lived in before; that as the Vessels were taken
from all common use, and applied only to sacred actions, to the Sacrifices,
and other Offerings: Thus God by grace, does take men, who before were under
the power of Satan, at the command of every lust, they were vile, unclean, fit
for no holy employments; now they are separated from those former evils: Thus
true Religion is that which keeps a man unspotted from the world, James 1. 27.
Thou do touch this pitch, and art not defiled; thou art in this Babylonian
furnace, and have not thy garments signed: This is to be a true and a good
separatist, when by the heart and affections, a man forsakes the ways of the
world; though he be in the world, yet he is not of the world; for the world
lying in wickedness, godliness cannot be but singularity and preciseness, in
respect of the multitude; therefore thou art not in the number of these
sanctified ones, nay thou can not say, thou art of the true Religion or have
any true Religion at all, till thou keep thy self clean and unblameable from
all the gross and foul wickedness, that the world usually commits.

Secondly, The godly are sanctified, because they are not only separated from
2.
their former profaneness, but they are also Dedicated and Consecrated unto
God, they are made his, and are peculiarly applied unto him; in which sense the
godly are called A Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and, The First fruits, James
1. 18. thus they are said to be none of their own, Phil. 4. The godly has God
set apart for himself (says the Psalmist;) so then, to be sanctified, is to be
given up wholly unto the Lord as his, no more a man's own, no more the worlds,
no more sins: Therefore all the sins of a godly man, have a kind of Sacrilege
in them, they take their souls and bodies, which were consecrated unto God, and
apply them to profane and the Devils use: Thus the Apostle argues, Shall I
take the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and make it one with an whore? 2 Cor. 6. In
this manner, all the sins of the godly are to be aggravated, Sin not with thy
eyes, with thy hands, with thy body, thou make the Temple of God an Hell,
thou art guilty of high Sacrilege.

Thirdly, To be sanctified you heard, was to be prepared and fitted for any
great work and employment; Thus also the people of God are created and prepared
3.
for every good work: All the actions of grace are supernatural, far above
humane power, they are Divine works, and therefore must have power from above
to enable them thereunto. To leave thy sins, thou must be sanctified thereunto;
to pray aright, to hear the word of God in a soul-saving manner, there must be a
sanctification of thy heart; especially this is used for executing Justice upon
the enemies of God and his glory: This is Gods Sacrifice, and thus every
particular Christian, he has many Sacrifices, for the offering of which he
needs this Sanctification. A broken and contrite heart, that is a sacrifice,
Psalm. 51. good works are a sacrifice, prayer is a sacrifice. Now as in the Old
Testament they were peculiarly consecrated and fitted thereunto; thus also in
the New Testament, none can subdue sin, approach nigh unto God in any holy way,
that is not first sanctified by his spirit, 2 Timothy 2. 21. Sanctified and meet
for the Masters use. As the Medes were sanctified to destroy the Babylonions,
so must thou be to kill thy lusts, to mortify thy sins: Though you are not now
to kill beasts, to destroy them unto God, yet ye have beastly lusts, which you
are to mortify continually; Pride, Covetousness, Profaneness, these are
beastly lusts, which thou art sanctified to destroy.

Fourthly, To be sanctified, in the Scripture sense, Is to be made fit and
lawful 4.
for its proper use: Thus some expound that place, The unbelieving wife is
sanctified through the believing husband, 1 Cor. 7. that is, made fit and
lawful for conjugal relation, though that is not all the meaning; but we have
another place, where every thing is said to be sanctified by the word of God
and prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 5. viz. All our Meats, Drinks, lawful ^mployments, they
are sanctified by prayer: The curse that is upon all the creatures is removed
away, and thy meat is made fit to nourish thee, thy clothes to warm thee, etc.

In this sense Divines speak of a civil right, and a sanctified right to the
creatures: Of a Civil and Spiritual right to the Creature.
Wicked men have a civil, lawful right to the goods, to the possessions they
enjoy, and possess them with a good conscience, but they want the sanctified
right of them; i. e. they have not the grace of God in their heart, whereby
they might improve them in a godly manner, to the glory and honor of God; It
being impossible without faith to please God: Oh then bewail thy condition!
while thou art unsanctified, thou art not fit to eat, to drink, to be a
possessor of any estate, any honor, any goods; not but that a wicked man is
true owner of what he is, but he has not a sanctified use of them, he does not
eat or drink to the glory of God, his estate and wealth he knows not how to
improve for blessed and heavenly ends.

Fifthly, To sanctify, is to acknowledge and use all things that belong to
God, after an holy, reverent and heavenly manner: Thus the people of God are
often exhorted 5.
To sanctify God in their hearts, Isa. 8. 13. and so they are commanded To
sanctify or keep holy his Sabbaths, Isa. 29. 23. so that herein is a true
sanctified person discovered, when he does with all holy fear and reverence
approach near unto God in his Ordinances: Thus a godly man is described by this
property, He fears an oath, Eccles 92. because an oath is a sacred appeal
unto God, as the witness of our actions, and because his majesty is so great
and glorious, that we are unworthy to take his name into our mouths; therefore
he is said To fear an oath, he trembles to swear. O how far are those then
from Sanctification, who profanely and passionately belch out their oaths,
and without any reverence, yea in madness and fury, make mention of God in
their Oaths. If thou weit sanctified, thou would acknowledge the Name,
Person, Nature, Attributes and Ordinances of God Sacred and Holy, and so
would after a serious, humble and holy manner use them, and make mention of
them: So that the swearer and the curser, howsoever he may mitigate his sin,
that he didit in his passion, and he does not think of it, yet he can never
pretend to Sanctification; for where that is, it does rule the heart with such
an holy and reverential awe of Gods Majesty, that he never makes mention of
him, but with Religious and trembling affections. Its admirable what the
Heathens have been in this very point of swearing, how unwilling to do it,
though in a lawful thing, and all because of a devout apprehension they had of
that Sacred Majesty to whom they did appeal in their oaths. O then, what shame
and confusion should this be to Christians; there is scarce any old man, or
young man, any rich man, or poor man, but given to this detestable sin of
swearing, for which a man may properly be called profane, be cause he has
low, despicable and irreverent thoughts of God. Another duty of a godly man
sanctified, is to keep holy his Sabbaths, as you read in many places; so that
the loose, careless and contemptuous despising of it, is an argument of an
unsanctified heart: The godly make it their delight, and they keep a spiritual
Sabbath from their sins, and by this means, their souls enter into an holy rest
that day: But the ungodly man, he judges these days a burden, a trouble, he
longs to have them over, that he may to the world, or his lusts again: Try then
thy Sanctification, by thy holy esteem and prize of thy holy duties, which are
for the increase of godliness, and promoting of that: When thou come to pray,
to hear, to keep his Sabbaths, with thy thoughts full of the world, the love
thereof, or delight therein, thou art no ways prepared to sanctify God.

Lastly, To sanctify, is to have all the faculties and powers of the soul,
renewed by holy principles within, and thereby carried out to do those things 6.
which are holy, and after an holy manner: And thus all those that are
regenerated are wrought upon, their understandings are made holy, their wills
holy, their love an holy love, their grief and fear holy: This is the chief
mercy, above all Riches, Honors and Greatness; without this Sanctification,
every man, though alive, is dead; though rich, is poor; though happy, is
miserable. And for the better discovery of it, consider:

First, the efficient cause to which this is peculiarly appropriated; and that
is, 1. The efficient cause of Sanctification.
The Holy Spirit of God, called, The Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13. Romans 1. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. and, The Spirit of Sanctification, because peculiarly
appropriated to him to work this in us: So that if thou desire this
Sanctification, fain thou would have a sanctified heart, and sanctified
affections; O it troubles thee that thou art not acted by such holy principles;
lift up thy eyes to heaven, pray that God would vouchsafe this holy spirit to
thee, which will work like fire, consuming that dross of corruption in thee. No
wonder, if under much preaching, many judgments of God, people remain profane
and loose, dissolute in their sins, for neither Minister or Angels, can infuse
this holy foundation into them. its the proper work of Gods Spirit: Take heed
therefore of grieving or resisting this spirit, and that you do, when ye live
in sins against conviction against the plain declaration of Gods word; when
that informs, directs judges and condemns thee, yet thou will go on, and
be obstinate in thy sins: This is the sad case of many thousands, who thereby
chase away the spirit of Sanctification from them. Now that God is more willing
to bestow his spirit, upon those that ask him in a right manner, then any
father is able, or willing to give any necessary good thing to his child,
appears Mat. 7. If ye being wicked know how to give good things, how much
rather will your Father in heaven, give his spirit to those that ask him: O
then say, This is the necessary thing, this is to be sought for in the first
place. 2. The inst(...) meant of (...) ctifi(...) word


Secondly, The instrument of this Sanctification, the means whereby God will
work it, is the Word: Thus our Savior prays, That God would sanctify his
Disciples by his truth, his word was truth, John 17. There is no ordinary means
for the obtaining of this, but by the word: This is the Chariot of the Spirit,
here we must expect its workings. As it had beed a vain thing in Naaman, to
expect the cleansing of his leprosy in anywater but in Jordan, so it is as
foolish and absurd to expect sanctification by any humane rites and inventions
of men, a number of which are introduced in popery. Now as Gods spirit only
efficiently sanctifies, and not humane power or freewill; so the Divine truths
of God are instituted Mediums for this glorious effect, and no other
superstitious designments made by men: Oh then, if ever thou would be
sanctified, be a diligent hearer of the word, hear in season and out of season,
as we are commanded to preach: Come to this fountain often to be washed in,
throw thy self frequently in this fire, to get thy dross out. The effects of
Gods word are admirable, especially in this point, to sanctify thee, to make
thee have holy affections, and holy principles, and holy ends and aims in all
thou do. As those that are much in the Sun, they cannot but be much colored
by it; so those that are in reading often, in hearing often, in praying often,
they will find such an holy change upon them, such admirable effects on their
lives, that there will be as much wonder at them, as there were of those who
were dead and rotting in their graves, yet raised by the mighty power of
Christ: As therefore there is no hope of that tree that is near no waters side,
that grows in a barren wilderness; so there is no hopes of ever being
sanctified from those who seldom or never come to hear the word, or if they do,
its out of formality, custom, and with so much dullness, sleepiness and
distractions, that their very outward deportment manifests much contempt and
irreverence toward God? Do these men come to be sanctified? do such come with
this grand expectation, Of unholy to be made holy?

Thirdly, The Meritorious cause, which procures this great privilege at 3.
The meritorious cause of Sanctification.
Gods hand, is Jesus Christ: Thus the Apostle adds, In the Name of the Lord
Jesus; so that one great effect of those Agonies and Sufferings which Christ
underwent, was to obtain Sanctification: Christ shed his blood, that he might
purchase to himself an holy people, Tit. 3. Oh then, how should this make you
highly esteem it! Was it a small or a light thing for which Christ endured all
those torments? could we not be sanctified, but by his blood? why then do
thou make no matter of it? where is the man that cries out, Oh Christ dyed,
and yet I am not sanctified? Christ has shed his blood, and yet I am not made
holy.

Fourthly, Consider the extent of this Sanctification, its universal throwout:
4. The extent of Sanctification.
I pray God ye be sanctified throughout, in spirit, soul and body, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
3. The spirit, that is in the choicest and most sublime part of a man, that
needs Sanctification; even these Heavens are defiled, this Sun has black and
foul spots. Hence we read of Carnal minds, Corrupt understandings, and
therefore we need the Sanctification of them, yea, this must be the first work
of Sanctification: its your mind, your judgment, your reason, that is so
great an enemy to God; What hinders, but that thou should go out presently,
and give thy self up unto all holy obedience? but thy mind, thy judgment is
not satisfied, that has this or that carnal plea; so that of all parts, this
eye, this understanding must be light, else all the body will be dark: Oh
therefore that God would sanctify your minds, your understandings, make them
holy, then would your affections and your conversations quickly become changed.
Then the next thing to be sanctified, is the soul; that is, the affections and
passions, as commonly Interpreters think; and indeed, these are like the wheels
in the Chariot, like the fire among the Elements; if these be not sanctified, a
man is carried up and down lik a ship in the storm, without Pilot or any
conduct: And besides, these affections are very unruly and masterful, therefore
the sanctification of them is more requisite. Lastly, there is the body, and
that also must be sanctified; viz. Organically, as it is the instrument of the
soul: Thus the tongue, the Eyes, the Ears, the Hands, they all are to be
Sanctified. A great deal of bodily wickedness there is in the world, and
therefore that must be made holy. Therefore Chastity, and freedom from
uncleanness, and whoredom, is in a peculiar manner called Sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. 4. Observe, you who are carried away with unlawful, lustful
pleasures: Chastity and purity of Body from such loathsome courses, is called
emphatically, Sanctification. So that Fornicators, Adulterers, Lustful, and
Lascivious persons, they are in a special manner unsanctified persons; they are
no more to be called Godly that live in such sins though they should pray,
hear, make never such profession of Religion, then darkness to be esteemed
light.

Use, Of Exhortation. Is there such a work of God as sanctification; and is
that necessary to every one, then look out and examine diligently whether thou
Use.
have it or no: God has made thee, and created thee, but has he sanctified
thee? God has given thee riches, wealth, honor, parts, and learning, but has
he given thee Sanctification? Alas the lives of most men, are so profane,
impure, unclean, filthy, that you cannot call them Sanctified ones, unless in
that sense as the Hebrews call whores holy, as I told you. And this is the more
to be lamented, because men enjoy the means, and live under the way to
sanctification, which is Gods word. Oh that thou who should be a Temple of
the Holy Ghost, should be a swine for the devil to enter in: I entreat you to
be awakened; if no sanctification here, no glorification hereafter: Without
holiness no man shall see God. Why? can you rest and be quiet till you get
some evidences of Sanctification: be no longer brutish, but men, but
Christians. Say, O Lord, I desire that at last I may be sanctified to thy own
self, Oh separate me from my wonted sins, my customary iniquities.

SERMON LXIII.
Signs and Characters of Sanctified ones.

1 COR. 6. 11. But ye are Sanctified, etc.
IN what sense a godly man is sanctified, has already been declared. Now let
us consider the symptoms or properties of sanctification, which will be as so
many testimonies or evidences, whereby we may come to be assured that we are
sanctified.

It is true, such is the self-love, and self-flattery in every man, that he is
quickly persuaded that he is one to whom this privilege does belong. When
therefore it shall be discussed, Who are they that are thus qualified; It will
appear so difficult and rare a thing, that every one may be astonished and cry
out, Who then can In what sense all Christians^ are Sanctified.
be saved? We were indeed in our Baptism Dedicated, and Consecrated to God,
and so had a kind of sanctification. There is also an external sanctification,
vouchsafed to all those who are under the outward Administration of the
Ordinances, in which sense Believers and their children are called Holy, 1 Cor.
7. in opposition to Heathens, and unbelievers: but this is not the
sanctification in the Text, nor that to which the promise of glory does belong.

Let us therefore consider the signs by which we come to know who are truly
sanctified.

And first, They who are so, have the spirit of God effectually, and powerfully
1. Those that are Sanctified have the Spirit of God dwelling in them.
dwelling in them. That as wicked men have the Devil filling their hearts, and
he reigns in them, whereby they are carried out to all wickedness, with
delight and boldness: Thus those that are sanctified are full of the Holy
Ghost, being partakers of his operations, and so are thereby fitted for all
holiness. Hence it is called the spirit of sanctification, and the holy
spirit, because where the spirit of God dwells, there it sanctifies, and
makes holy. Alas the greatest part of Christians are destitute of Gods Spirit;
yea, they have scarce heard whether there be an holy Spirit or not: And
thereupon they have nothing but customarinesse, formality, and education, which
do act them in all religious duties. But as in working of Miracles, no humane
strength or power could enable them thereunto; they were only done by power
from the Holy Ghost; So neither to love God, to believe in him, to mortify
sin, can be done by the sole strength of free will: but it must be the Spirit
of God changing and new-moulding the heart. Oh then consider this, all you who
go in a round, pray and hear, and hear and pray, in a general customary way:
The spirit of God is not in these; which yet is like the soul to the body: like
fire to the sacrifice: like winds to the ship; Our duties and hearts are but
Cisterns, that is the Fountain. There is never a Duty accepted, if the spirit
of God be not working therein, Romans 8. The spirit helps our infirmities, and
God hears the voice of his own spirit. Till therefore thou art made partaker
of Gods spirit, all thy external righteousness and holiness is but a shadow
and no substance. It is an image or picture, no real life at all. Oh then, How
far are profane, dissolute men from this Grace of sanctification? Does the
holy spirit of God dwell in thee? Does not the unclean spirit rather live in
thee, whose heart and life is made like a very hell? Is it the holy Spirit of
God that inciteth thee to curse, to swear, to lusts? Oh blasphemy to think, or
say so. Let then all ungodly, and foul wretches be ashamed and confounded
within themselves. It was the Devil that desired to enter into swine: The
Spirit of God appeared in an innocent and harmless Dove: Some men are so far
from having the Spirit of sanctification, that they mock and deride at it, yea
maliciously oppose it; but these are reserved to a dreadful judgment.

Secondly, Those that are sanctified, have a ready and willing obedience to the
truth and commands of God: Therefore it is called Sanctification of the Spirit
to Obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 2. It is impossible to have Sanctification, and not to
have a cheerful and willing obedience to all those duties that are required of
us. Does God say to the proud, Be humbled, if sanctified, he obeys
imediately? Does God say to the profane, Be sober and heavenly; when
sanctified he yields immediately; insomuch that all those hearers who live in
visible disobedience to the word of God preached, they have no evidence of
their sanctification: Obedience is better then sacrifice. God looks to that
more then praying, hearing, or coming to the Ordinances: Do thou say as
Christ? Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, thy Law is written within my heart.
Thus David being sanctified, professes his ready and willing obedience unto
God: And Paul also, Lord, What will thou have me to do? Act. 9. 6. He gives his
heart up to God like a blank, let God set down what he pleases: As fire does
melt the toughest Iron, and makes it in any frame you would have it, Thus the
spirit of sanctification does melt and affect the soul, that it becomes
cheerfully obedient in duties of the greatest self-denial, and contrariety to
flesh and blood. Oh then think not within thy self, I hear thus much, I come to
Church thus often; but what obedience is there in thy life? That crowns all
thy duties; that is the glory of all religion. The Israelites that proffered
thousands of Lambs, yea the children of their body were not so acceptable, as
if they had done justly, and walked humbly with God: Obedience is a necessary
fruit of sanctification.

Thirdly, Those that are sanctified delight in the use of all those means and
excercises 3. Delight in Ordinances.
which increase sanctification. The Godly are described by hungring, and
thirsting, and seeking, and so they can never have enough of holiness: Now the
preaching of the word is one principal instrument of sanctification, Sanctify
them by thy truth, thy word is truth, John 17. It is an argument thou have not
this sanctification upon thy affections, when thou have no high esteem, or
price of the holy Ordinances; when this hony-combe is loathsome to thy stomach,
full of filthy Lusts. The Godly are to call the Sabbaths, a delight: and the
word is aggravated under all manner of excellencies by David's gracious heart;
and for this end, because it has spiritual and savory effects: So then if thou
would know the evidences of thy sanctification, and judge thereby, Examine
how thou art affected to the means of grace? Do they become welcome and
precious to thee? Do thou cry out like those in the transfiguration, It is
good to be here? Is it as meat and drink unto thee? Then thou may comfortably
rejoice in this, That God has given thee a sanctified heart, to love the word
of God, and the means of Grace, and that because of the powerful operations
thereby, cannot be but by a spirit graciously wrought upon.

Fourthly, Those that are sanctified, are diligent in preparing and fitting
themselves for the holy duties they are conversant in. Thus to sanctify, was
to set a man apart 4. Preparation for duties.
for the spiritual employment he was called unto. And herein is a great
discovery of the Truth of Grace seen; when men do not overly, and customarily
perform holy Duties, but they do Hoc agere, as the Priests cried out in the
Heathens sacrifice. Thus it is a duty to serve the Lord without distraction: 1
Cor 7. and hence are those expressions, Watch to pray, Mark 13. 33. take heed
how you hear: Mark 4. 24. Be swift to hear, laying aside all superfluity of
naughtiness, James 1. 21. To pray with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with
all thy soul, this is the fruit of sanctification, How many need this truth to
be powerfully pressed upon them. I speak not of profane and ungodly men, who
quite lay aside the performance of any holy duties; they pray not at all, they
hear not at all, or very seldom: but of those who take upon them the
profession of religion; that hear and repeat Sermons, that have family Duties
constantly: Alas it is not the doing of these; it is not the bare performance
of these that argue thy sanctification: But do thou watch unto these duties?
do thou take heed to thy self in the doing of them? Are they not discharged
as a Task, as a burden thou know thou art obliged unto? This is to be
feared, That when God comes to examine your religious duties, they will be
found but so many empty formalities, Duties neither coming from the life of
Grace, nor yet stirring up and increasing that life. Oh this is to be
considered, That all holy duties are to come from spiritual life, and to stir
up spiritual life; whereas the deadness, the dullness, the barrenness of all
thy private and public duties, are a great testimony at least to thy defect
in sanctification. Say then to thy soul, Awake thou that sleep: What? Did
David pray thus? Did Daniell pray thus? Did Jonah in the whales belly pray
thus? Be afraid that thou art only Lukewarm, that thou have no true zeal, and
so God will spue thee out of his mouth, as he threatens, Rev. 3. 16. Persuade
your selves that your heartlesse, customary, lazy performances, are great
sins against God, have a contempt of his Majesty upon them: and for which God
does threaten to take away the means of Grace, as from some of the Churches of
Asia. Oh then say to thy self, How can this earthly, cold, lazy heart of mine
stand with sanctification? How can I say I have the love of God, and Christ in
me, which is like fire, and do things thus coldly? Dwell upon this sign,
meditate much upon it; for how easily and readily does negligence, and
laziness creep into all your performances; insomuch that our duties are
therefore so ineffectuall, and unprofitable, because they are not animated, and
enlivened with the power of godliness.

Fithly, Those that are sanctified, are clean and purged from those vicious,
and foul 5. Free from noisome lusts
noisome lusts that they were once plunged into; and thus washed and sanctified
are joined together. The Leper was not a sanctified person in the Law, because
he was unclean, 2 Timothy 2. 21. If a man therefore purge himself from these, he
shall be a vessll unto honor, sanctified and meet for his Masters use. If he
purge himself from these (that is) from all unclean ways of iniquity, then he
is sanctified. Consider therefore how unspotted art thou kept from the
wickedness of the world? How clean art thou from thy former defilements? Are
not the same blots, and bloaches upon thy life as formerly? Are there not the
same monstrous deformities as before? How can thou hold up thy face? Why art
thou not confounded within thee, to think how unclean and brutish thou art? Be
not then any more wallowing in thy mire and filthiness. It is time at last to
make thy self pure.

Sixthly, Those that are sanctified they are (as it follows in that Text)
meet for 6 Fit for spiritual employment.
their Masters use, sit for any spiritual employment, prepared unto every good
work. Oh this is a blessed estate when thou art fit to be employed for any
service by God. As Esaias, when he had a coal from the Altar that touched him,
then he was sanctified, and the uncleanness of his lips was taken away. Thou
art not fit to be a Magistrate, a Minister, a Master, a Father, a Servant, till
sanctified for this use. There must be a particular ^moothing, and fitting of
thee for every particular relation, for every good Duty, else thou can not
serve God thereby. It is the greatest honor that we creatures are capable off,
that we may be used as instruments for his glory. Now men may be either passive
instruments, or active instruments under him; Passive instruments I call, all
such as are raised up by God to do his work; but they have no aim or spiritual
inclinations to serve God therein. Thus Cyrus, and Nebuchadnezzar, they are
called Gods servants, but their hearts were not sanctified for God in this
work. Again there are active instruments, and such are those who in the Text
are made meet for their masters use, they have humility, and an holy fear of
God. They eye him, and look up to him; and in this sense Moses, Joshua, David,
and many others were sanctified. If therefore God call thee to any service, if
God put thee into any relation, though never so mean, know thou can not go
through that relation in a gracious manner, unless sanctified thereunto, and
made meet for it. Be not a blunt and unserviceable instrument in Gods hand.

Seventhly, Those that are sanctified, are not cast down with inordinate and
sinful fears, because of all the troubles and persecutions that may fall upon
them in doing 7. Not cast down with fears.
their duties. The work of sanctification is accompanied with much opposition,
persecution, and many difficulties: Now herein is the excellency of this seen,
that a man is not discouraged for all this; he fears to offend God by any
sin, or neglect of his duty, more then any external misery. Sanctify the Lord
your God, and let him be your fear, 1 Pet. 3. 15. Be not afraid of what terror
and troubles the world can raise against you for godliness sake; but sanctify
God, and let him be your fear: That is, have holy, high, reverent, and great
thoughts of God; look upon his name, his power, his authority, as greater then
any man's. It is sanctification only that will make a man encounter with all
oppositions, that will make a man fear God only: for that puts an awful
esteem into us of his great Name.

Eighthly, Those that are sanctified, by this their sanctification are made
spiritual 8. Spiritual Priests.
Priests, offering up spiritual sacrifices unto God. Not that they may take
upon them the public office of preaching, and administering sacraments, but
because they have sacrifices in a spiritual manner to be offered up unto God:
Especially that place is much to be urged, Romans 12. 1. Offer up your bodies as
a reasonable sacrifice unto the Lord. In the Old Testament they did after a
corporal manner slay and kill Beasts, offering them to God: But now we are in
a spiritual manner to crucify and mortify the flesh, with the affections and
lusts thereof. If then thou art sanctified, all thy inordinate passions, and
affections of anger, love, and joy, are circumcised. As the sacrifice of one
kind was to be wholly burnt unto God, no part to remain, so art thou wholly to
be resigned unto God, and all that is thine is to be given up unto him, that so
no love may be in thee, but of God, and in reference to him; and thus of all
other passions. Oh then if thou find sin, and uncircumcised affections, and
motions in thee, be afraid, for the spirit of sanctification is not to be
received in vain; where that rules and reigns, there will be a daily killing
of those unruly Lusts.

Ninthly, Those that are sanctified, they have also the privilege of
Justification, 9. Justified and adopted.
and Adoption, whereby they are enabled to come with boldness to the throne of
Grace. The spirit of God, which is the sanctifier, is also the comforter, and
it does comfort by the fruits of Sanctification, Hence Romans 8. The Apostle
describes those to have the spirit, who walk not after the flesh, nor fulfill
the lusts thereof. So that the more thou aboundest in sanctification, thou
do also come nearer to consolation; not but that the most holy and
sanctified ones of God, may sometimes for gracious ends in Gods dispensations,
be barren of all comfort, and destitute of joy. But because joy and comfort is
promised to the daily exercise of Sanctification, the righteous and the godly
they are called upon to rejoice, as being the only and proper subjects to whom
this consolation does belong. Therefore by wicked and unsavory words and
actions, we are said to grieve the spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 30. and no wonder, if
when we grieve that, that it grieveth us, or leaves us to be grieved, and
vexed by the Prince of darkness.

These properties being thus opened, let us consider the grounds and reasons
why Reasons or motives to sanctification.
we should so much press after, and desire this privilege.

And first, To the sanctified person, God makes all things sanctified. Oh noble
and unspeakable privilege; to the clean, all things become clean, Romans 8. all
things work together for the good of those that love God, and that is an effect
of Sanctification: What will win us and move us, if not this advantage? All
things shall be Sanctified to thee, i. e. All things shall make thee holy;
mercies, afflictions, comforts, and crosses. Thus as the Temple did Sanctify
the gold, and every thing brought therein; so this Sanctified person by Gods
grace, has every thing Sanctified, health and sickness, straights and
liberty, life and death. Now that is the utmost mercy in a mercy, to have, it
Sanctified; it is the highest thing to be desired: Thou can wish and expect
no more then this, then that the condition thou art in, the providence of God
which befall thee, may be Sanctified; yet this thou art sure of, who art first
Sanctified thy self. This advantage is indeed spiritual, and therefore remote
from earthly and worldly men, who so they have mercies, never care or pray for
the sanctification of them.

Secondly, Those that are sanctified, are the only fit and welcome persons
that may 2.
come into Gods presence. Thus in the Old Testament, they were to Sanctify
themselves when they were to draw nigh unto God: And that Typical legal
Sanctification, did instruct concerning our Moral Sanctification. Those that
draw nigh to an holy God, in any holy duty, ought themselves to be made holy.
What have thou to do to take my words in thy mouth, and hate to be reformed,
said God? Psalm. 50. Again, I hate your new Moons, and your solemn feasts, says
God to unsanctified persons, Esa. 1. Remember therefore that thou art no
prepared, or fitted man to approach near unto God: there is no gracious
invitation of thee till thou have thus been sanctified. Stand aloof off: holy
duties are for holy persons: holy men must draw nigh to an holy God: if God bid
thee depart from him here, under a dispensation of Grace, How much more will thou hear that terrible Depart, at the day of judgment?

Thirdly, Therefore endeavor after sanctification, because that only answers
really 3.
to the name and title the Scripture gives all believers, all that are
baptized. They are called Saints, to the Saints at Corinth: The Saints salute
you. I know many controversies are about this compellation; I touch not on them
now, only this is certain, the Title of a Saint binds thee to real
Sanctification. To be called rich, and yet poor, is but a mockery: To be
accounted well, and yet sick, is but a real misery: And thus it is here: To be
be called holy, and yet wicked; to be styled a Saint, and yet a Beast, or a
Devil, Oh how should it shame and amaze thee? Say then, My Christianly, my
Baptism, my Religion does oblige me to this Sanctification. I have only a
Title, if I have not true holiness. So that all you who live in gross
ignorance, and scandalous ways, What shall I term you? How shall I name you?
Art thou fit to be called a Believer, a Saint? Yet I speak not this, as if the
Scripture called none Saints, or holy, but such as had internal Sanctification.

Fourthly, Be therefore stirred up to this, because this is better then all
knowledge, parts and abilities. Oh that men who look at religion, would mind
this more. 4.
This is the will of God, your sanctification, follow after holiness or
Sanctification, without which no man can see God. Thou think it a great
matter to be able to repeat Sermons, to dispute in matters of religion: Oh but
it is better to speak five words from a principle of Sanctification, then five
thousand from parts and intellectual abilities only. Oh then say, if I pray, I
preach, I dispute, I repeat, and have not Sanctification; I am but a tinckling
cymbal that makes a pleasant noise to others, but it self is not affected
therewith.

Use of Exhortation, still to be moved and pressed hereunto. Oh the comfort and
glory of being in the number of those that are Sanctified: I may add one motive
Use.
more, this is the only evidence of your Election, of Justification, of right
to eternal glory. Here a man must begin; If I be sanctified, then I am elected,
then I am justified. How then can you have any comfort? How is it that you are
not full of fears and troubles, that find no tokens of sanctification upon
you, but the clean contrary. Sanctification, it is the end of all our
preaching, and of your hearing; and therefore every thing has been in vain to
you till this be accomplished. Do not then rejoice any more that thy riches
have increased; that outward mercies have abounded; but still look to this, Art
thou sanctified? Yet after you have heard Sermon after Sermon, How prone are
you to go home the same men? Not neighbor to say to neighbor, How may we do
that we may be Sanctified.

SERMON. LXIV.
The counterfeits of Sanctification. That Devotion, in superstitious Customs,
or Gods own Ordinances, or being externally in Covenant with God, do not really
sanctify a man.

1 COR. 6. 11. And such were some of you, but ye are Sadctified, etc.
YOu have heard the nature and properties of Sanctification: Now let us discuss
the counterfeits of it: for there are many things in Christianity which people
do generally trust in, as if they had power to sanctify them, in the mean
while neglecting wholly true and real Sanctification. This point is of great
consequenco, if men would diligently attend to it: For as it was generally
received among the Jews, that the Temple and Sacrifices did sanctify them,
though their lives were full of wickedness: So there is scarce any one
Christian, but thinks his Baptism, his Christianity, the Gospel, these do
sanctify him. And as among the Jews, this principle ingraffed in their
hearts, was that bitter root which made all things else bitter; so it is now
among Christians. Let us go over in particular those abused instruments for
sanctification.

And first, There are and have been many superstitious humane customs
introduced, in the zealous performance of which men, have thought themselves
sanctified. These 1. Zeal in Superstitious cestoms.
things have abounded in Popery: Insomuch that all the holiness almost they
celebrate and commend, is this external holiness. Hence their holy images,
holy vestments, holy Altars, holy Crosses, holy Water, and a world of such
Consecrated things they have, in the devout use whereof they conceive
themselves made more holy. The accumulating and heaping of these consecrated
sanctities, were brought in partly by an ignorant zeal to imitate the Jewish
dispensations, as also a desire to symbolize with Paganish rites: and partly
for to satisfy the ambition and avarice of their holy Mother, the Church of
Rome: And if we consider the general ignorance and superstitious disposition
in most people, It may seem a wonder of wonders, that ever such a reformation
could be brought in, as should take people off from their accustomed
superstitious sanctification. But God calls things that are not, as if they
were: Now although I hope there are few that hear me, but have learnt better
then to be addicted to such consecrated holiness, yet take these antidotes
against it.

1. That if the instituted consecrations, and sanctifications in the Old
Testament, Antidotes. I.
and that by God himself, did not upon the mere use of them, or the work done,
beget real, and moral sanctification; much less can mere humane
institutions, introduced solely by the will of man. Now that it was so in the
Old Testament, it is plain. We read of many purifications, and sanctifications;
They had holy vessels, the holy Temple, the Priests Garments were holy; yet
none of these instituted holinesses did make the priests or people better;
though they had holy Oil poured on their bodies, yet if they were not anointed
with the graces of Gods Spirit, all was nothing. Though they came to an holy
Temple, yet if their bodies were not an holy Temple, this profited them not;
and no remission of sin could be obtained by the killing of Sacrifices. If then
Gods own Consecrations did not make persons inwardly, and in their lives
sanctified, How can we think that holy places, holy Oil, holy Water, or holy
times that have no Original, but from Man's presumption, shall be able to work
such effects in us.

2. These can have no such sanctified operation, because not appointed by God;
and where there is no Divine institution, we may not expect any Divine
operation. II.
In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Traditions of Men, Mat.
15. 9. In vain, Oh what a Thunderbolt is this; Who can persuade the
superstitious man, that has labored and toiled himself in such ignorant and
formal Devotions, that all is but labor in vain? Why might not men appoint
Sacraments, and add more to those two Christ left us, if so be that they could
appoint any Usages or Rites, which would work such effects?

3. It argues a people of a Divine and Noble disposition, when they enquire
into III.
the Original, and Divine institution of things. Has God put his stamp and
seal upon such a Custom? Is there a Divine superscription upon such a
religious Rite? This would be like pulling off the scales from the eyes, and
make them weary of Egyptian darkness. The Hebrews call Idols sometimes by a
word that signifies Terrors and Fears, because the Worshippers of them did
excruciate themselves by a thousand of superstitious fears about them. And thus
also are all the Traditions of men, perplexing the consciences of men with
endless scruples; whereas a true knowledge of God out of his word, arising in
the heart of a Man, would like the light quickly dispel this darkness.

4. It is a dangerous thing to depend on these things for sanctification,
because they fill the heart with opinions of merit, satisfaction, and
compensation made to God. IV.
Hence where these Customs are introduced, there the Doctrine of Merits and
Free Will, and of humane satisfactions, are vehemently asserted: Now the main
scope of the Scripture is to pull down this pride of man's heart, to empty him
of all righteousness and worth; to make him to see Christ's fullness, and his
emptiness. Oh, How far was Paul from thinking of any satisfactions, or
Compensations, who admireth that Evangelicall Grace so much vouchsafed unto him
a most grievous sinner! The Godly heart cries out with the Centurion, he is
not worthy Christ should come within his roof.

5. The work of this external adherent holiness is very easy. It is no
greater V,
labor or trouble to besprinkle themselves with so much Holy water, to be
anointed with so much Oil. If this were all that Christ required of those that
would be saved, hell would be empty. But to what purpose are consecrated
Crosses, and Sannctified Beads, if thy tongue, and eyes, and whole body be not
also sanctfied. The Papists they give this reason, why so many turned
Protestants, because (say they) Protestantism chalks out an easy way to
heaven, it is but Believe, and all will be well: but Popery holds out a more
pleasant and suitable way to flesh and blood; for what burden is there in
heaping up many Ceremonious and superstitious actions? The mortifying of one
sin, the crucifying of one Lust, will be more heart-ache and trouble to flesh
and blood, then a thousand such Traditional services.

Secondly, Well then, it may easily be granted, That such petty ridiculous
sanctities that are by men's commandments, may be no more then dung, yea, an
abomination unto the Lord. But what shall be thought of those holy Duties which
God has appointed: there is holy praying, holy hearing. These holy serevies
which God himself has Commanded, Does not the constant, and diligent use of
these sanctify a Man? No, these are not barely to be relied How the constant
and diligent use of Gods Ordinances, do not sanctify. I.
upon.

For 1. These duties do not sanctify, except thou be first sanctified
inwardly. Prayer does not make thee holy, but an holy prayer proceeds from
holiness. These duties do then only increase, and add to our Grace, when they
are the exercises and effects of a sanctified life within us. A wicked man who
is spiritually dead in his sins, can no more pray after a spiritual gracious
manner, then a dead man can speak or breath. Do not then mistake in this
business: these religious Duties are called holy, not because they sanctify
every one that appears near to God in them; but because God, who is the
object of them, and on whom they are terminated, is an holy God, and because
they increase holiness in those who are endued with a supernatural life.

2. God in the Old Testament does severely rebuke all those that draw nigh to
Him II.
in those duties he commanded, and yet refuse to be washed from their sins.
This is the main scope of all the Prophets in all their Sermons, upbraiding,
and complaining that they would approach to him, as if they were his people, in
a very solemn manner: They would hear, yet do nothing, Ezekiel. 33. 32. And
thereupon God disdaineth their Duties; God accounts of them no more then as
heathens, and the vilest of men: And do we not need such Prophets again, to
awaken our people? May not we say? The burden of the Lord? the burden of the
Lord. To what purpose are those multitude of Duties? Wash ye, and make ye
clean, and so will God accept you. What a ridiculous thing is it to comfort thy
self with an holy prayer, as thou think, when thou have so many unholy
words, and unholy actions? will God take notice of thy duties, when thy sins
cry so loud in his ears? but we have spoken heretofore of this.

We come to the Third thing intended, And that is the holiness of the Covenant
3. The being exreanally in Covenant with God, how it Sanctifies, and how it
does does not sanctify a man.
under which all pass that outwardly profess God to be their God, and accept
of Jesus Christ to be their Lord. This is the highest holiness next to that of
Sanctification, and true Godliness: Now because this is a controverted point,
and many who confess an outward Covenant-holinesse that was Typical among the
Jews, yet deny any such federal holiness in the New Testament, and therefore
say all the holiness in the Gospel, is a Moral real holiness; we must be the
more tender what we deliver herein.

And 1. Consider, That God who is the supreme Lord and Governor of all, that I.
might deal with man only in an absolute way, as a Lawgiver, man being his
Creature; yet such is his gracious goodness, that he enters into a familiar
Covenant-way with us. God might have commanded us to do such and such things,
but never have entered into a Covenant to promise and engage himself to be thus
and thus, and to do thus and thus for us. This Covenaut of Grace is that which
the Scripture does so often speak of and admire; the substance of it being to
become our God, and to make us his people. Now what tongue can express the
privilege, and great glory of this condition, to own God for our God; so that
thereby his wisdom, his power, his goodness, all is for our advantage; and we
come in all duties unto God, not upon absolute terms, but Covenant terms, and
that of Grace: Where by God does as it were lay aside the glory of his Majesty,
and his terrible severe justice and becomes like one of us, condescending to us?

2. This Covenant is dispensed in an external, and visible administration, by
II.
the Word and Sacraments. The preaching of the Gospel is the solemn
promulgation of this Covenant, and invitation to enter therein: The Sacraments
are seals to ratify and confirm this holy and sacred agreement. Now because
all know not the work of Grace, to whom this Covenant is externally
administered, hence arises that necessary distinction of an external Covenant,
and an internal. The external Covenant is that whereby in an outward visible
manner God does own a people, and they externally profess their owning of him;
but yet in their hearts and souls they do not steadfastly cleave unto God, and
faithfully keep this Covenant in the Conditions thereof. The internal, or
inward Covenant, i^ that whereby God does in a Spiritual powerful manner take a
people to him, working in their hearts all those gifts and graces promised in
the Covenant, as regeneration, remission of sin, adoption, and the like: And
in this sense only the truly godly are in the Covenant, and they are only
Gods people, and he their God. This distinction of a Covenant into outward and
inward, is not a distinction of a Genus into it is Species, so much as a
distinction of a thing into the several administrations and dispensations of
it. If Adam had stood firm in that state of integrity, there had not been this
distinction of an external and internal Covenant: for all then would have
been godly; and the outward dispensation of Gods love would have been to none,
but those that were indeed his. But since the fall, even in Gods own garden,
there are weeds as well as flowers, there is Chaff as well as Wheat in his
Floor: and therefore some are partakers of the Covenant only externally, some
both externally and internally also.

3. By reason of this external and visible participation of the Covenant. All
III.
those who live under it, and do not apostatize, or absolutely revolt from it,
have a kind of external Covenant-holiness, and in opposition to Heathens and
Pagans or Apostates may be called holy. This is indeed greatly doubted of by
some; but if we consider the Scripture, God does own a people for his, though
not inwardly godly, as long as they externally own him, and do not plainly
renounce his Worship and Service. It is true indeed, if we speak of spiritual
and gracious Communion with an enjoyment of God, so they are none of his; but
we now relate to an external society only: Thus the Jews, though they were
false and hypocrital in their hearts, yea full of many a^ominable ^mpieties,
yet God owned them as his people, till the conjugall bond at last was wilfully
and perfidiously violated by them. Hence in that they were Circumcised, and
solemnly worshipped the true God, God owned them as his people, though he did
also at the same time reproove them severely for their sins. Hence the
Heathens, Ephesians. 2. are said to be strangers from the Covenant and
commonwealth of Israel; Implying, that all the Israelites by Birth and
Education, till they made a manifest revolt, were under the Covenant. Therefore
consider what the Apostle says of all the Jews Romans 9. 4. Who are Israelites
to whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, i. e. The Ark and outward
testimony of Gods presence, and the Covenants, and Adoption. They were all in
Covenant, and so outwardly the sons of God; and therefore God by the Propht
complains that they had taken his sons, and his daoghters, which they had
brought forth ^o him, and offered them up to M^loch. Thus you see in the old
Testament, that even unregenerate men were in some sense under the Covenant,
and so had an external holiness; and therefore sometimes they areall called
Saints, Deuteronomy, 33. 3. in opposition to the world, that was destitute of the
knowledge and true worship of God; and some again, that were the children of
the Kingdom, should yet be cast forth, M^t^^. 12. Under the New Testament,
that such an external, visible enjoying of the Ordinances does also bring a
kind of external holiness, which Heathens and Pagans have not is apparent
first by that place, 1 Cor. (...). Else were your children unclean, but now
they are holy. What holiness can this be?

First, it cannot be a civil holiness, as some would expound it. That is, they
are legitimate Children, and not Bastards: for in that sense the children of
heathens are holy, i. e. they are not Bastards, because marriages are lawful
and val^d amongst them.

The^ secondly, Holiness cannot be understood of true inherent holiness, for
so all the children of Believing Parents are not holy. How many godly Parents
have wicked and ungodly children?

Therefore thirdly, it must be meant of an external Covenant-holinesse, whereby
Believers were in outward manner owned by God, and by that their children also
had a right to Baptism, and so are not born as Children of Heathens in the
outward power of Satan and wrath: For although by nature they are children of
wrath, yet being born within the Covenant, they have an holiness; that is, a
right to such Ordinances they are capable of, which the Children of Pagans have
not. Thus H^b. 10. 29. the Apostle speaks there of an Apostate who never had
true inward grace and sanctification in him; yet he is said to be sanctified by
the blood of the Covenant. How was that? not really and in truth; for then he
could never fall into that unpardonable sin: but externally and in respect of
the outward enjoyment of the Gospel, with their profession of obedience
thereunto. And hence it is, that the Apostle writing to all Believers, to all
Churches which he had planted, he gives them the title of Saints: especially
we are to take notice of that expression, 1 Cor. 1. 2. To them that are
sanctified, called to be Saints. The Corinthians (you know) were many of them
taxed for grievous and dangerous crimes, both in Doctrine and manners; yet he
styles them Sanctified, and Saints. As for the exception that some make, he
speaks thus in respect of the better part. I grant that to be true in part; yet
because the other did not wilfully renounce Christ, they might in some sense be
said to be sanctified; for they voluntarily owned that holy profession and name
of Christ, though in works they denied him. Besides, those titles showed what
they ought to be, and what Obligations were on them to walk holily: But this
requires a more large and exact handling. Some reject the Translation called
to be Saints; because in the Greek it is (...), called Saints, but this is
needless; for in the first Verse Paul is said to be (...), called an Apostle;
which necessarily denotes his Apostleship to be the end of his Calling; as
Saintship is the end of ours.

4. The offer and tendering of this Covenant is not enough to make a people
outwardly holy, but there must be an outward and visible accepting of it. The
Gospel IV.
has been preached to many people, who yet rejected it; and therefore not
taking the Covenant, continued still in their natural pollution and
uncleanness; and this is necessarily to be pressed upon you: for most
Christians know not, or attend not to what they do. There is none of you who
are Baptized, and own the title of Christians, but ye have entered into a
Covenant with God, you have promised to be his, you have resigned up your
selves unto him, as your Lord, whose Laws you will obey. Thus as many as are
baptized, are said, To put on Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 27 That is, their external
profession, and Sacramental obligation, 1 Pet. 3. 21. That Answer of a good
Conscience is an allusive expression to Covenants and Contracts which are
mutually made between parties. Oh then, that all you who glory in your Baptism
and Christianity, and thereby in a kind of holiness, would remember what those
stipulations were? Were not those engagements to ^enounce the devil, to forsake
all wicked ways, and to cleave only to him? Because you entered into such an
agreement, and made such an external profession, therefore thou art in a sense
under the Covenant, and so have a Covenant-Sanctification. But all this will
not avail without true, real, and practical holiness, and amendment of thy
life.

First, This holiness is but titular and nominal; and although it be of some
dignity I.
and privilege, as it was to the Jews, to have the Oracles and promises
belonging to them; Yet it is not advantageous to the chiefest and most
necessary good, which is the enjoyment of God, and eternal happiness. Now as
in all other things the name does not satisfy without the reality, the name of
riches without r^ches; the name of health without health; so neither may the
name of Sanctification, without the thing it self. Put not then any confidence
in this, that thou art under Gods Covenant, thou have given up thy self to him
in Baptism, thou wearest this Badge and Mark; for all this is but a shadow and
no substance, till thy affections and conversations be made really holy.

Secondly, This Covenant-holinesse will not serve, because it does but
aggravate II.
and heighten the wickeanesse of those who being under this bond, yet walk
contrary to God. God will proceed against thee as a persidious violator of that
holy Covenant thou made with him, for thee who have thus entered into Covenant
with God, and brought all thy Children under this relation, to perform no
Covenant-duties; how unpardonable is it? Therefore God does greatly complain
when his people are no better, and walk no more holily, then those that never
knew him, or drew nigh to him. Hos. 6. 7. But they like men, have dealt
treacherously. Some expound it thus, They like Adam transgressed the Covenant;
That as Adam placed in Paradise continued not faithful to God, so the
Israelites brought into a rich and plentiful land, flowing with Milk and
Honey, brake those holy bonds they were tied in to God. But we rather take it
as Rivet, They, like men, that is, as if they were none of my people, as if
they had never covenanted with me, but were, like the common men of the world,
that live without the knowledge of God, so opposite and rebellious are they
against me. Oh how truly may this Text be verified of too many Christians:
Like men they transgress Gods Law.

Use of Instruction. How prone men are, though it is very vain, to have hopes
in a false counterfeit Sanctification. In Popery the greatest part of their
religion Use 1.
is placed in holy Images, holy Temples, holy Ceremonies; as if these things
did sanctify them. And although Protestants are generally delivered from this
blindness, yet how do they lean upon external Signs or Badges of holiness,
because they partake of an holy Baptism, have a Covenant-holinesse, which also
is communicated to their Children, how ready to be puffed up with it! Oh but
none of these holinesses or sanctifications, is meant in that place. Without
Sanctification no man shall see God: And, Be ye holy as I am holy. Attend
therefore to that which is true Sanctification, that to which the promise of
grace and glory is made.

Use 2. To rebuke sharply all profane and ungodly persons, that yet are under
the names and Titles of Christians, and sanctified persons, Oh the Justice of
Use 2.
God will fetch thee from these very Altars and condemn thee. How can the
patience of God any longer bear with thee, in the profession of holiness, (for
so thy Christianity is) to be wicked and unholy. Many times have thou been
admonished herein; tremble at it, and know, the seasons and opportunities of
getting holiness will not continue always.

SERMON LXV.
Comfortable Directions to poor Doubting Christians.

1 COR. 6. 11. But ye are Sanctified, etc.
I Shall conclude the work of grace at this time expressed in the Text, under
the notion of Sanctification, and that shall be by handling some practical cases
which may justly be propounded by a godly sanctified heart, for seeing this is
the evidence of our election, and justification. No marvail, if the soul may
have doubts to be informed about therein. And,

First, It may be demanded Why, if I perceive those common gifts and abilities
which come from the holy Ghost in me; I may not thence conclude the Spirit of
I. Whether from common gifts of the Spirit a man may not conclude grace to be
in him.
sanctification in me? There were in the Primitive times extraordinary gifts
vouchsafed by the Holy Ghost, according to the promise of old, Joel 2. Now all
these were from the same spirit, as the Apostle witnesses, 1 Cor. 12. 4. And
although those extraordinary works of the Holy Ghost now cease, yet there are
many gifts still dispensed unto men, that cannot be called the works of the
slesh, but the gifts of Gods Spirit; such as believing for a season, joy in the
word preached: illumination of mind, tasting experimentally the sense of Gods
word, in which the Apostle says, They are partakers of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6.
May we not then, where we feel these things in our selves, or see them in
others, conclude there is the work of sanctification?

To this in the first place I Answer, That amongst men, who judge by outward
appearance, Answ. He may not
and cannot try the hearts and reins, which is Gods Sovereignty, these things
are much admired, and received for Sanctification. Hence if we see a man have
good utterance and gifts in prayer, with affectionate inlargements; if he speak
of some joy and sweetness he has in the Ordinances; if he can confer and
dispute with some illumination of mind and understanding in religious things;
we are apt to take all that glisters thus, for gold: and because others do put
such an esteem upon them; therefore they that have such gifts do easily
persuade themselves that they are sanctified also. But these gifts of Gods
Spirit are not sanctification. A man may have all those enumerated
excellencies, and yet be an unregenerated man. For,

First, You have many instances of those who have had these gifts, and yet no
true Reason. (...).
members of Christ. As those Hebrews 6. which the Apostle speaks of; and
therefore though the Apostle had reckoned up those great things, yet he says,
I hope better things of you, and things that accompany salvation. In this
number was Judas, the foolish Virgins, the third kind of hearers, such are
compared to Swine washed; though washed, yet Swine still. Oh then think it not
such a matter, if because of parts and abilities in prayer, discourse and
conference in Religion, thou art eminently admired by others; for these are no
sure sign of Sanctification. Here may be light, but no oil; and therefore
though it be our saying ordinarily; Such an one is an able Christian; Why so?
because of gift in Prayer, ability to speak in divine things; yet that is not
so. He is an able Christian, who is strong in the works of Sanctification, who
is able in believing, in heavenly mindedness, in humility, in uprightness and
sincerity of heart. If ever the Professors of England needed any truth, they
ought to give diligent heed to this: For how is that which is indeed true
godliness neglected, and curious Disputes, and needless Controversies exalted
in the room thereof!

Secondly, These do not sanctify; because a man that has these gifts of the
Holy Ghost, is still carnal and unsavory, improving them wholly to carnal and
2.
corrupt ends. It Is commonly objected by Arminians, and others, when we say,
That an unregenerate man is wholly flesh, and altogether corrupt: and yet may
have many gifts of Gods Spirit: how then can they be wholly corrupt? Are those
gifts of God evil? and its answered, The men are altogether corrupt and
carnal, though some good gifts of God be in them; for they improve all these
to a sinful end, for self-advantage one way or other; even as they do the
external Gifts of God, Riches, Honor and Glory: so that as by these they are
not made holy, but their corruptions are more drawn out by them: So it is here,
they are not made holy by these Gifts and inlargements, but rather internal
and soulcorruption is more strengthened thereby, But I have spoken at large,
that the common gifts of Gods Spirit are no evidences of grace.

A second doubt therefore may be, what a true godly man, who is indeed
sanctified, should do, when he finds no evidences of his sanctification. All
II. What a truly sanctified man should do when he finds noevidences of
sanctification.
the Sermons he hears preached about it, put him into fear and tremblings of
heart: for alas! he goes home, and looks in his soul, compares himself and
the symptoms and properties of sanctification together, and O the
disproportion he presently discovers! Insomuch that he has little joy in
himself, and none knows but his own soul, what sad temptations, and heavy
anxieties of spirit he lies under.

To Answer this: First, it cannot be denied, but that even a sanctified person
Answ. 1.
may be in great darkness, and heavy blackness of soul, that he cannot but
judge himself for the present to be a Reprobate and a Cast away; to be an
hypocrite, and all that he had done, in hypocrisy. David sometimes casts
forth despairing words in his Psalms about his condition, as if he had no hopes
of God: Heman the Psalmist complains of the terrors of God, that made him even
distracted thereby, Psalm 88. 15. This is no new thing, for a child of light
to lie and walk in darkness; for a child that is heir to a great inheritance,
to be in the dark close womb, knowing nothing of it. God has wise ends in
this, both in reference to the persons themselves, that are thus exercised, to
humble them, and to keep them low; as also to teach wicked men, that if Godly
men be thus scarcely saved, where shall the wicked appear? Although wicked men
for the most part suck poison hence; and God makes this an heavy
stumbling block to them; that they conclude the contrary, as if it were
godliness, and the too much following of Sermons, and the means of Grace, made
them so. But oh miserable deluded souls, to fall at such stones, and to harden
themselves in wickedness by that, which should indeed humble them. But to
direct the tempted soul in this matter: First he must give up himself to the
instruction and information of others, who are godly and wise; for he being in
a temptation is not fit to judge, nor can he pass righteous judgment. A man
in the dark cannot see his face in the glass, nor in muddyed and turbulent
water. Thou art sick, and we see Physicians themselves, though never so wise,
will yet hardly venture to be their own Physicians in dangerous diseases, but
require the assistance of others; Christ himself had an Angel to help him; The
same word (...), in the Scripture is both to exhort and comfort, because
comfort is not received in a gracious heart, but by frequent and daily
exhortations. Do not then regard thy own thoughts, and thy own determinations.
Its said Abraham staggered not through unbelief, Romans 4. 20. That implies,
that there are temptations, which do as it were give a man a great blow in the
head, making him dizzy and staggering. Now as a man in such an unexpected blow
knows not what he does, nor understands himself; so neither does a
Christian in such temptations. Remember therefore thy self in this black
condition: Say, I am not wise enough, nor able enough to judge my self.

Secondly, Art thou in doubt about thy condition? consider whether there be not
some great sin committed, and unrepented of, that does justly provoke God 2.
to cast thee in this darkness. This was David's case after those foul
enormities; then he could not tell what to say, or think of himself. This David
insinuates when he prays so earnestly for truth in the inward parts, Psalm
51. Wonder not then if such foggy mists raise so great a darkness, that it
obscure the very Sun. Thou desire impossibilities; thou would have evidence
of sanctification, when its evident thou do not mortify thy sins;
Therefore repair that crack in thy building, that leak in thy Ship. David in
another Psalm 32. speaks also that he had no quietness in his bones, till
he had confessed that sin which troubled him. Do not then deceive thy own
soul; till thou have put that Dalilah away from thee, never think to enjoy the
joy of the Lord, which is thy strength.

Thirdly, It may be thou dostnot distinguish between the presence of Grace, and
3.
the power of it; between weak graces and strong graces. And that which is
little, or which is not to thy desire and mind, thou accountest nothing at all.
A little infant has a man's nature in him, as well as he that is grown. As it
was in the building of the Temple, they were not to despise the day of small
things; so neither is a godly man to contemn or disregard the beginnings, and
the small things of grace. Our Savior would not despise the smoking Flax, and
will thou? Take ^^ed therefore of thinking thou have no evidences, because they
be imperfect and weak: One spark argues fire as well as an whole flame. The
child of God while he looks to the rule, and considers what he ought to be,
never remembers that the conformity to this rule is more or less in those that
believe; so then though thou art in the lowest form, yet thou art still in
Christ's school, and need to look backward for what has been done, and
fore-warned for what remains to be done.

Fourthly, remember the evidences thou have enjoyed formerly. This is a special
4.
way to keep the heart up against all assaults. The time has been when thou
did walk in the comfortable demonstrations of grace in thy heart and life.
The time was, when light did shine into thy breast and thou could with much
thankfulness acknowledge the good things God wrought for thee; let not then
the present darkness obscure all former light; live by the remembrance of what
thou have felt, if thou can not by any present sense and experience; for if
ever thou have upon good grounds discovered thy self to be in the state of
sanctification, thou are still: whatsoever thy present fears may be to the
contrary, God is the same, Christ and the promise continue still the same.
Think then of those Bottles of tears thou have filled, and remember it was once
day, though now it be night, and it will be day again.

Fifthly, lay down this also for a true and comfortable rule, That if thou
can 5.
not find such marks of grace, yet if there be earnest desires and strong
groans after these, there is grace begun in thee. These sprouts cannot be, but
where sanctification is. Hence it is, that those who hunger and thirst after
righteousness are said to be blessed, because they shall be satisfied, Matthew.
5. Though therefore corruptions are potent, they bear thee down, earthly
affections, immoderate passions are prevalent over thee; yet because thou
pantest and breathest after more grace, this is an argument of spiritual life
in thee. Paul that complained of the Law of sin within him, found also the
life of Grace within him; so that as long as thou do not willingly give up
thy self to sin, and obedience to the lusts thereof, here is no matter of
dejection, but encouragement, Paul and others have in this manner been
exercised.

Sixthly, If thou have no comfort from sanctifying grace, then make the more of
justifying grace. God many times hides those works of his in us from our own
eyes, 6.
that so we may the more esteem his grace without us. The hungry will prize the
Honeycomb, and the sick the Physician. Those that sit in darkness, they long
for light. Thus David, when he was in many sad and spiritual exercises, gets
into this Ark, in the midst of those waters that did overflow. There is a time
when God will put a christian to the life of faith, and make dependence and
adherence the greatest honor a Christian can bring to him; and this is most
eminently seen, when to his own sense and feeling he is a barren Wilderness;
the sense and discovery of grace in us makes much indeed for our comfort; but
dependence on the promise and adherence to it, even while we are ready to sink
and to be damned, is the greatest honor to God.

Seventhly, Consider this also, that as the heart is very deceitful in a
presumptuous man, flattering him upon false grounds to believe in God; so its
as deceitful in a 7.
tempted Christian to make him doubt of all things, fear all things, to regard
his sins only, and not his graces. How prevalent the deceit of heart is in
Pharisaical men, is evident to all the world; for how confident and bold are
such? When have they any fears or doubts about their condition? When do they
ever say, It may be all this is but a smooth skin, no sound vitals at all? But
in a godly man tempted, there his deceit works in a contrary way, not taking
notice of the great things God has done for his soul, he believes, and
mourns for sin, he would not commit any known sin for all the world, yet at
the same time cannot see the uprightness and sincerity of his heart: Say
then, I have a deceitful heart in my fears and doubts, as well as presumptions.

Eighthly, Know this also, That it is a great and grievous sin to deny the
works of God in us, to betray the uprightness and integrity of our hearts. You
see 8.
Job stands like a strong Oak against all the viosent blasts that are upon him:
He is a man outwardly and inwardly afflicted, and that by extraordinary
judgments from God, which made his godly friends conclude, that certainly he
was an Hypocrite, God did not use to give such extraordinary blows, but where
there were great faults: now see how resolute Job was in all this, He would not
part with his integrity till he dyed, Job 27. 5. As there is nothing wherein
the devil does more desire to shake thee, than in the integrity and truth of
thy grace; so in this thou oughtst to be the more peremptory, and its no
presumption; but great unthankfulness, not to acknowledge Gods gifts in thee.
Besides this is a bearing false witness against thy own self, not in matters
of goods or life and death, but everlasting peace and comfort.

Ninthly, Though thou sit in never so much darkness, not knowing what to do
or think, yet humble thy self under Gods hand, give not way to fretting
impatience, 9.
entertain no hard thoughts against God and his proceedings: Say, O Lord, if I
should never see good day in this world. O Lord, though thou shuttest me up in
a prison and dark Dungeon all my life time, that I can never get out, yet I may
not expostulate with thee; my heart must not swell or fret; for it is thou
(Lord) that do it. Thus if we would follow Peter's Exhortation, To humble our
selves under his mighty hand, then he would exalt us, 1 Pet. 5 6. It is indeed
very hard to rebuke those roarings of the soul, to quiet those tempests and
waves; we see what sad effects they had upon Job. Into what horrid passions he
breaks out; and when he was reproved for this, (O says he) if your souls
were in my souls stead, you would do as I do. Well, the stouter the
Adversaries are thou grapplest with, the greater honor it will be to conquer;
if it be a Goliath, then David will be more exalted.

Lastly, if thy temptations be thus violent, that as hitherto thou art
persuaded thou had no grace, yet from this time begin; it is not too late
now: If God will call thee in at the heat of the day, refuse not to labor in
the Vineyard. While thou art fearing and doubting about thy condition, the day
is spending, and night is coming on; so that though thou should grant, that
all which has been done by thee, has been in Hypocrisy, and on false
grounds; yet now begin to lay the first stone in a good foundation: Say, O
Lord, Let all these fears, all these doubts be sanctified to me, to make a sure
work: Qui nil dubitat, nil discit He that doubts of nothing, will never seek
out to learn; and it may be well for thee that God has shaken thee thus, it
may be to make the root stronger; There may be a clearer calm after these
boisterous troubles.

This may suffice to comfort those who stand thus suspended from God, and cast
III. Encouragements to those who find Sanctification in them but in a low
degree.
like Absalom from David's face. What encouragements may be given to that
Christian, who finds indeed Sanctification in him, but in a low degree, he is
a Babe, a child, not a grown man: now to such an one, no comfort ought to be
administered, so as to make him sit still, that he should have a nil ultra. No,
Paul himself, who ran like the Sun swiftly fulfilling his race, Phil. 3. yet
forgets what is behind, and makes fast on to what is before: so that to grow in
grace is a necessary duty, and we ought to be carried on to perfection, Heb 6.
Yea it many times may give ground of suspicion to Gods people, whether they
have grace in them, or no; because they are at such a stand: yea not so well,
but sometimes in decays and great dullness; so that if the increase of riches
add to the desire of them, how much rather should the increase of grace still
provoke thee more and more? But yet thou art not without many grounds of hope
and comfort.

For first, In that God has bestowed the least degree of sanctification upon
thee, 1.
he has done more unto thee then if he should give thee all the glory and
honor of this world. To be rich in faith, though poor in the world, is better
than to be rich in the world and poor in faith. Oh then with what thankfulness
should thou admire Gods goodness to thee? Has he given thee but this little
Mustard Seed of Grace? Has he but begun this great work in thee? This is
happier and more excellent than all the outward advantages of the earth. Its a
woeful thing to have our portion in this world. As Ismael had many great gifts,
but Isaac had the inheritance; so it may be God gives thee great outward
abundance; but as for the spiritual inheritance, that he gives to others:
rejoice then, and be exceeding glad, all you who find but the very first fruits
of this happiness.

Secondly, The promise of justification and pardon is made unto the truth of 2.
Grace, not to the measure and degrees of it: The little hand of a Child, may
hold a Pearl, as well as a Giants hand; so that though thou have not as much
grace and godliness as a Paul, or a David, yet thou may as comfortably apply
the Covenant of Grace to thy soul, as they did. Its not, he that believes thus
much shall be saved, but he that believes, John 6. 35.

Thirdly, Thou who art weak, yet see this and be wailest it, have this
advantage, 3.
which a stranger has not, to walk more humbly, to depend more firmly and
strongly upon Christ. Sometimes great Cedars, as David and Peter fall foully,
when less shrubs stand still. The more eminent a Christian is, the more danger
he is in, of pride, and self-confidence, and thereupon they fall more foully;
but the little child, that is afraid to go, will not let the Mothers hand go,
is kept from falling.

Fourthly, The weaker thou art, in some respects God has the more care and 4.
tender respect over thee. Christ will not quench the smoking Flax, Mat. 12.
20. The husbandman is most careful of his tenderest plants; Aristotle says,
Nature has put it into parents to have most love to their youngest and weakest
children. Thus God takes those that are weakest, and gives them more
consolations and the greater support.

Fifthly, There is no Christian so weak, but he may some way or other do God 5.
much service: and this he should comfort himself in, as the greatest honor he
is capable off. The Apostle often uses this similitude of a man's body, and
shows how that though one part be more noble than another; yet even the most
ignoble has its proper use, the body knows not how to be without it: The eye
cannot say to the foot, I have no need of thee; yea, the Apostle exhorts all,
That they should esteem of every man better than himself, Romans 12. Even the
meanest Christian does in some thing or other exceed a stranger.

Use. Be exhorted to this great duty and privilege of Sanctification. If there
be any honor, any happiness, any excellency, it is in this: Thou art not fit
for any Use.
holy duty, for any religious approach unto God, without Sanctification. Thy
Christianity, and the doctrine of Christ obliges thee unto it. This is the
proper and peculiar benefit that is in Christ's Church. There is no holiness
among Heathens, no Sanctification without the Church of God: well, though now
thou art a profane despiser, and it may be an opposer of holiness, yet one
day it will be in request, when Riches, Honor, Greatness will do thee no
good. Consider, this is the will of God, your Sanctification, 1 These. 4. 3. All
the commands in Scripture drive to this, they tend to this; If thou art not
holy, thou have no right to happiness, to have an inheritance among them that
are sanctified. Acts 26. 18. Holiness is promised under the Gospel to be in a
large measure. Zech. 14. 20, 21. Every Vessel shall have Holiness unto the
Lord: An excellent Promise to be improved by us.

SECT. IX. Of the Work of Grace, under the Notion of Conversion, or Turning
unto God.
SERMON. LXVI.
Showing that the Damnation of Wicked Men is unpleasing to God, and that which
he delights not in.

EZEKIEL. 33. 11. Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure
in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live;
wherefore turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; For why will ye dye O house of
Israel?
I Shall now in the next place, consider the work of Grace, under the notion of
Conversion, or Turning unto God, which is one of the most frequent words in the
Scripture to denote that duty. For the better opening of the words upon which I
intend to build this discourse, we may observe God himself inditing a Sermon
for Ezekiel the Prophet to preach, wherein there is, 1. The Doctrine, I have no
pleasure in the death of a wicked man. 2. The confirmation of it by an Oath,
which God himself makes, As I live, says God. 3. The use of Exhortation, Turn
ye, turn ye. 4. The Motive, Why will ye dye? For the occasion of these words,
you may see God giving Commission to Ezekiel to be a Watchman, admonishing him
by several Arguments to discharge his trust faithfully; and in that all
Ministers are concerned: It was Chrysostomes wonder, if any spiritual Officer,
who had charge of souls committed unto him, could be saved; for if a man is not
able to give an account for his own sins, how shall he do it for others?
Therefore the forepart of this Chapter, should be the faithful Ministers
Looking-Glass, wherein he should often look: And if there be so much joy in
heaven, for the reducing of one sheep that goes astray, how much rather for
the conversion of a wandering Shepherd! Another part of his duty is, to
vindicate and justify God; for the Jews quarrelled and repined at Gods
providence, as if his ways were unequal, or as if God did delight in the
destruction of men, yea, though they turned from their wicked ways. Now my Text
is an Apology unto that calumny, where the clean contrary is confirmed by an
oath of God himself; who though he cannot lie, and so his word is enough, yet
for condescension to our capacity, and to confirm our faith, does swear, That
he delights not in the death of a wicked man. O beatos nos quorum causa Deus
jurat, O miserrimos si nec juranti Domino credimus, Tertullian.

Now this Text is frequently urged and debated upon in the matter of
Reprobation, corrupt Teachers concluding from hence, that there is no Election
4.
or Reprobation absolutely, because God does seriously will every man's life,
and no wicked man's death. Some answer, that this place is wholly impertinent to
that question; for (say they) the Prophet speaks not here of eternal death, but
temporal, and that which is by the violence of the sword: And (say they
further) the antecedents and consequents do evidently show, that the sense is,
God does not will the death of a wicked man, if he will turn from his
wickedness; for the Jews charged God foolishly, as if they were punished
unjustly, for they persuaded themselves they turned to God, and yet their
calamities were not taken away: This is probable; but grant the Text to be
comprehensive of Eternal death, as many other places are; such as that, God
would not have any to perish, but to come to the knowledge of the truth, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 4. Then the answer is known, which may easily be made good, though it
be not my work now, God has an approving will, and an effective or decreeing
will. Gods Approving will is carried out to the objects, as good in its self;
but Gods Effective will is, when he intends to bring a thing about. God had an
approving will, that Adam should stand, therefore he gave him a command, and
threatened him if he did fall; yet he had not an effective will, to make him to
stand, for then who could have hindered it? Thus Christ's tears over Jerusalem
(How often would I have gathered thee, and thou would not?) were not
Crocodiles tears (as some say the Calvinists make them) for though Christ, as
God, had not decreed the conversion of the Jews, yet the thing it self was
approved of and commanded, and he as the Minister of the New Testament,
affectionately desired it: So here in the Text, God by this pathetical
expression, does declare, how acceptable and desirable a thing it is in its
self, that the Jews should be converted; how distastful and unpleasant their
damnation was: therefore mark the expression, he does not say, I do not will
the death of the wicked, but I have no pleasure in it: And if that of the
Arminians be true, that God does effectually will the conversion of all, why
then are not all converted? Who has resisted his will? but I intend grapes,
and not thorns; practical, not controversal matter from this Text.

The first Observation is, That the damnation and destruction of a wicked man,
is unpleasing to God, its not that which he delights in. Observe.


Before I open the point, you may object one known and evident place (there
being many others also equivalent to it) Prove. 1. 26. I will laugh at your
calamity, Object.
and mock when your fear comes: This argues their destruction was pleasing to
him. Hence judgments upon the wicked are compared to Sacrifices, because they
are so acceptable to him.

To Answer this; Both these are true, God delights not in the death of a
sinner, yet He will laugh at their Destruction: For if you consider death and
hell, as Answer
the sinners misery merely, and as sin brings it, so it is displeasing to God;
but as it is an act of justice punising the impenitent for his wickedness; so
it is well pleasing to God, for he is just as well as merciful. Even as a just
Judge that condemns a malefactor, may pity the man condemned for his crimes,
and the execution be grievous to him, as its the man's misery; yet as he is a
just Judge, so he delights also to have justice done: but this is handled in
controversies

Let us see wherein it appears, that this is not well pleasing to God; and
that therefore the whole fault and blame of a man's perdition, is wholly on his
own head:

First, Gods unwillingness to damn, is seen in the original and primitive
institution 1. Arguments to prove the point.
and creation of man: He made him after his own Image; endued him with all
sufficient power and ability to persevere: There was no spot, or blemish, or
defect in him, only he was mutable, and might Apostatize from this happy
estate, if he would: Seeing then God withheld nothing from him, that might make
him happy; and in him he covenanted with all mankind, intending the like good
to them; hence it does appear, how well pleasing it was unto God, that man
should continue in a state of holiness before him: Sin then came into the
world, and by it death through Adams voluntary transgression: There was no
Antecedaneous decree from God, necessitating him to sin: It was his own willful
choice, and that when he knew the penalty to the contrary; but yet so, that
Gods permissive decree of his fall, did precede, though not necessitating: If
therefore sin had been inbred in man's heart at first, as it is now since his
fall, then the cause would have been imputed to God; but then he had that
privilege of power to do that which is good, and to withstand what is evil.

Secondly, Gods unwillingness is seen, even since man's revolt; For whereas he
Reason 2.
might have dealt with us as the lapsed Angels, who are left without any
remedy, he has appointed an Ark to save some Righteous persons. There was
never such offers and tenders to Angels, as here in the Text, Turnye, turnye,
why will ye be damned? Now the means God has appointed for a man's recovery are
diverse: I. The means God has appointed for man's recovery.


First, There are means by way of love and goodness: There are also means by
way of Chastisements and afflictions. By way of Love; How winning and
overcoming should that be? Love does surround thee; its love that thou live,
that thou breathest; its love, thou art preserved from hell and damnation; its
love, that thou have any support at all; therefore the goodness of God in all
the Creatures thou enjoyest, should lead thee to repentance, Romans 2. The Sun
that shines to thee, the Earth that brings forth fruit for thee, the health and
perfection of the senses, should melt thee always into good. Again, because
naturally we are slavish, and so moved rather by judgments then mercies;
rather driven with whips, then drawn with silken cords of love; therefore God
leaves not that way unattempted also: Hence the Prophets are so diligent in
informing the Israelites, what was the cause of their plagues, famines, the
sword and captivity, even their sins; and therefore they should not be so much
weary of them, or cry out of them, as of their iniquities: God does not punish
willingly, says the Scripture, Psalm. 104. like the Be that naturally gives
honey, but stings not, unless provoked. As the Physician does not willingly put
his Patient to torments, but for his good: Thus it is here, God sees all his
love upon thee will do thee no good, thou do abuse it, and grow wanton under
it, therefore he will take another course, he will throw thee sometime into the
water, to see if that will get the filth out of thee; sometime into the fire,
to see if that will fetch the dross out: If therefore God would leave thee
incurable, he would let thee alone, and punish thee no more, as he threatens
some, Hosea 4. 14. O then know, there is never a mercy, or an affliction, never
a smile from God, or frown from him, but he will have an account of it: How
has it made thee weary of thy sins, and willing to repent?

Secondly, The means God has appointed, are either external or internal.
External, II.
are the Scriptures, and the preaching of the word of God. As where the Sun
shines, that is to give light and life; so where the Gospel arises, that is
to beget spiritual and supernatural life: The word of God therefore, and the
preaching thereof, is compared to all effectual and energetical things, to
Musterd-seed, to Leaven, to a Sword, to an Hammer, to Fire: Now why does God
cause this noise always to sound in thy ears, but because thou should hearken
and be obedient? It is true indeed, we must distinguish of wicked men; they are
either such as live in Paganism, in the ignorance of God, and without the
Church (though God has not left such without a testimony and a witness their
consciences within, and the creatures without, bearing witness of God) yet we
cannot say, that God so immediately wills their salvation, as of others, still
keeping to the first distinction we mentioned, and not contradicting that: Why
indeed God should thus differently dispense the means of grace to some, and not
to others; yea neglect the far greater part of mankind, is a mystery too deep
for us to wade in: Gods ways are always most just, when they are most secret
and unknown to us; yet even of such destitute persons, we may say, God has no
pleasure in their death, according to our premised sense; for he gives them
warnings against sin, and implanted a thousand witnesses within them, to accuse
them if ever they do evil: or such wicked men, who live under the sound of the
trumpet, that are awakened, and reminded every day of their transgressions, to
such as these God discovers, how unwilling he is, that they should perish in
their impieties. Consider therefore, that every leaf in the Scripture, every
Sermon thou hear, will be a terrible matter of account at that dreadful day:
God will say, How often would I have converted thee, instructed thee, but thou
would not! Then there are internal means, of which anon.

Thirdly, Gods pleasure in the conversion of wicked men is seen, by those
pathetical and affectionate expressions, which we see the Scripture uses;
which do not Reason 3.
only argue Gods will, but the height and strength of his will: As here in the
Text; First, Gods Oath, As I live (says God;) then the ingemination of the
duty, Turn ye, turn ye; lastly, a vehement expostulation, Why will ye dye? So
you may read many times in the Scripture those exclamations, Oh that my people
were wise, that they would consider their latter end; and we see Christ
himself, though in the midst of all that pomp and glory which was attributed to
him; yet weeping over Jerusalem, Oh that thou had known the things that
belong to thy peace, etc. Luke 19. 42. The truth of this also will further be
amplified, if you consider what zealous and importunate Messengers his Prophets
are: We beseech you, and entreat you to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
If ye will not hear (says Jeremy) my soul shall mourn in secret for you, Jer.
13. 17. The consistency of these things, with an absolute Election, in the
sense that the Orthodox maintain it, and not which their adversaries
calumniously fasten upon them, See in Controversal Writers.

Fourthly, That the death of a wicked man is displeasing to God, appears, in
that sin, which is the cause of death, is the only evil hated by him, and that
only which Reason 4.
he has decreed to punish to all eternity: Thou art of purer eyes, then to
behold iniquity, Hab. 1. and, God is angry with the wicked every day: He that
commands us to hate it, how much rather must he himself loath it? God therefore
is not the author and lover of sin; for Non est author ejus, cujus est ultor,
He is not the Author of that of which he is the Avenger: How then can God
delight in thy damnation, when the cause of it is so abominated by him! Indeed
(as you heard) seeing damnation is an act of Justice, and so has the nature of
good, God does delight in it; but as it is ruin of the creature by sin, so it
is not acceptable to him.

Fisthly, Gods unwillingness that the wicked should perish, appears in those
internal means, and inward works of Gods Spirit, that are vouchsafed to many:
Reason 5.
God thinks it not enough to give the word, and the ordinances, and thus
outwardly to knock at the door; but he also opens the door in some measure.
Hence come those convictions of Conscience, those illuminations of the
understanding, and many such secret motions of Gods spirit, that if possible,
the soul might at last bewail its sins, and turn unto God. Its true, thus far
God does not go with every one, neither are all admitted unto such favor, but
many within the means of Grace, have their hearts thus continually beaten upon,
and their consciences thus convinced and smitten: And therefore such who shall
yet retain their natural pravity and wickedness, when so many remedies shall be
applied, argue the greater obstinacy, and judgment of God upon them.

Now to all this, there is one grand and main Objection; which is, If God
Object.
do thus will and delight in the conversion of men, If those invitations are
serious, and so pathetical, Why then does not God change the hearts of all? why
are not all converted? why are any damned? Answ.


To this there is a true Answer and a false Answer returned: The false Answer
is by Arminians and others; Therefore some are converted and not others (say
they) because some do receive the grace of God offered, and not others: But
this is to put all the glory of man's conversion upon his own will; for why do
some receive the grace of God, and not others? Can any receive grace, without
the help of grace? Must there not be supernatural life breathed into a man,
before he can stretch out his hand toward God? besides, this opposes all
those places of Scripture, which describe man dead in sin, and unable to any
good; and conversion is not the awakening of a man asleep, but the resurrection
of one that is dead: Therefore the true answer is, that although God has
revealed his approving will thus, about the salvation of sinners; yet the
Scripture does plainly limit his effective will, to those that are elected, not
to all men, but to some, Romans 9. there this question is on purpose handled, and
the Apostles conclusion is, On whom he will, he shows mercy, and whom he
will, he hardens, And does there silence all those cavils, that proud sinners
may make; even this very Objection he instanceth in, Who has resisted his
will? So that you must compare one Scripture with another, and be sure to keep
sobriety and humility in this great mystery, not lanching further into this
Ocean, then the Scripture is a star to guide you in.

Secondly, Though God does thus will the salvation of sinners, yet he is also a
God of Soveraignity, and Power: None may prescribe to him; he is of boundless 2.
Wisdom and Counsel, and none can search out or know the depths of God, but the
spirit of God. How many things does the Scripture reveal, as objects of faith,
which cannot be comprehended by us; that are above all humane reason, though
not contrary to sound reason! Our Savior has taught us an excellent way to
resolve these dispensations of God, Even so Father, for so it pleases thee,
Mat. 11. As Ipse dixit must be the ground of faith; so Ipse voluit of our
submission.

Use 1. Of instruction, concerning the inexcuseableness of wicked men, who Use.
1.
perish in their sins; Who may be blamed but thy own self? Although we have it
from Adam; to lay our sins off from our selves, yet these fig leaves will not
cover our nakedness; for to God thou can not impute thy ruin: O Israel, thy
perdition is of thy self, Hosea 13. 9. Let no man say, when he is tempted, that
he is tempted of God, for he tempts no man, but every one is led aside by the
lusts of his own heart, James 1. Oh thou! that in this life time slatterest thy
self, thy sins must not be owned by thee, none may put thee in mind of what
thou art; when God shall at the day of judgment, discover all hidden things of
darkness, then it will be manifest, thou, even thy own self, have undone thy
self: God has done like a gracious, good, just and merciful God, but thou have
been a cruel enemy unto thy own soul, Qui voluntatem Dei spreverunt invitantem,
voluntatem Dei sentient vindicantem, You shall find his power in punishments,
who have despised his grace and mercy in offers thereof, Austin. Neither may
you excuse your selves, by casting your sins on Satan; for although he be a
Tempter, and does continually suggest corrupt lusts unto thy heart; yet this is
only by temptation, by suggestion; he does not make thee sin, whether thou will or no: Thou art stubble, and that makes the sparks of fire which come from
him, so easily inflame. As some Heathens have imputed their miscarriages to I
know not what, Fate, and the constellation of Stars; so many Christian people,
put their iniquities off either to God or the Devil: What would you have them
to do? they cannot help it; How could God punish and damn thee for these sins,
if he caused them in thee? God indeed has a just and terrible providence about
the sins of men, he is not an idle spectator of them, but yet he does not
infuse any wickedness into men; that they have of themselves, only God may
guide and order it to wise ends, and cause it to run down what channels he
pleases.

Use 2. The aggravation of the wickedness of those sinners, who stand out
wilfully against the goodness and patience of God, that would lead them to Use
2.
repentance; For how shall any mouth be opened for thee? who shall plead for
thee? What excuse have thou? Consider, that God desires thy conversion, who
does not need thee, who can be honored though thou art damned in hell: he can
raise up children to Abraham out of stones: When therefore God shall thus
invite thee for thy good and advantage only, he is not bettered by thee, nor
made the more happy, then thy forehead must be brass, that does not blush at
such ingratitude; cry out, Who am I, Lord? what am I, that I should be
regarded? wilt not thou have praise, and honor, and glory, though I be a
castaway? why should my life and salvation be so dear to thee, who am
naturally a cursed enemy to thee?

Use 3. Of consolation to broken and tempted Christians, who sit down like Job
upon the dunghill, abhorring themselves; they are loathsome in their own Use 3.
eyes, and because so, therefore they think God will not receive such Monsters
into his presence: Oh, they say, though God take pleasure in the life and
salvation of others, yet he will not surely do so to me: But O this Text,
should be sweeter then the honey or honey comb to thee; God says, As he
lives, he delights not in thy damnation: Art thou therefore weary of thy
sins? do thou renounce thy lusts? Then be not afraid to come, Those that
come to him, he will in no ways cast off: God says, Why will ye dye, O house
of Israel? Do thou turn the Text, and say, Why shall I dye, O God of Israel?
set this Scripture against Hell, Devil, and all accusations of conscience, God
does not delight to bruise and break thee with those many temptations, that are
worse then death it self.

Use 4. Of direction unto Christians, under all their miseries and troubles,
not to repine at God, but to blame and humble themselves. The Jews here, had
the Use 4.
devouring sword come upon them, which did cut them off father and son
together; now they thought Gods ways were not equal herein: And thus Solomon,
The wickedness or foolishness of a man, perverteth his own ways, and then his
heart fretteth against the Lord, Prove. 19. 3. As God has no pleasure in the
death of a man repenting; so neither in the troubles, calamities, and sad
afflictions he lies under: He does not afflict willingly; Were it not our
rebellion and untowardness, we should not have so many stripes and scourges
from him: Oh this is an excellent way to humble our selves in the dust; why
should a living man complain for the punishment of his sins? Lam. 3.

SERMON LXVII.
Diverse Propositions or Considerations introductory to the Doctrine of
Conversion.

EZEKIEL. 33. 11. Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure
in the death of the wicked, but that he turn from his way: Turn ye, turn ye
from your evil ways.
THis Text has informed us how unpleasing the death of a wicked man is to God.
We now proceed to the inference made from that proposition, Therefore the
wicked should turn from his evil ways. Turn ye, turn ye. The ingemination
denotes the vehement affection and desire of God, as also our stupidity and
love to our sins, when once calling will we not awaken, but we must over and
over again be called upon. I am therefore now to treat on that famous and
necessary work, conversion or turning from sin. As Satan and the Angel did
once strive about Moses his body, So now the great controversy between God and
his Angels, and the Devil and his instruments, is about a wicked man, whether
he shall still be kept in the bonds or chains of sin, or whether he shall be
loosened from them, and set free to walk in Gods Commandments. I shall,
because of the usefulness of this point, handle it doctrinally, and
practically. And the foundation upon which we will build our discourse shall be
this Doctrine, viz.

That conversion or turning, from our evil ways, is necessarily required
Doctr.
to an happy and eternal life. The Text has this in the affirmative and the
contrary, Let the wicked man turn, that he may live. Turn ye, Why will ye dye?
See how life is the necessary consequent of Conversion, and death the fruit of
neglecting it. Life and death are the great Arguments in the world. What will
not a man give for life? and death is the King of terrors. We use to say, such
a man is so earnest and busy in that matter, as if life and death depended on
it. To be sure, such ought your cares, prayers, and endeavors to be about the
avoiding of sin, and cleaving to that which is good; for life and death are in
these things. Oh that men by faith and an effectual Meditation would apply
these things more.

For Introduction into this matter, consider some particulars.

First, That the phrase in the Text, To be converted, or turn our selves, is a
metaphor Introductory considerations. 1.
taken from the outward situation or position of bodies, and is applied
sometimes to things, sometimes to persons. To things; so God is said to turn
joy into laughter, and to turn the captivity of Sion: unto Persons, and
sometimes it is applied to God, when of angry he becomes loving and propitious
unto men, when they leave their lusts, and turn to him, both are comprised in
this Text: Turn unto me, and I will turn unto you. Turn unto me by an holy
change, and I will turn to you by a gracious change, though all the change be
in man, not God. The Texts of Scripture which command and commend this
conversion are so many, that it is endless to name them; so then as bodies,
are said to have such a local posture, (as for example) a man may stand with
this posture, as to have his back upon the Sun, and his face clean contrary to
it; Thus it is with the soul, the affections of the soul are its feet, and when
it turns from God, the back is turned upon the Sun; and in that posture he
continues, till by faith and repentance he be turned again. Consider therefore
in what posture thy soul is, whether thou art not clean opposite to God and his
way. As naturally we came into the world, with our faces toward hell, and our
backs upon God; so it is with our souls.

Secondly, As by sin we are thus turned from God, which is terminus a quo, so
the Creature, and the lusts of sin are the terminus ad quem, to which they
turn. Conversion 2.
is a motion; Now in all motions, there is the term from which, and the term
to which. Thus in the motion of the soul to sin: The term from which, is God;
the term to which, is sin: and the contrary is, when we turn to God; so that if
there were no other arguments, this might easily persuade us to come out of
that custom and delight in sin, which we have been used unto; for how
reasonable and happy is the change, to leave sin, that has guilt, torment,
condemnation, and all curses in it, and to turn to God, the fountain of all
happiness and joy! Oh, we might think, that all the violent temptations of
sin, should never be able to hold us, but that we would quickly break all
those bonds, and run to God.

Thirdly, This phrase of turning to God, and from sin, implies thus much, That
while we live in sin, we make sin our Lord and Master; and therefore follow
3.
that, turn up and down after that, as the Servant after his Master: but when
we cast off these transgressions, then we follow the Lord our Master, and go
after him; so that all men in the world are divided into those two ranks,
either they are such as go after their lusts, turn after them, as the shadow
after the body, or else such as cleave unto the Lord, and as the herb
Heliotropium, turns up and down after the Motion of the Sun, so do they in
obedience and affections after the commandments of God. Now this service and
obedience to the lusts of the flesh, is a tedious and toilsome life indeed,
though to the corrupt heart it may seem otherwise: Come unto me all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden, Matthew. 11. 22. A man that turns into the way of
sin, is like a traveller that should turn into a way full of Quicksands and
Bogs, and dangerous Precipices, having also a sore and intolerable burden on
his back, pressing him down with exquisite pain.

Therefore, if you ask, How can wicked men be thus merry, jocund, secure and
presump^ucus, when they are in such a dangerous estate? The Answer is easy.
Quest. How wicked men that are in cruel bondage to their Lusts can be me^ry.
Answ.


First, They are ignorant and foolish; their eyes are put out; and mad men
cannot apprehend the danger they are in.

Secondly, sin is a connatural and suitable object to their depraved affections;
and so they swallow down sin, which is like honey in the mouth, though it prove
Gravel in the belly. Oh then that all wicked men would have those repenting
resolutions, as the Prodigal, I will leave my Husks and Swine, and rise, and
return to my fathers house. I will leave these new lovers, and new Husbands,
and go to my old, as the Church purposed, Hos. 2. 7.

Fourthly, This Conversion unto God, as it implies sin putting us into an
aversion from him; so also it supposes slight and contempt, which every wicked
man puts upon God. For to turn the back on a man is an action of scorn, and
disdain. Thus God complains, They turned the back upon him, and not the face,
Jer. 32. 33. All sin has in it a contempt of God; for it is the turning the
back on God. And although every sin does not formally, and expressly intend
such a disdain and contempt of God; yet interpretatively, and in truth it does
so. Aristotle says, that contempt and contumely do more provoke an ingenuous
man than real oppositions. When God would aggravate David's sin, he calls it,
A Despising of him. Oh then that wicked men would lay this more to heart! Thy
ungodliness and wickedness thou live in is so much scorn and contempt
offered unto God, its turning the back on him. Now for thee a poor sinful
Creature, who have all thy mercies from God to put contempt on him, how
unsufferable is it? and the greater the contempt is, by how much base and more
ignoble thy lusts, are to which thou turnest. To prefer the Devil before God,
to regard his temptations more than Gods Promises; What arrogance, and
impudency is this? Did the Devil creat, thee, does he preserve thee, did he
dye, or was crucified for thee? Then if thou art so many ways obliged, and
engaged unto God; yet for thee to prefer the Creature, yea the Devil before
God; how unjustifiable is it?

Fifthly, Because by sin we are thus averse from God. The further we go on in
sin, and the more progress we make in those ways, the farther off still we
are from 5.
God, and our turning back to him will be a more difficult thing. The Prodigal
went into a far Country, spiritually as well as corporally: He went far from
God, and therefore his return would cost him dearer: so that this should make
every man stop betimes in the way of his sinning; this should make him without
any delay return to God: for every day thou go farther, and still farther
from him; whenever thou shall return to him, thy task will be the harder. Oh it
is seldom seen, that a man who has all his life time been in motion and
travel from God, should at last bethink himself, and resolve to go back to
God, from whence he fell. As Austin said of the Heathens noble and admirable
actions of morality, which he called glittering sins, That the faster they
learn, the more they were out of the way; This is true of all wicked men, the
greater haste they make in this world, and the more days they live, the
farther off are they from God: thou art farther off from salvation, than thou
wast many years ago. A sad thing it is to consider, that the longer thou
live, the less hope of thy Conversion; the more time thou have spent in this
world, the further off from happiness. Be not then worse than the Horse, or
the Mule, for a Bridle in their mouth will stop them, and turn them out of the
way: But though the Scripture put many Bridles in thy mouth, give thee many
curbs to keep thee from sin, yet thou will violently rush on. The Apostle could
say of some, Their salvation was nearer than at first, Romans 18. but we may of
many, Their damnation is nearer.

Sixthly, This Conversion, and turning unto God, is in Scripture spoken
sometimes as 6.
our work, and sometimes as Gods work. Thus in the Text, Turn ye, turn ye. And
again, Make ye a new heart, and a new spirit: But in other places, its made the
peculiar gift of God alone. Thus God says, He will take away the heart of
stone, and give an heart of flesh, Jer. 31. Ezekiel. 32. So, He will circumcise
their hearts, He will give them a new heart, etc. Now how can these be
reconciled? If God do it, how can man? If man, how can God? Can it be Gods
gift and our work too? Now there is returned this answer by erroneous Teachers,
that (say they) from those places its plain, our Conversion is partly from
Free Will, and partly from Free grace, though Gods grace be acknowledged to be
the principal: The one teaches Gods operation, the other our cooperation.
Thus they do not exclude God totally, yet they make him only a co-partner with
us in this work of conversion: But this is quickly dispelled, by those places
that describe man dead in sin; and so can be no synergist with God: as also
by those Texts which give the praise and glory of Conversion totally and solely
to God, not dividing this glory between him and the Creature, no more than
divine worship, of which God is so jealous, that he will have it alone.

The true Answer therefore lies in this; That the former kind of places of our
duty and obligation, what we ought to do; They are not a measure of our power
what we can do. When the Prophet says, Turn ye, turn ye; He does not here
declare what we are able to do, but what we ought to do; and yet this is not in
vain, because by this we are convinced of our impotency, and are humbled under
our infirmity; and withal God makes this a practical command to turn us: Even
as that word at first, Let there be light; or that of Christ to Luzarus,
Lazarus come forth; and the latter kind of places they argue the work of
Conversion to be wholly of God, in which we are subjects receiving; not agents
co-working. This is to be understood in respect of the initiall working of
Grace; for this phrase, Turn ye, does also imply that we act and work; being
first acted and wrought upon by God; Actiag^mus, and hoc been agimus, quod a
bono agamur. So that to speak properly, turning to God, or conversion, is not
so much that work of grace infused in us, which we receive, as Adam had the
breath of life breathed into him; but its the actual motion and turning of the
soul, which flows from the fo^m^^: So that this is rectus secundus, the other
is actus primus, as they say. Hence a man is not said to turn to God, because
he has the habits and principles of grace, but because they are actuated, and
by them the soul does move to God, as is more largely to be showed. Thus then
you see how those places are consistent together.

Seventhly, This Conversion or turning to God, is either the first Conversion,
or the latter. The first Conversion I call that, when we are at first
translated from the 7.
state of darkness to glorious light; when at first we are taken off the bitter
root we were in, and ingreffed into the sw^et Olive Tree. The latter conversion
is that when upon falls, or sins committed, we have in some measure turned from
God again, but afterward return. Thus Peter's recovery is called a conversion,
Luke 22. 32. When thou art converted strengthen thy brother. And thus when the
Disciples fell into p^^d and contention, our Savior says, Except ye be
converted, and become like little children, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, Mat. 18. So that although there be but one main fundamental
conversion, or turning to God, yet seeing every sin, especially those that are
more foul, do turn remarkably from God; therefore even converted persons need
daily to be further converted. Do not therefore rest in this, that thou art
once converted, thou can remember the time and instrument of it; but
consider, there is a daily conversion, and turning to God requisite; Thou art
to be converted from thy daily pride, daily hypocrisy, daily guile of soul,
diffidence in the Promises. Some think, because of that great work, and
remarkable change God once made upon them, that therefore they may say, Soul
take thy ease, for thou have much good laid up for thee, and think to be
clothed in all glory, like the L(...)es, that neither labor, or spin; but the
word of God tells us, that there are daily corruptions remaining, from which we
must constantly turn away.

Eighthly, There is a two fold Conversion. The one from Heathenism and Paganism
or Heresies, to the true Faith and Doctrine of Christ: The other not only from
8.
that, but also from ungodliness and impiety in our lives. Now though the one
be much admited, yet the latter is the chief of all. We see by the preaching of
the Apostles many thousands were converted; but many of these were Hypocrites,
and loved the world and their lusts still. Therefore they were only converted
to receive the faith of Christ, not to obey his holy laws and commands. Thus
some are said to Turn from their Idols to the living God, 1 These. 1. 9. But if
they did not leave their sins, and their carnal confidences, which were as so
many Idols, they found no advantage. Therefore diligently mark this; Its a
light matter to be converted from Heathenism, Heresy and Popery, so as to come
to acknowledge the Truth; but art thou also converted in thy heart and
affections, to submit to, and willingly obey the Laws of Jesus Christ? This is
all in all.

Ninthly; Therefore in the last place; As every part and faculty of the soul
and body has been averse from God, so Conversion must be in them all. The mind
must 9.
turn from its vain, ignorant, blind, and unbelieving thoughts and
imaginations: The will must turn from its obstinacy, perverseness and
disobedience: The heart and affections from their unlawful objects they were
placed upon; and from all this excess, violence and immoderacy: for want of
these comes that partial and imperfect Conversion to God so often condemned in
the Israelites. Oh then sit down and think, Lord, every thing within me is
averse to thee, there is nothing but is turned from he Oh then vouchsafe thy
Grace, which will make all within me turn to thee; mind, heart, affections,
and all my might: you will find that true Conver^^ are very rare, half Converts
and partial conversion is often; but this true, solid, and universal
Conversion is in a few only.

In the next place, let us consider, what goes to the m(...)g up of this
Conversion, or turning to God. And first,

There must be a true and sound understanding out of Gods Word, that the way we
What goes the ma(...) of conv(...) 1.
are in is a wrong way: That if we turn not at la(...) the end of those (...)
is in hell and damnation. A blind man, or he that walks in the darkness can
see no necessity to turn out of the way he is in. Therefore if this Text may do
any good to thee, pray for illumination of mind: Say, Lord, open my eyes, that
(...) may s^^ the cragg^^, and slippery, and dangerous places I walk upon. Thus
Esaias 6. L^st they hear with their ears, and understand, and be converted. That
understanding is antecedent to conversion; so that ignorant, sottish and
brutish people, who know nothing of God, or of their own corruption, are very
remote from conversion: till thou come to know and understand the danger thou
art in, thou will not be willing to go out of the way.

Secondly, The ways of sin must administer some wear(...)ss and trouble; else
the 2.
soul will never think of returning: Come to me ye that are heavy l^den. When
the Prodigal is almost farnished, then he thinks of going to his Father. When
Isreal's way is hedged in with thorns, then she will go back to her first
husband, Hos. 3. So that if thou would ever turn to God, pray thou may feel
the weight, and burden of sin in some measure, not to break thee, but to drive
thee out of the way thou wast in, when thou believe lions and all curses to
be in thy way, then thou will quickly go back; whereas wicked men that live in
^ollity and prosperity, that have no trouble, no exercises, nor crosses in
their sins, they are far from Conversion; they never think of going out of that
broad way as long as they find it so sweet and pleasant: and hence God in mercy
afflicts, grieveth, and continually troubles that sinner whom he intends to
convertr.

This Conversion cannot be, till God has first infused a supernatural life in
a man; 3.
for seeing this turning is a spiritual motion of the soul, there cannot be any
motion, if there be not life first: and in this respect, no man in the world
has any active fitness, or worthiness in him to be converted, no more than
thorns have to become grapes, or stones children. The first step that must be
taken toward heaven, must be after Christ has said unto thee, Arise and walk.
Iter ad gratiam est per gratiam, perque ipsam venitur ad ipsam, Prosp.

Fourthly, Its not enough to have this life infused, but there must be the
actuating 4.
of it. For to turn is an action, is a motion; and therefore though a man be
renewed passively by God, yet till actively he move unto God again, he is not
said to turn to him: so that this conversion does denote more than
regeneration, or a new creation; for in them its enough if God has wrought a
spiritual change; but here he does not only work to will, giving the ability
and power, but to do also, giving the exercise of this power.

Fifthly, This turning unto God is to be looked for in the constant and diligent
attendance 5.
upon the preaching of Gods Word; for that is instituted as an instrument to
change and turn us. You have many examples of the great and glorious
conversions, that have been upon the most indisposed and unlikely subjects. And
how so? By the plain and powerful preaching of Gods Word. Its not humane
Oratory, or artificial eloquence has done this, so much as the autoritative
and spiritual explication and application of Gods Word; and therefore all those
who carelessly neglect, or despise the Ministry appointed for this end, no
wonder they reject the good counsel of God; and its no wonder why Satan does
so rage and set against the Ministry of Jesus Christ; for this is the only
Engine and Battery that destroys his Kingdome^ and rescueth poor captives
that were taken in his snares.

Use of Instruction. See and understand now the necessity of thy conversion. It
is Use
that which undoeth most; you live the same, come to Church, and go home the
same, and you never think of a turn and a change that ought to be upon you.
Does not God say to thee, Turn from this and that evil way of sinning, why will thou dye and be damned in it? but thou like the Serpent stoppest thy ear, if
there were no other Motive to make thee turn than this, that thou live in an
age, where many turnings and changings of things have been, this might prevail.
God has turned peace into war, quietness into trouble; why then should not
thou turn profaneness into holiness; security, into godly fear and trembling?
Oh turn from sin, before God turn thee into hell; and the longer and further
thou have gone on in wicked ways, know it is the higher time thou should
return. He goes far that never turns (we say) and why then is it thy
obstinacy to do so?

SERMON LXVIII.
The Impediments and Obstructions of Conversion; And what kind of persons are
most unlikely ever to be converted, not to drive them to despair, but to awaken
them out of their Security.

EZEKIEL. 33. 11. Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye O house of Israel?
THe particulars that clear the nature of conversion are dispatched: Let us now
consider, what are the impediments and obstructions of conversion. That
conversion now adays is very rare, comparatively to former times, experience
evidenceth; and yet how much reason, and what unanswerable arguments may be
pressed on every man's conscience? Therefore its worth the while to consider,
what are those causes that make men continue in their accustomed sins, when God
and his Ministers do thus importune to leave them. Now although it be true,
that in every unregenerate man, there is a natural impossibility to turn unto
God, and so no hopes of any man in the world, if we respect humane power and
strength; yet there are many, who besides this natural impossibility, have
contracted on themselves a voluntary impossibility of turning unto God; so that
their conversion, is not the taking away the stone of the heart, but the
stones; for they have laid one upon another: We shall then examine, Who they
are that have the Symptoms of difficulty to be converted. 1. Ignorant and
stupid people.
what persons they are, that have the Symptoms and visible Characters of
difficulty to be converted, rather then other men.

And first, Ignorant and stupid people, that have no knowledge or understanding
about God or themselves: These are notoriously indisposed to turn to God; the
reason is plain, because understanding goes before conversion, and is initial
or introductory to it; as Isa. 6. 10. So that if there be no knowledge, there
is no hope of any turning to God; therefore Laodicea is counseled to buy
eye salve, Rev. 3. 18. as that which would be the first means to help her; and
this Prayer is still to be continued, for those whose conversion we desire,
That God will give them eye salve: Its ordinarily said, As God in the first
Creation wrought light, before other things; so in man, who by nature is a
miserable Chaos and confusion, God causes light to shine out of darkness. The
bruit beasts are not capable of conversion, because they have no reason; and
although our reason be naturally corrupt, and so a great enemy to God, yet
there is by it a passive capacity, though not an active of conversion. Hence
the Gospel at first did take the best and most glorious effects in cities,
where men were bred up in more knowledge and understanding: It Is true, Paul
says, Not many learned are called, 1 Cor. 1. and, God chooses the foolish
things of the world, to confound the wise; and our Savior Christ gives thanks
to God, That he had hid the things of salvation from the wise, but revealed
them to babes: But by Wise and Learned, are meant such, that with their
learning are also pufft up with pride; and by babes, were not meant those that
have no knowledge or understanding, but that are lowly and weak, comparatively
to others: Howsoever, where conversion comes, it gives light and knowledge, if
there were none before. The consideration of this, should much startle and
amaze many of you, for how woeful and lamentable is the ignorance of most? how
little is known about original and actual sin, which is their disease? and how
little about Christ, who is the Physician? God would have all men to be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2. The knowledge of the truth
must be first attained; and on the contrary, Its a people of no understanding,
therefore he that made them, will not save them, Isa. 27. 11. Christ told the
woman, If thou had known the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee,
Give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, John 4. 11. If thou had
known; and this we may say to those, who lie still in the dungeon of their
sins, If thou had known what thy condition is, what the curses of the Law
are, how terrible God is, how few shall be saved, and such like, thou would^t
not stand idle, as thou do, but like the Heart, pant after the blood of
Christ, as that after the waters: Oh then that God at last would persuade
ignorant people of their damnable estate. To whom is the word without profit?
to whom is it a savor of death, but to ignorant people? Where may the Ministers
make their sad complaints, They have labored in vain, and none believe their
report, so much, as where this darkness, this night is upon men's hearts? You
old men then, that know nothing, that understand very little, why are ye not
afraid, being you are in such darkness? and you fathers, whatsoever you fail
in, fail not here, about instructing your Children, though you cannot leave
them wealth and estates, yet let them have the knowledge of God out of the
Scriptures: How much would it affect you, to have children bodily blind? would
you not heal them, if you knew any remedy in the world? but to your childrens
ignorance and spiritual blindeness, you are voluntarily accessory, and you
willingly are the cause of it.

Secondly, Men far from conversion, are such as have a Pharisaical Self-conceit
2. Men that have a Pharisaical conceit of their own righteousness.
of their own Righteousness and good Works; by which means, they never think of
going back, for none can persuade them, but they are in the right way already:
This is a generation, that will sooner dye in their sins, then ever turn to
God; and our Congregations have such, as well as the former. Observe our
Saviors Sermons, and you shall find, that he did least good, upon those that
justified themselves; insomuch, that he tells them, Publicans and harlots
entered the kingdom of heaven, before such as they were; and again, I come not
to call the Righteous, but sinners to repentance, Luke 5. 32. so we preach, not
to convert those who think themselves Righteous already, who applaud themselves
in their good Moralities, or plausible lives; but to those who are convinced of
their sinfulness, and groan under it: I know it is a very unpleasing thing for
a man, to be found a sinner, to judge himself and condemn himself upon that
account; he had rather sit down with a false, dawbed peace, and cozen his own
soul, then arraign and terrify himself after that manner; but it is a vain
thing to hide and extenuate, when we have to do with God; we must judge our
selves, else God will judge us. It was the Churches bold presumption, that
would at last destroy her, to say, She was rich, and clothed, and wanted
nothing, when indeed she was miserable, and naked, and wanted all things; yet
in such a foolish Paradise do many place Rev. 3. 19.
themselves, They be converted, they become changed, they are as good as any
others already, they have as good an heart as any other: These men are most
incureable, and are in the greatest danger, because they feel no danger: O then
know, That quietness and security which thou have in thy breast, and all that
3. They who have been long accustomed to sin.
confident presumption in thee about thy self, will at last be like the cobweb,
not serve to cover thee, when the tempests of Gods wrath shall arise.

Thirdly, They have but little hope of conversion, who have been long
accustomed to sin, whose iniquities for many years together have been taking a
deep root. If a Blackamoor may change his skin, then may you do good, who have
been accustomed to evil, Jer. 13. 23. Hos. 9. 9. When Israel had deeply
corrupted themselves, then God would remember their iniquity. A man that has
been a long while given to his lusts and ungodliness: Oh who can give hopes
that ever he will turn to God! Take heed then of custom in any sinning, it is
like a millstone about thy neck, it will, like Pharaoh, oppress thee, and keep
thee down, that thou may never leave Egypt. The Devils that possessed a man
from his youth up, were more difficultly cast out, then any others: The
husbandman has little hope of a crop in sowing, when the soil has a continual
wont to miscarry. Custom in sin, makes men like the tall grown Oaks, which
cannot be removed, they have got such deep hold in the earth; whereas at first
sin is more timorous, and less impudent, the conscience of a man is not so
hardened: A continual use in sin, takes away all the sense and feeling of it,
all the horridness and terror of it: Thus men that are accustomed to cursing
and swearing, they mind it not: Men given to lustful and filthy ways, have no
horror upon them, after their unclean practices; and why? custom is like a
great stone laid upon a man, already dead and buried in the grave of sin: And
therefore a sinner, habituated in an evil way, is compared to Lazarus, who was
dead and buried, and even putrified ere he was raised again.

Fourthly, Those that have enjoyed the means of grace for a long season, and
yet are briars and thorns: These give little hopes of conversion. The ground
that 4. Those that have had the means of grace a long season, and yet continue
ungodly.
has often received rain, and brings forth nothing but weeds, is nigh unto
cursing, Heb. 6. 7. Those that refused the Prophets, The dust of their feet was
to be shaken off, in testimony against them, Mat. 10. 14. The word of God does
most good, and has the greatest effects, at its first coming to a place; as
you may read in the several plantations of the Church at first, whereas the
longer men live under it, the authority and majesty of the word is abated: Ye
did for a ^^ason rejoice in his light, as our Savior told the Jews concerning
John Baptist, John 15. 35. When God has sent his Ministers and Prophets one
after another, admonishing, instructing, and vehemently exhorting and charging
you, to part with your lusts, saying, You cannot have them and Christ too; you
cannot hold them an heaven too: Its a sad presage, (and yet thou hardenest the
neck against all these reproofs) that Christ has said of thee, as of that
fig tree, Never fruit grow more on thee. As there are ears of corn that are
blasted, that never thrive, or come to any good; so there are many blasted
sinners, impenitent and obstinate, which after many remedies applied, yet
continue under the power of their disease: O then, consider how much this
concerns you! you may by your unfruitfulness and barrenness under the means
of grace, make your conversion less possible, then that of Pagans and Heathens.
Did not our Savior say? Mat. 11. 21. That the Tyrians and Sodonians would have
showed more effects of a conversion, then the Jews to whom there had been so
much preaching, if God would have vouchsafed the Gospel to them? Certainly you
are in a more dangerous estate, then any people that sit in darkness, and have
no light: If so many Sermons, so many Sabbaths, so many Exhortations, have done
no good? who can but think it is in vain to plant and water any more?

Fifthly, Those that have accustomed themselves to rebel against the light, and
to live against the convictions of their conscience: As the Mariner used to
storms and 5. Those that have accustomed themselves to rebel against the light.
tempests, is not afraid; so these continually used to the whips and scourges
of their conscience, at last are not afraid at all, yea, quite put it out: The
Apostle calls this A cankered conscience, seared with an hot iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
or Quite cut off, as some expound it; and certainly, this must be a desperate
presage: for seeing conversion is let into the soul, by that needle of
conviction; if this be resisted, and continually beaten back, what hope is left
at the bottom? Therefore this is the inlet to the sin against the Holy Ghost,
from which never any was, or shall be converted, of whom if we had certainty,
we might no more preach to their conversion, then to the Devils and damned in
hell. But whence comes this impossibility of turning to God? it arose at first
from rebelling against light, living in those sins, which the spirit of God
convinced thee of by the word, and so in some measure, Doing despite unto the
Spirit of Grace: This makes thee at last insensible; even as frequent walking
barefoot, brings a senselesness of pain upon the feet: Now whether this light
be natural, ingrafted in thy conscience; or supernatural, revealed by the grace
of God, it is a woeful hardness, to resist any of them: This indisposition to
conversion, is very common; for what man is there, that lives in gross
palpable sins, that does not rebel against his conscience, and rebel against
the light of Gods word: Oh! this must argue, thou have devilish wickedness in
thee, that thou do the things, thou know are sins: I say, Devilish,
because the Devils have great light in their understandings, but malicious
enmity against God in their wills: If therefore thou would prepare the way
for God in thy heart, and have the gates of thy soul unbolted, that the King of
Glory may come in, be sure, let thy conversation answer thy conviction; let thy
heart in affections and practice, be proportionable to thy light and judgment;
be so blessed, that when thou know, thou do also: Therefore you that live
under much preaching, are often in hearing, and ministerial admonitions, you
had need take heed to your selves, for as often as thou sinnest, thou go
against the instructions of thy own heart: Thou know otherwise, thou have
been taught otherwise, thou have heard otherwise; This is kicking against the
prick: This daily use to the noise and sound of conscience, will at last take
away the terribleness thereof.

Sixthly, Those also are very far from turning unto God, even without any hope,
6. Those that by God are given up to the power of their sins.
that are by Gods just judgment, forsaken and given up to the power of their
sins, to sin with all greediness, wilfulness, and without any remorse at all.
There are such who have this incurable disease upon them; and which is more
terrible, it is to be found chiefly in the Church of God, and amongst them,
that have enjoyed the best means: Thus Isa. 6. 10. Many of the people of Israel
are to have their eyes shut, and their ears made deaf, and their hearts
senseless or fat, lest they should understand and be converted. To make the
heart fat, is a metaphor from beasts, that by the fattest pastures, are soonest
prepared for the Shambles; so many people by the choicest and most excellent
means of grace, are ripened for this heavy judgment of a senseless spirit. Woe
be it to those persons, that are smitten with this spiritual blindeness: Behold
then the severity and terror of God, to several persons, who for a long while
receive his grace in vain, and resist his spirit; God in his anger swears,
This people shall never enter into his rest, give them blind eyes, a deceived
heart, a stupid conscience, let no Ministry trouble them, let no judgment
awaken them: Therefore howsoever thou boastest in thy boldness and impudency in
sinning, and bravest it toward God and man, yet thou art more terribly cursed
then Cain, for he went trembling about under his curse, and thou go securely
in all jollity and mirth.

Seventhly, A people of frequent resolves and purposes to amend, while
judgments 7. Those that after judgments are removed, against frequent
resolutions, return to their former sins again.
are upon them, but when they are removed, returning to their former sins
again: Such discover their inconstancy and hypocrisy so often, that they give
little hopes of a true and right turning to God. Pharaoh, while the hand of God
was heavy on him, how ready then for his duty! then he will let the people go,
then he cries out of his sin; but no sooner is the rod taken off his back, but
he is in the mire as before. The people of Israel are also a pregnant instance
for this, while they were in fears of enemies, or under any of Gods sore
judgments, that they sought and cried mightily to God; but let them have
respit, they fall from God again: Hence are they so often condemned for
hypocrisy and backsliding, (...) such whom God would wholly forsake at last;
this is too often to be found. There are many people in times of fear, and
dangers of death, are as soft as wax; but when recovered, as hard as iron: Men
of aguish dispositions, sometimes very hot, and again very cold; sometimes in
great fears, straights and troubles of soul, ready to roar out like Bears, for
the anguish upon their souls, because they have sinned against God; and other
times as bold, and ready for the same sins they complained of, as if they were
not the same men. As they say of long ague fits, they end at last in a
consumption; so these changes and vicissitudes upon thy soul, will at last end
in final Apostasy: O then be sure to keep up all those Engagements and
Obligations thou have taken upon thy self: Be the same in health, as sickness;
in joy, as fear; after a sermon, as when thou art hearing one, that fills thy
heart with fears.

Eighthly, Such also seem remote from conversion, that are scorners and
deriders 8. Deriders of holiness.
at godly and holy things: The profane scoffer, is seldom turned an humble
lover of the things he so despised: Hence he is a blessed man, That sits not
in the seat of scorners, Psalm. 1. 1 that has nothing to do with them: The
Apostle Peter speaks of some men, 2 Pet. 3. 3. whose damnation is of old
ordained for them, and they are scoffers and deriders at the day of judgment,
and Christ's coming. Solomon does often sentence a scorner, for a man that shall
perish in his wickedness. I know not why it is, but it falls out, that
godliness and true holiness is the object of scorn, derision and contempt to
carnal and wicked men: Thus David was the song of drunkards; and what is more
ordinary, then to despise and deride the practical power of godliness? Now what
hopes can such give of turning to God? will thou come and be in the number of
those, whom thou mockest and despisest? will thou eagerly pursue that way, thou
did so deride? though this be too common, yet it argues high profaneness.
Many wicked men, as Herod, though they did not turn godly themselves, yet they
reverenced and honored it in others; And will thou be so arrogantly wicked, as
to scorn at that, which thou should renown and embrace? Who can think that
these Dogs and Swine (for so the Scripture calls such profane wretches) should
ever be turned into Lambs?

Ninthly, As scorners are far off from this privilege, so proud and haughty
men, they seldom are converted: The humble and meek he will teach his way Psalm.
15. 9. Proud and haughty men.
These high Mountains are always barren of good: God resists the proud; How
is that? By not giving grace to them. Pride is a diverse shapen sin, it emptieth
it self into many channels: There is pride of Parts and Abilities, pride about
Birth, Estate, and External Greatness; which way soever pride vents it self,
commonly Christ will not come into that heart, and dwell there: They were the
proud persons, that did not care what Jeremy told them from the Lord: The
Humble, the Meek, the Poor, the Hungry, the Empty, the Naked, these are drawn
home to Christ; but the proud and the full are sent empty away: Take heed
therefore of any kind of pride, for this will always make thee at distance
with God: This will make thee contemn the Word of God, and the voice of his
Messengers. Oh! think the mountain of thy heart must be made a plain, ere
Christ will own thee.

Tenthly, Apostates and Revolters from former zeal and forwardness in the ways
of God: when these fall away, there is little hopes for such to turn unto God:
The 10. Revolters.
Scripture is clear, Heb. 6. and Peter compares such, To the Dog returning to
his vomit, and the Sow to the mire; and that their latter end is worse then
their beginning; yea, that it had been better they had never known the way of
Righteousness, 2 Pet 2. 21. yet such instances of Apostasy and Backsliding, all
times do sadly afford; and truly, such Prodigals, seldom go home to their
fathers house again: Its true, the work of grace was never sound and right in
them, no, not when they most flourished; for if they had been of us, they had
not gone from us: Oh then! take heed how you abate of your former love and
zeal; you once were more forward for God, once you delighted in holy duties,
and holy companions; now thy heart is become like a dried wilderness; the
world, and thoughts of the world has choked all: Oh sit and tremble, lest
this be but the beginning of thy sorrows.

Lastly, Those are difficultly brought home to God, who are ensnared and
entangled 11. Those that are entangled in wicked company.
in wicked and ungodly company, who have ungodly relations, live in ungodly
families: For whenever such are invited to turn to God, then their carnal
friends become impediments in their way. Paul consulted not with flesh and
blood in his conversion; if so, he had not turned to Christ: And this undoeth
you, God and your conscience calls upon thee, Turn to God, why will thou dye
and be damned in these sins? but then thou consultest with flesh and blood,
some ungodly friends and acquaintance, and thus they hinder thee: Oh thou
should say to the dearest friend in the world that stops thee in this course,
Get thee behind me Satan, for thou savorest not the things of God: Hence our
Savior is so peremptory, He that loves not me, more then father or mother,
cannot be my disciple; neither would our Savior have one that would follow
him; so much as go back to bid his friends farewell, or bury his dead father: Oh
then consider, that when a right eye, or a right hand offends thee, these must
be parted with: The Queens daughter must forget her fathers house; when thy
soul is espoused to Christ, thou must forsake all thy former lovers.

Use of Examination, put thy self upon this severe and impartial trial, whether
Use.
thy name be not in one of these black scrols or no: Art thou not to be found
among the ignorant and stupid, or proud and profane scoffers? or among those
that rebel against their conscience, or change in their resolution, as good or
evil flows upon them? Have not thou a long while accustomed thy self to an
evil haunt or custom of sinning? If these, or any of these; Satan and sin has
bound thee in such strong cords, that are not easily broken: while therefore
there is any hope, though there be not so much probability; yet while God has
not declared an utter impossibility, Go and commune with your own hearts, and
stand in awe; yea, cry out, Lord turn me, and I shall be turned; say, I am
weary of my former courses, they are a shame, a torment, an heavy burden upon
me: Oh! (say) I dare not go one step further in the way I was in, I see Hell
gaping to devour me; and never let that trouble thee, to think how the world
will wonder and laugh to see thee become a new convert: Thou had better have
frowns from men then God; thou will leave the company of wicked and ungodly
wretches, to enjoy God and good men: There is a necessity of this turning, that
wickedness thou live in, must be turned from, or else woe unto thee that ever
thou wast born: If death and judgment find thee with them, no mountains or
hills can cover thee from the wrath of God: Hearken what thy own conscience
says, It is high time to leave off from being such a beast any longer; take
Manasses, take Mary Magdalen, take Paul for examples, they ran far in a foul
and dangerous way, but at last they turned: Oh this was there happiness, they
turned from their evil ways. Why do ye not take off all your cares and thoughts
from other things, and fix them upon this business?

SERMON. LXIX.
The Motives and Grounds, of our turning unto God.

EZEKIEL. 33. 11. Turn ye, turn ye, Why will ye dye, O house of Israel?
THe subject of the Text, viz. Conversion, is vast and large, like a living
fountain that always sends forth fresh streams: We have spoken of the
particular difficulties in some men's conversions rather then others: not that
they were to be without hope, but to awaken them out of their security. Now
motives and grounds for our turning unto God, are in the next place to be
considered. For in our Exhortations to be converted, we do not speak as men
destitute of reason, and forsaken of truth: But it is even a wonder when all
the Arguments out of Gods word shall be propounded, if every one do not say,
Arise, let us go hence from our sins. Motives to Conversion. 1.


And first, The possibility of thy conversion may make thee set about it. It is
not with thee as with the damned, and devils in hell. Being thou art not yet in
the Grave and Hell, there may be hopes for thee. Although the last day I showed
how difficult and unlikely some men were to turn to God, yet that was only in
respect of visible second causes; otherwise as when our Savior said, It was as
impossible for a rich man to be saved, as a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle; the Disciples then cried out, Who then can be saved? But our Savior
said, With man indeed it is impossible, but with God all things are possible;
So sinners, and wicked men under those Characters thus described, are no more
likely to turn to God, then a Camel with its bunch-back to go through the eye
of a needle: but with God all things are possible. An absolute impossibility of
turning to God is only in those that have sinned against the Holy Ghost, or
are for ever delivered up by God to an impenitent and a hard heart. But who
they are, is rather a secret in Gods council, then a mystery discovered to us:
so that no wicked men under any Characters whatsoever (unless those excepted)
may conclude in despair, That it is not possible they should ever be converted.
God does here invite the sinners of Israel in what quality soever, to turn to
God; now this is a great encouragement, the very possibility of turning to God.
Ah, How justly might God strike thee dead in thy sins, send thee with thy
goar blood to hell, and leave thee hopeless and helpless? But he has not shut
the door against thee: He has not yet bid thee depart into everlasting fire,
He knows thee not. It should be like oil in thy bones to think such a thing
may be. O Lord, Is not my condition desperate? Is there any hope left for me?
Am I not past all favor? Is not my time spent? Oh, What a mercy is this? But
(...)ing the possibility is uncertain, thy life is so short, time is so quickly
run out, that it may be thy conversion is not possible for any longer then a
day more, or a night more; then what inexcusable folly and madness will it be
to defer it? It is many times Satan's temptation to hold men a long while in
sin, and then to persuade them it is too late to turn to God. At first any time
is soon enough, and afterward every day is too late; but never believe that
suggestion. Oh then, as the Husbandman ploweth in hope, which nourishes all
actions; so thou may hear in hope, pray in hope, set onwork of reformation in
hope; for God never bid a people seek his Name in vain.

Secondly, Not only the possibility, but the probability may much prevail with
thee. For on Gods part it seems more probable thou may be converted, then
millions 2.
in the world. So that howsoever many men by abuse of the means, may make their
condition far worse then that of Heathens and Pagans: yet if we speak strictly
in respect of the means themselves, it is far more probable thou that have the
means of conversion, should be converted, rather then those that enjoy them
not. The greatest part of the world sits in horrible darkness without any
light: to them the word has not come, which yet is the ordinary means of
conversion; so that on Gods part, and the means, it is far more likely that God
wills thy conversion, rather then those to whom he sends no Prophets at all. It
is true, the word is sometimes sent to harden men, and it becomes the savor of
death; but this is after men have horribly abused it: and it is not the proper
and genuine effect of the word, but accidental through the indisposition and
obstinacy of the hearers. Well then, let this encourage thee to turn to God,
God has not withdrawn, or denied the means to thee; yet he sends his Prophets,
and ministers to call thee to him: Why does God vouchsafe all this to me? who
should turn if I do not? Oh it is intolerable shame if any in the world turn
to God, and thou do not who art so often exhorted. Do any in the world
repent, grieve for, and forsake their sins? and do not thou who enjoyest
the powerful means of Grace.

Thirdly, It is not only probable, but thy turning to him is very acceptable
and welcome. Thou art sure to have the door opened to thee: Never any man
turned 3.
to God that was put back again: Come unto me, ho, every one that thirsts
come, come and buy without money, Isai. 55. 1. No man that comes unto me, will
I in any ways cast off, John 6. 37. so that this should be like fire in every
sinners bowels. Oh Lord, when men have been offended, and grievously injured,
they many times become so implacable, that no submission, no satisfaction can
content them. But God after all the despite and disdain done unto him, is
willing to be reconciled: this goodness and mercy of God should abundantly
change thy heart. And certainly thou do not seriously and fully ponder these
things in thy heart, if thou did, thou would not a moment longer stay
from running to him: Thou would not only turn, but run to him; Draw us, and
we will run after thee, prays the Church, Cant. 1. God does not only
powerfully overruled the soul, but so sweetly enclines it to delight in good
and holy objects, that when the heart has once tasted of the goodness of God,
nothing can keep it from him: Seeing therefore thy turning unto God is so
acceptable to him, is so vehemently desired by him, Why should it not make thee
shake off all slothfulness, and address thy self to him?

Fourthly, Therefore turn to God, because this will prove thy good, and thy
happiness: It makes not at all to Gods happiness: God is all-sufficient, the
Sun, to which the Stars contribute no light: My goodness does not extend to
thee, 4.
Psalm 16. 2. If a man drink of a fountain he bettereth himself, he does not
profit the fountain: If a man see any comfortable objects by the Suns light, he
refreshes himself, he does not advantage the Sun: So it is here; If thou turn
to God, God is not made more happy by thee, he needs not thy conversion, or
thy Graces; but it is thy self only that will reap the profit. Oh then let
this move thee, What does this at all avail God? If I turn to him, it is my
good, not his that is interested herein? One would think that self-love would
herein provoke thee; for will a man give all he has for a Temporal life, and
not much rather for Eternal?

Fifthly, Therefore turn to God, because he is your God. God is the God of a
people two ways, internally, when he changes their hearts, and indeed
bestows 5.
all spiritual privileges upon them; and thus he is a God only to those that
have true grace; that are the Children of the promise, and according to the
spirit: but then he is a God externally to all such who outwardly own him, and
call upon him: A God by external Covenant and acceptance; and in this sense
he is the God even of those that are the Children of Abraham, according to the
flesh only. Now the scripture makes this external relation to be a ground why
we should turn from our sins, Hosea 12. 6. Therefore turn thou to thy God; to
thy God, the propriety is a ground of Conversion; and certainly the motives are
very attractive which are drawn from this: You all by your Baptism have
received God as your God; to be no more the Devils, or sins, or the worlds: if
therefore thou have Apostatized, and broken this Covenant, How necessary is it
to re^urn?

For 1. By External Covenant, thou tookest God to be the Husband of thy soul.
The Scripture delights to express it, by betrothing, and marrying the soul to
God, Hosea 2. 19. Thou wast to leave Father, and Mother, and all Loves, and to
cleave to him only. Now by thy sins thou have turned from this Husband, and
have set thy heart upon other Lovers. Thus the Scripture does not only call
Idolatry Adoltery, and going after other Husbands, but all inordinate love of
the World, or any thing therein, James 4. 5. Ye Adulterers, and Adulteresses,
know ye not the friendship of the world, is enmity with God? Here all kind of
immoderate, and excessive affections to any Creature, is Adultery: so then
whenever thou art turned from God to any sin, thou have run from thy Lawful
Husband; thou have forsaken the true object of thy Love: is it not then all the
reason in the World to take up the Churches resolution, Hosea 2. 7. I will go
and return to my first Husband, for then it was better with me then now: say
then, my soul has been playing the harlot all the while it has forsaken God;
it was God, and not these that my soul promised to cleave unto.

2. As an Husband, so in the next place, a Father also thou tookest him to be,
and by this means thou art commanded to call him Father: But if thou like a
Prodigal have left thy Father, and spent thy substance in the service of the
Devil, With what face can thou call him Father? Think of it seriously, you
who live in gross and palpable sins: Is God the Father of such wicked sinners?
Have they the Characters of sons, and not rather of enemies, who thus disobey
him? remember then that thou have forsaken thy Father, and by thy sins have
turned from him. Is it not time then with the Prodigal to say, I will arise,
and go to my Father, and acknowledge that I have sinned against him?

And Lastly, Then was he taken for a Lord and Master; for a King to rule and
reign over thee. Thy Baptism was a giving of thy self wholly up to Gods
government, to walk according to his Laws; now since that, How perfidiously
have thou violated thy Oath? Thou have not been a servant to him, but to the
Devil, Gods great enemy. It is usual with Divines to say, Baptism is
Sacramentum militare, a Military Oath; because every Christian being called to
a spiritual warfarre, does there swear fidelity to Jesus Christ, as the
Captain of his salvation. Now every wicked man is, Proditor militiae, a flyer
from his Colors, and runs into the enemies Camp. Consider then what Rebellion
and Treason against God is in every sin, after thy Baptism-ingagements; thou
art a runagate servant from thy Master. Now if so, is it not requisite that
thou should turn back to him? Every sinner is not only an Apostate, and
Covenant breaker in Adam our first Parent, but a second time a revolter, and
Covenant breaker also, by not living according to that ^^ipula^ion in Baptism.
Oh then it is high time for men to awaken out of this wretched estate. Go to
the true husband of thy soul, return to thy Father, and true Lord and Master
again.

Sixthly, Therefore turn to God from sin, because sin is a state of thraldom^,
6.
and slavery, and our conversion unto God, puts us in a state of freedom and
liberty. Of what a man is overcome, that is he a servant to, says the
Apostle, 2 Pet. 2. 19. Now then, thou being daily Mastered by such lusts, daily
overcom by such sins, thou art made a Slave and Vassal: And if liberty be Bo^um
inestimabile, a good that cannot be prized, yea, as the Rabbis say, If the
heavens were Parchment, and the sea Ink, it could not sufficiently contain the
praises of Liberty; How much rather is this true of spiritual Liberty, when the
son of God has indeed made us free? Why then can thou endure to lie in the
Dangeon of sin, to be kept prisoner and Captive in the Devils snares? And if
thou sai^st, I find no t^raledome, I feel no misery or bondage in serving
sin: It may be so; but therefore thy misery is far the greater: A man may
desperately be sick, and yet not feel he is so: And so may thou be kept fast
in the Chains of sin and yet apprehend no but then at all. But thou art to
believe the Word of God against thy own sense and feeling; that makes it such a
Captivity and slavery. Oh therefore pray to have this Captivity turned: Why
do I live in a Dangeon, when God has glorious mansion places? Why do I feed on
husks, when God has such dainties for a true convert? leave off this drudgery
to sin: The devil is an ^ll master; fills thee with much trouble here, and
eternal torment hereafter.

Seventhly, Turn unto God, because he will then turn unto thee, for so he
promises. Do thou turn with an holy change, and he will with a gracious
change. Thou had thy back on God, and God turned the back upon thee. Thou was
an enemy to God, and God was an enemy to thee: But who can stand under his
enmity? Who can endure his wrath? But upon the souls turning to God, what an
happy change and turn is made in all Gods dispensations? The Creatures are now
turned when he is turned; for they groaned under him as under a burden. The
Angels are now turned to him when he is turned; for they are reconciled, and
take him for a fellow servant. The Scripture that is curned also; for whereas
before every page did speak terror, and breath forth anger, now it breaths
only comfort and consolation to such. The providence of God is now turned; for
whereas before every thing was a Curse, and wrought to thy Damnation, now every
thing works to thy good, and furthers thy salvation, Yea now God is turned,
(to speak after the manner of men, though the change is properly in us, not in
him) for he that was an enemy, that was angry, that accounted all thy prayers
Abominations, that askedst thee, What thou had to do to take his Name in thy
mouth: Now he becomes a gracious Father, answers prayers, and welcometh thee
into his presence. Thus you see how happy a thing it is to turn to God, for
then every thing in Heaven and Earth, becomes also turned for thy good.

Eighthly, Turn unto Christ, for he is the true and proper rest for the soul.
You heard conversion was a motion, and all motion is at last for ^ome rest: Now
all the while thy heart moves after any sin, or Creature, as if happiness
were to be found there, thou art carried out in restless motions, thou ^^^nest
to one thing, and then to another, and in all there is vanity Turn then to that
God, which if once ta^ed of, thy soul will thirst no more, thou will be at thy
jou^nes and, thou will desire to have nothing else. Thus David, Whom have I in
H^^ve^ but th^e, and whom in earth but thee? When his soul was turned to God,
he was like the D^ve returned to the A^k: He was like an house on the rock.
Where is every wick^d man is like a man in a burning fever, or in exquisite
pa^s and tor^en^s of body; he turns on this side, and turns on that side,
and can get no rest or ease. Thus it is here; the wicked man turns from one
lust to another, from one sin to another, but can have no ease in all. It
therefore thy soul be wise, thou will think on these things: Thy actions are a
way, as the Scripture often calls them, and so they will lead to some end: if
they be the way of sin, they lead to death and damnation: why do^it thou not
think of turning to God? for in any thing that is not God, there cannot be full
content and satisfaction in the heart: Feciste (Domine) cor nostrum, as Austin;
O Lord, thou made our heart, and it is restless till it come to thee again:
Even as the Waters that come from the sea, never cease running till they are at
last emptied into that Ocean whence they came. Come unto me ye that labor, and
you shall find rest to your souls, says Christ: Think not then to say, It is
good for us to abide still in our lusts, it is better then if we turn unto God;
for in this thou speak as one who never knew God, or his goodness.

Ninthly, Set before thy eyes those Converts who are recorded in the Scripture,
and see the joy and happiness of their condition, and then do thou write after
their copy. Man asses a bloody sinner, that did not only sin himself, but
caused many others to sin, yet when he repents and turns to God, God
receives him, and his iniquities are forgiven as if they had never been. Oh
blessed change! So Paul, he had gone far in bitter opposing, and persecuting
the ways of Christ, though in ignorance; but when converted, Oh how does his
heart burn with all thankfulness and praise to God? What unspeakable joy does
he find in his heart to think he is what he was not once? If thou had never
heard of any that turned from their sins to God, or if they did, that they
have repented that ever they repented, they were sorry that they turned from
their sins; it was better with them when they served their lusts, then when
they served God. Then thou might have some plea. But when thou read of
the exceeding joy, and wonderful blessedness and peace of Conscience they
have had, who have been thus converted from their evil ways, What cords of
sin can be so strong as to hold thee any longer? Oh say then, as I have
sinned like a Manasses, like a Mary Magdalen, so I will turn to God with
mourning and humiliation as they did.

Tenthly, Turn unto God from the way thou walk in, because it is a way of
death and damnation. We may truly say, Lions are in the way, even those
roaring Lions that seek to destroy, And wilt not thou turn out of it? What
passenger does not take it for a great kindness, if traveling out of his way
to be informed, he is going a clean contrary way? and besides it is a
dangerous way, many Roberies and Murders use to be committed in that way, Will
not he with much joy thank you, and speedily turn out of it? This is your case
who live in gross and profane courses: Thou art going the clean contrary way
to heaven; men go not to heaven through such miry paths; and besides, there is
Hell and damnation, and all the curses of God in the way, Why then should you
not say, Blessed be God, and blessed be those Watchmen that have given me this
warning? Consider then, these are not ways to live in, to dye in: The life
that I live is not a life to have any comfort, any hope in. Oh therefore return
unto God.

Eleventhly, Therefore turn from thy sins to God, because these are thy
enemies, thy deadly Adversaries, they are sugared poison and venom. Thy sins do
as Jael to Sisera, bid thee come in, come in, and it provides pleasant
sweetness for thee, and puts thee in a secure sleep, and then it kills thee.
Now is it not the highest madness in the world for a man wilfully to stay
under his enemies power that seeks his blood, that plots his death, and no
friend can persuade him to come away? This is thy madness; so many sins thou
live in, they are so many bloody enemies to thy soul. They are called lusts
which war against thy soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. And will thou love thy enemies
rather then thy friend? Shall not God, nor the Minister, nor thy own Conscience
persuade thee to get out of thy adversaries hands? Neither think sin the
less enemy, because it is sweet, and pleasant, or profitable for the season;
for it is an enemy under a friends habit, and that is most dangerous of all. It
takes thee as Joab did Abner by the beard, as if he would embrace, but gives
him a mortal wound under the fifth rib. It comes and kisses thee as Judas did
Christ when he had plotted the betraying of him into his enemies hands.
Therefore judge thus of thy lusts, and thou will peedily escape from them.

Twelfthly, Therefore turn unto God, because the end of all Gods judgments 12.
and calamities which are brought upon thee, whether public or private, are
for this, to make thee turn from thy sins. When Nineveh is to be destroyed,
she must turn from her evil ways, else no hope: That threatening was to prepare
for Conversion. Thus the Prophet Isai, and others, Amos 6. complain, I smote
you with famine, and reckons up many several judgments, and in the enumeration
of every one, still concludes, yet are ye not returned to me, says God: So
that the end why God brings his sore judgments, is, That every one in the
Land should turn unto God. Have thou any personal Calamities, any Domestic
Afflictions? The lesson God would also teach thee by these rods, is to turn
from thy iniquities to him: Yea, as the end of all Gods Works, so of his Word
also, of all Preaching, and all hearing, is Conversion unto God.

Use, Of exhortation. Refuse not all these Motives, reject not these grounds of
Conversion: Which of them has not reason and strength enough in it to bring
thee to God? Art thou not sure to speed? Will not all sorrow be turned into
joy, when all wickedness is turned into godliness? Can you do better, be
more happy by turning unto thy lusts which have a moments pleasure, and an
eternities torment? Why do you not with all humility and thankfulness bless
God that calls you to turn to him? Why should he not suffer the Devil and
sin still to reign over thee, whom thou do so willingly serve? Consider,
What joy there is in Heaven, when a wicked man is converted to God; What joy
there is on earth to faithful Ministers, to Godly friends, when this
Conversion is vouchsafed unto thee: Oh say Then, though many Sermons have
heretofore moved me, and made me almost to leave my sins, yet this shall turn
me quite from them: I will be tempted no longer: I will no more consult with
flesh and blood, and God grant you may go home with another spirit upon you;
God grant that you might find the World like fire burning in your bowels, that
it may be said of every one of you as the Father of his Prodigal Son, He was
lost, but now he is found; he was dead, but now he is alive.

SERMON LXX.
Answering some Prejudices and Cavils of ungodly men, against Conversion, or
turning unto God.

EZEKIEL. 33. 11. Turn ye, turn ye, Why will ye dye, O house of Israel?
THis subject of Conversion, is like Ezekiels waters, that rise higher and
higher; therefore marvel not, if we continue long upon it, for the matter will
still be new, though it be the same Text. The last day our endeavor was, to use
all those forcible Reasons, that might persuade you to turn from your sins to
God; although indeed, the very naming of it, does carry so much light and truth
with it, that it argues incredible stupidity and obstinacyin all those, who
yet wilfully continue in their iniquities: that therefore every mountain may be
made level, and every valley raised, to make a prepared way for Christ, I shall
answer those Objections, or Prejudices, or Cavils, which are as a great gulf
between them and conversion. The Objections that arise from a carnal vain
heart, I will call The mountains that must be made low; the objections from a
discouraged or dejected heart, that doubts of its acceptance with God, if it
does return, or imagines strange impossibilities for its own particular; this
I call The valley that must be exalted: And first, let us endeavor to prevail
with the carnal man, to have so much faith, as to throw this mountain into the
sea. That objection which I shall begin with, is this:

To turn unto God, is to leave all those pleasures, that delight and carnal
mirth, I have had in my sinful ways: If so be I were to be a Cloistered Monk,
or a solitary 1. Carnal Objections against conversion.
Hermit; If I were persecuted, flying into caves and dens, that it would
deprive me of all my pleasure, then such contemplations, and holy meditations
might be embraced; but for me, that find such pleasure, such jollity in my
wicked ways, to turn to God with mourning and humiliation, is to bid me be no
more Naomi, but Marah: Thus the voluptuous man, the unclean man, the drunkard,
the glutton, the earthly and coveteous man; yea, all who find iniquity, like
honey in their mouth; these all speak like the Fig Tree and Olive Tree in
Judges, Shall I leave my fatness, and my sweetness, and forsake all my former
pleasures, to mourn and fast, and reform, and to live a strict life of
mortification? Thus every man is drawn aside by pleasure. To take you off in
this respect:

First consider, That the Scriptures judgment about sin, is wholly
contradictory to thine: The word of God acknowledges no pleasure, no
desireableness Answ. 1.
in sin; but the clean contrary, Gall, and Wormwood, and Bitterness, and Death,
Wrath, and Terror, and Curses, and Torments: How then come thou to speak of
pleasures and delight in sin, when Gods word knows no such thing? Now the
Scripture is the wisdom of an All-knowing God, and we are to believe that, more
then our own sense and apprehension: We see diseases do so infect the palate,
that it many times judges bitter sweet, and sweet bitter, but the nature of
things is not changed because the palate is changed; and thus it is here, by
reason of that corrupt frame of heart in thee, thou judge sin pleasant; no
ordinances, no godly objects have any savor or delight in them: but these do
greatly affect thee; know all this is a disease, a sickness upon thy heart, as
some diseases make the sick parties eat black coals, and such loathsome ^rash:
This is a disease. The word of God, which only reveals true wisdom, speaks
otherwise: Oh then! call no more thy lusts sweet, thy sins pleasant, its a
disease on thee makes thee think so, if thy palate and taste were spiritual,
thou would with dislike, reject every temptation of sin, as Christ did the
vinegar they gave him to drink. Paul told Elymas, He was in the state of gall
and bitterness, Acts 8. 23. Elymas did not think so, nor feel so: And thus is
every wicked man, in a condition of gall and misery; if his heart were truly
qualified, he would cry out of the bitterness of those sins, which he now says
are sweet: Judge then righteous judgment about thy iniquities, and thou will
quickly forsake them.

Secondly, Grant thy sins have pleasure and delight in them, yet they are
pleasant only to the brutish and sensual part of a man; the eyes, the ears,
the body, the 2.
imagination, these for the most part are pleased in the actings of sin: Now
what an unworthy and irrational thing is it for thee, to pursue those
pleasures, which are common to thee, with beasts? Sin happily may bring bodily
pleasures, bodily delight; but how low should these things be to thee that have
a soul, whose true good and happiness lies in godly actions, and enjoying of
God? Did not the rich man in the Gospel, show himself like a beast, when
speaking of his barns full, he said, Soul, take thy ease, for thou have much
good laid up for thee, Luke 12. 19. Soul! O brutish expression, what were these
good things to his soul? he might have said, Body, take thy case, but Soul he
could not: when therefore the pleasures of sin, have painted themselves, like
Jezebel, to entice and deceive thee, reject them with disdain: These are not
pleasures for an immaterial, immortal soul; these are not a proper delight, for
the chief and most noble part of me; If I were only a body, and not a soul;
then there might be greater reason to admit them.

Thirdly, Grant further, that sin has pleasure with it, yet its such a
pleasure, that causes death, a pleasure that brings damnation with it; like
some deadly and 3.
mortal herbs, that they say, will put a man into laughing till he dies:
Pleasant delightful things, do sooner cause diseases, then bitter: Much honey,
quickly turns into much choler; so that sins imbracement of thee, is like
that of the Ivy, which secretly devoureth the thing it cleaves to. Consider
what the Wiseman, that had got the true experience of all things, affirms, I
said of laughter, It was madness, Eccles. 2. 2. and, It is better to go to the
house of mourning, then of mirth, Eccles. 7. 2. do not then like thy sins the
better, because sweet and delightful. Poison that kills presently, may be made
sweet; and so those sweet lusts, and those sweet sports of sin, convey death
and hell in their pleasure.

Fourthly, Let it be still granted, that sin has pleasure in it, yet it is but
for a moment, its but like the blazing of some crackling thorns in the fire:
That which 4.
the Scripture speaks about a man's vanity of life; its but a Vapor, a Shadow, a
Bubble, is true of all the pleasures of sin; they pass away in the enjoying of
them: The godly comfort themselves in this, That these present afflictions are
but light and momentany, in respect of that eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.
7. and the contrary a wicked man may say, That these present momentany
pleasures, are nothing to that eternal weight of torment: Thus the grace of
Moses is commended, That he chose rather to endure the reproaches of Christ,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11. They are but
pleasures for a season; O then! when thou art but a mortal sinner, and thy joy
a mortal joy, all is fading; why then art thou so importunate after these
shadows?

Fifthly, Although sins may have sweetness for the present, yet they have a
torment 5.
and a sting afterward. A man that in his hot blood has got a dangerous
wound, he feels it not presently; but when he is cold, then he begins to be
sensible of it: And thus it is here, a man in the hot and violent pursuit of
lusts, feels nothing, apprehends nothing; but when his conscience is once
awakened and terrified, then he cries out, O the wounds, the sting, the blows
that sin gives him: Thus Solomon, speaking against drunkenness, not to be
enticed with the occasions of it, he adds his reason, Look not upon the wine,
while it moves it self in the cup, for at last it biteth like a Serpent, and
stingeth like an Adder. Prove. 23. 32. Little does the drunkard think, he had as
good swallow down so many live Adders, and stinging Serpents. The Apostle tells
us, That sin has a sting, 1 Cor. 15. How then is it, that thou perceivest the
honey, but not the sting of it? but its no wonder, for this is at last: At last
it biteth like an Adder, at the time of death, at the time of fears and
grievous judgments, then it puts forth those sharp and poisonous stings. It
was Aristotle's advice, we should look upon pleasures going and notcoming, they
leave horror and terror behind them: Commune therefore with your own hearts,
sit down and consider, This sweetness will be turned into gall; this is the
Devils subtilty, to present the pleasure, but not the torment of a sin; see
what a sting it made in Cains conscience, what a sting in Judas, and it will be
such a scorpion in thy side one time or other.

Sixthly, Thou will not turn to God, because of the pleasure in sin? Oh! but
what pleasures and joy do thou indeed deny thy self, by not turning to him:
If husks 6.
and dross has pleasure, how much has true repentance, and the exercise of
the graces of Gods spirit, which is the true manna? If a wilderness be such a
delight? what may Canaan be? If these drossie and filthy lusts do affect thee,
then how may glorious objects move thee, if thy heart were spiritual? At thy
right hand (says David) are rivers of pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.
and, We believe with joy unspeakable and full of glory, says Peter, 1 Pet. 1.
8. Therefore if pleasure and sweetness do move thee, Oh taste and see how good
God is, and all the ways of godliness. The pleasures of the world are like
muddy puddling waters; but these are pure streams: Thou will find one hours
praying, better then a thousand of profane fudlings; one hours enjoyments of
Christ as thy husband, by faith, then all the wanton dalliances and unchaste
imbracements of unlawful objects: Oh then! thou art an enemy to thy true joy,
to thy true peace, as long as thou do not turn to God.

Seventhly, Call not that pleasure, which when thy soul is powerfully wrought
upon by Gods grace, will be only bitter and miserable to thee: Look upon all
the true 1.
converts unto God, how have they been affected with sin: Did not Mary
Magdalene with anguish of heart, cause floodgates of sorrow to be opened? Did
not David upon his after-conversion to God, being turned aside by murder and
adultry, lie roaring through anguish of spirit? What profit, says the Apostle,
have ye of those things, whereof you are now ashamed, Romans 6. 21. And so here,
What pleasure and sweetness is there in that, which you now find so bitter?
And if thou have not such a merciful time here to find it bitter? thou will
have a terrible and just time to find it so in hell: What? do the damned souls
feel any pleasure? is there so much as one drop of honey, in all the gall they
are to drink? If not, where is thy wisdom and judgment, that do not throw
away thy sins as so much hemlock, and embrace godliness in the room thereof,
which brings its pleasant well-come with it, even much tranquillity and
quietness of conscience.

Thus we have unmasked this Objection, and made that appear to be a serpent,
which was taken for so pleasant a fish, if we may allude to our Saviors
expression.

The next obstruction in the way, which does commonly keep men from turning to
God, is the profit and great advantage they find in those sins they live in:
If they 2. The profit of sin.
be sins of Iujustice, Violence, Oppression, any unlawful way of gain; Oh (...)
hard then, not to cry out, Great is Diana: The Apostle speaks of some, that
thought gain was godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 5. not godliness gain, as it is indeed
great gain: Thus ambitious men, covetous men, those that are immoderately
affected to any thing, they care not what laws they break, what violation they
offer to Gods Commands, so that they may be rich, and great, and honored in
this world, that is all they look at; so that a too attentive eye to worldly
profit, is that many times which keeps from turning to God.

This is also easily answered, if a man go into Gods Sanctuary, or plow with
his Heifer: For

First, If there be profit in thy sinful ways, it is about worldly fading
things, which Answ. 1.
will leave thee at last, as Judas his thirty pieces did, in a tormenting hell:
Our Savior tells us, That if a man should get the whole world, and lose his
own soul, it will not avail him, Mat. 16. 26. whereas that is indeed profit,
which is immortal, which will continue for ever, which is profit in life time,
and profit in death time, which will be profit when thy body is buried, and
rotting in the grave: Thou then that gettest profit, and this earthly profit
comes upon thee daily, still remember thy grave will be a period to it: There
is a sudden storm arising, that will make all this suffer shipwreck, and thou
must swim naked, as it were, to Gods Tribunal, to be judged there.

Secondly, Never call sin profitable, for to that are all the curses of God
threatened, 2.
How then can that be profitable to thee, which makes a man cursed at home, and
cursed abroad, cursed in all his store and abundance? Oh do not deceive thy
self! it is not wealth, but Gods wrath thou art treasuring up every day:
Indeed, godliness is profitable for all things, as the Scripture says; and
has the promise of this world, and the world to come; but wickedness is
profitable for nothing, but has the curses of this world, and the world to
come: Do not then account of any increase by sin, God has threatened to blast
it, it will melt away like the dew, it will turn to garvel in the belly; all
these profitable morsels God will make thee vomit up. Hence the Scripture does
so commend a little with Gods favor, and obtained in Gods way, then all
treasures with iniquity, Psalm. 37.
call not then that profitable, which is either the moth to eat thee secretly,
or the fire to destroy thee violently.

Thirdly, That is only profitable, which is profitable to the greatest good
that we 3.
stand in need of, and to divert the greatest evil that can befall us: Now no
sins are profitable to that, but the clean contrary; for the greatest good that
we are capable of, is the favor of God, the light of his countenance: This
David does so often pray for in his straights, as being the only Sun to dispel
that dark night which was upon him; and on the contrary, no evil, no not of
misery, torment, and pain, is like that of Gods anger and fury against sin. Now
take all the profit and advantages thou have got in a sinful way, what do these
help, for the obtaining of the one, or repelling of the other? Oh take Cain and
Judas burning and scalding in the guilt of sin, can they buy Gods favor? can
they purchase the light of his countenance? Does not the Scripture make the
rust of their money, James 1. 3.
and the timber in the wall, to cry out, and witness against the wicked man?
Then be ashamed ever to pretend this any more, that the wicked ways thou live
in, are in so many respects hopeful to thee, for that cannot be, it destroys
the main, and is contrary to the true happiness.

Fourthly, That cannot be called profitable, which as it cannot help to the
good we cannot want; so neither at the time, when we are in the greatest
extremity. Riches 4.
will not avail in the day of wrath. Judas had the bitter experience of this;
if therefore thou could find any true profit in the way of sin, it might
then be discovered, when at the time of death, or at the time of fearful and
heavy judgments, thou art in the greatest extremity: But (alas!) how truly
may thou take up that, Ye are miserable comforters all; who does not then
cry out of his sins? who does not then bewail the time, and his folly, that
ever he entertained such a bitter-sweet as sin is: Take up then at last
principles of wisdom, lay up treasure for an evil day, provide against a sad
storm arise, and what will that be? The hour of death, the hour of Gods
judgments: Oh! then to have an Ark to run into, then to have a mark upon thee,
that the destroying Angel may not consume thee, is a great mercy: But this will
never be obtained in a sinful way; so that if thou turn to God, and art
constant in the daily exercise of grace, then thou have the only Cordial, the
only Oil to be poured in thy wounded soul.

Fifthly, Never pretend profit, for all the while thou do not turn to God,
thou art in every thing a loser: Who can enumerate all thy losses which come
through sin? 5.
There is the loss of all true joy and peace of conscience; there is the loss
of eternity in happiness, of heaven, and all the glory therein, which is more
then can enter into the heart of man to conceive; there is loss of thy immortal
soul, which is more worth then all the world; and lastly, there is the loss of
God, the fountain of all good and happiness, Bonum in quo omnia bona, That
Ocean of good, in which all the several streams of goodness empty themselves:
Oh then that ever thou should be so seduced, as to say, Its better to live in
my sins as I do, then to turn unto God! for what? is it better to have that
present profit, then Heaven, Happiness, and God to all eternity? Oh say rather!
These my sins will never make satisfaction for the loss ^incur by them; these
my corruptions will never get me as much, as I lose through them: I keep coals
and dung; and part with gold and precious pearls. Its the great ignorance and
pravity of our corrupt natures, that knows not how to put a right prize and
esteem upon things.

Sixthly, If thy profit keep thee from turning to God, and thou think it a
great part of wisdom and prudence to continue in this saving way, as thou
call 6.
it: Then how does this condemn all the holy Martyrs and Confessors for the
faith of Christ, of the greatest folly and madness that ever was; They may then
lay aside those Robes of Glory they are adorned with; For what did not they
lose? their wealth, their riches, their pleasures, their lives to follow God;
they thought turning to Christ more profit, then turning to any carnal safe way
in the world. Did not the Martyrs take the spoiling of their goods joyfully?
Did not they as willingly lay down their bodies at the stake, as men do their
clothes to sleep? Certainly, sin and the world did then tempt them to turn out
of Gods way, but they would go forward; and thereby our Savior had given them
an excellent Antidote, He that will save his life, shall lose it; and he that
will lose it, shall save it: And thus we have cast this mountain down, that
exalted it self against our conversion.

The third Cavil is, The custom and habit they have in sin: That now they say;
It is vain to attempt this work; had they in their younger years set themselves
upon 3. The custom and habit they have in sin, which seems unpossible to
overcome. Aus^^. 1.
such courses, there might have been hope; but now, none can make this crooked
thing straight, they are too far gone, ever to turn again, To remove this
stone: Consider

First, That God is ready to stretch forth his hand to thee, who are willing to
swim cut of this sea of corruption: This very thought or desire at last to turn
to him, comes from God: Thou art as unable of thy self, to have a good thought
of turning to God, as to turn unto God. The women could not remove the stone
from our Saviors Sepulcher, and there comes an Angel, who did it: Thou can
not remove or stir thy heart, but God can: And

Therefore in the second and last place (because this may be more spoken to,
when we come to remove the discouraging Objections that are in some 2.
men's hearts;) Although to change this custom of sin, and to make the
Blackamore white, be impossible to flesh and blood, yet with God all things are
possible; and therefore say, Though the work be too hard for me, yet it is not
to God. Lezarus was many days dead in the grave, yet Christ raised him to life,
as well as those that were lately dead. Consider how Autoratively God speaks. I
will take away an heart of stone, and give an heart of flesh; I will do it,
who can Ezekiel. 3^.
hinder? I will not depend upon the consent and cooperation of Free Will. Can
God do wonderful things, and miraculous works upon the whole Creation, upon
men's bodies, and cannot he also upon the souls? Is not he the Father of
Spirits, as well as the God of all flesh? Therefore be thou awakened and look
up to heaven, who changes the natures of things? who cures diseases that have
been from the very birth?

Use of Admonition to all those who are bound in any of these Cords. Arise, Use.
like Sampson, and break them in pieces: speak not of delight and pleasure when
thou leavest the ways of God; speak not of profit when thou losest God and
Heaven. Oh, no man is in the state of bitterness if thou art not, none are
undone men if thou art not. Why should not reason persuade you? Why should not
Scripture counsel you? Suppose Wisdom (as Solomon describes it) calling
aloud^ to you; Why do ye pass by O ye simple and foolish? Come in to me, I
have my Feast Prove. 6.
provided, my glory prepared: Why shall not this prevail with you? What, shall
lusts and sin stand at the door and say, Come in, turn into me; and you readily
go in, though her paths lead to the gates of death; and do ye refuse Gods
Calling? Will you not be justly condemned at that great day? Shall not heaven
and earth bear witness against you? Oh turn from sin now; fot in hell and
torments there is no turning from them.

SERMON LXXI.
That ungodly Friends and Relations are great Hindrances of ones Conversion,
with some helps or Directions to those that are thereby kept in their Sins.

EZEKIEL. 33. 11. Turn ye, Turn ye: Why will ye dye, O house of Israel.
THe next Mountain to be made low, that so way may be made for our turning to
God. is The Temptation of evil and wicked companions. Some have desires and
resolutions to come to God, and leave their sins; but then they have carnal
friends, and profane neighbors, they stop them in the way, or else they live
in wicked families, in ungodly places, where no fear of God is: and these
presently like Herod, kill all the young Motions and Desires that may be in any
man's heart, lest their Kingdom and glory go down: so that we may say, Evil
and ungodly companions are that deep ditch out of which few do recover. But
yet if thou applyest thy self to the Throne of Grace, and importune for divine
strength, thou will find it not only possible but easy to break these bonds,
and come out of Egypt. Therefore to take thee off this excuse, let us consider
this temptation of evil company and acquaintance.

First, It cannot be denied, that ungodly friends, especially if in near
relations, Ungodly friends great impediments in the way to heaven.
as Father, Mother, husband, wife, etc. are wonderful impediments in the way
to heaven. Many had in all probability, been turned to God, if they had had
better parents, better k^nred, lived in better families, where Piety and
Religion might be more encouraged, and a good example given thereto. It was a
great advantage to Timothy, That he had a Mother and a Grandmother, both godly,
and so from a youth he was acquainted with the Scriptures, 1 Timothy 1. 5. And it
is as heavy a judgment, where Children can see nothing but wickedness and
impiety in those who are their Superiors, or to live among men that are
profane enemies to godliness; Now the reasons why such men so yoked with
unrighteousness do hardly throw it off, are,

First, From the nature of a man, who is a sociable Creature. Its a natural
property to join in society with those amongst whom he lives, and by that
means 1. Why men yoked with unrighteousness, by wicked relations or
acquaintance, do very rarely become godly.
does easily partake of their sins. Therefore one great means of Conversion, is
to set our selves apart from company, To commune with our own hearts and be
still, Psalm. 4. that upon this retirement we may come to a right and ^ound
judgment in all things, Prove. 18. 1. Through desire a man having separated
himself interme^leth with all wisdom. Man therefore being a sociable creature,
its the greatest part of prudence and wisdom that can be to make choice of his
company, to see who they are that he acquaints with, for he will quickly be
colored, and receive the impression that others put upon him. Aristotle said,
That he who lived alone, was (...) a God or a Devil, because retiredness would
much improve a man, either in wickedness or piety; but that holds not in
every respect; for many times wickedness is incerased and drawn out by
companying with others.

Secondly, Because evil acquaintance puts so great a demur to Conversion,
Therefore the Scripture is so diligent, in giving many exhortations to avoid
all the Society 2.
of wicked men. If any man be a Drunkard, an Adulterer, a riotous person, no
not to eat with such an one, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Not to eat, that is, to have no
familiar, voluntary and unnecessary acquaintance with him, that may encourage
him and imbolden him in his sin: so, If any walk disorderly, from such
withdraw, that thereby the person offending may be ashamed, 2 These. 3. 11. And
Solomon the mirror of all wisdom, is very frequent in Precepts, concerning the
Adulterous woman; The young man must not come near her dwelling, he must pass
on the other side of the street, keep off from such place as places of the
plague, and dangerous infections. So where unjust violent men are brought in,
Prove. 1. entising the young man to cast in his lot with them, he is warned to
have nothing to do with them, he must avoid them, as the bird does the snare
that is laid for her. Hereupon the Psalmist begins his first Psalm with the
blessedness of that man, who does not sit nor walk in the company of the
ungodly, Ps. 1. 1.

Thirdly, Therefore ill company is dangerous, because sin is of an infecting
contagious nature; it quickly spreads through a family, through a parish,
especially if any eminent 3.
in place and office give an example to wickedness. The ground of that
Church-censure, Excommunication, is the contagion of other men's sins; Purge out
the old leven, that was in the incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5. 7. And why? because
a little leven leveneth the whole lump: he that touches pitch, cannot but be
defiled with it. He that lies in the dung-hil cannot but smell of it: so then
thy delight with ungodly, and profane men, cannot but in time make thee as
black as they. Why should not men be as much afraid of being infected with sin,
as with a contagious disease? but only we are carnal, fearing the evil of the
body, which is death, but not the evil of the soul, which is sin and damnation.
Oh then say, Why am I such an enemy to my soul? How can I ever turn to God as
long as I live here, delight in such men? How can I ever go into Canaan, if I
leave not this Egypt?

Fourthly, He that is joined in ungodly acquaintance, does hardly turn to God,
because 4.
there is not only evil got by them, but this is also a sure demonstration of
that man's naughty and evil heart. For it is the old rule, simile, simili,
gaudet; similitude is a cause of love; and therefore if ye see a man delight in
the society of that man, who is profane and wretched, that man is so too in
his heart and disposition; for though many men will not outwardly be drunk or
swear, yet if they love those that do so, it is plain their dispositions are
against godliness as well as others: so that as David having a godly heart,
did evidently demonstrate this by that expression, His delight was in the
Saints of the earth, Psalm. 16. 3. So it is a sure demonstration of a wicked
man, though he may not do outward wickedness, yet if he keep company with those
that do it. The Apostle makes it a sign we have passed from death to life, If
we love the brethren, 1 John 3. 14. and if we love those that live in the
exercise of all evil, it is a sign we are still in the state of death: separate
therefore thy self from that evil society, if thou will turn at any time to God.

Fifthly, Therefore do evil companions so greatly hinder conversion, because
they are 5.
daily hardening and encouraging one another in an evil way. Thus they
emboldened one another that said, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall
dye: and the Apostle alleging this, says, Evil communications corrupt good
manners, 1 Cor. 15. 33. For as the godly are recorded in Scripture as so many
live ^oals put together, enflaming one another with fire from heaven, thus
those that feared God spoke often one to another, sath Mal. 3. 15. and in Esai,
23. they are calling upon one another, Come, let us go up to the house of the
Lord, we will go also: So the contrary is with wicked men, they put presumption
and desperate boldness into one another; they hearten one another. Where any
hopeful seeds of good motions are rising up, they presently pull them up: What,
you grow precise? What, you turn melancholy? What matter is it what Ministers
preach? They must have something to say; thus they are able to blast all, and
one wicked companion is able to do more hurt, then many sermons good.

Lastly, Therefore are those, who are joined in evil fellowship, hardly
converted to God, because men are moved by examples, especially of a multitude.
Where corcuption is universal, there not to be carried down the stream, argues
life of grace: Examples affect more then precepts, because they are visible and
obvious to the eye, Thus Peter is said to comple some men to Judaize, by his
example merely, Gal. 2. 31. especially examples are more potent and violent,
when they are general: Therefore you have a special command in this case, Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23. 1. In corrupt ages, where
sin like a deluge does overflow, then to have some men apply themselves to God,
is a great wonder. Thus it is spoken as a great matter after that all flesh had
corrupted his ways, Then began men to call upon the Lord, Genesis 4. 26. as some
expound it; Then some men began to set up the pure worship of God. Well, though
this be such a mountain in the way, yet several considerations may make thee
easily climb over it.

First, You have the example of some who have lived in profane places, have
been 1. Directions and means how to get through, or cast off the impediment of
wicked companions and relations.
compassed about with all wickedness, yet these even out of hell have cried
unto God and drawn near unto him. Thus Hezekiah was born of a wicked Father,
King Ahaz, and all the family was likely very much corrupted, because he did
after all the abominations of the heathens. Yet how wonderfully does God bring
a clean thing from an unclean! Thus in Nero's Court, who was the monster of
men, and no doubt but his family a monster of families, especially for cruelty
and bloody persecution of the Church of God, yet the Scripture tells us, there
were a company of Godly men, even in Nero's Court, Phil. 4. 22. Thus also
Nicodemus a Pharisee, and a great man in the Pharisees counsels, yet he fears
God, and is not drawn aside by their examples. Do not thou therefore put it
off, and say, if I lived somewhere else, if I had any to join with me, to take
my part, I would then turn to God, but now I must do as those with whom I live,
else there is no abiding for me: speak not thus, for the Scripture records
those that have broken through greater difficulties then thou art in, neither
if thy heart were right, could this stop thee.

Secondly, Lay this down for a rule, that it is not so much a friend, a father,
a 2.
neighbor, as the devil in and by these that does thus tempt thee to keep from
God: For such is his subtilty to destroy thee, that he lays all baits, and
uses the most likely instruments that may undo thee, as we see he did thus
from the beginning: He does not imediately set upon Adam, but upon Eve, and by
her seduceth him. Oh, If Adam had perceived the Devil tempting him by her, How
resolutely would he have gainsaied her? Rev. 10. It is said, The Devil should
throw some of the Saints into prison, How so? The Devil would stir up the
malice and venom of wicked men against them; especially this Truth is
manifested by our Savior when Peter took him aside, and dissuaded him from the
suffering which he was to undergo; see what entertainment our Savior gives
him, Get thee behind me Satan, for thou savorest not the things of God, Mat.
16. 23. Oh thus should thy zeal and anger work: It is not thy friend, thy
father, thy husband, thy neighbor, but the Devil in all these, that seeks to
destroy thy soul.

Thirdly, Remember this, that Christ makes it a fundamental qualification in
every one that would be his Disciple, to hate father, and mother; and brother,
and sister, 3.
for his sake, Luke 14. 26. Be not then startled at this: Oh my parents, my
kindred, my friends would never endure me, should I turn to God, and live a
holy strict life. Think of this Text; he that hates not the dearest relations
for Christ's sake, is not worthy of Christ. Therefore our Savior calls for a
man to cut off his right hand, to pull out his right eye, Mat 5. 30. the
dearest things in the world, that may be an offense to him, and keep him from
God; for as Christ says, It is better to go with one eye, and one hand to
heaven, then both eye and hands to hell. It is better to go with the frowns and
anger of thy dearest friends to heaven, then with all their love to hell. Never
then urge this any more, I dare not for my friends, for my acquaintance; for
thou can never be Christ's Disciple, if any thing be dearer to thee then
Christ. We see Christ himself, though a pattern of all holiness, yet when his
mother would have had him done something when it was not Gods time, Woman,
says he, What have I to do with thee? Joh. 2. not mother, but woman, and what
have I to do with thee?

Fourthly, Whenever the Lord begins to shake and trouble thy heart for sin,
and thou art thinking of another life, to take another course; then it is thy
speci^ 4.
duty not to ask counsel and advice with carnal and unregenerate friends: alas
they think thou art mad; now thou will be undone; they know not what such
troubles for sin mean: Why then should thou discover thy disease to such who
are no Physicians? Take rather Paul's example, when God wrought wonderfully from
heaven to convert him, He obeys God imediately, and never consulted with
flesh and blood, Gal. 2. Thus do thou: Does God by the Ministry, by Preaching,
convince thee of thy sinful ways, of becoming a new man, give up thy self to
this call imediately? Do not consult with flesh and blood? But as Eliah when he
threw his cloak upon Elisha, and the spirit of God moved his heart, he
presently follows Eliah, will not go home to take leave of his friends, but
imediately follows him: so let it be with thee. And we see when some
proffered voluntarily to follow Christ, only they desired to bid farewell to
their friends, and one asked leave but to go and bury his dead Father, that our
Savior rejected them, Mat. 21. 22, and would admit of none of these excuses:
so that these instances should teach thee, when God by his Ministers calls thee
from thy sins, never to ask counsel at home, never to enquire what my kindred
and acquaintance will say, but presently follow God.

Fifthly, Does the strife and variance thou shall have with thy Natural
friends and acquaintance move thee? Oh, Consider that Christ has foretold this
a long 5.
while ago, and therefore be thou the more encouraged to endure such assaults.
Mat. 10. 31, 32. 30. 35. Our Savior there instructing his Disciples how they
ought to confess him before all men, least they should be amazed to see the
jars and contentions that will be because of godliness: He tells them, I am
come to set a man at variance against his Father, and the Daughter against the
Mother; and a man's foes shall be they of his own household: mark this Text, for
it may seem very offensive and harsh. Shall Christ's Doctrine be a makebate?
shall that set families all on a fire, and a contention? This seems to be
little credit to his Doctrine. But it will be thus, not from the Nature of
Christ's Doctrine, for that is a Doctrine of peace with God, and peace with men:
but wheresoever his Truth is received in the practical power of it, such is the
violent opposition even of the dearest friends against it that are not godly,
that it raises up all their hatred and violence against it. Hence we read in
Ecclesiastical history, that sometimes even children have been persecutors of
their Fathers: Let not then thy spirit sink under this, That by thy turning to
God, and condemning the wicked ways that the family lives in where thou art,
thou shall make much contention, stir up an hornets nest; for this is no more
then Christ has foretold. Considering the venomous, and malicious disposions
men have naturally against God and his truth, it cannot be otherwise; only let
this teach thee wisdom, and courage to prepare for a storm.

Sixthly, How many times do evil and wicked men, though never so great one with
6.
another, fall out in deadly enmity about worldly sinful matters! For although
these Swine and Bears do many times agree well among themselves, especially
against godliness, which they look at as the common enemy, yet there is no true
love among wicked men; they hang together as ropes of sand, any matter of
profit, lust, or pride, will presently make them rage at one another. Now what
should thou care for the love and friendship of such men, who can love no
body but for self-respects? The Heathens have excellently debated this, that
there is no friendship among wicked men, but only good men; for when profit or
pleasure is the knot that tyeth them, that is easily broken; when wicked men
agree, it is not peace, but conspiracy. Never then let that dishearten thee: Oh
if I set my face for godliness, be once accounted in the number of those that
walk strictly, all my neighbors will reproach me, every ones mouth will be
open. Art thou so weak a Creature to regard this? their love is not worth the
owning; no wicked man can love another, but for carnal ends; and therefore they
are very hypocrites, and secret back-biters of one another where it makes for
their advantage: so that in this thou show thy self unworthy of Christ:
there are many men that its a glory to be spoken against by them, and it would
be a man's dishonor to have their good word, yea, a man should presently say as
the heathen, nunquia mali feci? what evil have I done that such a man commends
me?

Seventhly, Consider this thou who art hindered by natural friends and carnal 7.
acquaintance, that if thou forsakest these to cleave to God, Thou will never
repent of thy loss. For Christ will be in stead of a Father, Husband, or the
most necessary friend that can be. Thou will find thou have made an happy
exchange; for what friend could quiet thy conscience, forgive thy sin, support
thy spirit, fill thee with spiritual joy? Now Christ will do all these: embrace
that promise, for it is worthy of all acceptance, Mat. 19. 29. Every one that
forsakes Houses, Sisters, Father, or Mother for my sake, etc. shall receive an
hundred fold in this life, and shall inherit everlasting life. Here will be a
twofold satisfact^ion, thou will have in this life an hundred fold comfort for
that one comfort thou have forsaken, though indeed Mark adds, it will be with
persecution. Oh then never think thou shall be undone, thou shall lose all the
favor and love of thy friends, for thou do but part with a drop to have an
ocean; and consider that comfortable place also, Mat 12. 50. For whosoever
shall do the will of my father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and
sister, and mother: suppose thy friends will never own thee more, never take
thee for brother, or sister more, yet see Christ will be these, thou will be in
a more comfortable relation.

Eighthly, Consider that all thy merry company will be so far from easing thy
torment, 8.
that they will increase it the more when thou come indeed to be forsaken by
God. When thou lie a dying, ready to give a dreadful account to the great
God, What will thy companions say? They will come and stand by the bed side,
and take thee by the hand, remember we have been thus merry together, we have
played these pranks; Oh miserable and wretched comforts! thou will cry out, What
does all this avail me now I am a dying, and know not what will become of me? Oh
I have no ease, no quietness, What shall I do? Oh I cannot abide to see you, I
cannot endure to look on you, you bring all my wickedness to my mind. Thus it
will be with thee, if God do but in the least manner awaken thy secure
conscience.

Let the Use be, first of Admonition to you that are Parents, Masters, Friends,
or Neighbors, take heed of checking and quenching any little spark of a good
motion that God may work in your children and servants: It is an heavy sin to
murder their bodies, but far greater to murder their souls, and yet thou do
this, when thou can not abide to see in thy wife, child, or servant, any
desire to become a new creature. Thou callst it Melancholy, madness, folly, and
thou despisest it in thy heart. Oh know this is to act the Devils work in an
high degree: As Herod sought to kill Christ as soon as he was born, so thou
endeavourest spiritually to kill Christ in the heart of him who is almost
converted. There is too much of this divelish wickedness in the world; men
that had rather see their friends and neighbors, any thing in the world, then
profess godliness.

Use 2. Of comfort to those who will cleave to God, and follow Christ, though
they have all the hatred of their friends, though parents, husbands, make them
have a weary and sad life, yet they love Christ more then all: Oh blessed art
thou above others, thou art a kind of a Martyr; all the hardship and grief
thou go through for godliness, it is a Martyrdom: The Scripture gives thee
many encouragements in this way.

Use 3. Of Exhortation to all those who are entangled by evil company, by
ungodly society. Oh come out of that Egypt, come from that Babylon; never
expect to be Christ's Disciple till thou leave that accursed followship. What is
it to be affected at a sermon, to be almost persuaded on the Sabbath day, and
then presently after to fall into the company of those that hate and abhor
piety. Oh had not thou better say to them, depart from me, I will know you
no more, then have Christ say to thee, Depart into everlasting fire, I know you
not: And know godliness will help thee to excellent company, to excellent
mirth: A good Conscience is a continual feast: Thou will enjoy God, Christ will
dwell with thee. The innumerable company of Angels, and the spirits of just
men made perfect, will be of the same fellowship with thee; Oh what an happy
exchange will thou quickly find.

SERMON LXXII.
Some Helps and Encouragements to those that are discouraged, because of the
fruitlesness of their Resolutions to Repent, or the hainousness of their Sins.

EZEKIEL. 33. 11. Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye, O house of Israel?
WE have endeavored to make plain those Mountains, that are in the way to our
Conversion, and turning to God: Now it remains, that we exalt some Valleys,
and remove those discouragements that are on men's spirits, while in the
general, they seem to desire and purpose to turn unto God. I acknowledge, these
valleys are not so many as the mountains; discouragements and dejections not so
frequent, as presumptious; more are fondly persuaded of the easiness to turn to
God, then the difficulty: which is clearly evidenced, by the secure and
negligent disposition of most, that though they hear never so much about this
duty of turning to God, yet never consider or apply, never make any matter,
whether they are turned unto God or not. I will not be too long in enumeration
of the usual dejections in this kind; I shall instance in one or two, which
will in effect serve for the rest: And

First, There are some who say, They have many purposes and desires to turn to
God, they have frequently resolved to forsake their sins, but then these
quickly perish 1. Discouragements in some men's spirits, hindering them from
turning unto God. That they often resolve, but find no power to turn.
again, and so they think it is in vain to try any more: They do but as the
man, that is rolling a great stone upon the hill, which presently returns
with the greater force: They are as a man striving and rowing hard against the
stream, but immediately is forced as much backward, as ever he got forward: And
I cannot but think, that this is a sad objection upon many men's hearts, who
have their times of relenting, of much sorrow and trouble, and then take up
high resolutions, They will never live, or be as they have been; in the mind
they are in, all the temptations in the world shall never prevail over them any
more. Now to help such out of their disconsolateness; Consider

First, That it may be these purposes they have, are not hearty, real, and
fully conquering the heart: They are but a kind of wishes and desires, such as
Balaams, 1. Helps.
Oh, that I might dye the death of the Righteous: They are but faint wishing
and woulding, as we say, and this will never do any good: They are such desires
as the Sluggard is said to have, which yet does scarce draw his hand out of his
bosom to help himself: Its not as the phrase is, To cleave to the Lord with
full purpose of heart; as Paul said in another case, I could wish to be made an
Anathema, so thou could wish to be separated from thy lusts, thou could
desire to be a new convert; but these are such languishing motions, that they
are like those living Creatures, (...), that live but for a day; there comes up
a worm, that quickly consumes these gourds. The desires of a man in his
conversion, are compared to Hunger and Thirst, to Panting and Breathing, all
which are the most violent and impatient motions of a man: Can a man be hungry,
ready to be starved, and sit still crying, O that I had food? no, it will break
through stone walls. You see what the hungry Lepers did, 2 Kings 7. 8.
desperately ventured even into their enemies quarters, that they might be
satisfied: And thus, if thy purposes and resolutions were full and strong, no
lust, no temptation could be so strong as to hold thee any longer; but now they
are half desires, and faint wishes, and God has made no promise to such, that
they shall be satisfied. Austin speaks of himself before his conversion, how he
had many desires and resolutions to leave his sins, which made him pray to God,
that God would give him grace to part with them, yet at that very time he was
afraid (he says) that God should hear his prayers; he was afraid God should do
that for him, he desired: And thus it may be with thee, thou have many
affections and desires to forsake thy sins, frequent relentings, yet if it
should come to it indeed, that thou must be taken from them, it would be a
trouble to thee; all which argues, thou art not real, fully bent against them.

Secondly, As these purposes are but weak and faint, so it may be they are
slavish in thee, extorted only from outward considerations of danger and
punishment, in fear 2.
of death, and of public judgments: Now if so, its no wonder if these thorns
do not bear grapes: This is often in the Scripture exemplified, Ahab, Pharaoh,
the Israelites; while the strok of Gods judgments was upon them, then they
would turn to God: Thus the Israelites turned and turned very often, but they
turned from God again, as often as they turned unto him: Now the ground of this
miscarriage was, because these purposes were violently wrung from them, they
dared not to do otherwise; and so when the cause was removed, the effect
presently ceased. Look then, what it is that is the rise of thy resolutions;
thou resolvest and resolvest sometimes, even with sad and bitter tears, but
thou art after wards where thou were before; Is not this that which marreth
all? These resolutions never are, but when thou art in some fears, in some
terrors, and these violent things therefore will never hold long: They will
hold as long as the principle of their violence holds; but when that cease,
all thy purposes fall to the ground again. Never then wonder to see the
Israelites commit those idolatryes, and that injustice, which sometimes they
cried out off, and confessed to God; for all this was squeezed from them, not
willingly done by them: O then! if thou would at last see a sweet harmony,
between thy resolution and conversation, begin to mend thy purposes; let them
not be resolves out of fear, but out of love: O Lord (say) not only in time of
danger, but in the midst of all mercies and comforts, my soul breathes after
thee: Its not fear of hell and death makes me take up these conclusions, but
love to thee, and what is holy: Thou may be sure, this will hold, thou will
be the same, if this move thee first. Thou will be no longer, as the man that
purges his ship, which leaketh, and water comes in at one place, as fast as it
is emptied at another; but thou have laid a good and sure foundation to build
upon.

Thirdly, Thy purposes vanish away without execution, because it may be they
art only sudden and flashy, they continue but for a season: They come like
sudden lightning, 3.
that makes an astonishment for the present, but immediately is gone: Thus
Balaams desires were upon a sudden apprehension of Gods glorious providence to
his Church. Agrippa was almost persuaded to be a Christian, for that time while
Paul was preaching; so that those purposes, which are not constant not rooted,
will dye as soon as they begin to live. As our Savior speaks of a temporary
says which does immediately spring up, and immediately wither; so Mat. 13.
these resolutions, they do presently rise up, while we are preaching, and
while you are hearing, but then as soon as the duty is over, thy purposes are
over: Therefore as David prayed for the people, that offered so willingly, God
keep this always in their hearts, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. so should thou, O Lord,
not at this time only, but always make my spirit thus resolute, thus fixed
against iniquity; let not these holy motions of thy good spirit dye within me.
Its not the having of godly resolutions to turn unto God, but the powerful
retaining of them, and making use of them in time of need, that does avail and
help us: Why then art thou so disquieted within thee? the cause is plain, thou
may see clearly what is to be done: Let not those resolutions of thine, be
as pilgrims and strangers, that lodge but for a night; let them rather be as
the fire upon the Altar, that never went out. As it is said of the wicked man,
that he cannot sleep, till he has accomplished his mischieef; so do thou take
no rest, till the godly purposes of thy soul be fulfilled.

Fourthly, Thou complainest, that thou art driven from thy resolutions to 4.
turn unto God: Then resolve more in the grace and power of God, not in thy own
humane strength and confidence: This makes men fall again as often as they
rise, they think to stand by their own power. Certainly, if in ordinary common
things, we may not peremptorily resolve to do such and such things, but to
expect his aid and providence, if God will; much more in spiritual duties: say
then to all thy sins, which have so frequently conquered thee, as David to
Goliath, I come unto thee in the name of the Lord, whom thou have defied; I set
upon the mortifying of these sins, not by my own strength, but in the power of
Christ, whose glory and honor my sins would take away. When Paul spoke of that
excellent temperament of grace, He knew how to abound, and how to want; he
concludes, I can do all things through him that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13.
overcome nature, remove mountains, make the dead to live; thus it will be with
thee, if thou adhearest to God. Alas, what can an hand do, if separated from
the body? what the branch, if divided from the vine? no more can thy purposes
or resolutions, unless partaking of Christ's influence: If therefore thou
would not have yea and nay, as the Apostle excuses himself in another case,
but thou would be settled in thy conversion to God, go out of thy own
strength, lean no more to thy own power, but cry out, Oh thy weakness, Oh thy
impotency, Oh the guile and falsehood of thy heart; there is no more trusting of
it, no more believing in it; and therefore Lord, let thy right hand uphold me.
Do as the little child, that has attempted to go alone, but finding it
cannot, holds the father by his hand, and then he is not afraid to go. Do as
Peter; when ready to sink in the waters, then he cries out then Christ holds
his hand out to sustain him.

Fifthly, If thou find thy self thus prone to break thy promises and
resolutions, 5.
this should not so much dishearten, as make thee the more wary and diligent:
Difficulties do not dishearten, but inflame a resolved spirit, even as stirring
does the fire. If oppositions and temptations should take away all hope and
confidence? then every man might sit down with fear in the way to heaven, and
say truly with the sluggard, A Lion is in the way, yea, many Lions; but God
has made the way to heaven narrow and straight, that so we may the more strive
to enter therein; and the violent must take heaven by force, even as the
Israelites did the Land of Canaan: So then, though thy turning to God, put thee
in many agonies, many fears, sometimes in hope, sometimes again in despair; yet
let not this make thee cast away the Anchor of Hope, and say as they did, It is
in vain to pray, to resolve, to seek any longer: That expression of the
Apostle, calling Hope an Anchor, Heb. 6. 9. is excellent to this purpose. Would
it not be a wild mad thing in a Mariner, when the waves arise, and strong
gusts beat his ship back, if he should in that conflict throw away his Anchor?
no less is thy folly, while thou art thus unconstantly tossed up and down,
sometimes in high resolutions toward Heaven, sometimes as low as hell; thou
castest away thy hope, which only would support thee; Oh rather say, These
difficulties arguue a duty of the greater watchfulness; there is more reason
for me to watch and pray, to fear and pray.

Sixthly, Let that encourage thee, while climbing up this high hill, That God
has made gracious promises, even to the least sparks, the least beginnings of
any good in a 6.
man: How comfortable is that? The bruised reed he will not break, the smoking
flax he will not quench, Mat. 12. 20. as God said about his Temple, None should
despise the day of small things; so it is here, Let not small things be
despised: What is less then a grain of Mustard Seed, and yet how quickly does
that overgrow other herbs! so that there is no doubt on Christ's part, but that
he is ready to draw thee, and to give legs to thee; the only question is,
Whether thou do seek him with thy whole heart? let that be, and the
Ministers of God may insure thee, that he will make little sparks flame into a
great fire: There is an excellent promise in Isaiah, The faint and weary shall
renew their strength like an Eagle, Isa. 40. 30, 31, 32. Oh then, sit down and
meditate on these gracious promises that are made, even to the Hungry, to the
Thirsty, to such who seek, though they have not found; never doubt on Gods
help, only be sure thou art sincere and hearty in thy purposes, to turn unto
him. Certainly, God that hears the young Ravens, and gives them food, will
hear those young and infant cries and resolutions of thine to better things.

Seventhly, This may also greatly encourage thee, though thou have many foils,
That grace is far more potent then sin: Though thy sins be pleasant, be made
natural 7.
to thee, though they grow up like weeds, of their own accord; and grace is a
stranger, and a plant in an unnatural soil, while in thy heart, yet it is far
stronger then thy strongest corruptions; so that thy diseases are not such
incurable ones, but that grace is a medicine and plaster potent enough to help
thee; there is balm in Gilead: For as Christ is stronger then the Devil,
therefore he judges him, and casts him out of the strong holds he had; so
grace is more effectual then sin: Fear not then to grapple with thy lusts, say
not they are above me, they are to strong for me; for the seed of God, whereby
a man is born of God, is stronger then this. Hence faith is said to overcome
the world, 1 John 5. 4. and as for outward helps, Greater is he that is with
us, then those that are against us; so for inward help also, if thy sin be
great, let the power of grace be also apprehended greater: The house of David
will grow greater, and the house of Saul lesser; make therefore thy arguments
from without thy self, not within; say, O Lord, thy grace can cure me, thy
grace can deliver me out of this miry clay.

Eighthly, Do thou complain thy resolutions take no effect, thou art still
where thou were? consider, if it be not, because though thou purposest aganst 8.
sin, yet thou do not abstain from the occasions of it; and if so, no marvel
if it be labor in vain: Never think to turn to God from thy sins, if thou do
not turn from the occasion of them: Alas, if thon have not strength to avoid
the occasion of sin; which is less? how can thou sin it self, which is the
greater: He that resolves not to be burnt in the fire, will never come too
near the flames; he that will not be enticed by the adulterous woman, must not
come near her dwelling. Job that resolved against uncleanness, made a covenant
with his eyes. Paul that feared to be a castaway, kept down his body; thou
may then easily see what undoeth thee: No marvel if the Bird that
endeavoreth to fly up to heaven, fall down again, when a string is on her foot:
Thus thou have sometimes heavenly resolutions, heavenly meditations, but there
is a string on the foot, or rather a millstone about the neck; and that is, the
occasion or temptation to some sin, from which thou can not part: Separate
thy self therefore first from the occasions of sin, then the sin will be more
easily subdued; as the husbandman first cuts away the under bushes and
brambles, before he lays his ax to the root of the tree: This is so great a
matter, that our Savior teaches us to pray, Not to be lead into temptation;
he does not say, lead into sin, but temptation; for that is opening the gate,
that is the first tumbling down the hill, and it is hard to stop afterward.

Lastly, to quicken thee in thy resolutions to turn unto God, though thou 9.
often get falls; Consider what the strong appetites and purposes of men in
natural and worldly things put them upon. Those that will be rich, says the
Apostle, pierce themselves through with diverse cares, 1 Timothy 6. 9. Their
earnest desire after these things, puts them upon all labor and toil day and
night; every difficulty is easily devoured, per mare, per terras, etc. they
compass sea and land, and all to possess themselves of these fading riches.
Take the ambitious man, that has a boundless and vast desire after honor and
greatness, he does not only resolve and resolve, but is very industrious to
complete his designs: Take the malicious man, how unquiet in his sleep, how
restless in his thoughts, till he has vented his poison! Now shall men in
sinful and unlawful ways, not only imagine wickedly; but constantly and
effectually practice it? and shall not thou be as active in the ways of
godliness? Never then let this temptation bind thee hand and foot; and
certainly if thy conversion to God could never be attained, if thy turning to
him were impossible, yet its better and more safe to dye in combats and
conflicts with these lusts, then out of diffidence to give up thy self a
prisoner to them: Its more noble to go lame to the grave, with thy struglings
against thy dear corruptions, then to become a voluntary slave to them.

The next valley to be exalted, is the greatness of a man's sins (for other
objections The second discouragement is the greatness of a man's sins.
will come in more seasonably elsewhere) and of this only very briefly: Thou
art persuaded to turn to God, thou could readily set upon the work, but thy
sins have such a ghastly look, and are of such a bloody nature, that thou
doubtest, God will never accept thee: But this is a vain fear; For

First, The Israelites in the Text, were sinners in as high a degree as
ordinarily 1. Help.
could be: If you regard the nature and quality of their sins, if the means
against which they rebelled, the obstinacy and refractariness in them; all
these things made them bloody and crimson sins; yet to these how pathetically
and compassionately does God speak, Turn ye, turn ye! and it is universal; he
does not say, Turn ye only, that are sinners of such a degree, but as for the
rest, they are incureable; but he speaks generally: So Jer. 3 7. I said unto
her, after she had down all these things, Turn ye unto me; and in that Chapter
many times, though they were an adulteress and a backsliding people, yet he
inviteth her to return: Therefore let not that cast thee down.

Secondly, Fear not acceptance because thou have been a great sinner, for thy
2.
Acceptance and Justification is not founded upon thy turning unto God: Thou
art not pardoned and received into favor, because thou art turned from thy evil
ways: No, its Christ blood, not thy tears which makes the atonement; its true,
without this turning to God, there is no favor to be had from him, but its not
because of this: So that thy Conversion and thy Justification are two distinct
things, they are several privileges, and though never separated, yet are
always to be distinguished.

Thirdly, Therefore turn unto God, even because thy sins are great; for the 3.
greater they are, the more dangerous it is to continue long in them. As a man
sick of desperate and dangerous diseases, he has a great cause to seek out for
help: None have so great cause to turn, as those that are so far gone out of
the way; and thou need more grace then others.

Use of Admonition, to you who are not yet given up to a reprobate heart, Use.
and senseless spirit, that have many secret desires, yea, and serious purposes
to turn from all your evil ways: Oh take heed how you quench these coals; be
afraid of every thing that may suffocate and stifle these beginings; take heed,
God may never give you these good thoughts any more, the Angel may never come
down to stir the pool again. Oh! what a sad thing is it to suffer shipwreck
near the very haven; to be damned, when thou have even been entering into
heaven! Oh that you were not almost, but altogether persuaded to turn from your
evil ways; it may be God may inspire this holy purpose at this time in thy
heart: Oh go home and cherish it, pray over it, mourn over it; say, O Lord,
keep this always in me: As thou have planted it, so water it, and give it sure
increase.

SERMON LXXIII.
Of Gods framing and devising evil of Calamities, That men might turn from
their evil doings; Also what Gods framing and devising evil implies; And why
Judgments and afflictions which are the good effects of Gods Justice, Wisdom,
and Power, are called evil.

JER. 18. 11. Thus says the, Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a
device against you, return ye now every one from his evil way, etc.
IN the former part of this Chapter, you have an injunction laid by God on
Jeremiah, and the execution of it. The injunction and execution, is in going
down to the Potters house, and beholding a work upon the wheels which was
marred, the Potter made it another vessel, as it seemed good to him. This was a
Type, or outward visible sign, in a lively and ocular manner to represent the
power, Sovereignty, and Omnipotency of God, in respect of all Kingdoms and
States, and more particularly of that of Israel. Every Kingdom is but as the
Potters unformed and ^ude clay; God is the Potter, and he can easily make it on
a sudden a vessel of honor, or dishonor: He can easily make it, and then
break it in pieces again. This is the meaning of that Type, as appears by
verses, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Now my Text is a conclusion, or inference from this
Type explained, wherein is p^rtly information, and partly exhortation; only to
make these the more prevalent, you may observe Jeremiahs Commission, given him
by God himself, which should make him bold and courageous, Go to, speak to the
men of Judah, etc. 2. The subject to whom he must perform this embassage, in
the Hebrew, To the men of Judah and Jerusalem, to every man; which denotes the
universal and general corruption that was on every man. This coming from God
ought to be received by him with all fear, reverence, and submission. The
matter of his Commission is partly to instruct, and partly to exhort, as you
heard. To instruct, and that is in the beginning of the 8. verse; Behold, I
frame evil against you, and devise devices against you; wherein is the
efficient cause, 1. God: Our Calamities and Judgments come not by chance, or
by inferior instruments ouely, but God is the principal agent: And it is his
sword, his famine, his plague, his War, because arrows shot out of his quiver.
2. The manner of his efficiency, or causality, He frames it; a Metaphor
alluding to the Potter spoken of before. This Metaphor is plainly expressed,
devising a device: How much is observable in this you shall hear af^terwards. 3.
There is the effect, which is called Evil. There is a twofold evil, an evil of
sin, and an evil of punishment: This latter is here spoken of, as being the
effect of the former; why afflictons are called evil, is anon to be spoken to.
The second general part of his Commission is exhortation, wherein is the duty,
Return ye. 2. The time, now, Return ye now. 3. The term from which, of their
motion, 1. Particularly, Every one from his evil way. 2. Generally, And from
your evil doings, which is more positively, and affirmatively urged; Make your
ways and doings good. Lastly, you have the peoples incorrigiblenesse, and
obstinatenesse notwithstanding, and they said, There is no hope, but we will
walk after the devices of our hearts. You will perceive that the excellent
matter to be derived from this Text, will like the widows oil, or our Saviors
bread, multiply exceedingly in the use and spending of it. But that I may frame
a body, and not a monster of discourse, I shall put my self in a methodical
way. And first I shall treat of the information, which is Gods forming, and
preparing of judgments for this end, to make men turn to God; so that not
only the Ministry, but all Gods Chastisements, whether public or personal,
are for this end, to turn us unto God from our evil ways.

Obs. God does frame and prepare evil, calamities, and desolations, that so
wicked Obs.
men may turn from their evil doings.

God brings his evil (which is indeed a good act of Justice) that we may part
from our evil. The same Hebrew word is used for the evil we do, and the evil
God does, though they differ exceedingly; so that we see God preaches not only
by his word, but by his works. His turnings of a Kingdom by Wars and others
judgments, is to cause our turnings: God removes a peoples peace, mercies,
and external good things, that they might remove far from them all their evil
things. To open this Doctrine, let us consider these particulars,

1. What is implied in Gods framing and devising of evil. 2. Why Calamities are
called evil, seeing they are the good effects of his Justice Wisdom, and Power.
3. How conversion is intended by all these, and why.
For the first, Gods framing of his judgments has these observable
particulars contained in it.

First, That our miseries and calamities come not by chance, or peradventure,
they What is implied in Gods framing or devising of evil. 1.
rise not out of the dust: We are not to blame instruments; but they all come
from Gods hand. The Arrow falls not of it self, or by accident, but as it is
directed by the Archer: a piece of clay is not of it self made into such a
shape and form; but it is as the Potter pleases. The stone of it self pierced
not into Goliahs head and killed him, but as with skill and power flung by
David; so that when it is said, God frames evil, this should teach us, That
there is no evil of punishment in the land, but he does it. The Evangelist
calls diseases (...), Strokes, because they come from Gods hand. Now this is a
great matter; for such is man's Atheism, and profane security, that he
conceives of God, as keeping himself within the circle of heaven, and not
acting and governing the world by his providence here below. The Church was
better taught, when in her Captivity and other judgments, she makes her
moans, but still looks over all instruments to God, Why have thou, O God, cast
us off? and why art thou angry with us? Psalm. 74. 1. Job also was better taught
when he considers, not the Sabeans, but God spoiling him of all his comforts,
The Lord has given and the Lord has taken, Job. 1. ^t has been the great sin
of England in judgments upon her, that she has cried out of instruments; some
lay all the blame on oneside, and some on another side; but the anger and just
displeasure of God for our sins has not been acknowledged.

Secondly, This phrase, to frame evil, supposes Gods Sovereignty, and
omnipotent power over all people. He can as easily destroy a flourishing happy
Kingdom, as the potter can mar his vessel on the wheels, Isa. 41. how
excellently is God described in his majesty and greatness, holding all the
world in his hand, Ut homo nidum, as Tertullian, as a man does a birds nest;
yea, all the nations of the world are but a drop, but as small dust, as
nothing, yea less then nothing: Oh what little cause have men to trust in
greatness, power, forces, fenced cities and strong places, when they are but as
so much dust, when God breaths on them! and it is as impossible for any
earthly power or greatness to subsist and keep from ruin, when God is angry,
as dust to lie still in the air, when a stormy wind does arise: Well then might
Jeremy cry out, Jer. 10. Who would not fear thee, O King of the Nations? Let us
not then account any thing great but God; we are clay, and he is the potter:
And as it may discourage, when we are a sinful people, though overslowing in
all external mercies; so it may encourage a people when converted, though in a
desolate confusion, for God can make this rude clay, a glorious vessel of
honor; he can make dry bones to become living men: Here is his Sovereignty
extolled in this phrase.

Thirdly, It argues, that God can suddenly and quickly bring judgments upon
men: Gods wonderful works of his wrath, are not only seen in the matter he 3.
does, but also in the manner: On a sudden, in a moment calamities rise before
any man thought or looked for them; even as the Church says, When he turned
their captivity, they were as men in a dream, Psalm. 126. 1. so when he brings
their captivity also: Hence you have the expression in this Chapter, At what
instant I speak to a land to pull it down, or build it up: He can do those
things in an instant, which humane power could not produce in many years. I
create light and darkness, Creatio fit in instanti they say; God makes the
deluge of his wrath to overflow in an instant: Thus he overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrha on a sudden; and that wonderful work of God, in bringing dead bodies
out of the grave to appear before his Tribunal, will be in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, 1 Cor. 15. 52. so that when God is said to frame evil
against a people, it implies, that he can bring this in a moment, on a sudden,
before men think it possible. How often does the Prophet tell them, That their
miseries shall come upon them as travel upon a woman with child: Oh how should
this make every wicked man speedily turn from his evil ways, for God can bring
his judgments on thee in a moment; thou may have no time, no space to
bewail thy sins, but his anger will consume thee in the twinkling of an eye;
yet how securely do men live in open rebellion against God? how do they put far
off from them the evil day? They put it far off in their thoughts, when God
puts it very near in reality upon them: Could men eat and drink, and rise up to
play, if they did consider how obnoxious they are to the sharp arrows of God,
which may be shot into their hearts every hour? who can tell thee what evil the
next day, the next night, the next hour, may bring upon thee?

Fourthly, Gods framing of evil, as the Potter does his clay, does denote an
impossibility to resist, and to escape his judgments: Can the clay refuse the
Potters 4.
hand? no more can wicked men Gods Government, whereby he punishes wicked men
for their sins: There is no running from God, If thou gettest into heaven or
hell, as the Psalmist says, his right hand will find thee out, Psalm. 139. 8.
God tells Lu^ifer, that is Nebuchadnezar, Though he build his nests in the
clouds, yet he will pull him down: He that escaped the Lion, the Bear would
devour him; and he that escaped the Bear, the Serpent out of the wall would
sting him, Amos 5. 19. If then God prepare and frame evil against thee, its not
all the policy or power in the world can secure thee. Who art thou, O piece of
clay, O mortal man, dust and ashes, that thou should be able to flee from
Gods anger, when it pursues thee?

Fifthly, As it argues irresistableness, so a necessity of submitting and
yielding 5.
to him; Not to strive or repine at his chastisements: Thus the Scripture
often, Shall the potsheard rise up against the Potter, and say, Why made thou
me so? Romans 9. 21. The foolishness of a man perverteth his way, and his heart
fretteth against the Lord: Thus when we by our evil deeds cause Gods wrath to
fall upon us, we are ready to say with the Jews, His ways are not equal; its
part of the sin and punishment which the damned have in hell, that they curse,
and rage, and blaspheme God continually: Oh take heed of being like the damned
in hell, fretting at that evil which God frames against thee! Do thou, as
Jeremy here, Go down into the field of the potter, and consider the clay there:
Remember thy own self, thy dust, thy clay, and thy sins; all which will make
thee not open thy mouth, because God does it. How should this humble the proud
and lofty spirits of haughty and obstinate sinners? God he frames his
judgments against thee, and can(...) thou refuse them? must thou not yield the
back to his scourges and blows? why should a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins, Lam. 3.

Sixthly, This phrase does imply, how unwilling God is to exercise his wrath
which 6.
he has purposed; for here he tells the Israelites, He frames and devises
evil against them, as his purpose and resolution; therefore let them return
from their evil ways, to prevent the actual pouring out of his wrath: Thus in
the former part of the Chapter, God speaks to a people about pulling them down,
before he does indeed destroy them. To frame and purpose evil, is not presently
to bring evil; No, if that people, against whom it is framed, repent of their
evil practiced, God will of his evil framed and resolved on: Thus God speaks of
Whetting his glistering Sword, before he run it into the bowels; and he is said
to roar like a Lion, which gives warning before he tear in pieces, and there
be none to deliver. The Prophet expresses this way of God excellently, when
having instanced in what judgments God purposed to visit them with, And
because I will do this, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel, Amos 4. 12. Take
thou our Saviors counsel, Agree with thy adversary in the way, before he hale
thee to the judge, and thou be condemned, Mat. 5. 25. from whence thou can
never be reprived: So that this expression of framing evil, signifies much
love, goodness, and unwillingness of God actually to destroy.

Seventhly, To frame evil, and devise it, does excellently represent the
justice 7.
of God, that he deals with men according to their wickedness; for as this
people would not turn to God, but go after the devices and imaginations of
their own heart; so God he will imagine and devise from his heart evil against
them; so that its a very suitable expression to those wicked men. As in another
place, when the Israelites were so obstinate, that they would walk in the way
which they should choose; God to answer them, tells them, He would also choose
out their delusions, Isa. 66. 4. so true is that of Psalm. 18. With the froward
thou will show thy self froward: So that this should exceedingly humble and
terrify wicked men, for God will shape out punishments, and frame out such
judgments, that will be very answerable and proportionable to thy wickedness.

Eighthly, To frame evil, and devise it, implies the wisdom of God:

First, That he afflicts in counsel and deliberation (to speak after the manner
8. 1.
of men) not in sudden, irregular passion; he frames it, he devises it: Thus
when God was to destroy the whole world, he says, Let us go down and see
whether it be so or no: These are expressions to humane capacity, to show how
just and wise God is in all the calamities he brings upon a people. When
Theodosius had in cruel passion, caused the people of Thessalonica to be put to
the sword, for some offense done against him, Ambrose would not admit him to
the Sacrament, till he had repented of that cruel passion; and withal, made a
law, that when any man was condemned to death, there should be thirty days
respite between sentence and execution, that so nothing might be done in
passion.

Secondly, Gods wisdom is seen, in that its not every kind of judgment he
takes, but what is fit for his end he propounds: As the Potter does not make
every vessel in one shape, but one one way; another, another, as his use is of
it, Thus God shows wonderful wisdom, in the variety of his afflictions, one
is one way exercised, another, another; because they come not at random, but
are framed by God, at his pleasure. Hence Dan. 9. he is said to watch over
evil, to bring it upon them. God watches over evil, to show that he considers
what is the fittest judgment, what is the fittest season, who are the fittest
subjects: Oh how well is it, that the framing and devising of all evil, is not
in the Devils hands, and wicked men's hands! they indeed frame evil, and devise
malicious devices; but they are only instruments, every way limited, in power,
in time and place, and therefore they cannot devour as they desire: And thus
much for the phrase, To frame and devise evil, when attributed to God.

In the next place, consider briefly, why judgments and afflictions are Why
judgments and afflictions are called evil.
called evil; For is not God just in dispensing of them? Are not his judgments
righteous and holy? Do not the people of God with much joy and praise,
acknowledge them? why then should they be called evil? This has struck so much
upon some of the Ancients, Arnobius and others, that they thought only that
good came from God, which was pleasant and comfortable; and that these bitter
sore afflictions, come only Permissive, as the Orthodox say, about the evil of
sin: And the error about this, made the Marcionites hold two first and chief
principles: One Good, from whom came only good; the other Evil and wicked,
from whom came only evil: But the Scripture is very clear, and the Prophets
are very diligent to inform, That all the judgments they lay under, were
brought by God upon them for their sins.

First therefore, They are called evil, because though in their nature and use,
the good fruits of Gods justice, yet they deprive us of our temporal and
spiritual 1.
good we might enjoy: So that as the happiness and quietness we might have in
body and soul, is truly called Good; so that which depriveth us of these, may
well be called evil. Thus the Prophet, Your iniquities withhold good things
from you, Jer. 5. 25. Oh how should this, if not the love of God, make thee set
against thy sin; for its that which depriveth thee of all temporal and
spiritual good; its that which turns all thy honey into gall, all thy wine
into vinegar, all thy bread into a stone.

Secondly, It may well be called evil, because its the fruit of that which is
truly evil. The evil of punishment is the necessary daughter of the evil of
sin; 2.
now it is usual to call any effect by the name of the cause, and nothing is
more ordinary in Scripture, to call both sin it self, and the punishment of
sin, by the name of sin: Thus sin is said to lie at the door, Genesis 4. 7. Christ
became sin for us, 2 Cor. 4. Your sin will find you out, Numb. 32. 23. that
is, sin and punishment: So that no man may commit the evil of sin, with hope to
escape the evil of punishment, for they are both chained together.

Thirdly, They are evil, because upon all men naturally where they fall, if not
prevented by grace, they draw out their evil, they make them more wicked, as we
may 3.
see in the damned: so that afflictions and judgments of themselves, have no
suitable power to convert and turn from sin, but rather stir up the fire of
corruption in men to a greater flame. They are as Garlike, and other unsavory
herbs, the more they are pounced, the worse is their smell.

But although they be called evil, yet they are nothing so evil, as the evil of
sin. The breach of Gods law, the offense done to his Majesty, is infinitely a
Sin the great(...).
greater evil then any temporal or eternal misery; yea, this latter is to be
endured, rather then the other committed: Oh! who shall persuade the world of
this? that to be poor, to be miserable, to be tormented with all kind of cruel
deaths here, and eternally tormented hereafter, is nothing so bad as to commit
the least sin; yet nothing is more true then this thing. Oh thou that judge
sin pleasure and profit, hearken to this; few have Anselms resolution, That if
sin be on one hand, and hell flames on the other, he would chose rather to run
into this latter, then commit the former. Job was charged for an hypocrite by
his friends, though falsely, in this, that he chose sin rather then affliction:
An hypocrite will rather venture on the evil of sin, then fall into the evil of
affliction.

Use of Admonition, To take heed of all ungodly and wicked ways, for you see
you have to do with a wise and just God, who frames punishments for Use.
thee: Do not think to escape, do not please thy self with impunity, God sees
and looks on, and accordingly is preparing to smite thee: Oh, while you are
jolly, secure and merry, what is doing in heaven against you! Be not any longer
profane Atheists, but set faith on work; imagine with Belshazzar, thou do
not only see an Handwriting on every wall against thee, but on every cup, on
every pot, on every bed, on every piece of ground thou treadest upon: O turn to
God, before he put his purposes in execution, then thou can not resist, but
art undone for ever.

SERMON LXXIV.
Of Afflictions; The difference between Penal-Destructive Calamities, and those
that are Medicinal; And how Afflictions are operative to the Conversion of men.

JER. 18. 11. Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device; Return now
every one from his evil way.
THe Doctrine gathered from these words is, That God purposes evil and
calamities against a people, that they might return from their wicked ways. In
this point three things are to be considered; 1. That God frames all
calamities. 2. That these calamities are called evil; both which are
dispatched. The third thing which remains is, That Gods end in all these
exercises, is to make men turn from their sins: Conversion is the end of all
Gods scourges and stripes; if men did throw away their evil, God would quickly
burn his rod. As Absalom sending for Ioab, who would not come to him, till his
corn was set on fire, and then Ioab hastened quickly to speak with him; so it
is here, God speaks once or twice, yea often to us, to turn from our evil ways;
but we stop the ears, and will not obey: at last God afflicts us in our body,
or estate, or name, one way or other; and then we say, or at least should say,
Come, let us return early unto God: So that Gods judgments, they are real
sermons, God preaches by them, as well as by his word; insomuch that he puts a
remarkable observation upon their obstinacy and impenitency, Amos cap. 4. from
the 6; verse to the latter end, upon five several judgments, he adds, Yet
have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord: So that public and personal
evils which come upon us, should make us turn from sin: And Oh take heed, that
God says not, Yet have ye not returned unto me: Thus also God complains
again, (...) 12. 13. For the people turns not unto him that smites them: So
that you see, God looks for conversion, from every one whom he does any way
chastise for sin: For opening this point. Consider

First, That Gods afflictions upon a people, may be branched into three heads:
Afflictions branched into three heads.
some are first merely exploratory, or by way of trial, to draw out a
Christians graces, and to increase his glory Thus persecutions and troubles for
the Gospel, imprisonment and Martyrdom; these were not so much evil framed by
God, to make them turn from their sins; but conflicts and combats appointed by
God, for his choice and valiant Champions, that so they might receive the
greater weight of glory: And hence the people of God are commanded to account
it all joy, when they fall into such temptations, James 1. for what the fire is
to the dross, the water to a spotty garment, the winnowing to the wheat, the
same are these combats to them, they strengthen their graces, they weaken
their lusts, and they advance their glory; so that the ignorance of this end,
does sometimes put Gods children into great perplexities; for because they fall
frequently under Gods afflictions, no sooner is one over, but another succeeds,
like the waves of the sea; they begin to doubt presently about the main, they
call the very foundations into question, Why does God thus follow me with
losses and troubles? is it not because I am an hypocrite? may I not fear the
great work of conversion is yet to be done? But this is a temptation; had not
Job been well exercised to discern between good and evil; these very
temprations had broken his heart.

A Second branch of Chastisements, are indeed for sin, and flow from Gods
anger, 2.
but they are wholly medicinal: They are to let blood, like the Physician who
intends health; not like the Butcher, who is to destroy; and these by the
Scripture are called (...), because God would discipline us by them as
children, not punish us as condemned malefactors.

And if you say, How can these be for conversion, when sometimes they fall upon
those that are converted, such as are made Gods children already? Quest.


To Answer this, you must remember what was said heretofore, that even those
who are converted, do yet need daily to draw nigher and nigher to God; Answ.
they are to be converted daily from those frequent corruptions, which estrange
them from God; and thus when Gods own people have their afflictions, they are
to consider, Is not this to turn me nearer to God? is there not such pride,
such dullness and coldness in the service of God, that I am to be turned from?
Well, its clear, to Gods own children, they are thus medicinal; but by the
Texts forementioned, and in several other places, its also evident, that even
to those who are sinners, and remain in an unconverted estate, God reaches out
his gracious offer in their troubles: That as it is said of several Psalms,
which more principally contain the subjects of affliction, A Psalm to give
understanding; so should thou write, as it were, upon every trouble, upon
every affliction, An affliction to give understanding. Do not Physicians
command men distracted, and out of their wits, to be kept in dark dungeons, to
be bound in straight chains and fetters, to have hard and miserable fare, that
so by all this hardship, they may come to their understandings again? thus God
does, Men by their sins are turned mad, they are grown out of their right
reason; they indeed think strictness and preciseness is the way to make men out
of their wits; but thy lusts and thy wickedness, deprive thee of all sound
judgment; now God, that he may recover thee, binds thee in chains, afflicts
thee with several judgments, that so at last thou may seriously consider of
thy self, and thy condition: so that there was never any trouble befell thee,
but thou should make as good use of it, as ever thou did of the best sermon
thou have heard. Hence Parisiensis will not call these afflictions evil, but
good; and therefore divides Gods dispensations into Bona Attractionis, and Bona
Retractionis; Good things drawing or attractive, these are Gods mercies; good
things withdrawing or retractive from sin, and these are afflictions.

But thirdly, There are some judgments of God for sin, wherein God does not
aim at conversion, but utter ruin: Therefore when we say, God by his
calamities, intends 3.
the conversion of men; it is not to be understood universally, not of all men,
nor at all times; God has some judgments which are called (...), punishments
and torments, which proceed from the mere hatred and implacable enmity of God;
and so conversion is no more intended by these, then the flames and torments in
hell are appointed to convert, or to bring the damned to repentance: Thus was
the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha, fire and brimstone was a fit declaration
of the hell they had deserved; and although it may not be peremptorily said,
that all the whole world that perished save eight persons, were all damned, for
that is disputed among the Learned; yet its plain, the greater part were
incurably wicked, and so the deluge, though of water, was not to wash their
sins, but God did first throw them into water, and then into eternal fire
presently; and woe be to those wicked men, to whom their miseries here are but
the beginning of sorrows hereafter.

Now we may observe a difference between these penal, destructive evils, and
The difference between penal evils, and medicinal. 1.
healing medicinal ones, in these respects:

First, Destructive calamities come violently and totally upon men; So that the
wrath of God comes upon such to the extremity, to the uttermost: Thus Sod^m and
Gomorrha were overthrown in a moment; and God thre^tens incurable Israel, That
affliction shall not rise up the second time, Nahum 1. 9. he will strike them
dead with the first blow; whereas Gods converting scourges, they come by
degrees: As God removed his glory from the temple, being unwilling to stir up
all his wrath, as the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 78 38. when therefore God
does first threaten before he smite, and when he does smite, he does it with
moderation; when if he does rebuke, yet it is not in his sore displeasure; then
all these dispensations are to purge out thy dross; then thou art set on the
fire, that thy scum may go over. Jeremy makes an excellent difference between
these two dispensations, Ier. 10. 24, 25. Correct me, O Lord, but with
judgment, not in thine anger, l^st I be brought to nothing; so then, never
repine or grud e under any sore hand of God upon thee, if it be with judgment,
with measure, not in wrath; then it is but the shepherds crook, to bring the
wandering sheep in: As the waters of the flood overflowed the mountains, and
drowned all the Roval Palaces, and great buildings, that were extant at that
time, but advanced the Ark higher to heaven; so do afflictions to incurable
men, that mind earthly things only, and glory with greediness in them; but
those that belong to God, will be advanced to heaven thereby.

Secondly, Afflictions are converting, and not destructive, when God does
vouchsafe inward teachings of the soul, inward meltings and humiliations of the
spirit 2.
with them. Gods judgments upon Pharaoh, had no gracious operation upon him,
because his heart was more hardened every day. Hence the Psal^rist, Blessed i^
the man, whom thou chastenest, and teach thy way, Psalm. 94. 12. when Gods
chastening and Gods teaching go together, then there is hope of an hearty
conversion unto God: when God strikes on the back, and opens the eyes at the
same time, then are afflictions blessed and happy to such men: The bitterness
of them is quickly recompensed with the fruits of righteousness they bring
forth. Consider then, does the rod give thee wisdom and understanding? does God
speak wisdom to thy heart, while thy outward man is so sharply exercised? then
these things come from love, and will end in love: Oh this undoeth us in out
calamities! we attend to the outward burden, and grievous nature of them, we
ask, When will they be gone? we cry out, How long Lord? but wenever remember
that we are by our calamities in Gods School; we consider not, neither do we
hearken to what God says unto us; look then to have teaching, as well as
striking: Oh woe be to that man, whom God only beats and beats, but teaches
him not at all: This is a forerunner of sad destruction.

Having premised these things, I come to show in the next place, how
Afflictions How afflictions are operative to the conversion of men Not of their
own nature.
are operative to the conversion of men, what influence they have to make us
turn to God: And here are two Errors to be avoided:

The first is, as if afflictions of their own nature, in their own self, could
beget any such heavenly change upon men: No such matter, for if the Word of God
it self, and the Sacraments, if destitute of Gods spirit and his power, are
uneffectual, how much more must these outward calamities be? Therefore as
Ezekiels wheels could not move, unless the Spirit drive them; nor the pool of
Bethesda communicate health, unless the Angel descended and stirred the waters;
so neither do any afflictions or troubles at all, do any good, but where Gods
spirit moves upon these waters. Experience confirms this, How many times do
people grow more desperate, more obstinate and impenitent in every evil way, by
the judgments upon them? The Prophet Isaiah complains of them, O Lord, when
thy hand is lifted up they will not see, Isa, 26. 11. Though a fool be brayed
in a mortar, yet he will not learn wisdom, Prove. 27. 22.

The Second Error to be avoided, is to attribute any merit or worth to a
patient Nor by way of merit for the patient bearing of them.
bearing of afflictions, as if by this we could merit either grace or glory.
The Apostle indeed says of Afflictions, That they do work an eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. but the word does not there signify a proper causality,
only God does make afflictions advantageous for his children glory: Do not
then think, that because thou have a miserable life here, God is bound to make
thee amends in the life to come: Those that say such things, know not that
their sins have deserved all wrath in this world, and the world to come. This
stone being removed out of the way, I proceed to describe the manner how these
outward calamities may further conversion.

And first, They are very advantageous to set the word preached upon our
hearts: But first by setting the word preached upon our hearts.
I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, says God, but thou heardest not, Jer.
22. 21. The word of God is never so likely to have a powerful impression, as
when men are in miseries; then their proud spirits, their lofty hearts are
tamed: As the rod in the school, and discipline makes instruction easily enter
into the negligent child; so when God teaches you by his word, and afflicts
you by his works, this may provoke to conversion: Does God therefore put thee
in this fiery furnace? say, This is to bring all that has been preached to me
to my mind; God has a special regard to his word, it is the precious seed
sown, and therefore he ploweth and harroweth the ground; he afflicts and
humbles Hearers, that they may get good by it: This is the proper use of all
chastisements, to make way for the word preached, to mollify and soften, that
it may enter; and therefore what hearers are more obstinate and opposite to the
word, then such as live in jollity and security, that have their hearts ease?
These have a fat heart, and so are not sensible.

Secondly, Affliction helps much to make men sober and wise, to give our
selves to understanding; and by understanding we come to be converted. Solomon
often 2. Afflictions help to make men sober and wise.
tells us, That the rod gives wisdom; and therefore God takes this way with us,
we being far more stupid and senseless in spiritual things, then any child can
be to humane Learning: Now when God depriveth us of our joy, of our comforts,
of all outward delights, this is apt to make a man to consider the vanity of
all things, What are Riches, what are Honors, what are External mercies to be
me thus afflicted, thus broken and bruised? When thou rebukest man for his sin,
all his desirable things perish; when then God takes away the desire of thy
eyes, the desire of thy heart, this is to make thee wise; as you take away the
childs babies, to make it learn its lesson: Its better to go to the house of
mourning then laughter, for the living will lay it to heart. The Prodigal never
came to his true mind, till he was brought to bitter extremity: Oh then, if
thou find Gods hand heavy upon thee, say, This is the time to get wisdom,
speak now Lord, for my heart is ready to hear: If thou do not know more, and
understand more then ever, thou losest the benefit of thy affliction.

Thirdly, Affliction may further conversion, in that it does sensibly teach a
man, how 3. By sensibly teaching a man how sad and bitter a thing it is to sin
against God.
sad and bitter a thing it is to sin against God: Sin is compared to gall and
wormwood, but it is never perceived to be so, till God bring us into external
miseries: Thus Jeremy, Jer. 2. 19. Then shall ye know, it is a bitter thing to
depart from God: Therefore though men in jollity and outward ease, never think
of turning unto God, yet how is it that you refuse, whose sins have found you
out. These Serpents have now put out their stings upon you; you find your
iniquities no longer smiling on you, no longer tickling and pleasing of you,
but they have said you in a tormenting bed of sorrow: Thou have received thy
good things, but now thy time is come for evil things: Every man does quickly
settle upon his lees, if he be not removed from affliction to affliction: How
fit then and congruous is it for that man, who lies under the smart of his
sins, to depart from them! What is the cause of thy present misery, of thy
present troubles? is it not sin? What has brought thee into that deep gulf
thou art in? is it not sin? What has turned all thy waters into blood, as it
was with the Egyptians? all those comforts and delights thou usest to refresh
thy self with? is it not sin? Then why do thou not say? If sin make all this
evil, if that bring all this misery, why shall I embrace it any louger? And a
Christian will further argue, If these beginnings be so heavy, what will the
after end be? if in this life it sting and wound so deeply, what will it in the
life to come? What is hell and the tormenting flames thereof, if now sin be so
terrible?

Fourthly, In this afflictions may also prepare for conversion, because they
are apt 4. They are apt to dead a man's heart to all creature-delights.
to dead a man's heart, and all his delights that he took in the creatures: Sin
is an aversion from God, and conversion to the creature; now grace is an
aversion from sin, and conversion to God; and there is nothing does so prepare
and take off the heart from the creature, as when God afflicts us in them, and
by them. As then the breast is made bitter, to wean the child; so God puts
bitterness in every comfort, in every condition, makes affliction to grow up
with every mercy, a thorn with every flower; that so thou may say, Its not
good to be here, we must seek a better good then these things are: In their
afflictions they will seek me early, says God, Hosea 5. 15. Oh when God shall
make every thing briars and thorns to thee! when thou look for good, and
behold nothing but bitterness, now is the time to allure thy soul to God; say,
What will thou do? whether will thou go? Has not that Star wormwood fallen
into every state thou art in? Has not God bid thee be called no more Naomi,
but Marah: Why then do thou any longer seek for grapes on thorns; for true
happiness in the way of sin? God took the Church into the wilderness, and then
he spoke to her, Hosea 2. 14. Oh when God has brought thee into a wilderness,
all comforts are kept from thee, then take the advantage, then pray, then
mourn; now, if ever, that iron of thy heart is in the fire, and it may be
beaten into a good frame; and therefore the more universal thy affliction is,
if it takes thee off from all refuges, leaves thee not one drop of comfort,
the likelier it is to do thee good, for thy spiritual disease and corruption is
contumelious, that it must be strong physic, else it will not work on thee: As
long as thou can catch upon any twig, any branch to save thy self, thou will
not throw thy self into the arms of Christ: Therefore God hedged the Churches
way with thorns, Hosea 2. 6. that she might not any way break through for her
sins; and when she was thus stopped, then she resolves to go back to her
former husband again. Thus afflictions in these particulars may help on our
turning to God, not but that the word is the proper instrument, only this may
smooth and prepare the way for the word to enter; insomuch that a man, who has
no afflictions, and who lives in all the ease and delight of his soul, he may
be in a desperate condition, and most dangerous, though he bless himself. Its
related of Ambrose, that being in the house of a man who boasted he never had
any calamity in all his life; Come, says he, let us make haste out of this
house, lest some remarkable vengeance of God fall upon us: He thought those
were most unhappy, that had so much earthly happiness, Nihil infelicius semper
felici.

Here is one doubt to be answered, and that is, Why should men be pressed in
times of calamities and miseries to turn unto God, seeing that is usually
branded Quest.
for hypocrisy; all is out of fear, and extorted, and so not thank worthy: If
Israel return to God, because he is framing evil against them, its merely for
fear of evil, and not love of God, or what is good. Does not the Prophet call
the Israelites fastings and mournings, when they were under Gods judgments, by
no other name, then howlings, as if they were so many beasts kept up in a den,
ready to be famished, that cried for food only, Why then should this be urged
upon us?

I Answer, These calamities must be the occasion only and initial motive; they
must prepare and make way, but they must not be the principal ground, nor the
Answ.
only: Even as the needle draws on the thread; or as in matter of faith, the
true Churches Authority, makes way to receive the truth of God, but afterward
we believe for the divine Authority thereof; so these outward miseries, they
give the first hint, they begin to make the first shake, but afterward the
soul forsakes sin, and cleaves to God, not out of fear only, but love to him:
We do not therefore press you, to make your afflictions the only ground, but
let them be sanctified introductions: And so I proceed to the Uses.

First, That no man has cause to boast and rejoice of his outward prosperity,
that he is not afflicted as others, he lives and is dandled, as it were, in
the worlds Use 1.
lap: Who knows, but that this is the fatting of thee for the shambles? Who
can say, but that God is most angry with thee, while he seems not to be
angry: Oh how much better were it, that God did follow thee by one affliction
after another, by one misery after another; this great calm is but the
forerunner of a terrible storm; know sin has it stings, and it will one time
or other be terrible. As its said, the Magistrates has not the sword in vain;
so neither are all those threatenings, all those arrows and swords of Gods
vengeance in vain, But who believes our report?

Secondly, That we the people of England, of any Nation in the world, should be
a converted generation to him: It should be matter of amazement and
astonishment, Use 2.
if every sinner be not turned from his evil ways; for God has not only
framed evil against us, but poured it on us; he has not only whet his
glistering sword, but run it in our bowels; the Lion has not only roared, but
torn in pieces: In vain do we speak and hope of Gods turning his wrath from us,
till we have turned from our iniquities: We look not to the true cause of all
our judgments; the sins we lie in, we live in; the sins that every Town and
Village walloweth in, these have been our undoing: Oh then you who say, Your
have lost thus much and thus much by the times, be able to say, You have lost
your sins also, and found God.

SERMON LXXV.
Of the time of turning unto God (viz.) presently.

JER. 18. 11. Return ye now every man from his evil way.
THe Prophets Commission consisted of two parts, The first Instruction. The
second Exhortation. We are upon this latter, and in it are observed 1. The
duty, Return; the nature of which has been already discussed. 2. The time now,
Return now. 3. The term from which, with the approprition of it, Every man from
his evil way. 4. The extent also of it, From your evil doings. The next thing
in our method to be handled is, the time when this duty must be set upon, and
that is now Turn ye now.

From whence Observe, That Conversion or turning unto God, is a duty required
at the present time. Thus in other places parallel in the margent, where this
duty is often commanded; still the time is prefixed now, Return ye now.

For opening of this necessary practical point, Consider Man is prone to put of
the day of repentance.


First, That it is a very prone inbred thing in a man to procrastinate, and
still to put off the day of repentance, and conversion to God. He resolves,
and he purposes, and he hopes in God to do it, and God gives him grace to do
it, but he never sets upon the work. Do but commune with your own hearts, and
see if there be not something or other ready always to stisle and kill those
purposes to return and so thou art always delaying, and delaying, hoping for a
time at last, till it may be thou fallest into the grave, and so all thy hopes
cut off. Now the causes of this delay to turn to God, may be several: Sometimes
it may come from sluggishnesse and Causes of men's delays to turn to God. 1.
idlnesse: Even as the sluggard has a desire to eat, but he tolleth himself on
the bed, and says, Yet a little sleep, and a little slumber, and so he
refuses to set his hand to work. Thus it is here, he desires to part with his
corruptions, to sin no more, but then he cries a little more ease; so much
praying, so much hearing, so much humiliation, so much fervencie and violence
is very tedious to him: The kingdom of heaven is to be got by violence, Mat.
11. 12. and the way to heaven, is striving, runinng in a race, wrestling and
combating, all which the idle man will never do.

A second cause is, Dear, and excessive love to the lusts we live in, when we
have at 2.
the same time some conviction, and yet strong corruptions. Conviction that it
is high time for us to break off our sins by repentance, and yet strong
corruptions do so entice us, and persuade us, that we are not able to break
these bonds, and cast them asunder, then conversion is delayed. Thus Agrippa
was almost persuaded to be a Christian, Act. 26. 28. but yet his present lusts
withheld him.

The third Cause of delay to turn unto God may be, the immoderate and excessive
love, and cares of the things of this world. Those are apt to surfeit, and
over-charge the 3.
heart: this dust got into the eye, is apt to blind them. Thus the young man
that seemed so forward, when he was bid to sell all, could not bear that
Doctrine, but went away very sorrowful, Mat. 19. 22.

A fourth Cause, may be recovery out of some dangers, diseases, or calamities
that we were in. The Israelites often turned unto God, but they proved
deceitful, they went 4.
backward, as well as forward, and what was the matter? They would turn to God
from violent fears that were upon them; they then cried, and mourned, and
prayed unto the Lord; but this fountain presently dried up when a sunshine day
came. So that prosperity and freedom from trouble, makes a man pur off his
resolutions, as much as ever he put them on in times of adversity. Thus you
see what are the causes that may make men use that Corvinumcras, as Austin
calls it, The Crows note, Cras, to morrow, to morrow.

2. Consider, that it is an high, and a very grievous sin, for a man
obstinately and It is a grievous sin to resolve to turn to God, but not yet.
formally to have this expression, I will turn to God, but not yet. I say to
have this formally, and not with attention to it, it argues very great
rebellion, for it supposes light in thee; thou see thy self out of the way,
thou see thy self undone, and wandering in ways to hell, yet thy rebellion
against this light is so great and manifest, that thou will oppose it: besides
it argues much contempt; for if thou did highly prize God, and his favors,
thou would immediately forsake all other things, and cleave to him.

These things premised, now let us consider why we ought to take the present
Now, not to put off, no not a day, an hour, not this moment; and there was
never Why men should turn to God presently. 1.
any duty had such reasons for it. As

First, The vanity and uncertainty of a man's life is so obvious a reason, That
it is strange every one does not resolve, Now will I forsake my accustomed
sins, I will do it now. The shortness of our days is frequently agrravated by
the Scripture, therefore we should apply our hearts to wisdom, we should not
look so much to this moment, as provide for eternity: Who art thou then, O
mortal man that does yet put off thy repentance? who has given thee security
for to morrow? why do thou not take the Holy Ghosts council? To day, and
while it is called to day, hear his voice, Psalm 95. 7. Oh dust and ashes, Why
art thou not afraid of being blown away with every breath of Gods displeasure?
In wordly matters you are careful to make every thing sure; you know not what
will fall out, it is good to be certain; and in heavenly things, there you
content your selves with any probabilities. The Psalmist gives a convincing
Epithet, Psalm. 4. O ye mortal men, how long will you love vanity. Let us then
beseech thee who art entangled in thy lusts by that body of death thou bear
about with thee, by the consideration of that sentence of death past upon every
one, the execution whereof may be this night, so that thou never may hear
this Exhortation more, by the consideration of the grave into which thou art
falling, that thou would no longer put off, but turn from thy sins. Oh say,
contrary to those Epicures, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye:
Let us pray, and return unto the Lord, for to morrow we shall dye.

Secondly, Turn now, because the day of Grace and salvation offered unto thee,
is as uncertain in continuance as thy life. Thus the Apostle, Behold, now is
the time acceptable, 2.
now is the day of Salvation, 2. Cor. 6. 2. therefore receive not the grace of
God in vain: and our Savior, Work while ye have day, for the night is coming,
and no man can then work, John 9. 4. If a black night for Ordinances and the
Ministry should be coming upon you, the sun and the stars be turned into blood:
Oh then, whither will thou run? and what will thou do? gather the Manna
therefore while it falls; come in while the door of Grace stands open: take
heed of being like Esau, coming too late for a blessing, like Saul, that cannot
have God answer him any way, by Urim, or Thummim, or any other manner: The
Prophet Jeremiah might well say, Return ye now; for shortly captivity, or the
sword will deprive you of all means of grace: How diligent is the husbandman to
take the season for sowing, the tradesman his season for buying and selling!
but for our souls we are not wise: We say not, Oh my soul, now if ever let this
sermon pierce thee, now if ever let this exhortation prevail with thee. Oh
unwise men, go and learn of the brutish Creatures, they are so wise as to lay
up their store in summer against winter: and thus it ought to be with thee; if
there may come a sad time of famine for the Ordinances, and the means of Grace,
do thou as Joseph, who laid up provision for that time of scarcity. Now while
God calls, do thou say, here, Lord, I am.

Thirdly, Therefore turn now from your evil ways, because the longer you put
off, the more you hinder your peace and happiness. All the time spent in sin
is lost time, it must be all redeemed again as the Apostle exhorts, Thou art an
hinderer of thy peace and comfort all the while thou art laboring in the way
of sin, thou art with the Prodigal feeding on husks, when thou mighst have a
fatted calf; thou art eating onions when Manna may be gathered: What are the
pleasures of sin, to the enjoyment of God, the peace of a good Conscience, and
joy in the Holy Ghost? How will thou try out when once set at liberty from this
prison, Now I begin to live, Now I begin to have happiness, now I begin to
have pleasure, but never till now? Thou will find a damage, and a loss which
cannot be repaired, but by that happiness in Jesus Christ: So then bethink thy
self, What a loser am I, exchanging dirt for gold? It is my own advantage and
happiness, if I betake my self to God immediately.

Fourthly Therefore turn to God, because the longer thou putst off, the greater
difficulty it will be to leave thy sins. At last Conversion will be every day
more remote then at first; for the difficulty will arise several ways, here
will more then a threefold cord be to be broken.

For 1. It will be more hard, because sin is every day hardening of a man's
heart 1.
more: Now all hardness of heart makes turning to God more difficult: wax is
sooner melted then cold Iron: Therefore says the Apostle, To day if you will
hear, harden not your hearts, Psalm. 95. implying that every delay does freez
the soul, and make it more benumbed: if thou art not fit to day, thou will be
less fit then to morrow: and hence it is why men rooted in sin, and inveterate
in old customary iniquities, do seldom change their black skins: the beginnings
of a wound are to be healed; if you let it rankle and canker, then that grows
incurable at last. Oh then take up betimes; while there are any relentings, any
meltings, go presently to God: If thou gettest cold after this heat, then thy
disease will be more mortal.

2. Therefore it is more difficult if thou delay, because to thy natural
hardness 2.
thou will add adventitious, and acquisite, Every man naturally has a stone
upon his heart, and grace must remove that in conversion; but when thou have
refused often to come at Gods call, then there is a second, and a third, yea
many stones laid upon thee while thou art buried in the grave of thy sins; Oh
then, woe be unto thee who do make thy condition worse at last, then at first.
Who knows if thou had regarded the first impressions, and motions of Gods
spirit, but that thy condition had been more hopeful? Oh take heed of proving
bankrupt in the way of sin; then the more thou spendest, the likelier to be
cast into that dungeon out of which there can be no redemption. Take heed then
of adding hardness to that which is inbred in thee: Thou have enough to press
thee into the lowest sea; thou need not have more milstones hung about thy
neck.

3. It is therefore more difficult, because the judgment of God is more
terrible to such in a spiritual manner. The Lord has spiritual judgments, as
well as 3.
temporal; and although we groan and complain more under bodily miseries, yet
these spiritual have the greatest danger; and of all spiritual ones, this of
hardness of heart is the most grievous, as by the Prophet appears, Esai. 6.
Go and make their hearts fat, their eyes blind. Oh then fear the longer thou
putst off, lest God will smite thee with more stupidity, more senslesnesse, and
so at last thou f^ll into an hopeless condition, that all means used for
recovery, do make thy sickness more desperate.

4. Therefore it is more difficult if thou delayest, because the devil has
thereby IV.
got the stronger possession on thee; for every man has either God and his
spirit dwelling in him, whereby he becomes a lively Temple, and his house, and
so all things are according to his government, or else the Devil he has a full
possession of him; but now his hold in thee is stronger and stonger, as thou
delayst, and therefore it will be the more hard to cast him out, when he has
had so many years possession. The devils that possessed the man from the womb
up, could not be cast out but by some extraordinary way. The devil was in Judas
his heart long before, yet says the Scripture, The Devil entered into his
heart, John 13. 27. How is that? was he not before there? Yes, but now more
then ever; he had sinned more, and resisted the grace of Christ more, and
therefore God gave him up to the greater power of the Devil: And thus it will
be with thee; the more thou putst off, the more thou delayest, the greater
Tyranny and reign will Satan have over thee.

Fifthly, Therefore turn now to God, because the sooner thou go to him, the
more service and honor thou will bring to him. Suppose a man be called at the
twelfth 5.
hour, yet how little can he do for God before night? Alas thou have lived a
long while in the service of sin and satan, and thou need even Methusalems
age to do God service, for all the dislervice and dishonor thou have done him.
Paul because he had been very active for the Devil, and so labored more then
many of his equals in pulling down the Church; therefore when once converted,
see how he rejoices as a giant to run his race, and he labors afterward
more then all to build the Church. Oh then think the greatest honor thou art
capable of, is to do the Lords work: Angels rejoice in this; and all the while
thou art in the course of sin, then thou art doing the Devils service: Although
now there be no greater delight to thee, then fulfilling the lusts of the
flesh, yet when thou art once turned to God, thou will labor abundantly in the
work of God, and it will be an heavy trouble to thee that thou have been an
enemy so long to God, and promoted the work of his adversary. Therefore get
betime into the vineyard of the Lord, and so thou will have time to do him the
more service.

Sixthly, The sooner thou turnest to God, thou will prevent the more sin, and
so the 6.
more shame and trouble of heart. Those that have gone far in the ways of
wickedness, they have the greater falls, and so their broken bones put them
into the more pains e're they can be healed. Oh what a deal of peace would
Manasses, and Mary Magdalen have enjoyed, if they had been converted in their
younger years! So if Paul had been betimes drawn home unto God, he had not had
all that trouble and grief of spirit for persecuting the Church of God. Those
that are aged women, they say, have the sorer and more dangerous travails, if
they had never any Children before: and thus they have the more difficult
conversions, the greater anguish and pain of Conscience, who have lived long in
sin, and committed great ones. Hence is that, Remember thy Creator in the days
of thy youth: and it is good to bear the yoke in the youth; so it is here, it
is good to feel the bitterness of sin betimes; it is good in our younger years
to feel how sad a thing it is to displease God; this advantage has early
conversion. So then, let young ones hearken to sermons, let them attend to what
the Ministers of God exhort; for conversion does not only belong to the old,
but to the young; yea commonly conversion is sooner wrought upon the younger
sort of people, for they have not resisted the grace of God so much, they have
not provoked God to give them up to their own hearts lusts and desires, as many
aged persons have.

Seventhly, Suppose thy conversion and turning to God for the future, were not
only possible, but sure; if it were infallibly revealed to thee, that God
would before 7.
thy death make himself known in a gracious manner to thee, yet how unfit is
old age, or a diseased sick body to turn to God? When thou have given the Devil
all thy service, and power, and strength, then to give a Carcass to God it is
unseemly; like those Heathens that keep the honey to themselves, and offer the
wax to their Gods: say then to thy self, as the Prophet in another case
concerning those that offered blind, and same Sacrifices to God: Offer it now
to thy rulers, and governors, see if they will accept of it: And thus it is
here, thy lame, diseased, infirm service, How fit is it for God, when it is not
fit for any man? The command is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy strength: if
this be required of thee, then it is most unworthy and dishonorable dealing,
to put off God to thy feeble age.

Eighthly, Consider the nature of sin, what it is, and thou must needs say,
There is no way, but presently to go out of it. It is the poison of the soul,
and that is not to be 8.
kept long in the body: It is the bloody wounding of it, and thou must not let
it lie long in this bleeding: it is the mere mercy of God that sin does not
give a damning stab and blow to thee, to undo thee to all eternity. Why then
will thou stay for an hour, for a moment in this estate? Who would abide long
in a place, where fire is ready to burn and consume all before it? Yet this is
thy condition; it was Lots great stupiditie, that when fire and brimstone was
ready to rain from heaven upon him, he would not go out till the Angel came and
pulled him out, The Lord being merciful to him, says the Text, Genes, 19. 16.
And thus it is here, our sottishness, and stupidity is so great, that although
heaven above be against us, and hell beneath ready to devour us, yet we think
not of conversion to Him.

Ninthly, If so be thou would ever turn to God at all, then why not now? Do
not deceive, and delude thy own soul; if ever thou will part from thy lusts,
begin presently, 9.
for what can be more necessary? Commonly this is our method, that we will do
the necessary things in the first place; we will first provide for our lives,
before we do for ornaments; Nature teaches us to do that which has the
greatest necessity: now then what is more necessary then to turn to God? if
this be not done, thy sins are upon thee, thy lusts will overwhelm thee, thy
damnation is sure and unavoidable. Turn now unto God, because it is most
necessary: one thing is needful: neither riches, honor, or any advantages are
like to this. Besides, if ever thou will turn to God, do it now, for there can
be no reason hereafter, which will not be much more now. Is sin of a terrible
damning nature, then it is so now? Does Gods anger belong to sin, so it does
now? Is God also to be loved, and chosen before all things? then now as well as
at any time hereafter. Thy comforts will be greater, thy honor more, thy
service to God more; therefore return now unto God.

Use of Exhortation, to be persuaded to this duty, Return now, set immediately
upon the work, Why should Gods work be done last of all? Oh think rather I will
turn unto God, and that presently, because I may dye before I think of it. If I
dye before I have settled such and such worldly businesses, there is nothing but
a temporal loss; but if I dye before I have settled the peace of my soul, then
I am eternally undone. Oh how many have been surprised by Gods stroke, before
ever they thought of it: then they cry out, Lord, spare me one year longer,
Lord, give me space once more; I am not ready to dye, I have not quitted my
sins; Oh if I dye now, I shall dye and be damned in them. Come then and take
the good counsel of the Prophet, Do it now; are your hearts yielding and
consenting? you will have the comfort of sincerity, if you turn to God while in
your health and strength; whereas when fear and danger works upon thee, then
still thou will doubt of thy integrity in what thou do.

SERMON LXXVI.
That Conversion puts a Man upon leaving his Beloved Sin; The reason of the
difference of Darling Sins in men, and the Signs by which a Man may know his
beloved Sin.

JEREM. 18. 11. Return ye now, every one from his evil ways.
THese words (you heard) were the second part of Jeremiah's Commission, the
matter whereof is exhortatory, and in that the duty, and the time of the duty
have been considered. The third thing in order to be prosecuted, is the
subject, with the appropriation of it, Every man from his evil ways. Besides
the common and general sins, wherein all had defiled themselves, there were
also peculiar darling and beloved sins, that every one had espoused
particularly to themselves: If therefore they would declare their sincere, and
unfeigned Conversion unto God, they were to throw away these Dalilah's to
sacrifice these Isaacs, their only sins, which they loved so much. A man may
leave many sins without any trouble, so as it be not that to which he is dearly
engaged.

That true Conversion will put a man upon the forsaking his dear and beloved
sin: He will not as Lot, desire to have a little one spared: So, Lord, I will
pray, hear, Obs.
turn unto thee; only in this spare me. Some say, that Naaman the Syrian was
not truly converted, because he stuck at one beloved sin; for when he
proffered his service to the true God, promising to take him for the only Lord,
he adds, Pardon thy Servant in one thing, that when I go down into the house
of Rimmon, and my Master lean on me, I also then bow down, 2 King. 5. 18. They
that make him not a true Convert, say, here was hypocrisy. This Office was a
place of honor and profit, and so though he would acknowledge the true God in
many things; yet this his evil way he would not leave; I will not determine
that point of his true Conversion; but certainly this is a very frequent
miscarriage in these days; Many hear the Word gladly, receive it with some
joy, and do many things willingly; but then they are held in one string, there
is one dead Fly, and that marreth the Box of ointment, so that it passes a
Diminitive but on a man, and all his Religion. As in that Naaman we instanced
in, it is said he was a great man, and of great authority in the land, but he
was a Leper, and that marred all: so it is here, he prays, he hears, he
conformeth to many godly things; but there is such a finne, such a lust, and
that undoeth all; and as every man may have his particular sin; so its
observed, that Nations have their proper sins. The Jews in former times were
above all sins prove to Idolatry; therefore its thought God did exercise them
in such a bodily way of worship; and so many external and glorious Ceremonies
were commanded them; that if possible, they might not desire Idolatrous
worship. The Corinthians, their sin was uncleanness and wantonness, therefore
the Apostle does so much press Arguments against that. The Cretians are
branded to be always Liars; and the Apostle confirms this testimony. Thus
Nations have their proper sins, as well as particular persons, yea particular
Towns and Villages, by one reason or other, are observed to be more prone to
some kind of sin then others: But I shall limit my self to particular men's
darling corruptions, which is the root to be plucked up, the Fountain to be
dried up; and every Christian should be so far a spiritual Physician to
himself, as to be able to know, what is that particular sin to which he is most
inclined; for at that breach hell and damnation will enter.

But to make this point naked and open, consider, That Original sin, though it
Considerations about beloved and darling sins. I.
be the seed of all kind of wickedness, and there cannot be an instance given
of any horrid crime in the world, but this would carry a man unto it, yet this
poison in every man vents it self in one way, rather than another: Even as in
every man's body there is a seed and principle of death; yet in some there is a
pronenesse to one kind of disease more than to another; and this may be called
that man's proper sin, his evil way. As Philosophy tells us, Though all the
individuals of one kind agree in one common specifical nature, yet every one
has a particular difference, whereby it is distinguished from another, which
they call Hecciety; so its here, though there be many sins acted in common by
all, yet several men have their particular corruptions, which are like the
Prince of Devils, that commands all their other sins. Its true, there is no sin
committed by any man, but thou have cause to bless God, that thou art not as
desperately entangled in it, as others. Therefore what the Psalmist speaks of
the worst of wicked men, and highest enemies to the Church of God, the Apostle
Romans 3. applies to every man. Yet evetie man has his inclination to one
kind of sin rather than another: and this difference of darlingbeloved sins
may arise from two grounds, the one internal, the other external.

The internal cause of a beloved sin is the complexion and bodily constitution
of a The reason of the difference of darling sins in men. 1.
man: For as one man's body inclines to choleric diseases, another to
melancholic; so the very natural constitution, while a man is under the power
of sin, hurrieth one way rather than another: Not that this excuses a man,
to say, its his inclination to do thus and thus, he cannot help it, for
sanctifying grace will work in a man, a contrary inclination, put another
predominant principle within him; and besides this does not extenuate, but
aggravate his sin; for the more it is rooted, and cleaves to him, the more
difficult will his recoverie be; so then a man's peculiar sin, that he is most
addicted unto, may arise from his bodily constitu^ion, that may be a more
prepared instrument for some vice rather than another. Or our darling sin 2.
may arise from some external causes, and they may be these.

First, Custom and use in some kind of sin. Frequent custom does at last
breed an habituated delight, and becomes a second nature; so that men who have
been in long Captivity and service to lusts, they willingly have their ears
boared, and are never willing to leave that Service. We see daily sad
experience of this truth. Men who through long continuance in sin, have now
turned it into their nature, They say of that sin, as Christ of grace, One
thing is needful; They add Drunkenness to Thirst, as Moses calls it,
Deuteronomie 29. 19. That is, after they have committed sin, they are
vehement and fervent for it again.

Secondly, A darling Sin may arise from the condition, or relation we are in.
There may be some temptations suitable to the inward lusts of an heart, that we
cannot leave such sins, unless we quite forsake such a condition, or calling.
Judas his beloved sin was Covetousness; and his condition he was in, carrying
the Bag, that was a continual blast to blow up the fire of lusts; so if
ambitious men get to the pinnacle of honor; if covetous men to places of profit
and gain, here the Serpent in their breasts gets the warm beams of the Sun,
there is a daily incentive to add many Cubits to the stature of their lusts;
and its a very ill and malignant constellation, when a man's outward condition,
and his peculiar sin meet together, he had great need to pray to be delivered
from the mouth of such Lions.

Secondly, In the next place, that may be called a man's particular way of
sinning, which yet we cannot call his beloved sin. For it may be a great grief
and torment II.
to him, it may be a Tyrant usurping power over him, not the delight of his
soul. Some say David was very prone to the sin of lying; its plain, that being
in many streights by Saul, he used many unlawful shifts: Now this was an heavy
burden to him, Deliver me from the way of lying, Psalm 119. ^9. He does
earnestly pray against this Sin: And so in another place, Psalm 31. 10. He
speaks of being kept from mine iniquity: so the godly may be more prone to fall
into one sin then another; some into inordinate passion, some to cowardly fear,
some to diffidence in the promises; yet these are not their beloved sins, but
their hated enemies, they mourn and complain with Paul, That this Law of sin
within them leads them Captives; They cry out, and say, Their souls suffer
violence within them: No sin, but Christ, is the beloved of their souls; he
is the chiefest of ten thousands; yet some corruption or other beats them
often down; they are more overtaken in such a corruption then in any; Therefore
they say, This is my iniquity, this is the Saul that is always pursuing of me.
Its necessary the godly should understand this difference between a sin
beloved, and a sin violently tyrannizing over them: for this is most certain,
whosoever gives up himself willingly to one kind of sin, he is yet in the
state of nature and wrath, he is not turned unto God.

Thirdly, As many of Gods people have found their hearts weakest to resist some
kind of sins: so the godly have for the most part some grace or other wherein
they III.
do most excel. They have their way of grace, wherein they are most
admirable: Thus Moses is marked for his meekness, David for sincerity and a
faithful heart, Paul for zealous labor in promoting the Gospel. Hence the
godly are exhorted to think better of one another than their own selves;
because there is no grace, but one man may exceed another in: This should teach
the head or eye not to despise the foot; for even that member has some
peculiar serviceablenesse which the other has not.

In the next place, consider the Signs or Discoveries of a beloved sin, and
they will appear thus: IV.


First, That which swallows and devoureth all thy other sins. All other sins
are but streams emptying themselves into that Fountain, and Ocean; this is the
darling 1.
sin. The Pharisees peculiar sin was vainglory, because all things were
referred to that: For seeing such a sin is in the room of God to them, whole
belly is their God, says the Apostle, Phil. 3. 19. Therefore they refer all to
that. The Adulterer, if he be greedy toget gain, its but to consume upon his
lusts; for that is the Idol of his heart; so Covetousness in an earthly man is
called Idolatry; because all the sins he commits, all the fraud and wrong he
does, its to satisfy this: As in a man's body, where there is one great wound,
all the humors will run thither.

Secondly, A beloved sin is that, wherein a man cannot endure to be reproved
and rebuked sharply. They can with great delight, hear you preach against such
2.
and such sins; but then come to that wherein they are most entangled, then
all their malice and venom works, so that there is no such discovery of a
darling sin, as a man's impatience, and fretting against those who faithfully
rebuke. When Herodias desires John's head in a Platter, it was because his
Tongue had reproved her beloved sin. Thus because the Pharisees were reproved
by Christ for their beloved sins, hypocrisy, and Self-righteousnesse, they
were moved with envy and hatred against him. Try then thy self, can thou
endure the sharp Rasor should come upon the sorest part? Is there nothing that
is in the Word cutting like a two-edged sword, but thou art willing it should
enter into thy very heart? This is very comfortable.

Thirdly, That is a man's beloved sin, on which his mind, his heart, and all
his 3.
labor is spent. The Voluptuous man is described to be one that makes
provision for the flesh. The Adulterer is brought in by Solomon diligently
observing the time for his Lusts. The malicious Enemy to Godliness is said by
David to go up and down the street like a Dog waiting for an opportunity, and
cannot sleep till he has accomplished mischief. As Joseph was known to be
Jacobs Darling, because he bestowed a more excellent coat upon him than the
rest, and so the elder Son was to have a double Portion, as most beloved; So
that sin which has a double Portion above others, that which has more of
thy Cares, thy Thoughts, thy heart; that is thy Darling sin: Oh kill that,
crush that in the Egg, before it come to be a Cockatrice. Men should commune
with their own hearts, and study themselves more than they do in this matter.

Fourthly, That is thy darling sin, which thou would have spared above all.
Thou would never stand delaying, but turn immediately to God, but for that. 4.
That which thou hidest in time of danger, as Iehojadah did young Ioas, hoping
in time to make him King. This is the Goliath of all the Philistims: Commonly
when the Grace of God comes close to a man's heart, begins to wrestle and
combat with sin; then there is no such sturdy and potent enemy as that
beloved sin. All the difficulty is in throwing down that mountain. When there
was a man very forward, and not very far from the Kingdom of Christ, our
Savior to try his sincerity, presently puts him upon the leaving his indeared
sin, and then says the Text, He went away exceeding sorrowful. This was the
cup of Jelousie-water that did presently make his thigh to rot. What then is
the sin that hinders thee always? That is the (...), the millstone about thy
neck (...) If it were not for that, thou could gladly run in the way of Gods
commandments: This is the great enemy to thy souls peace, spare it not but
destroy it.

Fifthly, The darling sin may be found out by the easiness to be overcome by
it. Sampson is easily persuaded by Dalilah, when none else in the World could 5.
steal away his heart. The Apostle bids us lay aside the sin that does so
easily bese^ us, Heb. 12. 1. Its the general Rule of the Scripture, Of what a
man is overcome, that he is in bondage unto: and if the man be easily without
any resistance overcome, then its an argument he is the more in bondage.
Consider then what that sin is, which thou can hardly refuse, what that is
which finds the door always open, and there know all thy Calamity arises by
that, Its an heavy slavery (if the soul could be sensible) to be at the command
of any sin; when it faith, Go, thou go; and when Come, thou come: Thou
can deny nothing to it, as Herod could not to Herodias; Ask not half, but the
whole Kingdom of Heaven, and thou will part with it to enjoy thy lusts.

Thus you have heard how this particular sin of a man, which is his own
indeared corruption may be found out.

Now lets consider, Why Conversion to God does in a special manner make Why
Conversion makes a man leave his darling sins.
a man leave this: The work of Grace does in a peculiar manner take off this
yoke (...) That what Amnon did by unnatural, carnal lust; he hated Tamar as
much and more than ever he loved her: so when men are once truly humbled for
sin and turn to God, those particular lusts which were their delight, their
sport, their constant practice, they are now most set against them; of all sins
their hearts do most ^is^ and swell with an holy indignation against them. Now
the grounds are these:

First, This beloved sin was the strength and power of all other sins. They
all run into this: This is a kind of an original mother sin, that bred and
1.
nourished all other transgressions. As Sampsons strength lay in his hair, so
all the power and effi^acie of sin in a man, ran into that Channel of his
beloved sin. That was the premum mobile which carried all the rest with it; so
that as it was given in command to the Soldiers, that they should not fight
with little, or great, but with the King of Israel: so grace in the heart of a
man does not so much assault less sins as this great one. Come, says grace,
let us destroy this, and all is ours, This is the strong man that must be bound
ere the house can be taken: This is the Dim that must first be destroyed. No
wonder then, that a man entangled in any close beloved sin, can promise himself
any true comfort or hope, for he is under the strong power of sin and Satan, as
long as this is upon him.

Secondly, Therefore a man must forsake this beloved sin, because in true
conversion unto God, we are to leave sin upon such spiritual and Scripture
grounds 2.
which are true in every sin, as well as in any. The grounds of turning from
sin are, because its contrary to an holy God, it opposes an heavenly and
pure Law, it grieveth Gods Spirit, its the noisome filthiness and dung of the
soul: Why then if this be thy ground, then all this is true of thy beloved sin
as much as any; for that is against Gods holy will, that is opposite to a
spiritual Law that is contrary to purity and the beauty of the soul. Its an
hypocritical Conversion, when men leave some sins, and not others; they can
part with some kind of cocorruptions; but then there are others of which they
say, as was of Goliah's sword, None like that. Now all this is but deceit and
frowardness of heart, this is but halting before God; for if thy beloved lust
be sin, if an enemy to God, if an adversary to his glory, how can thou
lodge it in thy soul? Oh that people would attend more to the true spiritual
and acceptable ground of leaving any sin, for that would sweep all away, it
would not leave an Hoof in Egypt.

Thirdly, Therefore in Conversion, a man will be sure to leave his peculiar
sin, because all repentance and humiliation is a kind of revenge, and
spiritual judging 3.
and condemning of our selves. If we would judge our selves we should not be
judged of the Lord; so the Corinthians, that had been too conniving at the
incestuous person, not endeavoring to purge out the old Leaven as they should:
when they began to turn from this sin, then says the Apostle, What fear? yea
what zeal, what indignation and revenge? 2 Corinthians. 7. 11. In all things ye
have labored to clear your selves in this matter. Thus it is with a godly man;
of all sins, that which was his greatest delight, his greatest practice, now
his greatest zeal and indignation is against: Was uncleanness his beloved
sin? Now he does especially abound in purity; that so all the world, yea and
God also may see him clear. Was pride his darling sin? then of all graces he
is most clothed with Humility. Paul's great sin was persecuting and
destroying the Church of God once: but when converted, who had such Fatherly
bowels? who had the Church in his heart so much as he? As Cran(...)er, that had
subscribed with his right hand to that which was against his Conscience,
afterward with revenge put that first into the Flames; So does the true
Convert; Of all sins I will be revenged most of that, by which I most
dishonored God. Thus Mary Magdalen takes that hair of hers which had been used
to allure others, and washes Christ's Feet with it. And those eyes that had been
wanton Snares, do now stand beblubbered with Water. Thus the godly man will be
avenged upon his spiritual lusts.

Fourthly, Conversion to God is the bringing of a man to true and solid
Wisdom. 4.
Now that will presently advise him to take heed of that sin which will most
easily seduce him: He will take heed of that fire which has so grievously
scorched him; He will remember the deadly wounds and bloody strokes such sins
have given his Conscience; and therefore he is afraid, and trembles at the
very approach of such sins. David when he had been thoroughly humbled for his
Murder of Uriah, afterward refused to drink the Water that men jeoparded their
lives for: This is the blood of man, he cries out: So will the true Convert be
afraid to come near the borders, near the temptations of his old former sins.

Lastly, Therefore does Conversion make a man leave his darling sins, because
5.
it puts a man upon showing the greatest love he can to God, who has showed so
much to him. Now wherein can he show more service and love to God, than by
killling his Absalom, by offering his Isaac? Now, says God, I know thou love
me, because thou have not spared thy only beloved Son. So God, Now I know
thou art truly converted to me, for thou do not spare thy dear lusts, thou
do not hide thy beloved sins any more: Love to God will put a man upon
this; and no wonder, for it puts a man to lose his Wife, Children, yea his dear
life for Christ's sake: is it then any wonder, if it parts a man and his beloved
sins?

Use of Instruction, That all they are still in their Hypocrisy, and lie under
Use.
Gods wrath, who retain any beloved sin. What though thou do many things,
yet if thou will not part with thy Herodias, thou art in Gall and Wormwood. And
this is the rather to be observed, because a man may go for in the profession
of Religion, yet have some secret beloved finne that he hugs in his Bosom all
the while. Oh throw that Toad out of thy heart; Christ cannot, will not dwell
in thy heart, till that enemy of his be dislodged. Oh let a Judas be a Pillar
of Salt to season you: Did not he pray, hear, work Miracles in Christ's Name,
and yet lived in a secret beloved sin? God will unmask such Hypocrisy, and
make thy sin find thee out.

SERMON LXXVII.
Shows that all Persons have need to turn unto God, and sets forth the true
acceptable Motives to Repentance.

JER. 18. 11. Return now every one from his evil way.
IN this exhortatory conclusion hathbeen considered, 1. The duty, (Return) 2.
The adjunct time (Now.) 3. The subject to whom, with the appropriation of it,
Every one from his evil way: This latter part admits of a sub-division; 1. The
general term from which a man must turn, and that is, An evil way. 2. The
restriction of it, His evil way: The restriction has also been absolved. There
remains only one thing more in this Exhortation, and that is the general
term, (Evil way.) Conversion is a motion; and as local motions have a term from
which, and a term to which; Thus it is here in spiritual Conversion; and you
cannot clearly understand the nature of this duty, unless it be considered in
both the terms: and of the term from which, at this time from this Text.

The Observation, The term from which we are to turn in our Conversion unto
God, is the evil and sin we live in. Observe. I. Who must be converted.


That which we are to move from, yea run and fly from, is the impiety and
transgression of our lives. Every one that lies in any sin, must be turned
upside down, as it were; his love must be where his hatred was; his grief where
his delight was; his back, where his face was; and his face and affections upon
that, on which his back and all contempt and scorn was. To turn and change from
a man's former sins, is no disgrace, but a necessary duty, and a great dignity:
Thus Conversion is a motion from sin, not like the turning of a door upon the
same hinge, never moved out of his place. Wonder not that I am long on this
subject; for I am not yet near the bottom of this excellent Fountain of matter,
and we shall draw up new and fresh water, not troubling you with the same
matter that has already been handled. For the discovery of this point; Consider

First, Who they are that are in sin, or live in sin, and therefore need
conversion: Every man. For
For many a man is eternally undone, because he does not see a necessity of his
turning to God; he either takes for granted, that he is already converted, or
1. All by nature are in a damnable state of sin.
he thinks conversion is only for Pagans or Heretics, to the true Christian
faith, or some notorious gross sinners, whose sins are of a crimson color.
Therefore to undeceive and convince you herein, know and consider, what it is
to be in sin, or who may be said to be in sin, and every such person needs
conversion.

First therefore, Every one by nature is in the damnable state of sin, although
he never committed any actual impiety: Thus sin was unknown to Heathens, and
denied by some Heretics; but the Scripture does plainly assert it, concluding
us To be children of wrath by nature Ephesians. 2. he does not say, by actions, by
custom, by practice, but by nature: This is the first stone, and the deep
foundation that must be laid: This is called native, original, natural, and
hereditary sin. Till a man be inwardly and powerfully convinced of this, he
cannot ever think of turning unto God; so that conversion is requisite to every
one that has this birth-sin. We come naturally with our back to heaven, and
face to hell; now here must be a conversion unto God: Begin here, and study
here, How were it possible that men should sit and hear so much of turning to
God, and never begin to move toward him, but because they feel not this
natural averseness in their whole man from God, and what is holy? Let no man,
free from gross sins, and walking in an orderly civil way, think this duty of
conversion does not belong to him; for if thou had no more sin in thee then
the child new born, thou were yet to turn unto God, as being in a dangerous
path of death and destruction; yea, this conversion and turning from this
innate corruption, is far more difficult, then from any actual impieties, for
this is more closely bred in thee, and settled in thy bowels: The Scripture
calls this thy body, thy flesh, thy members, as if thou were turned into this
sin: This is the fountain, this is the root, this walks with thee, rises
with thee, dwells in thee, as in its proper possession: so that in your turning
from sin, be sure you go as deep as to this native filthiness: Its not to turn
thy coat, or thy skin, but thy very heart and inwards, when you are to turn
unto God: We shall show in time, of many turnings to God, but they laid no good
foundation, they laid not the ax to the root of the tree; they cut off Sampsons
hair, but plucked it not up by the root, and so the strength of corruption
prevailed over them again; so that this turning from sin, is to turn from thy
own self, to leave thy own self, and join with God, to be one with him: As iron
put into the fire a long while, loses its coldness, and its black color, and
looks like fire. Its a true and good saying of Ambrose, Homo recedens male a
Deo, cecidit in seipsum, Man falling from God, fell into his own self: So that
he is as a beast tied up in a close dungeon; his thoughts, his affections, his
designs are only for himself, original corruption has brought this perverse
distemper on a man; look then that thou break this Dragons head: Thou will
find thy self within (how glorious soever in thy externals) like Ezekiels
wall, whereon were pourtrayed the forms of all creeping and abominable things;
or like Peter's sheet, that had all the kinds of unclean beasts within, Thus
thy heart has all manner of vile and foul lusts cleaving unto thee; and
therefore though thou were as innocent from actual sins, as once in thy cradle,
yet thou art to turn to God, and to forsake that present condition.

Secondly, That man is still in sin, and so needs conversion unto God, who 2.
Having inward delights and lusts after sin.
has daily inward delights and lusts after sin, though it may be, fear, and
shame, and outward punishment keep them from acting the evil they would do. It
was a received opinion among the Pharisees, and many Heathens, that the mere
will and purpose to sin, did not deserve punishment, no not from God: From man
indeed it cannot: but to think thoughts, desires, and inward purposes of sin,
are free also with God, is to deny the Law to be a spiritual law, forbiddin,
all the inward motions and affections of sin; it is to deny God to be a father
of spirits, who beholds and tries the inward man, and does most abhor
spirit-filthiness. Hence Peter, 2 Pet. 1. Beseeches as strangers to abstain
from those lusts that war against the soul: Grant therefore, that still thy
life be unspotted from all the gross sins of the world, yet as long as unruly
lusts prevail in thy heart, as long as inward secret motions of sin prevail
over thee, thou art far off from God, and therefore need turning to him: Oh
how well were it, if all thy filthy lusts within were discovered to thee! if
thou did judge thy self a serpent, which though it has a glittering,
glorious skin, yet is full of poison and venom within.

Thirdly, He is still in his sins, and so needs turning to God, that does
constantly and daily live in the committing of gross and known sins: This is as
clear 3. And some live in the constant and daily committing of gross and known
sins.
as that thou live and breathest; and to this man properly the Text speaks,
Return from his evil way. An evil way, is the trade, custom, and ordinary
practice of a man: Oh then if we behold the lives of most men, who is there
that does not need conversion? who does not walk in one evil way or other? who
does not live in the practice of one known sin or other? Then what an heavy
judgment is this of God, that no more are converted? that so few ever turn
from their wicked way, but live and dye in it? How often, as the Scripture
cries out, Return, O Shunamite, Return, Return, have the Ministers of God
cried aloud to such, Return, O return, and yet men go on desperately in paths
of rebellion against God! Oh why is it, that when so many in our Congregations
need this grace of conversion, so few obtain it! Know, thou that live in the
customary commission of any known gross sin, thou art speedily to get out from
it, as Lot was out of Sodom, when fire and brimstone were ready from heaven to
destroy him.

Lastly, They live still in their sin, and so need conversion to God, Who
though 4. Or if they nenever yet repented of them.
now they do not commit their sins they once did, yet never have truly and
unfeigned lyrepanted of them: Oh its again and again to be considered, upon
what terms men leave their sins; Thou wast such and such a profane wretch
once, but now thou art not; How comes this forbearance of time? if it be not
from godly sorrow, and a true apprehension of Gods displeasure, thou art still
in thy sins, though they were committed many years ago. Its one thing not to
commit sin again, and another thing to turn from sin: The former may be done
upon many grounds that are not heavenly and gracious; but the latter is only
upon pure grounds: But of this more in the counterfeit work of conversion.

Thus you see how every Auditor is not to let these sermons pass as general
things, like a tale that is told, wherein they are not concerned; but to
consider, Is not all this spoken to me? am not I in the number of those, who
yet need conversion? was it ever done upon me? when did God ever make this
change upon me? Oh this undoeth you! notwithstanding all preaching, and all
your hearing, no man says, What have I done? am I turned to God? you see every
man by nature is a Blackamore, that must be made white: If thou have not
outward wickedness to turn from, thou have that inbred pollution, yea, thy own
self to turn from. Thus you see who are to turn from sin.

Secondly, Which is the quintessence of this point, Let us consider what are
the motives and grounds which are acceptable with God, when we turn from II.
The acceptable motives and grounds of repentance.
sin; for, as you heard, Men have left their sins, they have not so much turned
from them, but even run from them. Ahab, the Israelites, Judas, those turned
from their sins, would do so no more, at least as their present condition was;
yet they never truly turned from any one sin: Therefore consider, that every
kind of forsaking sin, is not presently a turning unto God. That you may
understand this, consider what are the right motives with a true convert to
leave sin; he will never do or live as he has done, no, not for all the world;
And

First, There are inferior or less principal motives, which do lawfully work
upon a man, to make him turn from sin, so long as they are in the second place;
And that is the 1.
Argument in the Text, Gods framing and bringing evil upon men for their sins:
When God complains that he had thus and thus scourged them, yet they did not
return unto him; this argues, That its lawful to turn from sin, because of the
fear of punishment, and Gods judgments accempanying it: And commonly this is
the first motive in place, though the last in dignity and worth: Let then all
the threatenings, all the wrath of God denounced against sin, make thee speedily
turn from it, for God (as the Magistrate) does not bear his sword in vain,
neither does the Scripture threaten in vain; but if there be no more reason
then this, if this be the principal and the only, then thou love sin still
in thy heart; thou art kept from it, as the Dog by a clog on him, from doing
his mischief. The godly, though they may be first awakened to turn from sin by
these thorns in their sides, and yokes on their necks, yet they stay not in
these; but they have more Noble and Divine grounds why they turn from sin; And
they are:

First, The offense and just displeasure that is given God, by their
iniquities: Oh 1.
this prevails with them, more then all external punishments in the world:
Alas, what is sword, or death, or hell it self, to Gods frowns, to Gods
displeasures? Thus David in his conversion to God, after his grievous relapse,
is affected with this, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this
evil in thy sight, Psalm. 51. It was not loss of child, and many other sad
chastisements that followed him and his posterity, did so much affect him as
this; He had displeased God, and done evil in his sight: This is a sure and
everlasting ground, those that walk by this rule, will never prove a deceitful
bow.

Secondly, They turn from sin, because of the contrariety it has to the pure,
spiritual 2.
and holy Law of God: And this is a sure sign of a true convert, when a man
turns from his sin, because of the enmity and repugnancy it has to the holy
Commandment of God: This is to leave sin, because of the nature of it, and for
its selfs sake. Hence though God had not confirmed his Law by any threatenings,
or made it penal in such an high way of punishment, yet the heart of him, who
thus turns to God, could not close with it, or embrace it. The Apostle makes
the very nature of sin to lie in this, that it is a transgression of the Law:
Now then when a man shall leave sin, not only because it has the curses and
the punishment of the Law, but because its the transgression of the Law; this
is a good sign. You may behold this excellent disposition in Paul, Romans 7. What
is that which makes him so sadly bewail his captivity and thraldom to sin? see
the motive, Because the Law was holy and spiritual, and he was carnal: The
purity of the Law, and the impurity of his spirit, made such anguish and
conflicts in his soul: Oh then consider, what is that which sets thy soul on
turning from sin, is it merely an external punishment, not the loathsome and
contrary nature of sin, to Gods pure commands? this is not complete and
sincere; it does not argue thy turning to be from a true inward principle, but
from external violence: Even as the wheel in the mil, moves as long as the
force of the waters compel it, but when they cease, then the wheel cease;
all see this motion is not natural, but violent; so it is here, as long as the
waters of afflictions are upon thee, they set the wheel of thy heart moving in
prayer and other duties, but when these are dried up, then thou stand
immovable in thy sins. Oh then hunger and thirst for this frame of a true
convert, that thou may say, O Lord, though sin has so many inticements of
pleasure and carnal advantage on one hand; and though it has so much wrath and
terror on the other hand, yet neither of these prevail so much with me, as
because sin is contrary to so exact a rule, opposite to so heavenly a
principle: He that can upon good grounds say this, needs not doubt of the
integrity of his heart.

Thirdly, The true Convert leaves his sin and turns from it, because of love
to God, and those graces which sin does thwart: Ye that love the Lord, hate
evil; hate that 3.
which is evil, and cleave to that which is good, Romans 12. Men may turn from
sin, and yet love it for all that; they part with it, because sin is either
taken from them, or they from it: Who can say, but that Pharaohs dismission of
the people of Israel, was wholly against his will? had it not been for the
sharp rod on his back, he would never have yileded; now all these things are by
force and constraint: But as God loves a willing giver, so he loves a willing
forsaker of his sins, one that does it with love and delight in him. When two
things are frozen and congealed together, they may either be violently
separated by forcible breaking the ice, or kindly by the thawings and meltings
of the Sun: Thus it is here, when men and their sins are congealed together,
the Devil has married them together; now these may be separated violently, by
some forcible judgments of God, that they cannot sin, though they would, as
they have done; or else in a kindly, gracious manner, and that is by the love
of God shed abroad in their hearts; for whatsoever is not done out of love to
God, is not thank worthy, neither does God accept it: But the bypocrite, when
he is forced to leave his sin, it is with him, as it was with the Devils that
possessed bodies, they came out indeed when Christ commanded, for they could do
no otherwise, but sore against their wills, therefore they were vexed, and tore
and rent the possessed party as they went out; thus they leave sin as
unwillingly: Therefore let the love of God be kindled like a fire in thy
breast, and that will separate thee from sin.

Fourthly, He turns from sin, because of the unkindeness and ingratitude that
is in every transgression: All sin has rebellion in it, against God as our
Sovereign, 4.
and unkindeness against him, as a merciful father, and the fouutain of all the
good we have: Now he that does truly turn from sin, is much moved thereunto,
because of the unkindeness therein to all Gods mercies, because God was so ill
recompensed after his love to us: Thus God aggravates David's sins, by
enumerating the several mercies that were bestowed on him, If all this had been
too little I would have given thee more, says God; so many mercies, so many
hot coals of fire, and this makes a man escape from his sins. We might also
show, that because these grounds of turning from sin, hold in every particular
transgression, therefore their conversion is universal; but of that hereafter.

Now let us instance in those things that hinder this motion or turning unto
God: And III. The hindrances of it. 1.


First, Want of spiritual life: You wonder not if the dead carcass lie always
in the same place, and do not stir it self; neither is it strange to see men
dead in sin, and buried in the grave of it, never taking one step forward to
heaven.

Secondly. As in corporal motion, there are two things requisite, the eye to 2.
direct, and the feet to walk; so for the soul to turn from sin, there must be
a right and pure eye, and there must be sound and good feet. The eye is
understanding, especially faith, which is the pupil of the eye; that discovers
the danger we are in, the judgments imminent over us, and this will make us
rise up and walk. When that thick Egyptian darkness was, the people sat still,
and did not stir out of their places for several days together; and thus men in
darkness of mind, that know nothing of God, Heaven, or their own damnation,
they sit still and see none of this evil coming on them.

Again, Affections are often called the feet of the soul; by these we turn from
sin, when we are converted, love to God, grief for sin, and hatred of it,
desire 3.
and hope of pardon, and enjoyment of Gods favor: But the natural man is like
the poor Cripple, that lay thirty years by the pool of Bethesda, he cannot move
himself to be healed: As the poor bed-ridden man, he cannot stir or move
himself; so neither can such, who lie sin-ridden, under the power and command
of all foul iniquities.

Use of instruction, how much this Text, and this point of Conversion,
concerns most of our hearers; for who is not in one evil way or other?
Conversion is not only to be preached to those that are in the Highways,
Gentiles and Heathens, but to you who frequent the solemn assemblies; yet what
hearer goes home, and thinks with himself, I am yet to be converted, I am
yet to turn from my evil way? Do not easily persuade your selves, that the work
is done already; no, such a change as this would make more noise in thy
conscience, it would make more alterations in thy life; thy soul would have
been in travel and pangs ere this manchilde had been brought forth: How art
thou turned from that, which thou art committing every day? how art thou turned
from thy profaneness when it is still in thy mouth, in thy words, in thy
hands, and actions. Oh if you did consider you had to do with God, and
scripture Truths will abide so, when sin has cursed and damned thee into hell,
thou would not let these things pass away as thou do. You will know that
conversion has been preached unto you, and that all thy destruction and
damnation is of thy self.

SERMON LXXVIII.
Of the wilful obstinacy that is in some men, with the causes thereof; and that
ignorance of ones duty is no excuse.

JER. 18. 12. And they said, There is no hope, but we will walk after our own
devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart.
WE have considered Jeremiahs Commission in the two parts of it. The next thing
to be considered, is the success, or the event of it: and here we shall find
blasphemy writ (as it were) on their foreheads. Nothing but peremptory, and
wilful obstinacy against this so just, necessary, and reasonable an
Exhortation, And yet were this denial like that of the younger son in the
Parable, who said, He would not, but afterward repented, and went, it had been
more tolerable; but they persevere in this impudent disobedience: So that we
may take notice of the aggravation of their resolved wickedness. 1. In their
peremptory Negation, And they said, there is no hope: Although it was Gods
goodness to invite them to turn to him, it was their advantage, not his; and
although he threatens them with that evil he is preparing for them, yet they
say, No: And herein their rude and obstinate rebellion is more evident, in that
they make no excuses, pretend no reasons, but barely say, They will not turn
unto God from their sins. Those in our Saviors Parable, that were invited to a
feast, though it was their great sin to make any thing in the world an
impediment to their coming, yet they feigned reasons, and were willing to be
excused; but how they fell, the Prophet plainly sets forth, They will be what
they are, and they will not change. And this their obstinacy is further
declared in a two fold amplification. First, in that Phrase, There is no hope:
There is the same expression, and the Hebrew word in Chapter 2. 25. some render
it, Desperatum est, It is desperate; we are resolved to go on whatsoever it
costs us; Vatablus, expectoratum est, in this sense, our heart is wholly turned
aside, and plucked off from God; we cannot love him, or obey his commands.
Others, Obfirmati sumus, we are settled, and obdurate in our wickedness,
Jeremiahs preaching is in vain to us; he may hold his tongue, for we are set
upon that which is evil. On Translators render it, There is no hope, and that
may be in this twofold respect; First, We have for so long a time given our
selves up to the ways of wickedness, we have thus long accustomed our selves
to them, that now there is no hope that ever we should become better. Or
Secondly, we have for so long a time provoked God by our wicked rebellions,
that there is no hope for us to be accepted with God if we would return unto
him: But this seems not so proper, because at this time God did hold out his
Scepter of Grace to them if they would come in, and turn from their evil
ways. Now you may demand, Whether the Israelites did in plain and direct terms
answer Jeremiah thus? For it might seem improbable that they would acknowledge
their way an evil way, and yet live in it: whereas they must needs do so, if
they did in terminis thus refuse the Prophet; For (say they) we will walk every
one in the imagination of his evil heart: Or whether does not the Prophet say,
They said so, because by their lives and conversations, wilfully persisting in
their former impieties; They said thus by their actions, though not by their
words? They might do both; for we see the Israelites sometimes telling Jeremiah
to his face, That they would not do what God had commanded them by his mouth,
Jer. 44. 16. a notable place to discover their avowed and open disobedience to
God.

Obs. That there are some men, who though they hear never so much of their duty
to turn from their sins unto God, yet are wilfully resolved to continue in the
same. It Obs.
was not Jeremiahs portion only, or the Prophets and Apostles in former times,
but in all ages the Ministry of God meets with such incorrigible and desperate
hearers. Let the word of God sound as terribly, as that Trumpet will at the day
of judgment: Let all ways be used, John's austerity, or Christ's meekness: the
mountains of their sins cannot be removed into a sea of tears, and godly
sorrow. Do we not every day see this fulfilled? How few are the hearers that
come with this purpose, and prayer unto God, that they may go out from Gods
presence, cleansed from their leprosy? That they who came swine, may return
sheep? That they who came Crows, may go home Doves? This undoeth you, that you
come not to hear, that ye may be changed, made other men, but build still upon
your old rotten foundation.

To make this Doctrine like fire in your bowels, consider, That under the
Ministry of the word there are two kind of sinful and wicked hearers. Two kind
of wicked hearers. 1. Ignorant.


First, Those that live in their sins, and in an unconverted estate, by either
an affected, or a gross ignorance. Or 2. Such who have knowledge, and yet
knowingly, and wilfully commit those sins, that inwardly their own Consciences,
enlightened by the word, condemns them for. In these two ranks all wicked men
may be placed: For as for Heathens, who have a mere negative ignorance or
unbelief in God and his word, because they never had Prophets sent among them,
some (Divines) say they are not damned for the not knowing, or not believing of
those things which are manifested merely by revelation; but because they
detained the natural light of Conscience in unrighteousness. We speak not then
of such, but of those who are under the sunbeams of the word, and yet are
frozen in their sins, (a Devils miracle) or under the sweet droppings of the
Gospel, yet are a barren wilderness: Now some of these persevere in their sins,
from a sinful damnable ignorance. They know not the necessity of conversion:
they understand not what all these sermons tend to: They are altogether
unacquainted with such a work of Gods Spirit. Tthis ignorance does not excuse.
For the servant that does not know his masters will, shall yet be beaten with
many stripes, Luke 12. 47. because it is either first, an effected ignorance,
they desire to be in darkness, and not to see the light, that so they may the
more quietly, and securely lie down in their sins; they will not understand,
that so they may not do good: there is this horrible impiety upon men's hearts,
that they are afraid of divine light: they shut the eyes, lest they should
behold that which is Truth, or good: even as a man draws the curtain that no
light may hinder him to take his rest; as the thief hates the light because it
discovers his wickedness. Take heed then thou are not in the number of such
profane wretches; thou carest not for hearing, preaching, for reading the
Scripture, for acquainting thy self and family with the principles of religion:
This will breed scruples in thy Conscience: this will make thee see thy
prophannesse, thy injustice, to be crying sins; and therefore thou stoppest thy
ear with the deaf Adder, that no enchanting may draw thee out of the hole. This
is affected ignorance. Or secondly, It is gross ignorance, and that is which
comes by negligence, and profane carelessness: and this is the cause that most
in our Congregations are so ignorant about Religion, about Conversion, and
these main points of godliness. A profane negligence, they have no hearts, no
mind, no affections to such things; there is nothing belongs to their Trade,
to their husbandry, but they can skill in it, only in divine things they are
as brutish as beasts. Think not that this ignorance will excuse you; say not, I
am not book-learned, such things are too high for me: What, would thou be
thought a Christian, and yet the necessary principles of religion too high for
thee? Thou art to lay aside thy endeavor after all other things in this life,
till thou have attained to this: If thou do not eat of this tree of
knowledge, thou can never eat of the tree of life. Oh then that at last God
would make us Ministers sons of thunder, to awaken and terrify you out of this
gross ignorance.

The second sort of sinners living in their impieties, are these in the Text,
who 2. Profane.
have knowledge and instruction, yet are so desperately wicked as they will
persist in it however: and such are all wicked men who live in gross sins,
that are not only condemned by the word, but by a man's own heart. There is no
Swearer, Adulterer, drunkard, but he says, as these in the Text, No, but we
will go after the lusts of our own heart. Now though the other are inexcusable,
because their ignorance is wilful, so these are much more to be reproved.
Christ prayed, Father forgive them, because they know not what they do. Luke
23. 34. But here it is rather, Father, let thy wrath fall on them, for they
know what they do. Gregory and Austin speaking of those places, They go quick
into hell, and the earth swallowed them up quick, apply it thus (if by way of
allusion it may be received:) such who sin wilfully, who know their sin, who
feel their sin, whose consciences are quick to condemn them: Oh (say they)
these go quick to hell, and hell swalloweth these alive as it were. Now it may
easily be demonstrated, that many sinners are in this latter rank with these in
the Text, They say, No, we will do as we have done, take the pleasures of sin
we used to do, whatsoever is said to the contrary. Thus men follow one another
desperately into destruction: even as Saul, he first fell desperately on his
sword to kill himself, and afterward his armor-bearer as violently destroyed
himself. It is an heavy judgment of all judgments, thus willingly and
wittingly not to murder his body, but his soul, which is the greatest sin of
selfmurther.

In the next place consider (as was hinted before) that two ways we may
discover this obstinate disposition; either expressly in words, by a public
owning this impudent rebellion, or in our actions and deeds only: Of the
former sort the Scripture gives some instances, such as those that say, The
Lord sees not, and bid the knowledge of the most high depart from them, Job
21. 14. And again such as Ps. 12. say, Who is the Lord? our tongues are our
own, we will not be controlled. Of the latter sort are those, who though they
utter not this mischief with their mou hs, yet by their works they deny him.
Therefore think not to say within your selves, We are not such impudent sinners,
we do not belch such blasphemy with our mouths; for if thou go on wilfully
in thy wicked way, against all those admonitions and exhortations that are
dispensed to thee, God will judge thee in the number of such high offenders.

Therefore in the third place observe, What are those causes that tumble down
Causes of obstinacy in sin. 1. Atheism.
men headlong this hill of destruction, that they seemed to be carried into
hell as violently as the Swine possessed by the devil were into the bottom of
the sea; for men came not to be thus wicked at the first Temptation. And one
Cause is, Atheism and unbelief: Where this is, presently a floodgate is set
open for all impiety and wickedness, as Faith is the first foundation stone
in the building of all godliness: a man must believe that God is, and that he
is a rewarder of all those that seek him: so Atheism and unbelief is the first
sin that makes way for all other impieties. He believes there is no God, and
that God is not a severe Judge of those that do wickedly. Hence are those
expressions of the most flagitious men; Is there knowledge in the most high?
and God is not in all their thoughts: so that when the fear of God and his
judgments is stricken out of men's Consciences by unbelief, you may call that
man Legion, for many thousand of Lusts will quickly possess him; Oh then if
thou would be kept from this pit of confusion, daily quicken up in thee faith
in God, and all his attributes, as the Scripture reveals him, and fear of him
in all thy ways; for if these will keep a man from swallowing Gnats, much more
Camels.

Secondly, Another cause is long custom in sinning. This makes a man's
Conscience 2. Long custom in sinning
like Leviathans scales, as Job speaks of; this does not only make a man dead
in sin, but burieth him in the grave, and rolls a great stone over him: this
makes a man like the fat beast prepared for the slaughter, and yet fills us for
the present with all joy and content: These often say, There is no hope, We
have lived thus long in the pleasures of our sin, and they are so habituated in
us, that we cannot do otherwise. Hence experience tells us, that many men sin,
and that grievously; yet they do not so much as think they are sinners, because
custom has taken away all feeling from them.

Thirdly, Prosperity and abundance of ease and plenty in the committing of
their sins, does also make men lift up themselves presumptuously against God:
Thus God 3. Prosperity and abundance of ease.
by Jeremiah, I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou would not hear:
and Solemon observes it, because judgment was not presently executed,
Therefore the heart of man was set in him to do wickedly, Eccles. 8 11. and
David also takes notice of this, when being greatly troubled at the prosperity
of the wicked, and relating all things are according to their hearts desires,
he adds, Therefore violence compasses them as a chain, Psalm. 73. 6. What was
it that puffed up Nebuchadnezzar, so that he made himself as God, and Tire and
Sidon, that they set their hearts as God, but outward greatness? therefore
success and prosperity in wickedness, makes men exceeding bold, even against
God himself.

Fourthly, Hardness of heart: This does violently carry on men to wickedness,
for as long as that stone is, there can no mollifying, or softening impression
be received. 4. Hardness of heart.
Thus the Apostle argues, Romans 2. Despisest thou the goodness of God, and
after thy harduess and impenitent heart treasurest up wrath? hardness, and
then impenitency. Oh what is the reason that men do not give over, but still
add more wickedness? Is it not because of this hardness? It is a vain thing
for the Artificer to think to bring his cold Iron into any form or fashion
before it be melted, and heated in the fire.

Fifthly, Despair, That sometimes makes a man heap iniquity upon iniquity; he
thinks he can be no worse then he is, and therefore he will eat and drink,
for 5. Despair.
to morrow he shall dye, he shall be damned: Thus as you heard some explained
this, There is no hope, that is, we have committed such foul abominations, and
have sinned so presumptuously, that there is no hope, God will not receive us
if we should come. This was Cains condition, despair made him cry out, his sins
were greater then he could bear; and therefore he never humbles himself before
God, but goes on in his resolved wickedness.

Lastly, The Devils great power and dominien that he has over such men, makes
them boggle at no impiety. These are the Devils instruments prepared for every
6. The devils dominion over thee.
high degree of wickedness: As God has his servants, and precious vessels
fitted for all his greatest imploiment; so these are by the devil prepared for
the worst kind of drudgery: thus when the devil had entered into Judas his
heart, taken greater hold on him then ever, then he can guide him to that
perfidious act of wickedness to betray Christ into his enemies hands, yea and
can so horribly dissemble as to give him a kiss, pretending much reverence at
that very time of treachery. Thus you see what are those milsiones that are
hung about such men's necks to press them down into the sea. Here must be one
Objection answered, and that is, How can men sin willingly, and knowingly? for
is it not a received rule among Philosophers, and owned Object.
by Divines, that Omnis peccans est ignorans, All sins come from ignorance? And
is it not also another received maxim, That no man can will evil, because it
is evil, Nemo intendens malum operatur? and the reason is, because no faculty
can be carried out beyond his object: as the understanding cannot give assent
to any thing that is false, it is impossible but it should believe that which
is true, or appearing so; so it cannot be but that the will should will good,
or what it judges good, How then can thy sin, when they know it to be sin?

The Answer is twofold; Those mentioned rules are true, but thus men come to
sin wilfully and knowingly. 1. Although they have the knowledge of sins in the
general, and do in the universal believe these things to be sin, yet in the
par^icular they do not consider it at that moment of sinning; so that if we
take ignorance for imprudence and inconsideration that men do not weigh
circumstances or actions in the balance, then all sins come from ignorance. Or
2. Men come to sin wilfully, because as their Consciences tell them such
actions are sins; so their sense or corrupt affections, present at the same
time the pleasure and the profit of sin, and by this means, they take the bait,
not attending to the hook; and thus the evil of sin does not so much deter
them, as the seemiug good of sin does allure them.

Use of Admonition to all that hear this Truth. Take heed that there be not
many among you of this wilful obstinate rebellion against God: How can God or
his Prophets judge it otherwise, when he has not only framed evil, but
actually executed his severe wrath upon you by sore judgments? yet many return
not from their evil ways. If you are not guilty herein, Why then after so
many Exhortations and admonitions do thou yet embrace thy lusts? What is this
but like these in the Text? to say, No, we will walk after the imaginations of
our own hearts. To be sure thou will confirm that there is this
incorrigiblenesse, if still after this Sermon thou shall persist in thy
wickedness; for it will come to this, either (Lord) I am convinced, I will
stand out no longer, I will give up my self to thee; or else, For all that is
said, I am resolved to go on in my impieties. Oh do not think to plead
ignorance, think not to say, Lord for give me, for I know not what I do: Yea
thou do know what thou do, and thy own Conscience with the word of God does
constantly condemn thee for it. Now consider the aggravation of sinning thus
wilfully. 1. It is an argument of one that is hopeless, and incurable; for if
thou mockest at the day of judgment, and carest not for the threatening of God,
What remains to cure thee? Has not God used all means to reclaim thee, and
yet thou art in thy sins?

2. Consider, God will one day over master that unruly spirit of thine, he will
turn thy laughter into terror, thy jollity into horror: Who ever hardened
himself against the Lord, and prospered? Job. 9. 4. Think not that this
impudent boldness, and profane security will always animate thee; no, God
has his time when he will make thee tremble and quake before him.

SERMON LXXIX.
Of turning not only from sin, but to God; And how many ways men may do the
former, and not the latter; Also, what it is to turn to God.

JOEL 2. 12, 13. Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all
your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping and mourning: And rent your
hearts, and not your garments, etc.
THe former part of the Chapter is very elegant and copious in describing a day
of darkness, of thick darkness; that is, a day of Gods judgments, and his
fierce anger. The Prophet is very Rhetorical and Metaphorical, in setting this
judgment before their eyes. Some understand these Verses conjoined together,
of the Army of the Assyrians, or some other potent Enemy, that God would raise
against the Israelites: But Piscator from Verse 25. does probably gather, that
this whole destruction in several Verses, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. is not to be
applied to any Army of men and horses, but to that numerous company of Vermin,
Locusts, Caterpillars and Cankerworns, that God sent among them to devour their
fruit and corn; which the Prophet calls verse 25. Gods great Army; and indeed
the Prophets phrase seems to conclude this; for says he of this Army, verse
4. The appearance of them, is as the appearance of horsemen, and like the noise
of chariots upon the mountains shall they leap: Thus God many times uses the
vilest and most loathsome creatures, to punish the stoutest and most lofty men;
for as they say of Gods providence and wisdom in making of the creatures, he is
Maximus in minimis, the greatest in the least; so is he most dreadful and
terrible, in the most contemptible instruments. It troubled Abimelech to be
killed by a woman; and what a debasement was it to Pharaoh and Herod to be
overmastered by Frogs and Lice? Oh how greatly is God to be feared! who has
thousands of invisible Armies, that he can raise to destroy those that oppose
him. After the solemn and magnificent description of this dreadful judgment,
the Prophet advises the Israelites, what is the duty God requires of them,
their case is not yet desperate. Caterpillars and Locusts are loathsome to them;
let their sins be so, which are indeed the true Cankerworms that destroy their
mercies: This judgment would make the earth and heavens to tremble, verse 10.
let it work so upon their hearts. As God would punish them with the vilest of
creatures, so let them be more vile in their own eyes, then monsters and
beasts: If they would have God turn away his judgments, let them turn from
their sins.

This Text I have chosen, because it contains the term to which of our
conversion: We have already handled the term from which, and that is Sin. Now
the term to which is to be considered, and that is, God; so that in the words
you have the preface to the duty, and the duty: The preface contains the
authority and divine command enforcing to it, Thus now says the Lord; its the
great God of heaven that requires this, who by his word made heaven and earth,
to whom the winds and seas obey; how much rather should man? Oh apply this to
your hearts; Who is it but God that bids me turn from sin? its not the Minister
so much, its not the Messenger or Ambassador so much that I refuse, as God
himself; Is not his wisdom and his Sovereignty enough to command present
obedience. 2. The duty; and there is 1. The duty it self, Turn ye, which is
dispatched. 2. The term to which of this motion, Even unto God. 3. The manner,
With your whole heart. 4. The effects, With fasting and mourning. 5. The form
or nature of it, Rent your hearts and not your garments. 6. The motive to
encourage, For God is gracious and merciful, etc.

We are in order to fix upon the term to which, and that is God. Turn ye even
to God. Even to me, implies, that a man may turn and turn, and yet not turn
even to him; he falls short of this center, he comes not to his journeys end:
From whence Observe,

That it is not enough to turn from our sins, but we must turn even to Observe.
God.

Its not enough to go out of Egypt, but we must enter into Canaan; its not 1.
enough to hate evil, but we must cleave to that which is good. Turn to me,
even to me; let nothing else be the center, the end of your motion. This point
is of great consequence; for hereby I shall discover the counterfeit
conversions of many, And so set the true and counterfeit together; and not as
in other Texts, handle the counterfeits separately by themselves. That it is
not enough to turn from sin, unless we turn even to God, appears by that
complaint, Hosea, 7. 16. They return, but not to the most high; they are like a
deceitful bow. How do they return, but not to the most high? because they were
diligent in fasting, humiliation, and the outward exercises of repentance, but
still they were hypocrites in heart; and therefore proverbially compared to the
broken bow, that seems, as it were, to send forth its arrow directly upon the
mark, but the string breaking, it either falls on the ground, or flies back on
the face of the Archer; so they seemed by all their external duties, to aim at
God, and eye him, but all fell upon themselves; they looked no further then to
their own advantages. For opening of this, consider, how many ways men may turn
from sin, and yet not to God. 2. What it is to turn even to God. And

First; Men turn from sin, but not to God, when they commit them no more,
because 1. How many ways men may turn from sin, and yet not to God.
the temptations and occasions are taken away: So that if they would, yet they
cannot have an opportunity to satisfy or accomplish their lusts: There is
nothing more ordinary then this, men conclude they are converted, because they
do not sin as they have done; whereas the true cause is; the temptations and
opportunities are removed; so that there is not the work of Gods grace changing
thy heart, but the work of his providence removing the objects thereof. Snakes
and Adders they lie in their holes, and are alive as well in winter as in
summer, yet because in winter they want the warm reviving beams of the Sun,
therefore they appear not out of their holes: Thus sin, it may be, is as lively
and powerful in thee as ever, but there are not the kindly and warm
temptations to draw it forth: So then, this is no turning to God, because thy
heart is still the same. The Lion is a Lion, though his claws be pared off, and
he tied up in a dungeon: That King who stretched out his hand to lay hold on
the Prophet, and his arm withered, was never the more innocent, because he did
not actually commit his designed mischief; and certainly if the hearts of godly
men have deceived them, that they have thought it not possible for them to
commit such sins, as they have been warned about; as we see in Peter about his
Apostasy, no wonder if wicked men do so greatly delude their own souls: It may
be then thou can not be unclean, as thou have been, thy body is an old
painful decripit body; thou can not be such a Prodigal as thou have been, for
thou have not wherewith to do it: Alas! thou art not converted from sin, thou
art only deprived of the instruments of sin; therefore stand thou by, for here
is no glad tidings for thee.

Secondly, They turn from sin, but not to God, that forsake their gross wicked
5.
ways, but then either go no further then mere civility, or else divert to some
superstitious way of worship: This is much to be regarded, for here men swallow
down poison, while they think it is honey: And

First, those that turn to civility only, dye in the wilderness, and never
come to Canaan; yet this is a great conversion and change in the worlds
account: If they see a Prodigal turned a good husband; if a dissolute debauched
man, a sober temperate man, they cry out, Behold a true convert! but this is to
turn half way only to God: They leave the sin, and set upon the contrary duty,
but from false and infirm principles: They turn not to God, to close with him,
to receive him as their Lord and King, only they have some inferior reasons,
which make them thus change their lives: Fear of poverty and hardship makes
them better husbands; so the indangering of their bodily health by gross
intemperance, makes them more sober: Now in all this a man, though he turns
from his sin, yet because his motions are only humane, such as wise Heathens
have propounded to themselves, therefore they turn not unto God: These that
from profane men, turn to be mere civil men only, and not godly, are, as it
was with Jonah, who had got a goard to defend him from the heat of the Sun, and
he thought now he had a sure defense, but a worm arises presently to devour
it: So thou who art turned more civil and ingenious then once thou were,
beginnest to bless thy self, and admire thy condition, not considering that for
thy black coals and dirt thou did wallow in, thou have not found gold, but
copper. We may indeed, as our Savior did, look upon such who have this change,
and love them, and yet say, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of Heaven. The
Prophets and the Apostles press a far other conversion, then the most exact
Moralists among the Heathens; when therefore thou beginnest to turn and change,
be sure thou go to the proper end of such a motion; stay not in any thing
but God; do not take up thy lodging any where, till thy soul rest on him.

But the second miscarriage in turning from sin, may be into some superstitious
and seemingly zealous worship of God; and this is more dangerous poison then
the former. It has been the case of diverse, when afflicted in conscience for
sin, and feeling the load and burden of it, presently to fall upon some
austere superstitious exercise of Religion, which God never commanded, and by
this means they think to make God amends, and to give satisfaction; but this is
not so much conversion as subversion. Suppose the Pharisees had gained several
publicans and gross sinners to become their Proselytes, to leave their former
foul sins, and to be very diligent and strict in outward superstitions; yet our
Savior says, That such were made the children of wrath; they were not turned
to God, but in some respects more from him: Take heed therefore of turning from
a publican, to become a Pharisee; this is destruction still: And yet this kind
of conversion is for the most part only acknowledged in Popery; for they speak
much of their converts and conversion, but what is that which they so eminently
commend? viz. When men living in the world, and guilty of gross sins, do begin
to feel the terror and burden of them, and thereupon enter into some
Monastery, join themselves to some Religious order, as they call it, and this
i^ conv(...) easy and suitable to flesh and blood. As we see the Jews very
forward for any (...) Sacrifices, though they were ten thousand Rams, and
thousand Rivers of Oy^, when yet they would not turn from one sin; and thus it
is here: To bow to Altars, to go on pilgrimage, to keep a strict Lent, these
are far more easy to flesh and blood, then to mortify sin, Habes quod in to
occidas, said Austin. Though we have not Rams or Sheep to kill for Sacrifice,
yet we have several lusts to mortify, and this is a greater pain: So then,
beware of this delusion of Satan; for if he cannot keep men in profane
security about their sins, but their consciences will tremble and cry out; then
he leads them into dark superstitious ways, and so they damn themselves in a
narrow way, that leads to hell; for there is a broad way to hell, and there is
also a narrow straight way, which the troubled conscience of a man finds out,
wanting the guide of the Scripture: And the Devil makes such take up their
cross and follow him.

Thirdly, Then we turn not to God from sin, when we only change the practice 3.
of sin, gross foul bodily sins, to more spiritual soul-filthiness: As when we
with indignation cast away our profaneness and scandalous ways, but this
fills us with pride and self-confidence, and a carnal trust in our
Righteousness: Oh this is not turning to God, but further from him then ever; I
come not to call the Righteous, but the sinners to repentance, says Christ,
Mat. 9 13. such as are already conceited with a self righteousness, because
with the Pharisee, they can say, They are no Theives, no Adulterers, nor like
other men, these are in a direct opposition to conversion. This was the great
sin of the Jews, they went about to establish their own Righteousness, Romans 10.
1, 2. to set up their own Dagon; but alas, that could not stand before God.
Take heed then, that when thou have cast out some black Devils, there come not
white ones in the room; the Devil transforming himself into an Angel of light:
Oh its a great matter, when these unclean spirits are cast out of the soul,
what comes in the room thereof. Alas! the Parable tells us, that a man's heart
may be garnished and furnished to prepare for those Devils that are seven times
worse, Luke 11. 25. and as this holds for self-righteousness and pride, so for
vain disputations, and affecting new opinions in Religion; for if thou have
given over all thy profaneness, and on a sudden all thy strength runs out in
disputations about Religion: Thou do not mind mortification of sin, and
close communion with God, but thou art of this opinion, and that, and runnest
roving up and down in Religion, this is an argument thou art, it may be,
unsettled from sin, but yet not settled upon God; Thou art too much a seeker,
for it may be thou have not yet found God. Do not thou think conversion is an
exchange of one sin from another; no, its a well advised renouncing of all, and
taking God in the room of them.

Fourthly, Though we leave sin, yet we do not turn to God, when afflictions and
4.
calamities are the only motive to make us keep off: So that we are beaten
from our sins, as the dog from sheep, our hearts are not turned to hate those
lusts we once loved: This was that which made the Prophet say, They returned
not to the most high; because though they were constant in prayer, and
humiliation, and fasting; yet it was merely to divert judgment, and out of
love to temporal mercies: And thus also Zachary the Prophet expostulateth with
the Israelites, In those months, did ye fast to me, even to me? was it not for
your selves? Zach. 7. 5. If therefore these temporal calamities be the great
wheel to set all agoing, you return not yet to God.

Lastly, Let a man turn never so far from the committing of any gross sin, yet
if 5.
still he do not turn from himself, his self aims, self ends, self principles,
self interests, he is not yet turned to God; For conversion is the unhinging of
the soul, hanging it upon another hinge, or setting it upon another bottom then
it had before: Therefore the whole requisite to a Disciple of Christ, is
comprised in this, To Deny himself: If a man deny his lusts, his sins, all his
outward wickedness; yet if still he has not denied himself, he has not killed
the Serpent in his head, and therefore he will revive again; for therefore were
sins committed, because they were self-pleasure, self-ease, or self-profit:
This was the blood that ran in every vein; therefore till a man be no longer
himself, till he be converted and turned from himself, what a change soever may
be in his life, yet he is not turned to God. Thus you see, that several ways
men may turn from their sins, and yet not close with God; they are removed from
their former life, as the dove was sent out of the Ark, but they have not found
any place to rest their souls upon. Oh how much does this concern you, who have
made some motion from sin! you will not, you cannot, you dare not live as you
have done: Oh! but upon what terms is all this? Thou may turn from sin, and
yet go round and round about, till thou have fallen into the same sins or worse
again: As some wandering traveller, that has lost his way, goes directly to
that place at night from whence he came in the morning: Oh take heed of being a
broken Bow, to have all thy seeming turnings to God prove frustrated.

In the next place, let us consider, What it is to turn to God, even to him: And

First, it is, Because he is displeased and offended by sin: This is the very
quintessence 1. What it is to turn to God.
and differential mark of conversion. David bewailed this consideration in his
sin; and the Prodigal, when he became a convert, this wounded his heart,
Father, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, and am no more worthy
to be called a son: All is but forced and counterfeit in conversion, till this
be the great motive to set all on work: This will hold for all sin, and at all
times, whether in prosperity or adversity, life and death.

Secondly, To turn even unto God, is to be unquiet and restless in soul, till
we do 2.
enjoy his favor, and the light of his countenance: So that if all judgments
for sin be removed, if all outward comforts and abundance overflow, yet all is
nothing, till God be reconciled: Thus it was with David, Restore joy (says he)
and heal the broken bones, Psalm. 51. This is a sure Touchstone of grace, when
honors, riches, and all outward accommodations are nothing, unless God speak
peace: As Human said, when he spoke of all the honor and greatness he had, yet
all availed him nothing, as long as Mordecai lived: Oh say thou much rather,
All health, friends, children, comfort me nothing, till God cause his face to
shine upon me! Oh desire to bathe thy soul in this meditation! this will
manifest the uprightness and sincerity of thy conversion: O Lord, in thy light
is life, comfort, happiness, and all things else.

Thirdly, To turn to him, even unto him, is when the soul being weary of sinful
delights, and earthly pleasures, does wholly repose it self, and rest on God as
its true and 3.
proper center: It was the speech of a true Convert, Lord, whom have I in
heaven but thee, and whom in the earth but thee? it was the speech of the
converted Church, I will leave all my lovers, and go to my first husband, for
then was it better with me then now: Thus in true conversion, the soul
forsakes all, and cleaves to him only, Jer. 3. 14. Return, O Israel, for I
am married to you: No conversion, as long as God is not the only center of thy
soul; if thou have other objects, besides him, if other lovers besides him,
thou art not turned even to him.

Lastly, To turn to God, is obedientially to resign up our selves unto him as a
Lord, and our Sovereign, whose commands we will faithfully obey, whose Laws we 4.
will readily submit unto: Thus Paul, when converted, Lord, what will thou have
me to do? and the Church cries, when converted, Come, let us return unto the
Lord; as if she would say, Behold, here I am, do what thou please: So that to
turn to him, is to be like wax before the fire, melted into what form God would
have it.

Use of Examination, Have thou forsaken thy sins? art thou no more the beast,
the Devil thou wast once? Oh Consider, and again consider, upon what Use.
terms thou and sin did part: How have thou closed with God? is he thy center,
thy fullness? do not thou take a picture for the true person? do not thou
lodge in some thing on this side God? Oh what sad shipwreck is that which is
near the very haven! To turn so far and yet at last to be turned into hell! To
get so far out of Egypt, and yet to have Pharaoh recover thee again: Fear
imperfect and insincere conversion, as much as profaneness.

SERMON LXXX.
That our turning to God must be with the whole Heart; Wherein Hearty
Conversion consists, with the effects of it.

JOEL. 2. 12. Turn ye, even to me, with all your heart.
THe object, or term to which of our Conversion has been dispatched, we come
to the manner how we must turn to God, and that is, With all thy heart. God
does not say only, as in another place, give me thy heart, but all thy heart,
Prove, 23. 26. The Scripture does for the most part make the heart the seat of
the rational soul, as if all understanding, reason, and affections were placed
there, and herein it does contradict the opinion of most eminent Philosophers,
who make the brain or the head, the seat of the rational soul; now some learned
men think that therefore the Scripture makes the actions of the soul to flow
from the heart, because God does not make any account of mere speculative, or
brain knowledge; but as it is accompanied with the strong affections, and
motions of the heart, which put a man upon practice. Aristotle observes that
loose dissolute practices, do not corrupt the habits of mere speculative
sciences, as the Mathematiques, etc. but they do quickly destroy practical
habits, as prudence and the ability to guide and govern our actions. Now the
end of the Scripture being wholly to make us good, and to reform our lives,
which cannot be done without the vigorous and strong affections of the heart,
does therefore attribute all to this, in so much that a good heart, or a bad
heart, are made the good or bad treasury of a man. So then howsoever in some
places of Scripture, Mat. 22. heart is opposed to mind, and to soul, and
strength, yet when it is put alone, as here, then it stands for all these, and
in this sense we are to understand it, Turn to God with all thy mind, thy
soul, thy might, with all thy heart.

Obs. That we are to turn from our sins, even to God, with all our heart. This
Obs.
[Whole heart] is but two words, but has very great matter and consequence in
it: for a man to mourn for sin, to seek to God externally only, or with his
whole heart, differ as much as a picture and a live man, as real burning fire,
and painted: To leave sin unwillingly, as Phaltiel did his wife; to turn to God
with a deceitful heart, is very abnominable. If a false balance be so
abominable unto him, How much more must false and deceitful, or heartlesse
conversions? But this sacrifice does not so much need an exact division, or
cutting of it, as to be bur^^, or offered up in the flames of our affection.
What it is to turn to God with the whole heart. 1.


Let us therefore consider, First what it is to turn to God with the whole
heart, and then the consequents of such a total conversion.

And First, To turn to God with the whole heart, is when we do not reserve any
part thereof for any sin, when we offer up our selves an whole burnt offering,
and not like those Sacrifices where God had but part, and others they had part:
such a conversion Herod's was, that did many things gladly, but not all things:
such a Convert was Judas, Did it not seem a glorious thing in Judas to forsake
all, and follow Christ? but yet still he kept part of his heart for a lodging
to receive some Lusts. And such half hearted Conversions are frequent in the
world: Experience teaches us of many who turn from diverse sins they once lived
in; but there is one or two endeared sins, and those they would join with God.
Thus they attempt a contradiction, to make light and darkness have communion,
to cause an agreement betwixt Christ, and Belial. As the Idolatry of some is
recorded, who feared God, and yet worshipped the Idol gods of the Heathens:
They would have the Ark, and Dagon also; so these would turn to God, and to
some beloved sin also, as if a man at the same time could turn one eye toward
heaven, and the other downwards. Oh fear least it be said to thee, as it was to
Ananias and Saphira, Why have thou detained part of the price? Thou have not
lied to man, but to God, Acts 5. 3. and so thou dealest deceitfully with God,
who will not be mocked, as if thou had parted with all thy sins, destroyed
all thy enemies, and yet hidest some, as Rahab did the spies, that they might
not be discovered. Know then that he who turns to God, with all his heart,
does not wittingly or willingly spare any one Agag, he does not keep any one
Isaak alive whom God would have sacrificed. Oh what a sad conviction is this of
the insufficient, and imperfect conversion of thousands: If it be with thy
whole heart, How comes sin and the world to have so great a share of it?
Remember the first Commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods before me. God is
a jealous God, not only when his worship is given to other nuncupative Gods,
but when thy heart and affections are given up to any Object besides him.

Secondly, To turn to God with thy whole heart is with our utmost might and
endeavor, and highest perfection we are able to closewith him. It is
muchdisputed in what sense 2.
the whole heart is required in that commandment, Thou shall love the Lord with
all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might. The Papists give too
low an Exposition, making it to be no more then sincerely or truly. Thus they
bring down the Commandment to our power, and not make that to rise up to the
Commandment, but by the concomitant phrase, With all thy might, it is plainly
meant the utmost perfection of a man, and therefore can never be perfectly
fulfilled in this life; yet a perfection the godly have, though it daily need
more perfection, and in this sense we turn to God with the whole heart, when we
cleave closer and closer to him; and draw nearer and nearer: So that this
opposes all faint, wearisome, and imperfect turnings to God. God complained of
the Israelites, That they were weary of him; and such is the listlesnesse of
man to what is good, that he quickly turns out of the way, or fits down
before he comes to an end. Thus they did not turn to God; that began in the
spirit and ended in the flesh, Gal. 3. 2. and that with Lots wife look back,
wishing for their old lusts again. It was no wonder that the Prodigal should
with all his heart go from his swine, and his husks, to the dainty food in his
fathers house; but if after that he should have gone from the fatted Calf, and
been weary of his Fathers music to his old husks again, this had been
intolerable Apostacy. Do thou say then when turned to God, as the Church did,
I held him and would not let him go, Cant. 3. 4. Do not go forwards and
backwards as the children of Israel did in the wilderness: Oh if thy whole
heart were in this work, thou would be more earnest, violent, and pursuing
the enjoyment of God.

Thirdly, To turn to God with the whole heart, is to do it sincerely and
uprightly. Oh this God has complained of in the Israelites, that in their
seeming conversions, 3.
their hearts were not upright, and unfeigned in them: they did but dissemble
with their tongues, and as it is said of faith, may we not also say of
uprightness, When the Son of man shall come, shall he find uprightness on the
earth? He may find the Christian faith, he may find praying and hearing, but
shall he find sincerity? Thus the whole heart is very often used in the
Scripture for a sincere and upright heart, as on the contrary a false
hypocritical heart is excellenty called an heart and an heart. Oh this is too
ordinary to pray with an heart and an heart; to confess sin with an heart, and
an heart: An heart seemingly for God, and yet an heart for sin also: an heart
apparently for Christ, and yet closely for the world also. This is commonly
made the difference between the good Kings, and those that had a glorious show
of goodness, but wanted the power of it. The one is said to seek to God, or
cleave to God with the whole heart; the other had an heart and an heart. As
therefore the time was once when thou were afraid of prophannesse, and gross
impieties: so now take as much heed of hypocrisy, and falsehood of spirit.

Fourthly, To turn to God with the whole heart, is to have the heart all one in
this 4.
work, not to be overcharged with distractions and divisions of thoughts about
other things. Thus David prays, Unite my heart to fear thy name, Ps. 86. 11.
and dividing cares and thoughts, as also distractions about many things are
frequently forbidden. Oh this is admirable, and comfortable, when the whole
soul is inclined but one way, and that to God. As the Scripture speaks of a
city, or family, it is excellent where they are all of one mind: so it is well
when a man within himself is all the same way; nothing dividing, distracting,
or disturbing in his motions to God: to run well, and to have nothing hinder.
Thus some expound that promise, I will give them one heart, Jer. 36. 32. that
is an heart not divided, not distracted, but wholly bent upon one object. As a
Kindgom divided against it self cannot stand, so neither an heart in this sense
divided; some thoughts for God, and some against him; some affections pressing
toward him and some pulling back from him, so that if thy heart be wholly
turned to God, Oh what a sweet harmony will there be in that motion. No unequal
walking, no harsh jarring: but this being the predominant object, will carry
all along with it. Indeed it follows afterward, Rent your hearts, but that is
a renting off from sin, not a renting it between God and other things. Do thou
then grow acquainted with thy own heart more, see what it is that does hinder
thee from the one necessary thing: Is this turning with thy whole heart to God,
when it is divided into many objects? Oh let thy heart rather be as the Temple
was, into which they might bring no unclean thing, neither might men of no
business walk there up and down.

Fifthly, He turns to God with his whole heart, who does not entertain any
thing, 5.
Supra, contra, aeque, or cum Deo, Above, or contrary, or equal, or with God:
So that if all these particulars are necessary, we must conclude that
conversion is a rare work. For first to turn with our whole heart, is to prefer
nothing above God. This Christ makes a fundamental requisite in every convert.
A man must hate Father, or Mother, and his own life for Christ's sake. Oh the
wonderful change then that this converting grace makes upon a man: now his
right eye, or his right hand is not dear unto him in respect of God, and is it
not good reason that he who is the most high, should have the most high
affections, the most high desires? is it not reason to bid all things come
lower, that God may have the highest room in our hearts. Oh but how many
proclaim that there is a great gulf between them and conversion, for are not
their base and filthy lusts preferred before God? is not the Devil obeyed in
his lusts, rather then God in his Commandments? so that such instead of turning
to God, with their whole heart, thy are turned to their sins, and to the world
with all their heart: see then what that is which thy heart does seek in the
first place. The true Convert gives the best and choicest of his thoughts and
Affections to God: He now comes to Christ every day, and pours out as it were
a box of precious ointment, the most excellent and quintessential vigor of his
soul.

2. As an hearty Conversion makes a man prefer nothing above God, so neither
any thing against him, he will much less love that which is hated and loathed
by God. Oh then if thou art turned unto God, how comes it about that his
enemies and adversaries do so often lodge in thy bosom? How is it that the
prince of darkness finds the Gates of thy soul open, when the prince of Glory
should come in? No man can serve two contrary masters: It was a plain argument
that Dalilah was not hearty for Sampson, because all her projects were to
advantage the Philistims, that were deadly enemies to Sampson; and so when all
thy desires and purposes are to promote the ways of sin, to further the
Kingdom of Satan, thou may quickly conclude thou art far from conversion.
As Joab adjured David, Thou love thy enemies better then thy friends: so
may thou expostulate with thy own soul, That it entertaineth her own
damnable enemies, rather then her friends who would bring the greatest good to
her.

3. Hearty conversion goes further still, and loves nothing equally with him;
for where all the heart is, there all the heart cannot be any where else: God
will have all or none. It was the false mother that was willing to have the
child divided; the devil will take half, because in that he has all.

Lastly, Still higher the true Convert goes, for he entertaineth nothing with
God: Minus to amat, qui tecum aliquid amat. So that God being the Center, and
the ultimate repose of the soul, he entertaineth nothing with him in that
relation. There are some things that do so challenge a primacy, that they admit
nothing with them, as we say in our controversies with the Church of Rome: It
is a contradiction to say, a primary head, and a secondary head; so a primary
husband, and a secondary husband; and thus it is here: God is the head, the
spouse of every faithful soul, and so he will have no co-partner with him. And
although we are allowed to love lawful comforts here below, yet because all are
in subordination to him, and because of him, therefore still God is only
beloved. As we say, Such an house is such a man's, because though there be many
servants, many attendants, yet because they are but servants, and one master
only, therefore it is his house only: so it is here; The heart of a Converted
man is only Gods, and for him, because though other things be received, yet as
servants only, and with reference merely to God. Thus we are said to turn to
him with all our heart. Oh then if all these things go to an hearty Conversion,
In how narrow a compass will this work be found? Who that hears these things
may not cry out, And who then can be saved? Who may not begin to make a
stricter search into his heart?

In the next place, Consider the effect of this hearty Conversion unto God. And

First, It is inseparable for the future. He that has turned from his sins to
God with all his heart, will never go back again, as Hypocrites, and Apostates
do, such 1. Tho effects of hearty conversion to God.
backsliding argues that they never were rooted, or built up upon this rock:
see how confidently that eminent Convert Paul tryumphs, Who can separate us
from the love of God in Christ? Romans 8. And there he challenges all things
that can be named; so true is that, He which drinks of this heavenly water,
shall never thirst more, John 6. 35. He becomes even like God: He prays,
hears, believes, and loves God; and in these things he changes not. Oh
this inconstancy and unsetlednesse, is a plain enemy to hearty Conversion.

Secondly, Hearty conversion to God is insatiable: it has never enough of God,
still it would have more in him, as we see in David, how full of longing and
panting 2.
expressions after God! It will never repent him that he did turn to God: He
will never say, It was better with me when I enjoyed my pleasures, and my
lusts, then since I took God for my portion. And now here is one thing more to
Solomon's four things that never say There is enough, and that is a Godly heart
enjoying God.

Thirdly, This turning with the whole heart is invincible, nothing can conquer
it: This fire will dry up all waters: A man that has an half heart, or a weak
and 3.
lazy heart, will quickly be beaten back. A Lion in the way, or tall Giants
will soon discourage some men from Canaan: but where the whole heart is fixed,
there it will break through stone walls: Christ became our Savior with his
whole heart; and because this Law was written in his heart, hear how readily he
speaks, Rehold, I come to do thy will, O God, Psalm 40. 8. This made him
conflict with Death, and all Agonies through his Fathers displeasure. No wonder
then, till thy whole heart be in Conversion, if thou delayest, and find out
many excuses.

Lastly, This turning with the whole heart, is accompanied with much joy,
delight 4.
and pleasant sweetness: What is done with all the heart, causes a great deal
of joy. Thus God says, He would rejoice over his people, and do them good with
his whole heart, Jer. 32. 42. An admirable expression to show what joy and
delight God would take in doing good to them: so that to leave sin with some
trouble, with many murmurings and repinings, argues all thy heart is not in
this work.

Use of Exhortation, to take up this Duty. God meets with many hypocrites,
and in nothing more then in their turning to him: men would seem to do
something, they would gladly be thought Converts, but (alas) these things are
not done with their whole hearts. And know this, to turn with all the heart to
God, is a work of great difficulty and rarity. As Christ said in another case,
were there not ten cleansed, but where are the nine? There has returned but
one. So of those many that pray, and weep for sin, and say they will become new
Converts, may we not say, There is but such a man, and such a woman, that turn
with all their heart? Now be moved to this cordial hearty Conversion.

1. Because the work of the heart is more accounted of by God, then all thy
outward worships, though never so diligently, and zealously performed: Rent
your hearts and not your garments: God cared not for rent clothes, when men's
hearts were too sound in sin: and so, a broken and contrite heart, thou will
not despise; this is preferred before whole burnt-offerings.

2. Thou have turned to sin with all thy heart, thou have drudged in the world
with all thy heart: Now which is the most large and ample object to fill thy
heart: God or sin? God or the creature? Fecisti Domine cor nestrum, and
irrequietum est donec ad to veniat. Oh be for ever ashamed that thou should
have thy whole heart for sin and the Devil, and not for God.

3. To turn imperfectly, and faintly, will be the greater confusion to a man;
for thou had almost laid hold on God; thou were very near closing with him;
thou were almost entering into the haven, and then some sudden blasts of sin
or other, drive thee back again. Oh thou that beginnest to run in this race,
What hinders thee that thou do not get the prize?

Lastly, Thou will one day lament and mourn with all thy heart, that thou have
neglected the day of conversion; but then it will be too late. Would not the
damned in hell with all their heart be delivered from eternal flames, and put
into a day of grace again? Do they not with all their heart, and all their soul
roar out for their undone estate to all eternity? Oh that at last these Truths
might prevail with you: Oh that it might be no more published in Gath, or
Ashkelon, That our preaching is not converting.

SERMON LXXXI.
Of Tears and Sorrow for Sin; And that they must accompany Conversion.

JOEL. 2. 12. Turn even unto me, with all your Heart, and with Fasting, and
with Weeping, and with Mourning.
THE third part observable in the division of this Text, is the effect, or if
ye will, the concomitant property of a cordial Conversion to God: for we being
not immateriall and spiritual substances, as Angels are, but compounded of a
soul and a body: therefore many affections are required of us as so compounded,
which spiritual substances are not capable of: such are these in the Text,
Fasting, Weeping, and Mourning. So that tears and bitter weeping for sin, are
a good sign to evidence an hearty Conversion to God. As for Fasting required
also in the Text, that is not commanded primarily and intentionally for it
selfs sake, but as its isntrumental and subservient to prayer and mourning for
sin; for as precious seed sown in Bogs and Quagmires, can never come to any
maturity; so neither will any duty of humiliation thrive, where the body is not
by fasting or debasement prepared for it. What ever else needs explication in
the words, shall be discussed in the Doctrine.

Obs. That true and hearty Conversion to God from sin is to be accompanied
with sorrow and tears for sin. Its not a slighty, formal craving of
forgiveness Obs.
from God, but the soul is so wounded and pierced, and in such agonies, that
many tears flow from it. The Scripture commands this sorrow, promises such a
melting heart to those that are converted; and we have many examples of those
who were hard rocks; but when converted, much water of godly mourning came from
them. For a command, (because some have thought this afflicted, mournful
spirit, to be an old Testament-spirit, and not beseeming the spirit of Adoption
in the Gospel:) See it in the new Testament commanded, James 4. 9. Be
afflicted, and mourn and weep, let your laughter be turned into mourning, and
your joy into heaviness. This is required of Christians in the new Testament.
And as the Spirit of God did once move upon the waters, so he will still upon
spiritual humiliation. This exhortation is directed to those that were fallen
into grievous sins, and there is no other way for peace, but through this salt
sea of tears. Every word is emphaticall (...), be miserable and wretched; that
is, be inwardly touched with a deep sense of your sins, which make you
miserable. Oh, he that is turning to God from his sins, must cry out of
himself; O miserable and wretched man that I am, what shall I do? where is any
ease? who will pour oil in my wounds? The other word (...), Mourn, isallusive
to the custom of mourning in the old Testament, when they went in Sackcloth
and Ashes. Thy soul ought to be full of pensiveness, and bitterness, as
Tamars was, after she had been destowred, and thrust out of doors; she teareth
her garments, puts Sackcloth on her head, wrings her hands, goes wailing; And
I, whither shall I go? So sin and the Devil have ravished and constuprated
thy soul, which should have been left pure to God. Oh cry out, and make bitter
lamentations, for thou art undone for ever, unless the grace of God interpose.
Let your joy be turned to heaviness, (...), that is, such an heaviness and
grief as may be seen in a man's very looks; Thar all may say, What ailest thou?
What troubles thee? Thus as they abounded in carnal pleasures, and sinful
delights; so now all must be turned contrary; and as this is commanded, so our
Savior makes those blessed that practice it: Blessed are they that mourn,
Matthew. 5. 4. viz. for their own sin, and the sin of others; for they shall
be comforted: yea he denounces a woe to those that laugh and are merry, that
never rend their hearts, or wound their souls for the sins they have committed.
Oh then bless God, and count it an happy time, when God shall turn thy barren
heart which was like a wilderness, ininto running streams for sin. This is so
necessary, that its a grace particularly promised under the Gospel, Zach. 12.
They shall mourn, as one mourns for his only begotten Son. See there is the
spirit of prayer and mourning promised under the Gospel, and that for sins
against Christ, as cordially, affectionately, and a grieved manner, as a mother
cries for her only Son. You have examples also for this in the new Testament.
Did not Mary Magdalen make her head a fountain of tears, that could weep such
showrs as she did? Which made Chrysologus say, Terrarigat Coelum. Could she
have cried more heartily for the loss of her only child, then she did for her
sins? And thus Peter, after his relapse, upon his recovery, is it not said, He
went out, and wept bitterly. Matthew. 26. 75. So that you see it abundantly
proved, that our turning to God, ought to be with mourning and weeping: but yet
the point so generally delivered is subject to misconstructions; and therefore
take notice of these particulars.

First, That these waters of tears may arise from a fourfold Spring or
Fountain: As, I. Tears may arise from a fourfold spring. 1. Natural.


First, There are Natural tears; Such which come naturally from the
complexion, or peculiar disposition of the body at that time. Philosophers
say, That only man of all creatures does properly weep; and they dispute much
about the efficient cause, and nature of tears. Gregory Nissen, one of the
Ancients, that had much learning in natural Philosophy, makes the cause of
tears, to be the vapors that do upon the apprehension of any evil, quickly
arise by consent from the commotion and stirring of the bowels, which ascending
to the brain, by the coldness thereof are presently heated and congealed into
water; as clouds are by the coldness of the middle Region: Yet latter
Philosophers reject this: but my purpose is to speak of weeping and tears, not
as a Philosopher, but as a Divine. This is certain, there are natural tears,
which arise from a tender complexion, whereby children and women are more ready
to weep then men, and some men more then others: yea Aristotle observes, some
Drunkards are very prone to weep while they abound with liquor; we call them,
Magdalen Drunkards, that while they are full of Beer, and like beasts, will
then cry and weep, and complain of their sins: but these tears being nothing
but the excrementitious humor of vapors within, they are not at all to be
regarded. Some Godly men have complained, that they cannot weep, nor shed
tears for their sins. They can for other things, Temporal evils, that
afflict sense, but not for sin. To this I shall Answer anon.

Secondly, There are worldly tears, and carnal weeping; and that is when we
weep for the loss of any temporal mercy, or the evil of any misery come upon
us: such tears are daily to be seen among us, who live in the world, that is
nothing but a Valley of tears. This Christ forbade, when he said, Weep not for
me, but for your selves, Luke 23. 28. And this might be every day published
aloud, Weep not for the loss of such mercies, Weep not because of such
miseries, but because of sin and the loss of God. This when immoderate, is an
heavy sin, and it works death, as the Apostle says, and is repentance that
must be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10.

Thirdly, There is hypocritical weeping. The tears of Crocodiles, when men
fast and publicly mourn, yet all this is because of temporal respects, not
because 3. Hypocritical.
that God is displeased. We have too much of this weeping also: God complains
of such sorrow among the Israelites, and he compares it to the howling of
beasts. All weeping and crying about sin, if not for sin, is but dissimulation
with God.

Lastly, There is a godly weeping, which is wrought in us by the Spirit of God,
and that is because we have sinned, and grievously offended God, which fills our
4. Godly weeping.
hearts with Gall and Wormwood: This latter is like the rain of the cloud that
comes from heaven, sweet and refreshing; the other is like the salt water of
the sea, or the muddy filth of boggy places.

Secondly, Godly tears they also arise from a twofold cause. There are tears
of hatred and indignation, or great displeasure against our selves, because we
have so foolishly and wretchedly dishonored God, and ventured our eternal
undoing for a moments pleasure. There are also tears of love, and joy, which
the heart poures out with much melting, partly because they have grieved so
good a Father, and partly through joy to see so much grace vouchsafed unto
them. The former kind of tears, viz. of hatred and grief, Manasses abounded
with, and Peter's eyes gushed out such. The latter did flow from Mary Magdalen;
for our Savior attributes all that sorrow to her much love, because much was
forgiven her, Luke 7. 47. and the true Convert is to express tears of both
these kinds, of grief, and love; of hatred, and joy; Verus paenitens de
peccatis dolet, and de dolor gaudet; The true repenting Convert grieveth for
his sins, and joyeth in his grief. Even naturally there is much ease in
weeping, Expletur lachrymis, egeriturque dolor. And hence Tully complained,
that though all his tears were spent, yet grief did stick at his heart, How
much more will godly tears afford spiritual joy? Let thy heart therefore be
like the Stillatory, which having the hot love of God daily under it, will
plentifully vent forth the warm tears of Godly sorrow for sin.

Secondly, There may be a superstitious and Popish advancement of tears, and a
Christian Scripture-acknowledgement of them. This must be also remembered, a II.
A Popish advancement of tears.
Popish commendation of tears is, when any Merit, Causality or Worth is
attributed to them. Thus in Popery they make them have a spiritual effect, they
attribute the washing away of sin to them, they are judged satisfactory: But
how arrogant is this Doctrine, to make our tears and Christ's blood equal? If
the blood of Christ only does purge us from our iniquity, then cannot our
tears, which themselves need washing, as he said, Lava Domine Lachrymas meas, O
Lord wash my tears, they are so foul. Could we therefore weep an Ocean of
tears, yea blood, yet this could not blot out one debt of ours to God. We do
not then require mourning and weeping, as Friars and Popish Writers do: And yet
on the other side we abhor those Antinomian Doctrines, that make all sorrow and
weeping for sin to be legal, and unbeseeming the spirit of the Gospel. No,
the Scripture carries a mean between these two extremes.

Lastly, This must not be forgotten: There is a twofold sorrow, or mourning;
the one is intellectual, and spiritual; which is an act of the soul, whereby it
detesteth III. There is a twofold Sorrow. Intellectual and Spiritual, And
Sensitive.
and abhors sin above all evil, and vehemently dislikes it, choosing any
temporal evil, rather than this evil of sin. And there is a sensitive
sorrow; which is accompanied with bodily tears, and expressed in a sensible
manner. Even as there is a twofold prayer, a mental prayer of the soul,
whereby we immediately make our requests known unto God; and a vocal bodily
prayer, by the mouth also. Thus there is a twofold sorrow, one rational,
affecting the soul of a man, the other sensible, discovering it self in the
eyes, and face. Now the former kind of mourning, which is an act of the
understanding and will, full of displicencie and vehement detestation of sin;
this is absolutely to be pressed: No man can think he is converted that has
not this. But then for sensible and bodily tears, practical Divines give these
directions: first that in the pangs of our conversion, and while the soul is in
its first labor, then many times such Tears abound: whereas afterward in the
progress of sanctification, they are not powered out so easily. Be not then
presently discouraged, as if thy heart were a rock, and an hard Millstone,
because thou findst no affection, no melting, no tears; say not, Thy heaven is
made Brass or Iron; for it may be the time has been, that thy two eyes have
been as the Churches in the Canticles are said, to be like the Fish-pools of
Heshbon. Remember then the bottles of tears thou then did fill. Its not
probable that Mary Magdalen could always weep so plentifully as she did at her
first Conversion to Christ, and reconcisiation with him.

Secondly, Divines give another good Rule, which is to regard thy purpose, and
well advised forsaking of sin, so as never to return to it, more than any
tears whatsoever; for Hypocrites have shed tears, and they many times arise
from the bodily Constitution: Some can weep when they list; as there were women
hired to mourn: and experience tells us, of many that will weep and cry for
their sins, and yet for all that commit them again. Do thou therefore find
that thy soul loatheth sin, and that thou dare not, or can not entertain
any sin in thy life? never then question thy condition, because thou can not
shed tears, for these are accidental and separable, but the other is eslential
to grace; and this discovers the hypocrisy of many, that because they can
sometimes weep and cry, when they speak of their sins, they therefore conclude
all is well, though they go on in the practice of sin. No, its inward hating,
and outward forsaking of them upon spiritual grounds, will more testify thy
Conversion then rivers of water flowing from thy eyes.

Thirdly, If thou have mourning and sighing, because thou can not be so
passionately affected with thy sins, as with temporal evils: This may also stay
thy heart, thou can not go out and weep bitterly, thou can not water thy
bed with tears, as David did. Oh, but do thou groan and ^igh after more
degrees of godly sorrow? this may satisfy thee: for they that hunger and
thirst are blessed; and if the Spirit of God work in thee groans unutterable,
this is greater sorrow than weeping; Groans of heart, are more than tears in
the eye. When one Psannenitus an Heathen saw his friend put to death, he wept
abundantly; but afterward, when his Sons were brought to ex-cution, he did not
weep. The reason was asked, and this was returned, Leves curae loquuntur,
ingentes stupent, Light grief may be vented, but infinite grief stupifieth; and
so many times the godly heart is in such an amaz^ment and astonishment that
stupifieth it.

Lastly, Then only is want of Tears for sin, matter of trouble, when it is
because of want of hatred to sin, want of meditation, or want of love to God.
As for example, Thou have lost thy husband, thy friend, such an estate, and thy
daily thoughts of this aggravating every circumstance, makes thee weep many
showrs. Now if thou did seriously set thy self to meditate about sin and all
the aggravations of it, thy heart would melt as abundantly also; but thy
negligence, thy worldly cares, thy hard heart, thy carelessness that makes thee
so senseless. Know in this case, the want of fears is thy fault, and thou do
not meditate and pierce thy heart with sharp considerations that water may gush
out.

Now let us see, why Conversion is to be with mourning and weeping: And Why
mourning and weeping must accompany conversion. 1.
First, Because the evil of fin is far greater both in the loss it brings us,
and the positive damage it plungeth us into, than any outward evil whatsoever.
What a shame then is it, to see people weep over their dead friends? Oh none
have sucha loss as they have, and not to weep over their dead souls, for there
is no such loss as that by sin: Shall that superstitious man make such a
waiting for his Idols that were taken away, and shall not thou mourn bitterly,
because thou losest God and heaven by sin. Its the bitter evil of sin, that
makes all other afflictions bitter; there had been no other evil in the world
to provoke tears, had not sin been: This brought not only Thorns and
Thistles on the ground, but on every thing else; why then shall we not have
mourning for that which is the fountain and root of all other sad things?

Secondly, Therefore we are to turn from sin to God with mourning; Because
there is a condecency, and congruity of Justice in it. Its the greatest reason
and justice 2.
in the world, that as thou have by delight and pleasures in sin offended and
provoked God; so thou should by grief and bitterness for sin manifest thy
love to him: shall there be a time when sin was sweet and shall there not be a
time when it shall also be bitter? Oh consider this all you who have found the
short and momentaneous honey of sin, but not the sting of it; that have found
it sweet in the mouth, but not like Ezekiels Roll, bitter in the belly.

Thirdly, Its necessary there should be bitter mourning in our Conversion;
Because of the manner or method God takes in bringing men from sin; which for
the 3.
most part is accompanied with such strong convictions of sin, such tremblings,
and agonies of soul, that as the woman by Gods appointment is to bring forth in
pangs and travail; so does the heart of a man labor till Christ be formed in
it. Gods method is generally to convince of sin, the hainousness of it, all the
bloody circumstances that aggravate it, and that in a powerful, particular way;
so that he sees and seeleth himself to be this sinner: Then God discovers
the exactness of the Law, the spiritual extent of it, the innumerable curses
that it threatens to every disobedient person; and lastly, it discovers an
impotency, and an utter inability in a man's self and in all the world to help
him, so that he is despairing wholly of himself, and receiving a sentence of
condemnation upon his soul, only the grace of God comes in, before the soul be
overwhelmed: That stretches out the hand, as Christ did to Peter, before he
sink in the waters. Now tell us, Can all these exercises, fears, conflicts, and
commotions of heart be without mourning and weeping? It is true in some
Converts these pangs and conflicts are greater than in others; yet it being
Gods ordinary way to bring about Conversion by Conviction out of the Law, here
must be needs great divisions and troubles of heart.

Fourthly, There will be mourning and weeping in our Conversion to God, Because
of the sympathy and natural conjunction of soul and body together; so that 4.
what the soul is excessively affected with, there is an overflowing and
redundancy of this upon the body. Thus David is so often in sensible passionate
expressions of tears and desires after God, because his soul and heart did so
affectionately burn after God; Insomuch that not only his heart, but his very
flesh (he says) longs after God, Psalm. 84. 2.

Use is, Severely to reprove that stoninesse and hardness of heart upon many
sinners: When did they ever turn to God with bitter lamentations, and mourning,
Use.
and weeping? When was their laughter and joy turned into heaviness? You have
indeed sometimes seen them wring their hands, cry aloud they were undone,
because their estates are lost, their friends are dead, great pains and aches
of body have tormented them; but not a sigh, not a tear for their sin. Oh know
that in hell there will be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; then thy
sins will be apprehended in a more horrid and ghastly manner than now they are.
A tear in the eye for sin, is more commendable than a jewel in the ear: and if
thou can not weep, yet sigh and mourn like the Dove. O smite upon the
thighs, knock on the breast, say, Even Rocks (Lord) when thou have smote them
have given us water; but thou have smitten by thy Word, by thy Judgments upon
my heart, and yet no mourning at all. The tears of the hearers are the
commendations of a Sermon: Did you hear aright, you would pour your hearts out
like water, as the Scripture expression is. Neither do thou think it a
childish weak thing to weep for sin: For David, who had more knowledge than
all his Teachers, yet how plentiful in those showers! Neither do thou think
it an Argument of an ignoble spirit; for besides that Homer makes his Heroical
spirits (...), easy to weep, who more warlike and potent then David? yet how
many penitential and mournful Psalms does he make for sin.

SERMON LXXXII.
The Nature and Necessity of Godly Sorrow and Weeping for Sin, as
accompanying Conversion.

JOEL. 2. 13. And rent your hearts, and not your garments.
WE are arrived to the fourth Observable passage in the Prophets Exhortation,
and that is the form or nature wherein this turning to God does consist. The
very being and substance of conversion to God, is expressed in this phrase,
Rent your hearts, and not your garments. To Rent the heart, is a Metaphor from
bodies or garments, as in the Doctrine is to be showed: Only two things may be
taken notice of in this phrase. To rent the garments, was a custom among the
Jews, whereby they did declare their excessive and impatient sorrow or
detestation: Thus the High Priest rent his clothes, when he charged Christ
with Blasphemy; and Ahab rent his clothes, when there was fear of some great
judgments coming upon them: Thus Paul and Silas rent their garments with
indignation, when the people of Lystra would have sacrificed to them as Gods,
Acts 14. 14. Thus you see it was a custom among the Jews, in apprehension of
great grief, either for sins or judgments, to rent their garments; as they
used also to cover their heads with ashes, and to go in sackcloath, which
outward forms of mourning, are not to be drawn into practice among us, because
all Nations have their several ways of public mourning. The next thing
observable is, the expression by way of negation, Rent your hearts, and not
your garments; its usual with the Hebrews, to express a comparative by a
negative, Rent your hearts, and not your garments, that is, rather then your
garments; so, I would have mercy, and not sacrifice; i. e. rather then
sacrifice: God by this teaching us, that all external duties of Worship and
Religion are nothing at all, without the gracious and godly frame of the heart.

That Conversion unto God, is accompanied with a tearing or rending of the
Observe. Of rending the heart.
heart.

It is with as much grief and agony, as if the very heart were torn asunder. He
tells us, that turning to God does not consist in outward acts of humiliation
and sorrow; if this were so, hypocrites would be very diligent in it; no, there
must be a cutting or dividing the heart asunder, from all those former sins,
that were so constantly committed. This point is worthy the Ministers earnest
zeal, for people generally are not in earnest about this work; they will hear
much, yea, it may be, say much about it; but to have the heart thus wrought
upon, is very rare.

To open it therefore, consider, First, That the Scripture has other
equivalent expressions to this in the Text: That which is here called A rent
heart, in other Other equivalent expressions in the Scripture.
places is called A broken heart, yea, A contrite heart, Psalm. 51. 17. A
wounded spirit A tender melting heart, An heart of flesh, A soft heart, Ezekiel.
32. All which have, their peculiar efficacy, to demonstrate this gracious work
of God.

A broken heart, is taken from a broken vessel, or broken bones: Now this does
imply, what pain, what grief, yea and misery a man undergoeth, while he is in
turning unto God. David expresses his broken heart, by broken bones: Oh think
not then, that thou who have lived with an heartfull of ease, mirth, and carnal
jollity, that ever thou have attained to this duty: No, this is that thou art
afraid of; As Luther said, his soul hated the word Repent, because he
apprehended it a word of bitterness, gall and wormwood, and at that time knew
nothing of Christ, and the Gospel that might sweeten this bitterness: Thus the
hearts of many wicked men, do even hate and abhor the very name and thoughts of
a broken and rent heart for sin: They would not be put out of those pleasures
and jolly security in sin, upon any terms.

Again, as the vessel, when broken, has presently all that was in it
discovered and laid open: Thus it is with an heart in conversion to God, the
breaking of it, makes all that wickedness and ungodliness appear, which
formerly was hid and covered: Then he wallowed in such foul and noisome ways,
and never took any notice of it; then he always blessed and flattered himself,
still saying, I hope in God, I trust in God, I have a good heart, etc. O but
when once the spirit of God breaks that hollow and hypocritical heart of thine,
then O what depths of iniquity appear! What swarms of lust show themselves!
Then thou art monster, and abominable in thy own eyes; then thou can no
longer endure thy self, thou will be no longer a stranger, and unknown to thy
self. The heathens commended that sentence, as fallen down from heaven, Nosce
teipsum, Know thy self: But (alas) they had only candle light, or moon light,
not the light of the Sun, the Scripture, to discover themselves, and to judge
of themselves by it.

The other phrase is A Contrite heart, and that is more then broken; for this
is to be bruised or pounced into small dust: So that this does excellently
denote, what a rent heart is; viz. An heart that is beaten into small pieces,
that does not retain the outward form or shape that once it had; it is wholly
changed and altered. Take an earthen vessel, and let it be pounced into dust,
and there remains nothing of its old beauty or figure: So it is here, when
the heart is thus contrite, Oh it has nothing of its old security, of its old
mirth and jollity, it has nothing of its old false peace and self-flattering,
but becomes changed into another hue.

The phrase likewise of A wounded spirit, does fully set forth this Rent heart.
The body wounded, is subject to much grief and pain, but a spirit wounded to
much more; therefore says the Wise man, A wounded spirit who can bear? Pro.
18. 14. If thy heart be ever wounded for sin, it will be the heaviest burden
in the world to bear: Oh then thou will think poverty, outward torments, bodily
pain, nothing to a wounded soul: Oh but when shall we, like that good
Samaritan, meet with such persons that lie wounded for their sins, that we may
pour oil into their wounds! when shall the two edged Sword of the word give
such heart-wounds!

As for a Soft, tender melting heart: These come much to the same sense; for
before our conversion, every man's heart is of stone, and adamantine, like cold
iron, will receive no impression; Does not experience teach it? Why is it, that
after so many mercies, so many judgments, so many afflictions, so many
sermons, men are as prone and ready to sin as ever, but from the hardness of
their heart? What is employed in the phrase, Rent (...) hearts.


Secondly, Let us consider, what this phrase implies, Rent your hearts; and
then the negative, Not your garments: And

First, It supposes grief and trouble in the heart: The parts of a man's flesh
cannot 1.
be rent or torn asunder, but it must be with great sorrow: And thus it is with
the heart of a true convert, he finds much spiritual trouble and grief upon
his soul; his soul is rent and torn into many sad dividing thoughts, between
hope and fear, between faith and despair, between joy and grief; as you may see
in David's Psalms, such contrary affections working on him, that his heart
seems to be like the sea, when contrary winds blow upon it: Oh then! this
argues, that many men have never been in these spiritual deeps, and to feel
the wondrous works of God upon them; they have never said to their sins, as
Paul to his weeping friends, Why do ye break my heart? They have never said, O
how is my heart torn in pieces! There have been bodily punishments for heinous
crimes, when the Malefactors have been torn in pieces, limb by limb, by wild
horses; this must needs be exquisite torment, yet this has been born; But a
wounded spirit who can bear? These tearings and divisions of heart, when sin in
all the guilt and aggravations of it, is laid upon the conscience, who could
endure, did not God support in these agonies?

Secondly, It implies, violence offered to the heart: Even as a garment rent,
or 2.
our flesh rent, it is even by a violent motion; and so it is here, in
conversion there is an holy and mighty violence offered unto our unregenerate
part: To take that off from the sinful objects, it has been fixed upon, is
like keeping the greedy dog off from the sweet blood he has begun to suck:
Thus the Scripture expresses the work of godliness, by such words as implies
great violence and pain offered to the carnal part in a man: Hence its called
Crucifying the flesh, Gal. 5. 24. Romans 8. 13. Gal. 3. 5. There was great
violence and lingering misery the party crucified was put unto; and so we are
called to mortify the sinful lusts of the soul; so that although there were no
external tribulations in the way to heaven, though there were no persecutions,
no troubles, yet that which is done upon thy heart, upon thy sinful lusts, will
make the way to heaven a straight and narrow way. There is a soul-Martyrdom, as
well as a body-Martyrdom; and which is more terrible for flesh and blood to
undergo, is hard to tell. No wonder then, if you see men stick so at
conversion; O its an hell, its a torment to them; Why? the reason is plain,
conversion is a real Purgatory; they go through fire and water to be made
clean; they give themselves to be sacrificed by grace: Grace will not spare any
one dear sin or lust they have been accustomed unto. Its also no wonder if Gods
children find it so difficult, so contrary to nature, to do any thing
graciously; for how can it be but painful to hang crucified upon the cross, as
it were? for thus, as Christ dyed for sin, so they dye to sin.

Thirdly, In renting, there is a separation and disunion of the heart, from
that to 3.
which it was once united: And herein lies the very formal nature of rending,
to make a violent division of one part from another, so that the near union is
perfectly dissolved; especially this is seen in continuous bodies: And thus it
is also in a spiritual consideration; herein lies the very proper and real
notion of a godly rending of heart, when its wholly divided from those sins it
did once cleave unto: This is true, that love does make the party loving, and
the object loved all one. Hence it is, that the believer joined to Christ, is
said to be made one spirit, because he cleaves as glue to the Lord: Thus those
that constantly follow sins, they are made one with sin and the Devil; when
therefore they are truly converted, then comes this glorious separation and
disunion; they are no longer one, but twain, now sin and they have no more
union or communion, as it were: And how blessed is it to separate those, whom
not God, but the Devil has joined together.

Fourthly, This implies impatiency of spirit, as not being able to hear, see,
or 4.
bear sin: It supposes an extraordinary and raised apprehension of some
dreadful evil before us: Thus the High Priest did, when he thought Christ spoke
blasphemy; and thus the true Convert, he has raised and aggravating thoughts
about the evil of sin; he looks upon it with a more dreadful and sad eye then
men of the world do: Does the flesh, does the world or Satan tempt to sin? Oh
what horror takes hold upon him, what trembling amazement is upon him! he has
no patience, the zeal of God does so burn in his heart: Oh this is a sure
evidence, that few do truly turn to God; for where is that trembling, that
impatience in thee against sin? how readily and willingly do thou embrace
this Serpent, this Toad in thy bosom!

Fifthly, As impatiency, so indignation also, and high disdain is included in
this phrase: Thus Paul and Silas when the men of Lystra would have Sacrificed 5.
to them as gods, tore their garments with indignation, looking upon it as a
most unsufferable thing; and the like indignation against themselves have all
unfeigned converts; for every sin has gross idolatry in it; for thereby a man
attributes his supreme affections, desires and thoughts, also to sin, which do
belong to God. The Body-Idolater, he worships a stock or a stone, and boweth
down to that: Thou set up lust or sin, and bowest down thy soul to that: Oh
then, what cause has the soul to cry out, as Christ did, Get thee behind me
Satan! In every sin, Satan does tempt thee to fall down and worship him.

Lastly, This does suppose that a true Convert is thus affected, as well for
other men's sins as his own: For seeing this renting of the heart, implies a
deep apprehension 6.
of the dishonor that is done to God by every sin; then wheresoever it sees
sin committed, whether by our selves or others, it cannot but break out in this
heavenly impatiency and indignation; yea, the nearer they are to him who do
sin, if his children, if his servants, if his family, they are in the greater
zeal: Oh then, if you ask for a sign of a man's conversion, see how he is
affected to other men's sins as well as his own: When thou art converted,
strengthen thy brother, Luke 22. 23. Conversion does not stay upon a man's own
self, but reaches it self to others: Then will I teach transgressors thy ways,
and sinners shall be converted to thee, said David, Psa. 50. 1. so that if ever
thou have turned to God with thy whole heart, with this mourning and rending of
soul, thou could never bear sin in others: What? can a true convert endure
those that are profane and ungodly in his company, in his family? No, light
can agree with darkness as well: Come then and behold your selves in this
glass; by this see what judgment thou may pass upon thy self: Thou art so
far from casting out the wicked from thee, the ungodly out of thy family; thou
art so far from zeal to Gods glory, to bid all evil works depart; that thou
only choosest such, and make them the object of delight; and thou can not
endure, but art mad through malice against those that walk purely, and more
strictly then thou do. Could David say, Rivers of waters run down mine eyes,
because men keep not thy law, Psalm. 119. 116. and shall thou sit in the seat of
the scorner, and walk in the ways of ungodly men! Oh let this truth make thy
ears to tingle, yea, thy heart to tremble: How can thou say, without gross
hypocrisy, that thy heart is rent for sin, and yet love to see it committed
by others, thy family being like an hell, rather then heaven, wherein all kind
of impiety is committed!

The next particular is to consider, what is employed in the Negative or
Comparative, And not your garments: And that is, What is employed in the
negative, And not your garments. 1.


First, That no outward sign of sorrow or grief of heart, is regarded by God,
if the heart it self be not exercised therein: God allowed of sackcloth and
ashes, of smiting on the breast, of rending garments; but this was as dung
before him, he abhorred it, if the hearts of men were not wounded for sin: And
no wonder if God did refuse these outward signs, if without the heart, when his
own solemn and Religious duties, Prayer, Sacrifice, and the like, his soul did
loath, while their hearts were unwashed, and unclean. Hence are those frequent
complaints and expostulations God has with the people of Israel, why they were
so diligent in external duties of Religion, and so little careful about
cleansing and washing the heart: O that people could once be fit subjects to
receive this truth. We still cry, The Temple of the Lord, Circumsion, as the
Jews did; Our Baptism, our Prayers; but O where is the man that looks to any
godly work upon his heart.

Secondly, Therefore is the heart thus prized above all things, because that is
the fountain 2.
of all spiritual life: That is the good treasury, that is the fruitful tree;
even as the heart in the body does give life to all other parts of the whole
man: My son, give me thy heart, says God, and, With all keepings, keep thy
heart, Prove. 4. This is the seat of all good, or of all evil: This is the souls
Magazine, or spiritual Storehouse.

Now its very good to observe the reasons why God does thus prefer a rent Why
God prefers a rent and converted heart, before all outward acts of Religion.
and converted heart, before all outward acts of Religion, for men do not
consider these things: They would think themselves beasts, and unworthy the
name of Christians, if they should not pray, hear, and come to Church; but then
for this curious and necessary workmanship upon the heart, they never mind it
at all: Think therefore All is but a tinkling Cymbal, till God has turned thy
heart thus in duties: For

First, God never commanded simply and merely any outward duty of Religion, 1.
for its self sake, But especially he required gracious qualifications in the
exercise of them: He never commanded prayer, merely for prayers sake; nor the
keeping of the Sabbath, merely for external observations sake; and in this
sense some expound that, Sacrifice and burnt Offerings thou would not have:
If therefore these duties be not required, merely and barely for themselves,
why do not thou attend to that which is the principal? Oh say, Its not this
duty, so much as a converted heart in this duty; its not my coming to the
Assemblies, its not my hearing Sermons this day, so much as a changed turned
heart that God looks at: This is the Benjamin God commands you to bring, else
not to see his face. Hence when the hearts of men do not spiritualize this
duty; the Scripture calls it no more then a Carnal Religion, or a Religion of
the flesh, Phil. 3. and Heb. 9. The Legal Rites, because they did not reach to
the purifying of the conscience, are called Carnal Ordinances: See how
despicably the Scripture speaks of these things, when performed without
spiritual reference to Christ.

Secondly, Its Rent your hearts, and not garments, because all outward duties
of 2.
Religion, are but the vessels or pipes which receive such liquour, good or
bad, as are put into them: A man may be acting his sin, or his godliness, while
he is performing of them; as the Pharisees were: Although a constant, ordinary
neglect of Religious duties, be a sure sign of a profane heart; yet the
constant, daily performing of them, is not a sure sign of a gracious godly
heart; for they are such as is put into them: Even as the good Angels, and the
Devils also have sometimes appeared in humane bodies: And thus godliness or sin
may work in outward Religious duties; so that those external performances and
expressions, are not to be made arguments of gracious men: These leaves will
grow upon corrupt trees, as well as good trees.

Thirdly, No wonder if God prefer a rent heart, before outward signs of
humiliation, 3.
because these have been, and still are consistent with the most abominable
wickedness: They wrought miracles, and cried, Lord, Lord, who yet were found to
be workers of iniquity. The Jews had their New Mons, and their Oblations, and
their daily Fastings; and at the same time also had Idolatries, Adulteries, and
all manner of outward filthiness: So that it is a great matter to know wherein
true godliness does consist, what is the life and soul of praying, hearing, and
all Religious duties: One word spoken from a converted rent heart, is more
acceptable, then many thousands expressed in a mere customary and formal way.

Use 1. Is Conversion a breaking, wounding, tearing and rending of the heart?
Use 1.
then you may quickly judge how remote they are from this blessed estate, that
make it their business to keep their hearts jolly, secure, merry and full of
ease. Oh they must hear nothing, that must be like a two-edged sword at their
hearts; you must never tell them of hell, and the day of judgment, of the
narrow strict way to heaven. Oh bring not these sad and troublesome things to
their ears. Oh thou foolish wretch, that do wilfully fat thy soul for
destruction. Oh think that the word of God never works as it should do, till it
has grieved thee, diseased thee, till it has made all worldly delights bitter
to thee. Do thou think to eat and drink, and sin, and to have the good things
of this life, and yet no threatening enter into thy heart? Oh were thou not
bewitched, and hardened by sin, this present discourse would fall like fire into
thy Bowels; and if there were nothing to rend and tear thy heart, the very
civil and religious rents that are amongst us, might move thee. What woundings
and rendings have there been of the body by the sword? What religious tearings
in opinions and affections? Does not the Lord then teach us by these rents and
distractions what we should do in our hearts? And if after all this thou
find thy heart like Leviathans skin impenetrable, and say, How may my
heart be rent, and thus graciously affected? I say, depend upon the powerful
preaching of the Word: That is appointed by God, not only to set Father against
Son, and Son against Father, but a man against himself, his heart against his
heart, his affections against one another.

SERMON LXXXIII.
Of the Ministry of the Word as the Means of Conversion, with the other Ends
thereof, etc.

JEREM. 23. 22. But if they had stood in my Counsel, and had caused my people
to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil ways, and
from the evil of their doings.
THis Chapter has two main principal parts; the first is Promissory, the
second Comminatory.

The Promissory is of a threefold benefit. 1. Reduction from Captivity. 2.
Godly and holy Governors, both Civil and Ecclesiastical. 3. The Mission of
Christ, who is described in his glorious Office, he shall be called, The Lord
our Righteousness.

The Comminatory begins verse 9. against the false and wicked Prophets, as
the fountain of all the wickedness in Jerusalem. The sins they are accused of,
are a profaning of the holy things of God, Adulteries, and swearings; as also
Hypocrisies, which not only they themselves were guilty of, but infected
others also. The wicked lives of Ministers make a great deal of Atheism among
people: They are like poisoned Fountains or Springs, which do presently
conveigh poison to all that drink of them. Now as their sin is decyphered, so
their judgment is threatened ver. 15. grief and heavy trouble of mind; for
says God, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of
Gall. They fed the people with Gall in their deceiving Sermons, and God he
feeds them with Wormwood. Now my Text does by way of contrary aggravate the
sad and damnable effects of a corrupt and sinful Ministry; for whereas verse
14. he had showed that they did strengthen the hands of wicked doers, so that
none did return from his evil ways. On the contrary, in my Text he declares
the good, and soul-saving effect of it, in case of a godly and conscientious
discharge of their Function. So that in the words you have good qualifications
supposed: and secondly the godly and blessed success that will flow from hence.

The good qualifications supposed are two.

First, If they had stood in my Counsel. To understand the full sense of this
consider, 1 Kings 22. 19. and Job 1. 6. Where God is described as a Judge
sitting upon his Throne, and all the Host of heaven standing by him on his
right hand, and on his left; so that the meaning is, If those Prophets had not
delivered the imagination of their own hearts, but had attended for my
commands, had received all from me, as the Angels do; then, etc. And further
note, that To stand before one, is an Hebraism, describing the ready posture of
servants, to receive any command. Thus Gehezi is said to stand before his
Master; and we are forbidden to offend any of those little ones, because their
Angels behold always the face of God, Mat. 18. 20.

The second qualification flows from the former, And cause the people to hear
my words. The false Prophets preached their own words of peace to them, whom
God cursed; but they must be like the Trumpet, that sends forth no other voice
than was breathed into them. Ambassadors must keep themselves strictly to the
words of their Commission; and Executors to the Will of Testators: for If it be
but a man's Testament, no man may add to it, how much more to a Divine?

The next thing supposed, is the good success, They shall be Fishers of men
indeed; though while they followed their own ways, they labored all night and
day, and took nothing; yet then Christ will command them to throw in the Net,
and they shall catch abundantly. When they thus water and plant, God will give
great increase.

Doctr. That the Ministry of God faithfully discharged, according to Gods own
Doct.
Counsel, is a sure way to turn men from their sins.

To explain this, consider:

First, That God has firmly and immoveably set Ministers and Pastors, or their
Office in the Church, for glorious and supernatural effects. That although God
was pleased to make the world, the old Creature, by his own word immediately,
using no Angels, or other things as instruments (nay they could not be used
instrumentally to that infinite work of Creation) yet he is pleased to appoint
spiritual Officers in the Church, To be co-workers, as the Apostle says, with
him, 2 Cor. 6. 1. Not that they cooperate with God in the infusing of grace in
the soul, (no, that is Gods sole work) but they prepare and dispose the subject
in a moral way, by convincing and instructing the Consciences of their
hearers. That God has thus firmly appointed such spiritual Offices is plain,
1 Cor. 12. 28. God has set some in his Chnrh, set as he has set the Sun and
Stars in the Firmament: and then he reckons up extraordinary and ordinary
Offices; and these are called gifts given to men, and the fruits of his
Ascension, Ephesians. 4. 11. where they are again enumerated: So that by these
places, you see a Ministry is a Divine Office, a plant of Gods own planting:
and that it is not a temporary, but a perpetual Office appears by their end,
which is perpetual, Ephesians. 4. 13. till we all come to a full stature in Christ:
And the Apostle in his Epistles to Timothy, laying down the Characters and
Qualities of such who are to be Ministers, he charge those Commandments to be
kept impartially till the coming of Christ. 2 Timothy 5. 21.

Secondly, As God has appointed this Office, so it is the expression of his
wonderful goodness and love to mankind therein. Hence God does so often tell
the Jews of this his great love to them, that he sent them his Prophets,
rising early and warning of them: and in Ephesians. 4. they are called the gifts,
which Christ gave after his Ascension; and indeed they are greater than any
temporal mercies, if men could spiritually judge. The giving of us the heavens
and the earth, with all the abundance thereof, is not like to the giving of
faithful Ministers to a people. Therefore God to comfort the people of Israel
when they were in great extremities, he tells them, He will give them such
Pastors as shall rule after his own heart, Jer. 3. 15. And their eyes shall see
their Teachers, though he feed them with the bread of affliction, Isa. 30. 20.
Hence are those triumphing expressions to them by the godly; How pleasant are
the feet of those who bring the glad tidings of the Gospel? Romans 10, 15. And
how can it be but thought an exceeding great mercy, when God who needs us
not, shall yet send his Ambassadors daily to us, to entreat us to be reconciled
unto him? As if a glorious Emperor should send Messengers to win the affections
of a poor despised Beggar to be espoused to him.

Thirdly, The end of this Office is supernatural, for divine and spiritual
effects. And herein it differs from all earthly employments, who have only
outward 3. The end of the Ministry is supernatural, and fourfold.
happiness and prosperity for their end. Hence it is that they are called
Angels; their employment being sacred and heavenly, like that of the Angels.
Now this supernatural end is reduceable to a fourfold effect.

First, They are appointed for the Conversion, and spiritual change of the
hearts and lives of those to whom they are sent. What a wonder was that of
Peter, who I.
Converted three thousand at one time from their former ignorance and
wickedness! Let not the Heathens any more boast of their Orpheus and his Harp,
which would make wild Beasts came, and follow him; Here Peter does far more
by the spiritual Keys of his Ministry: and thus James says, James 1. We are
begotten by his word, and its the Word of Regeneration. Hence they are called
Fathers, spiritually begetting Children unto them in the Lord. And if that be
true, as it is, which Austin says, The Conversion of the soul is a greater
wonder than any miracle; then where the Ministry has this Divine effect, its
more admirable than to cure blind eyes, or deaf ears, or raise dead men from
the grave. Oh then this is a strong and mighty experiment of Gods work in the
Ministry, when it does reach thus into the inward hearts and consciences of men.

Secondly, Another main end is to confirm and strengthen those that are
converted; To make them grow more and more, as Ephesians. 4. till we come to a full
stature in II.
Christ. Its pride and arrogance to think thy self so knowing, or so godly, as
not to need a Ministry; for suppose thou do hear no more than what thou
know, yet how dull are thy affections? how apt to apostatize, and
back-slide! and therefore the righteous man he needs Ezekiels Watchman as well
as the wicked, that he may not turn from his righteousness, Ezekiel. 3. And this
is a noble fruit of the Ministry, to build up, when a foundation is already
laid, to be adding cubits to thy stature, to be always blowing upon thee with
this spiritual wind, that thy graces may be flourishing and sweetly fragrant
always.

Thirdly, Another effect is to revive and comfort those that are cast down with
the sense and burden of their sins. Hence they are said to preach glad-tidings,
and this III.
is called the tongue of the learned, to speak a word in season to those that
need comfort. These are the good Samaritans, that bring precious oil, these
apply the Balm of Gilead: And oh that we had more subjects to improve this
glorious effect of the Ministry upon: A wounded conscience for sin, is an
unknown thing to men of the world: To feel the Agonies of sin through Gods
displeasure, because of our iniquities, is a Riddle to natural men: but where
such are, how welcome are the glad tidings of a Christ untothem!

Lastly, To direct in matters of doubt and to advise in cases of Conscience.
Hence IIII.
they are compared to light, and to guides, that lead the blind, and direct in
unknown and dangerous ways: and certainly, this is no mean task: Who is
sufficient for this very employment, To determine in perplexed cases of
Conscience, what is to be done, and not to sin? Thus Paul determines many cases
of Conscience in his Epistles, about eating, and not eating, about presence in
Idololatrical Temples, about marriage and single life, 2. Cor. 7. and the
meeting of a Synod at Jerusalem, Act. 15. was in one part to advise in matters
of conscience. These are the four noble and supernatural ends, for which God
has appointed this Office; so that we are to attend upon the Ministry, and to
expect these divine effects in no other ordinary way; for Christ's promise is to
be expected only where his Institution is.

Fourthly, The wisdom of God is herein observable, That having appointed the 4.
Ministry for such supernatural effects, he is pleased to use such outward
contemptible means. We carry, says the Apostle, this Treasure in earthen
Vessels, 2 Cor. 4. 7. The Vessel is contemptible and unworthy, yet the treasure
therein is glorious: That God should work such admirable effects in a way so
unlikely to flesh and blood; this was to confound the world; for when he
appointed the twelve Apostles, who did more to change men's hearts, than ever
all the Emperors could do to propagate their Empire by the sword; how mean and
despicable were they? Thus God has still appointed, that not the humane
eloquence and external pomp of the world, should be isntrumental to this
savoury and spiritual operation; But the plain and simple Explication and
Application of Gods Word; which made Paul truly say, That God has chosen the
foolish and weak things of the world, to confound the wise and strong, 1 Cor.
1. Hence Romans 1. Paul again calls it, The foolishness of Preaching^; that is,
in the eyes of carnal and humane wisdom. The Jews they require a Sign, and
the Greeks wisdom, that is, eloquence and acute demonstrations: But this
foolishness of Preaching, is the power of God to salvation. Oh then take heed,
that vain carnal pride and contempt do not hinder thee from this spiritual
good; as Austin was offended at the simple and plain style of the Scripture, he
found not such swelling, tuned eloquence, as in humane Authors, which made him
say, Dedignabar esse parvulus. Oh know, that unless a man become like a little
child, he can never with faith and trembling receive this word aright. I wonder
not then, if the great wise men of the world do so undervalue this plain way of
Gods Word preached; They cannot become like little children.

Fifthly, Consider, That although the Office and Ministry of the Church be thus
5.
ordained and owned by Christ; yet so universal and general may the ignorance
and corruption be of those that are in this Office, that the clean contrary to
Gods end is brought about. In stead of Instruction, men are more nourished in
Ignorance; instead of Conversion, men more strengthened in their wickedness;
as the false Prophets spoke peace, and promised good to those whom God
abhorred. Oh this is the most fatal judgment that can befall a people, to
have blind, ignorant, dumb and scandalous Ministers; and although people
generally may love to have such, because some eyes cannot abide the light; yet
its the heaviest expression of Gods wrath upon a people. This Chapter
complains that from such false Prophets all evil came to Jerusalem. Even as
if the Sun and Moon should be turned into darkness and blood; so is it, when
those that should be guides, eyes, watchmen, are clean contrary: only by the
way, when these are called here false Prophets, observe, that they may be
called false in two respects, either in regard of their Office, or in regard of
their matter; of their Office, and such are false Prophets, or false Ministers,
as have no true Call either mediate or immediate from God: So that although a
man should preach that which is true and good matter; yet if he have not
lawfully entered into this Office, he is a false Prophet. Consider that
remarkable place: If there arise a false Prophet, who foretells a thing, and the
thing come to pass, I the Lord do it to try you, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. Observe,
that a false Prophet may tell those things that are true; and God does thus
wisely and justly permit these things, to try people whether they be soundly
rooted, or not.

But secondly, a false Prophet or Minister is he, who though he have a true
Call, yet preaches false and corrupt matter to please sinners: Thus these here
are condemned for both: They run, and I sent them not, they were forward, and
yet had no Call. Thus they preached peace to obstinate sinners, and encouraged
them in their wickedness. Marvel not at it, if the Sons of Levi sometimes
need to be purified, Mal. 3. And the Devils main design is either to overthrow
the Ministry, or corrupt it.

Lastly therefore, if so be that Ministers would find the spiritual effect of
their Ministry; and that Gods promise and power might go along with their
Office, they are here directed to stand in Gods Counsels, that is, wholly to be
inquiring of him, and directed by him: for to convert souls being it self
supernatural, the means also must be supernatural, and that can be known only
by divine Revelation. What counsel therefore is it, which God gives them, in
the exercise whereof this comfortable effect may be produced? And,

First, That which is to be done before all other things, is to reform their
own lives; That the world may say, they believe that to be true which they
preach to others. Thus What Ministers must do that their Ministry may be
effectual. 1.
they are to be an example of all purity, chastity, meekness, faith,
temperance, heavenly-mindednesse. Not but that wicked men will cavil and find
spots in the Sun. You see Christ and the Apostles were much traduced, and they
walked through good report and bad; but let them approve their works to the
Lord, and then they shall have comfort. Thus the Apostle to Timothy; Attend to
thy self, and to thy Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4. 13. so shall thou save others: To
himself first, and then his Doctrine; the life of a man preaches; Aarons Bells
hung at his feet. What an uncomely thing is it to see a foul deformed Painter
to draw a curious lovely Image? No less is it to hear a profane Minister
pressing his people to purity; a dissolute Minister to urge his people to
strictnes: and therefore God threatened in Malachy, To make the Priests
contemptible, and as Dung, because they had not kept his Word, Mal. 2. 3. This
is woeful: But when the Ministry, for their faithfulness and opposition to the
wickedness in the world, are then as the Apostles were, made the offscouring
of the World; this is glorious.

Secondly, To take Counsel from God, is when they preach true Scripture, sound
Doctrine, which is after Godliness; for so the Apostle describes it, which is
after 2.
godliness: To please your ears, or delight the fancy, is not an acceptable
work to God; no more than if a Priest in the old Law in stead of offering a
Lamb, or Bullock, shall Sacrifice a Butter-flie, or a Peacock, because of the
radiant color. No, you are to feel it as a two-edged sword, as an hammer; and
the neglect of this solid Scripture-Preaching, has made many Ministers through
carnal affectation vent themselves into vapors and mere froth; and the people
have been fed with wind, instead of solid food. What has the Chaff to do with
the Wheat? says the Prophet in this Chapter. As it was said, He had made great
Progress in Rhetoric, to whose Palate Tullies phrase was pleasing, which is
not so swelling and affected as some other: So he is a good judicious hearer,
and like to get good by preaching, to whom the Scripture matter appears
sound, admirable full of Majesty and worth.

Thirdly, As he is thus to preach sound Doctrine, so there are several
qualifications which are like whetting, to make this two-edged sword enter the
more powerfully. Such are our zeal and tender compassion to men's souls, to cry
out with Rebecca, Give me 3.
Children, or else I dye. Our Savior Christ, when he saw multitudes of people,
though they enjoyed the Teaching of the Scribes and Pharisees, which had some
good use in it, else our Savior would not have directed the people to hear
them; yet its said, His Bowels were moved with compassion toward them, when he
saw them, as Sheep without a Shepherd: Zeal makes the spiritual meat hot, and
so the fitter for digestion.

2. Boldness to reprove sin; Rebuke with all authority. Jeremy must not fear
the faces of men, lest God confound him before them: That which some in a
crafty insnaring manner spoke to Christ, Master, we know thou speak the
truth, and art (...) accepter of persons, should be applied to every Officer in
the Church. Charge them that be rich in this world, That they be not high
minded; We have not received the spirit of fear, but of power. Thus John to
Herod, Paul to Felix, Chrysostom to Eudoxius.

3. With labor and diligence, Preach in season, and out of season: All their
names and titles imply diligence, (...), A Bishop or Over-seer, a Watchman, a
Shepherd. What labor did Jacob undergo in that Office? The Titles they have
are not so much of honor as solicitude; those that labor in the word and
Doctrine.

4. Consideration of their great account which is to be given not only for
their own sins, but of all others committed to them. The Sacrifice that the
Priest was to offer, was greater than that the King was, yea as great as the
whole Congregation for all their sins: to show that their sins as Ministers
were of an horrible aggravation; which made Chrysostom wonder, if any in that
Office could be saved; and indeed with God this is possible, and not with man.

Lastly, all these must be coupled with earnest prayer to God for a blessing
upon his word; for its he that teaches to profit; he opens eyes, he changes
hearts; he raises up the dead. We may lay the staff as Gehezi did, but God
gives life. Christ preached in the day time, and prayed in the night: While
thou ragest, frettest, and art full of heart-burnings against them; little do
thou think what earnest prayers he puts up to God, that his word may be blessed
to thy soul.

Use of Examination: Whether the word preached has obtained this saving Use.
effect upon your souls, although the Ministers of God have stood in his
Counsel. Have they been able to say, we have not ceased to give them daily
warning? O Lord, thou know our pains, our prayers, our desires; and yet they
are trees that bring forth no fruit. Well, God will say to such, Well done,
thou good and faithful Servant, Thou have delivered thy soul, their blood will
be required at their own hands. Its the great question' Why Conversion is not
so frequent, and ordinary now, as in the Primitive times, yea as at the first
reformation out of Popery? To that we may speak the next day: only know, Gods
anger is gone out against men, that he makes them have miscarrying wombs and
dry breasts. How few Ministers can say, as Isaiah, Behold I and the Children
which thou have given me. We would fain, as Jacobs sons were commanded to
bring Benjamin with them into his Fathers presence: so gladly when we shall
appear before God, would we also bring all our hearers with us, saying, Not one
of them committed to my charge is lost: but we have too many sons of perdition.

SERMON LXXXIV.
Why Gods power unto Conversion does not always go along with his Word though
dispensed by a faithful Ministry; and whether corrupt or profane Ministers may
be a means of Conversion.

JER. 23. 22. If they had stood in my Counsel, etc. then they should have
turned them from their evil way.
A Faithful Ministry (as you have heard) following the counsel of the Lord, is
the sure and ordinary way for conversion of men from their evil ways. This
Doctrine has been explained: Let us now Answer some material questions which
will further clear this point.

And First, It may be demanded Whether that Ministry which does indeed stand in
Gods eouncel, may not for all that be without this spiritual success? May not
they Whether a godly ministry may not be without any great success.
for all that see no good and comfortable issue of their labors? May not they
complain they have labored in vain? Shall we argue such a Ministry to be
corrupt, and unfaithful, because they are not blessed with spiritual children,
like Olive plants about them.

I Answer, That it does too often fall out, that even those who stand in Gods
counsel, that follow this star, do yet plough and sow upon the rocks, and see no
Answ.
seed grow up. Therefore this Text or Doctrine is not such a general, but that
it has its exceptions; and if we will seek for instances, how plentiful are
they to confirm this: Shall we think that this Jeremiah, who is so zealous
against the false prophets, that he did not take a true and faithful course in
his Ministry, yes, his whole prophecy does manifest that. Yet how sad are his
complaints that he had no success in his Ministry, Jor. 6. 29. The bellows
are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire, the founder m^lteth in vain, the
wicked are not plucked away; where Jeremiah is compared to a Refiner, or
Founder, his mouth is the bellows: The prophecy he had from God, was the
breath, or blast, the corrupt and impure mettle was the wicked Jews. Now all
this blowing, and pains in refining, was in vain, for the dross would not melt
away. Thus also the Prophet Isai, he stood in Gods council, yet he cries out,
Who has believed our report? Isai. 53. 1. And again, All the day long have I
stretched out my hands in vain. Ez^chiel also, a Prophet so frequently in
communion with God by spiritual visions, and therefore so often called the Son
of man, that these revelations may not puff him up: Yet God tells him, he goes
to a people that will not hear: but whether they will hear, or forbear, they
must have a Prophet sent to them, Ezekiel. 3. Yea, what need we go further for
witness to confirm this, when Christ himself, in whom were all the treasures
of wisdom and holiness, and no man ever preached like him; yet the number of
his converts were few, in respect of the multitude he preached unto, which made
him so bewail the Nation of the Jews, as a tree that had enjoyed much culture
and dressing, but still continued unfruitful, and so was to be cut down and
cast into the fire.

But what are the reasons, Why Gods power should not always go along with his
institutions? Why Gods power does always go along with his word. Reasons on
Gods part. 1.
What hinders, if when all things requisite on the Ministers part are
concurrent? Yet God withdraws himself. Now there may be reasons, first on
Gods part two ways.

First, From the freedom and arbitrarinesse in his works: He does in heaven
and earth whatsoever he pleases. The spirit blows where it lists, John 3.
Though therefore God has tied and bound us to wait on the Ministry, we must
frequent the Ordinances, yet he has not bound himself to work at every time,
to every Auditory. God keeps this sovereignty to himself: one Ministry shall
be more successful then another, and at one time more then another, and to
some people more then others: Yea, many times God makes the weakest, and most
unlikely Ministry to be more fruitful then a learned able one: even as Leah,
that was more deformed, had more Children then Rachell, who was more comely and
beautiful. So that as it is solely in Gods will, to whom he will to send a
faithful Ministry, he gives to some that make no use of it, yea that hate it
and are weary of it; and again denies it to others that long for it, or that
would with the Tyrians and Sydonians manifest greater affections to it. Thus
also when he has bestowed this Ministry upon a people, it is successeful no
otherwise then he will appoint: And herein we are to advance Gods
dispensations, which are wise and just, though the reasons be not always
visible to us. Even as although God gave the Apostles power to work miracles,
yet they could not do these when and where they plesed, for then Paul would
have recovered Epaphroditus; but they did them only when he vouchsafed power.
So that it is not of us that plant or water, But of God that gives increase, 1
Cor. 3.

A second reason on Gods part is his justice: For when a people have by their
former 2.
obstinacy, and unfruitfulnesse under the means of Grace, provoked him to
anger, he does inflict that just judgment of a blind mind, and an hard heart,
never to understand or be converted: and this is very woeful, but very
ordinary. Thus John 12. This is the reason why the Jews, notwithstanding the
daily preaching they had heard with their ears, and the miracles they had seen
with their eyes, yet it is said, They could not believe, because of that
spiritual judgment which was upon their souls. And thus it was also with
Esaias, Cap. 6. He is sent, not to turn them from their evil ways, but
accidentally through their corruption, to make them more obdurate, Oh then if
we see where much faithful preaching is, yet little Conversion, let us fear
and tremble at the wrath of God upon such a people. If God has given them up
to their own lusts? If he has smitten them with blindness of mind, and
wilful rebellion against his word, then they are under the judgment of all
judgments? And is not this anger of God visibly gone out against all our
Congregations? Was it not a plain demonstration that God had forsaken Saul,
when he would neither answer him by Prophet, or Urim and Thummin, or any other
way? So it is thy case; Neither prayer for thee, or preaching to thee is made
powerful to convince thy Conscience, to change thy heart: Oh men in the state
of Gall and Wormwood, though they think not, or believe not so of themselves.
Thou should after every Sermon say, Oh Lord why is it that this word has not
yet turned me from my sins? Oh what is the matter that it has not such power
upon me? Oh what shall I do? Have pity upon me, O God, and soften my heart.
Have pity upon me, O ye Ministers, and pray for me, that God would give me a
soft heart.

Another reason why the Minister, though faithful, may not yet rejoice to see
Reasons from the Ministry
the good fruit of his labors, is from the Ministry it self, and that two
ways also.

First, The Ministry does not work like a natural cause to the Conversion of
men, 1.
as fire burns, and the stone falls down, but as a mere instituted, and
Moral cause, as they call it, that is by the Council and power of God
accompanying it. If it did work as a natural Cause, from an inbred power, in it
self, then it would work always alike; then it would never be frustrated of
its operation without a miracle: as that the fire did not burn the three
Worthies, it was a miracle. If the Word of God preached should turn men from
sin this way, it would be a miracle that every Sermon, did not convert every
sinner: but it works only as an instituted cause. And thus as the pool of
Bethesda did not at any time vouchsafe healing, but when the Angel descended
into it: so neither do our Sermons upon every person, and at any time work upon
those that hear; but as Gods power shall come in; and therefore as was said at
the Sacrament, should be also at preaching, Sursum Corda, lift up your hearts
to him that is a Teacher in heaven: as he Baptiseth not with water, but with
fire; so he teaches by fire also. And this should direct people by earnest
prayer to look up to him: say, Lord, if thou go not along with me in
hearing; if thou speak not to my dead heart to live, to my hard heart to
become soft, it cannot be. Lord if thou had been here, says she, my Brother
had not dyed And so may we say, Lord, if thou had gone along with this
Sermon, with this truth, it had not perished without profit.

Secondly, The Ministry, though faithfully discharged, yet is in a subservient
way to Gods election. Now many are called that are not chosen: the Ministry is
sent where election has not to do sometimes: But then to such it is like an
excellent Medicine that is only proffered, and not received to work any good:
where therefore the Word of God does convert and make these admirable changes,
it is but the execution of Gods Election from eternity. Thus it is said, As
many believed, as were ordained to eternal life, Acts 13. 48. And Paul was to
preach at one place, because God had many people there; so that Election is
sure to obtain, Romans 11. 21. Wonder not then that the Ministry does not Convert
all, no more then that God does not Elect all. For on whom God has fixed this
purpose of Love, there he will take away the Heart of stone, make plain the
highest mountain, and change a most ravening Wolf into a Lamb.

Thirdly, Therefore a Godly Ministry following Gods Council, may yet bring
forth none, or very little fruit, because of considerations on the Ministers
part also: For Reasons on the Ministers part.
as in the Old Testament, though increase of Children were promised as a
blessing; yet many good women were much afflicted with barrenness, as Sarah,
Rachel, Hannah, and others: So it may be here in the dispensations of Gods
word. Those that have received five, or ten, may be diligent in employing of
it, and yet have no more increase then he that hid his Talent in a Napkin,
though with less guilt: For success is Gods work, not the Ministers duty. And
this may be

First, To humble Godly and faithful Ministers. Had they a multitude of
Converts? Did they see God so visibly go along with them? this might stir up
pride 1.
and vanity in them, as multitude of revelations was in danger to puff up Paul.
The Disciples when they returned from their spiritual progress to Christ, were
carnally rejoicing that the Devils were subject to them; and they could work
miracles in his Name, our Savior to humble them says, Rejoice not in this,
but that your names are written in heaven, Luke 10. 20. God therefore may say
not in anger, as he to S^alum, but in mercy, Write this man childlesse.

Secondly, God may give no more success, to draw out their Grace, and their
love to him the more: For this is a great testimony of it, when we can rejoice
2.
that Gods work goes on, though he will not use us as instruments. We see
John's Disciples had some envious thoughts to Christ, and his; and therefore
told John, That all went after him whom he Baptized; now see how graciously
John answers them, I told you I was not the Messiah, but I must decrease, and
he must increase, John 3. 30. The Pharisees envy against Christ, because the
multitude ran after him, did work the clean contrary to that in John, even to
the killing of him. It much that affection in Sarah, to be willing Abraham
should have children, though it was not by her: There is this corruption in us,
that we only would be the instruments God should use. As he said in vain
glory, This is the Babylon I have built; so we, This is the Jerusalem I have
built.

Thirdly, Hereby God would teach even faithful Ministers, that he needs no man's
3.
parts, no man's gifts or abilities: Christ took three of his Disciples up into
the transfiguration; this was a great favor, for it was the glimpse of glory.
Now he did this to them, and not to other of the Disciples: Christ has some
special favors which he will dispense as he pleases; for as the fountain
heedeth not the stream, nor the sun its beam, but they are wholly from them;
thus God needs not the graces, the gifts, the enlargements of istruments; but
many times (as the Apostle in another case) puts the greatest glory upon the
most uncomely parts.

Lastly, A Ministry following Gods Counsel, may yet find no success, because
of A reason from the people.
the froward, and indisposed temper of the people. Thus Christ weeps over
Jerusalem; How often would I have gathered thee, and thou would not? Thus the
Word also did not profit the Israelites, because it was not mingled with Faith:
and if our Gospel be hid (says the Apostle) It is to those that perish, whose
eyes the God of this world has blinded, 2 Cor. 4. 3. O words worthy of all
observation. If it be hid, that is, if men do not understand it, do not feel
the power of it, it is because thou art one to perish, one to be damned: It is
because the Devil has shut thine eyes. Oh then lay the fault where it is: Thou
art apt to to blame the Ministry, to cavil at him, or to blame his preaching.
But see what the Apostle says, If our Gospel, if our preaching be hid to you,
it is because you are to perish: For as the husbandman, though he should be
never so laborious in ploughing, sowing, and fitting the ground; though he be
never so careful to provide precious and choice seed, yet if the nature of the
ground be so barren, as it will bear no seed, or cause it to degenerate into
Cockle, all the labor is in vain: Or as the Gardener, though he water and
dress never so carefully, yet if the tree be dead at the root, it is all to no
purpose: So though the Ministers of God are very earnest in praying, preaching,
informing, rebuking, yet where the Tree is dead at the root, What hope is there!

The second grand quaere may be, Whether a corrupt Ministry that neglects the
Whether a corrupt Ministry may be the means of conversion.
counsel of God, may not yet be a means of Conversion? Whether an ungodly
Ministry may not be used by God to convert others? This was a question
discussed of old, between the Orthodox, and the Donatists; for the Donatists
thought, that if any Minister fell into gross sins, neither the preaching of
the word, nor his administration of Sacraments could do any good to others; for
how, said they, can death be a means to beget life? How can darkness produce
light? How can a Member of the Devil make a Member of Christ?

To answer this case, First, We must distinguish of the corruption of a
Minister: Answ.
For either it is Doctrinal, in respect of that matter which he preaches; or
else practical in regard of his life and Conversation: if the Corruption be
Doctrinal, then it is either total, or partial: Total, when he does wholly
forsake the Truth, and preach nothing but damnable Heresies, and the vain lies
and imaginations of his heart: and he that is thus corrupted universally, can
never convert others: The reason is, because the word and Truth of God is that
immortal seed, by which we are begotten: Sanctify them by thy truth, thy word
is truth, John 17. So that Divine truths are the only instrument of life
spiritual, as good food and not poison is of natural; but if it be only
partial, not in fundamentals, but superstitious additions; that ministry in
some respects may be profitable: and hereupon our Savior bid them hear the
Scribes and Pharisees, While thy sat in Moses chair, i. e. as long as they
preached the Doctrine of Moses, but then those that live under such a corrupt
Ministry, had need be very judicious to distinguish between good and bad,
Therefore our Savior, who allowed the people to hear the Scribes and
Pharisees, did also at the same time bid them take heed, and beware of their
Doctrine.

But in the next place, suppose they be Orthodox, and sound in their
judgments, Whether a profane minister may convert any.
yet ungodly and profane in their lives, Can we think God will honor such?
Can salt if it has lost his savor season others? Can light, not put under a
Bushel, but under a noisome dunghill, Can that enlighten others? Yet such
unsavourie salt, such obscured light is every profane Minister. To Answer
this, Consider,

First, That if that Holy and good discipline which Christ has appointed in
his Church were observed, no such ungodly Ministers were to be endured in
public office. Answ.
Hence Paul commands Timothy, That he ordain no man a Minister that is of an
ungodly and profane life; and certainly if Christ would have every particular
person, that is an obstinate wicked person, cast out of the Church, how much
rather an ungodly officer in the Church?

Secondly, Yet suppose that a corrupt Minister is continued for want of good
Discipline, it cannot be denied but an ungodly life is a great occasion to pull
down as much as the word builds up. Examples do work more then precepts. The
lives of Spiritual Shepherds are like those rods Jacob laid in the way for the
sheep to look on, that they might bring such colored lambs; and therefore if
ever they are instruments to convert others, it is a strange, a rare and
wonderful thing. Hence in Daniel, those that convert others to righteousness,
are said to shine like the stars in the firmament, Dan. 12. 3. which wicked men
cannot do.

Thirdly, But for all this we cannot say absolutely and universally, That no
ungodly Minister is used at any time an instrument to convert others, no more
then their ungodliness may hinder the good effect of the Sacraments they
administer, for these two reasons. First of Example in Scripture, That makes no
distinction between Judas and the other Disciples in the success of the
Ministry; They all twelve were sent out, they all did miracles, they all casted
out Devils, they all returned to Christ and gave him an account of their
success. To them all Christ said, He had ordained that they should go out,
viz. in their preaching, and bear much fruit, viz. in their Ministry, John 15.
16. And our Savior expressly says of some, That they should prophecy in his
name, yet he would bid them depart, because workers of iniquity: and Phil. 3.
There were false Apostles who preached Christ out of envy, supposing to add
more affliction and persecution to Paul, which must needs be an high degree of
wickedness and malice, yet Paul said, He rejoiced that Christ was preached
howsoever, which could not be if their preaching did no good. Although indeed
to these examples of Juaas, and the false Apostles, it may be answered, That
they were not at that time gross and scandalous sinners for ought can appear,
but unregenerate and spiritually wicked, not corporally.

2. They may be used by God for conversion, because the Ministry is gratia
gratis data, not gratia gratum faciens; It is appointed for the public good of
others, not for the Ministers good so much; and therefore God may work that end
of the public good, though the instrument be sinful: As says Austin, The seed
that is sown by a foul diseased hand, may bring forth fruit as well as that
which is sown by a clean hand.

Use of Admonition, take heed that the Word of God have no effect upon thee
because of thy sins. Oh how terrible will it be when it shall appear, God has
done for thy conversion what a gracious God might do; The Minister has done
what a faithful Minister should do, but thou have not done what a good hearer
should do: What is that? 1. Thou art not swift to hear, thou art careless,
negligent, thou do not diligently wait on the gates of wisdom, as sick men do
at the Physicians doors. 2. Thou do not lay aside all superfluity of
naughtiness, as the same Text requires; and so the word is like rain falling
on dirty ground that makes it more dirty. 3. Thou do not retain it and hide
it in thy heart as David, thou do not cover it with warmth, as the fowl does
her eggs; thou art but almost persuaded to leave thysins.

SECT. X. Of the Nature of Grace, under the Expressions of Taking away the
Stoney-Heart, Giving a Heart of Flesh, and, Writing Gods Law in the heart, with
the counterfeit thereof.
SERMON LXXXV.
Displayeth Gods Sovereignty and Dominion over the hearts of men.

EZEKIEL. 32. 26. the latter part.

I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
heart of flesh.


AT Verse 21. in this Chapter, God begins to open the treasures of his mercies.
We may say, This latter part of the Chapter is like the Land of Canaan, a Land
of Promise, flowing with spiritual milk and honey; for here is the promise of
reduction from their miserable Captivity, Verse 24. But because outward mercies
are nothing, without spiritual, therefore there is 1. The promise of the pardon
of their sins: It was not enough to be delivered from the power and rage of
their Enemies, unless also they were saved from the guilt of their sins; this
is promised Verse 25. But if men have pardon of sin, and not saved from the
power of it, they will every moment make themselves obnoxious to their former
misery; therefore Verse 26. there is a promise of Conversion and
Sanctification, with the consequent effects of it, in the 27. Verse: So that
this Text, if opened, is like a Box of precious Ointment; or like the Tree in
the Revelation, not only the fruit, but the very leafs, every particular word
has its efficacy. And for the better method, consider, 1. The Author and
Efficient cause of the mercy promised, I will take away, I will give: See here
Gods Sovereignty, and immediate power over men's hearts. No King or Emperor in
the world is able to say so, I will give men other hearts. 2. The mercy
promised, and that is 1. By removing the obstruction or contrary, I will take
away the stony heart. 2. By the position of the good vouchsafed, and that is
set down, 1. In the root. in the habit or fountain, A heart of flesh. 2. In the
fruit, stream or actual operations, I will cause them to walk in my statutes,
etc. 3. There is observable, 1. The manner of Gods vouchsasing this, it is by
way of promise, I will do thus and thus; an absolute promise, not suspended
upon man's merits or pre-requisites. 2. The manner of the working of this, its
irresistably, insuperably, omnipotently: So that the heart of a man is a
subject merely patient to receive it; not a free Agent to cooperate with this
mighty grace In all these particulars, we shall find what Sampson did in the
Lions carcass, many honey combs of spiritual honey: And let us begin with the
first, The sole efficient cause, who has the dominion over men's hearts: I will
take away the heart of stone; he that by his omnipotent word could say, Let
there be light, and there was light; does also here say, Let the stony heart
become soft; let the hard heart become tender, and it presently yields, it does
not withstand God; as if God had said, I know your hearts are too hard for you,
you cannot master them, you cannot change them, but I can do it: Whence observe.

That God has an immediate dominion and power over men hearts. Observe.


This is the sole prerogative of God, he can raise what terror and horror he
pleases there, and all the world cannot assuage it: He also can give peace and
comfort, and all the Devils in hell cannot take it away: If they were so
affected, as to cry out, What manner of person is this, whom the winds and seas
obey? how much rather may we cry out, What is that God, how great and
wonderful, who works in the hearts of men what he pleases? Thus Psalm 33. 15.
an excellent Psalm against Atheism, wherein the Psalmist gives several
arguments to prove the providence of God, that things are not carried in this
world, as men's lusts and counsels would have it, but as God orders it, either
in mercy or justice: This, I say, the Psalmist would have men believe; for when
we see things done in the world, contrary to that we judge righteousness, and
yet no judgments immediately following, we are ready to be tempted about our
faith. As Pompey, when he was overcome by Caesar, fled to Athens, and there
disputed there was no providence, because he thought he was deserted in a just
cause: But this is to be ignorant of God, and not to be able to plough with his
heifer, to understand the Scripture, by which all those Divine Riddles may be
opened. Now among other arguments, he brings one that confirms my Doctrine, He
fashoneth their heart alike: The Argument is this, He that makes the heart
knows every thing in the heart, and can make it think, will and love, as he
pleases. As the Artificer that makes a clock, he knows all things about the
clock, and makes it strike when and where he pleases: And the words are
Emphatical, He fashioneth; the same word is used of Gods fashioning man's body
out of the dust at first: So that God can as easily form and fashion the souls
of men, as he can their bodies; he can as easily strike them with fear, as the
body with diseases. Again, He fashioneth them alike; in the Hebrew (...) Simul;
that is, as some expound, all men's hearts, there is not one man's excepted; or
else as others, totally and wholly, there is nothing can arise in the heart,
not the least thought, or the least motion, but it comes by Gods providence.
Hence Prove. 21. 1. the Kings heart is said to be in the hand of the Lord: A
Kings heart, the greatest of men, and whose counsels and purposes seem to be
most hidden, and most potent to be effected; And its in the hand of the Lord: A
notable expression, to show how easily he can govern and turn as he pleases;
and then he uses an excellent similitude, He turns it as the Rivers of
waters: That as a stream of water running down the torrent, can easily by the
husbandman be stopped and turned down another course, either to refresh his
ground, or annoy it: Thus the Lord turns the hearts of those that rule in the
world, either for mercy or judgment, as he pleases. Now the better to clear
this truth, we will amplify this Sovereign Dominion of God over men's hearts,
in three particulars: Gods dominion over men's hearts is seen.
1. As in the way of his general Providence. 2. In the way of his Justice 3. In
the way of his Grace: And in all these three particulars God is admirable.

In the way of his Providence, his power over hearts is manifested:

First, In a sudden changing and raising up of their hearts by his mighty work
for such employments, that they were no ways able for before: That which 1. In
the way of his providence.
all the men in the world could not give; That which all the Angels in heaven
could not, that God does immediately. Thus Saul, when he was appointed to be
King over Israel, he was of the meanest Tribe, the meanest Family in the Tribe,
an ordinary man; and yet it is said, God gave him another heart; and when he
had that, with what courage and boldness did he take the Government upon him:
That other spirit, was not a spirit of Grace and Godliness, as the Arminians
would have it, but of Government, and Political Abilities; in token whereof,
Samuel at the Sacrifice, gave him a shoulder of it; to show the Government upon
his shoulders, and how he must bear the people: And as this was wonderful for
God to make such a change in him, so on the people also to receive him for
their King: All those followed him, whose hearts God had touched, says the
Text, 1 Samuel 10. 26. God did but touch their hearts, as the Musician does the
strings of his instrument, and they sound what he would have them: Such a
spirit of Government, those seventy Elders had, that were to assist Moses; God
took of Moses his spirit, and bestowed on them: Thus the Judges that God raised
up in Israel, when they were in so many extremities, especially Joshua, whom
some say, was the Heathens Hercules: These all felt the mighty work of God upon
their hearts.

Secondly, Gods power over men's hearts in a general way, is seen, In the 2.
abating and asswaging those fierce affections, and angry resolutions that men
have one against another: God in a moment can command those waves and winds to
be still. We have two famous examples for this; the former, in Esau and Jacob;
what resolved malicious intentions were in Esau, after the mourning for his
father was over to kill Jacob? and now there was a full opportunity put into
his hand; Jacob had no power to withstand him, and of a sudden Esaus affections
are wholly changed to him, Genesis 33. 20. How comes this black cloud to blow
away so immediately? was it not because God wrought, and moved upon his heart.
The latter instance, is of Laban and Jacob, he goes out also in a great fury
against Jacob; but what says God to him? See thou do not speak any word to
Jacob, Genesis 31. 24. and this presently softened his heart: We might add to
this, the meltings of Saul's heart toward David sometimes, when otherways he
was full of poison and venom: Thus also Joseph found favor in the eyes of
Pharaoh: And a notable instance there is, 2 Chronicles. 18. 31. where the Army of
the Syrians surprising Iehoshaphat, and thinking to destroy him, he cried out,
and God helped him; But how? the Text says, God moved them to depart from him.
So that we see, all our applications should be to God. Men have not their
hearts in their own power; men cannot think hurt to thee, yea, they cannot but
think and purpose good to thee, wherefore God moves the hearts of men thereto:
Thus he says to these waves, Hitherto thou shall go, and no further; he binds
up these clouds in the air.

Thirdly, Gods Providential working on men's hear^s, is seen in the inclination
3.
and determination of them (when they are indifferent in themselves) to such
ways, as whereby he will bring honor and glory to himself: In nothing under the
heavens is Gods Soveraignity so much seen, as here: For the hearts of men, are
those great instruments, by which he produces so many notable effects in the
world: Nebuchadnezzar is remarkable herein; the Prophet describes him as
standing at two ways, Ezekiel. 21. 21, 22. either to fight against Israel, or
another Nation: Now it was all one to him, which way he went, yet God so
ordered, that he should go against them. Thus as God is said to ponder and
weigh men's hearts in one sense; so in this sense also, he lays men's hearts in
a balance, and they easily incline this way or that way, and God he puts in
something that inclines their hearts rather this way then that way. Hence the
great Monarchs of the world, the Babylouian and Persian, they are compared to
Hatchets, to Hammers, to Bees, over which God has a command. The whole world
is his Host, and God is the Emperor or Commander; and he bids this go, and he
goes, that come, and he comes; as the Centurion did his men under him: What a
wonderful work was that upon Cyrus his heart, and his Successors, to let the
Jews build their Temple unto God again; yea, what a strange passage was that of
good to Mordechai, when the King could not sleep, that he should call for a
Book to read, rather then for sports or pleasures; and that of all Books, the
History or Chronicles of memorable things done in the Kingdom; and in that
History, he should pitch on the good service Mordechai had done, and was not
rewarded. Its remarkable also, that when God intended to punish Abimilech and
the Sechemites, Judges 9. its said, God sent an evil spirit between them, and
that was their ruin at last: Oh then how much is this God to be feared, to be
obeyed, who does in Heaven and Earth what he wills! Its not as Great men, as
Mighty men, as Wise men will; but the counsel of the Lord that shall stand.

Lastly, God in the Old Testament had a notable way of bringing about the
hearts of men for his great and mighty works by Dreams. 4.


There are three kinds of Dreams, Natural, Diabolical, by way of delusion: or
Supernatural, immediately raised in men by God. In such a way God Of Dreams.
formerly did inform men sometimes: Thus Jacob laying his head on a stone, had
a dream; and Joseph a dream about his Superiority over his Brethren, Genesis 48.
12. yea, Pilates wife had a dream, which she told Pilate, that he should have
nothing to do with that just man, to shed his innocent blood, Mat. 27. 19. But
that is disputed, whether the Devil did not put that dream into her, because he
would not have Christ crucified, knowing that by Christ's death, his Kingdom
would be dissolved; But how does that agree with Satan's entering into Judas
heart, tempting him to betray his Master. There were two great Kings, and
Heathens, such as had no knowledge of God, and yet God did visit them by
dreams, of things to come; as Pharaoh by seven years of barrenness, and seven
of fruitfulness; Nebuchadnezzar of the change of his Kingdom, and the mighty
alienation of it in time: But these did not understand them, till Joseph, and
Daniel, revealed the mystery to them.

Secondly, In the next place, Gods power over the hearts of men, in a way of
II. In the way of his Justice. 1.
Justice, is also admirable: And that in two respects:

First, In infatuating the counsels and thoughts of wise men: He strikes the
great ones of the world, when he is angry, with the spirit of madness and
giddiness, Isa. 24. 45. Thus David prayed, That God would turn Achitophels
counsel into folly, only God could do it: And the Princes of Zoan and Egypt,
that thought they were wise, and none like them, God stroke them with folly and
giddiness: So true is that old observation, Quos Deus vult perdere, prius
dormentat, When God intends to destroy and ruin man, he first begins with
their understanding, inflicting giddiness upon that: The eyes of a man first
dye, theu say, and so men perish first in their counsels, thoughts and designs,
afterward in other things: Thus God is said To catch the crafty in their own
wisdom, and he knows that the thoughts of the wise they are vain, 1 Cor. 3.

Secondly, Gods Justice upon men's hearts is, in the spiritual blinding and
hardening 2.
of them: Thus God is said to harden Pharaohs heart; and Elys sons would not
heaken to good counsel, because it was of the Lord to destroy them: Whom he
will, he hardens, says the Apostle, Romans 9. But this is a tender point,
Divines are large about it; only know, that God does not infuse hardness of
heart, nor any evil disposition in men, for he cannot be the author of that of
which he is the Avenger; but it is by withdrawing and denying his mollifying
Grace: And then as the withdrawing of fire from the water, makes it presently
cold, and return to its native temperament; so it is here, God forsaking the
heart by denying his mollifying and softning oparations, it cannot but grow
stiff and obdurate against God.

Thirdly, In the last place, Let us view the glorious power of God, over the
hearts of III. In the way of his Grace.
men in a gracious way; and that is properly intended in the Text: I will give
an heart of flesh. Now Gods work on the heart, when he changes it, in these
particulars:

First, He convinces and enlightens the mind with such a glorious light, that
1.
the person converted stands amazed at it: That we should show forth his praise
who has translated us out of darkness, into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9
And you that were darkness, are now made light, Ephesians. 4. This is the seeing
eye that God vouchsafes to some men: Now then, if to restore eyes to the
blind, was so wonderful a work, how wonderful is it to give a man new light?
God gives a man new abilities to see; he does not only bring the object, and
the medium, but the ability also; and till this be done, its impossible men
should ever love or desire what is good: Oh look up then to this! you are apt
to be wise in your own eyes, you are apt to say, as the Pharisees did, We see:
But pray earnestly to God for this spirit of illumination; thou will then find
as much difference in thy self, as one in a dark close dungeon; and another,
that is come out into the open Sunshine.

Secondly, Gods work on the heart, is to raise up such affections as may make
the 2.
yoke of Christ easy: That may make thee with delight and joy, to embrace what
is good: for here is the great obstruction against conversion, men have carnal
and earthly hearts, they delight in what is evil, they embrace the dunghill,
they love the mire, like swine. hence all heavenly and spiritual objects are
grievous and burthensom to them: Now then God he can turn this clod of earth,
into a star in the sky; he can change this heavy lumpish temper, into a
gracious spiritual disposition: And when he does thus, then what was once
tedious and grievous, now becomes pleasant and joyful.

Thirdly, He does make the heart tender and melting: And this is the great
mercy 3.
here promised: for naturally the heart is a stone in spiritual things; it has
^o apprehension, no joy, no sense; lay all the wrath of God before it, and you
cannot move it, you cannot make it mourn and grieve; but when God puts forth
this power, then a dry wilderness is turned into a pool of water; then the
mountains melt like wax before him; then rocks are turned into streams of
water: O then admire, and pray for this mighty work of God! do thou complain
thy heart is like the nether millstone? Oh it will not melt, it will not
change, it will not yield to God! go to this heart maker, and he will be an
heart breaker.

Fouthly, That which is the most admirable operation upon the heart, is the
bowing 4.
and bending of it, so as to make it of unwilling willing: Thus this expression
of the Text, I will give an heart of flesh, does denote the efficacy and
intimateness of his power; and so the Apostle says, God works in us to will;
and in this very point, upon this hinge hangs that great and special truth,
which the Orthodox maintain against Arminians and Papists: They will grant an
irresistible work of light upon the understanding, they will grant a potent
work upon the affections, but this they will not yield, that God makes the will
to will, that he so boweth and changes the heart, that it readily imbraceth,
what once it abhorred; yet in all that are converted, this power so
efficacious, must be needs put forth; for will not experience witness, that
every man's will, before converting grace came, was as opposite to God, as
averse to all holiness, as any natural man's in the world? did he not dispute,
argue, refuse, and show all unwillingness, till God broke open the gate of the
soul; he comes into the heart while the doors of it are shut: Thus he is said
to open the heart of Lydia, Acts 16. and Paul, was he willing to receive
Christ? did not he oppose, persecute and violently pursue the Church of God;
and while he was in these furious outrages, did not God in a moment bow his
heart, that he cries out, Lord, what will thou have me to do: But of this more
in the manner of Gods conversion.

Lastly, The sovereignty of Gods power, is to be adored, that he can comfort
the 5.
heart with heavenly joy, or wound it with sad and heavy temptations and
desertions when he pleases! Our hearts are calm and tempestuous, even as he
speaks the word, Job 34. 29. who can give trouble, if he speak quietness,
whether to a person or a nation. God struck the heart of great Nebuchadnezzar,
and made him like a beast; and he can strike the heart of a wicked man, and
make him roar like one damned in hell: Thus we see David sometimes complains
of the great terrors that he was even distracted with; and at another time, his
heart over-floweth with joy: This ebbing and flowing is according to the
presence or absence of Gods favor.

This point is worthy of all practical improvement: And Use. 1.


First, It shows what poor, weak and empty shadows all the great, wise,
powerful and mighty men of the world are: They are not the masters of their own
hearts, they cannot tell what they shall think, what they shall purpose, much
less, do, the next day. Well does the Psalmist say, They are lighter then dust
orvanity: What a folly then is it to put confidence in such, to trust in any
arm of flesh: You see a shadow is not able to move it self, but is this way or
that way, as the body stirs; so is all earthly and humane power: God uses
these Rods, these Axes, which way he pleases: Oh then say, nothing is great
but God, hope in nothing, trust in nothing but in God. An hill or an high
mountain may be something, if compared with the low valleys; but if with the
heavens its but a pins point: So earthly power and greatness, may be a terrible
thing to those that are weaker. Giants are tall things to Grasshoppers, but
compare them with God, and they are nothing, yea less then nothing.

Use 2, Is God thus powerful over the heart, then let the godly be comforted,
Use 2.
who find their hearts too strong for them; O their proud heart, their hard
heart, their unbelieving heart, their earthly heart, what shall they do? Its
true, should thou pray the Potentates of the world, yea the Angels of heaven,
to give thee a better heart, they could do nothing: O but God he is gracions,
ready, willing and able.

Lastly, Of terror to wicked men, how easily can he raise terrors and horrors
Use 3.
in that jolly heart of thine: If Judas and Cain would have given all the world
for a quiet heart, they could not have purchased it: Do not then presume too
long; do not still venture to offend him; he can send thee home with a roaring,
restless heart, he can make thee cry out, There is no help for me, O for a drop
of ease.

SERMON LXXXVI.
Of the Heart of stone, and what wickedness that name implies.

EZEKIEL. 36. 26. I will take away the stony heart, etc.
THe second thing observed in this Magna Charta, or grand promise of conversion
is, the good it self spoken of, which is described, 1. Negatively, or by
removing the opposite. 2. Positively. Let us consider what is that grand
obstruction which must be taken away, ere we can have an heart of flesh; and
that is the heart of stone must be removed. The word stone when it is used
Tropically in the Scripture, it is sometimes taken in a good sense, and
sometimes in a bad sense: In a good sense, for that which is firm and enduring;
thus Christ is called a foundation stone, Isa. 28. 16. and Believers living
stones, 1 Pet. 2. 5. because of their solid and firm compacting and union with
Christ. In which sense Bonaventure said the clean contrary to this promise,
Nolo Domine cor carneum, da lapideum, O Lord, I will not have an heart of
flesh, that is, flexible, and easily drawn any way; but a stony heart, that is
firm and enduring in good against all opposition whatsoever. But in this place
the word stone is used in an ill sense, for a senseless, stupid and rebellious
heart against Gods word. As the stone in the fire will sooner fly in the face
of him that sits by, then melt. So the heart of every man by nature will sooner
oppose, gainsay, and rage at those who reprove or instruct then melt, or yield
obedience: Whereas, Ier. 23. Gods word is said to be an hammer, beating the
very rocks in pieces; here it will have no such operation, unless God make this
promise effectual.

That every man naturally in respect of any divine or spiritual good, has a
very Observe.
heart of stone.

The disease of the stone in the body is an exquisite and unexpressible
torment, how much would men give to be eased of it. But this stone in the
heart, whereby we are wholly senseless and stupid about heavenly things, moved
neither with love or fear, or grief, is above all this torment, if men did
rightly judge of it. It was the Poets fiction, that men were made of stones,
Inde genus durum sumus: to be sure, there is this spiritual stone on the
heart; whereby we are an hard, tough, rugged, and untractable people; insomuch
that wheresoever God converts men by the Ministry, there he raises up children
to Abraham out of stones, there he makes water to gush out of rocks, there he
makes dry bones to gather together and live. To amplify this, let us consider
how much wickedness this How much wickedness is implied in this Epithete,
Stony heart. 1.
Epithete (stony) does imply to be in every man naturally.

And first, It denotes senselessness and stupidity; for so commonly we
express that by a stone. We say of a senseless, irrational man, As good speak
to a stone. Thus Nabals heart is said to be dead within him, and become like a
stone, he was astonished and amazed through the danger coming upon him, he was
made stupid, and apprehended nothing. The Scripture delights by way of contempt
to call the Heathen Idols, wood and stones, because they had eyes and saw not,
feet and walked not: Just such stocks and stones are all men by nature; they
have cors and hear not, they have hearts and understand not. That whereas the
Prophet cried to that insensible Altar of stones, O Altar, Altar, 1 King. 13.
2. and presently it rent asunder, here the Ministers of God may cry aloud, and
no man is sensible of his sin, or cries out, What have I done? Oh then pray
that God would remove that heavy stone, which lies upon thy heart, that under
all preaching and teaching makes thee still so insensible, that Ministry or no
Ministry, judgments or no judgments are all one to thee. Do not then be any
longer like the stones in the wall, who know nothing, understand nothing,
though they are built in the walls of the Church where much preaching is. Some
derive (...) the people, from a stone, I know for other reasons, but we may
say, because of the stony heart, and insensibleness that is in them.

Secondly, It implies incapacity and indisposedness unto any thing that is
holy. As they are not sensible, so much less prepared and fitted for any
spiritual duty. 2.
The building of the material Temple was a type of believers. Now as the stone
could not polish and fit it self for the Temple, so neither have we any power
in our selves to take away the least enmity that is against God. Insomuch that
this text does triumph over all those corrupt doctrines that advance free will,
and power in man to spiritual things. What, can a stone make it self to live?
Can Ezekiels dry bones produce life of themselves? Could the bone taken out of
Adams side, make it self a living woman? Its true, man has reason,
understanding and a will, and so in that sense he is not a stone; but he has
no reason to think what is good, no will to choose what is good, and so in that
respect is like a stone. And hence it is. that we need not wonder, if men of
great parts and wisdom are yet so foolish and void of all love and delight in
what is good, for a man may be very quick and apprehensive in all matters of
learning and humane perfections, and yet be a very stone about what is godly.
Nicodemus had great understanding in the law of God, yet how unfit for that
doctrine about Regeneration!

Thirdly, The stoniness of the heart does imply, not only indisposition, but
active contrariety and resistency to what is holy. Thus the Jews are called a
people of a 3.
stiff neck, that is the same with a stony heart, Act. 7. Ye have always
resisted the holy Ghost, (...), you fall like an heavy stone with violence upon
the word of God, and all divine exhortations. The stone is not only indisposed
for polishing, but as much as lies in it, does resist, and beat back again the
hammer that falls upon it. Oh this active enmity and vigorous opposition which
is in all men by nature, to that which is holy, is much to be lamented. The
Apostle, Romans 8. speaks of this enmity of the flesh, which does so far prevail,
that it makes a man not only not subject, but it cannot be subject to the law
of God, for these two are contrary, the spiritual law and the carnal heart, and
so as light and darkness, fire and water cannot accord, so neither can these.
Marvel not then if ye see men, whose thoughts, purposes, affections, and all
ineavours are against godliness: Their hearts to conceive mischief against it;
their tongues to be always railing or deriding of it: For can the toad vent
honey? can the serpent spit cordials? no more can these endure what is
supernatural.

Fourthly, This describes the hardness of the heart, and impenetrableness of
it. Its a stone, and though the word be a two edged sword, yet is it any
wonder, if 4.
a sword cannot pierce through an hard stone. The Scripture, Ephesians. 4. 18.
speaks of a threefold hardness, natural, acquired, by voluntary sins against
conscience, and judicial, inflicted as a just judgment by God upon those who
have rebelled against the light; now this which we speak of is the natural
hardness, that which is in every man and woman. Take the most civil and
ingenuous man, who is so tractable in all things of morality, yet he has an
hard heart to that which is spiritual. The doctrine of repentance,
mortification, and powerful walking with God, is that which can find no
entrance in him. Oh therefore that this spiritual hardness were more
apprehended; you can complain of hard times, of hard dealings in the world. Oh
what hard dealing has God from thee! His judgments have not broke thy heart,
his mercies have not melted thy heart, Oh think if there were any softness, if
any drops in thee, if any meltings in thee, thou had not to this day
continued such a rebellious wretch against God. Illud est cor durum, quod non
trepidat ad nomen cordis duri; If thy soul does not break, and tremble, and
melt at the very preaching about a stony heart, its because thou art
overwhelmed by it. This hard heart is else where called an heart of adamant,
which is as much as that, which cannot be turned: Oh this is thy case; nothing
has tamed thee, or humbled thee to this day.

Fifthly, This word holds out the pertinacy and immoveableness of the heart from
5.
the way of sin. A great heavy stone lies many years in the same place; and
thus it is with every man naturally, how self-willed, how unmovable! you
cannot stir him out of his former ways of impiety. Though he hear much, though
he be entreated, reproved, and constantly warned over and over again, yet he is
still the same man he was. Thus as the godly are commended for their immovable
state in godliness and in happiness, they stand like Zion, which can never be
moved; the same are they in a state of wickedness and impiety. Oh then, how
does experience daily witness this pertinacy of men's hearts in adhering to
wickedness. When they are so convinced, that they can say nothing for their
sins, they must needs confess its their duty to be other men; they cannot say
one word for self-justification, yet they will not move from their former
course of impieties. What kind of hearts we have, was typically represented by
Moses, when the law was commanded to be written in stones, for albeit one main
reason was to preserve the laws perpetually; as Heathen lawgivers have
commanded their laws to be engraven on brass, or cypress trees, that will not
putrify: Yet the Apostle alludes to an Allegory, when he tells the Corinthians,
they were his Epistle not written (2 Cor. 3. 3.) in tables of stone, but fleshy
tables of the heart. So that to have hearts of stone, is to be pertinacious,
wilful; say what you can, bring the Scripture never so plainly, demonstrate
and convince the haynousness of sin never so clearly, yet nothing shall make
any alteration in them; they will be wicked, because they will be.

Sixthly, An heart of stone is an heart altogether cold, and destitute of any
warmth 6.
or heat of grace. A stone is nothing but hardened earth, and as siccity and
frigidity are the two properties of that element, so are they of a stone.
Hence, it was a miracle to bring water out of the rock: Citius e pumice aquam,
is a Proverb. Stones have these two qualities, as the earth out of which they
are generated, Siccity or dryness, there is no moisture, there is no wateriness
in them, and thus it is in every man's heart, a dry barren spirit, there is no
juice, no sap of any grace. Therefore the Greek word (...) hardness, and (...),
does excellently express this cursed temper, for that is properly the dryness
of any herb, when it is withered, its then good for nothing, all the juice is
out of it. And thus men by nature have not the least dropping or melting of
soul: And observe this, A man may have a very tender, juicy heart, as it were,
about earthly things; Jet an husband, wife, or any earthly advantage be lost,
and rivers of water can gush out of thine eyes: They may be of a pitiful and
tender complexion, and yet as dry and barren as a very stone about the sins
they have committed, and the iniquities they are guilty of. Indeed David speaks
of a drought upon his soul, that it was like a parched wilderness. Psalm. 42. 1.
but that was in a gracious sense, because of the earnest pantings and longings
he had for the enjoyment of Gods favor. But this is in a very wicked and
desperate sense, when men have not the least meltings, or thawings of soul upon
any divine administrations. The other property is frigidity, or coldness, As
cold as a stone, we say; and thus every man's heart is destitute of all that
fire and heat which does usually accompany the life of grace. Hence men are
said to be dead in sins, Ephesians. 2. 4. death and coldness go together. The Spirit
of God in its operations is compared to fire, because of the efficacy and
fervency of it; now men destitute of this spirit, are wholly liveless; and cold
in any thing that is good.

Seventhly, Seeing a stone is nothing but a product of the earth, it has also
the property of the earth, which is heaviness or gravity, an inclination to
descend, to fall downwards. 7.
And this also is wonderfully seen in every man's disposition by nature: His
affections are wholly set upon earthly things, though he has a body straight
up toward heaven, and so excelling other creatures, yet his soul is bowed down
to the ground, so that in this sense, as well as others, we may say, he is a
worm and no man. The bodily curse of the serpent, is spiritually fulfilled on
him, To lick the dust of the earth, and to make that his food; this is the
heavy portion of every man by nature, to swallow down iniquity like water, to
center upon earthly objects, as naturally as the stone falls downward; Wonder
not then, if you see men wholly plunged in earthly affairs, they mind not,
they regard not, they understand not heavenly things; for (alas) how can the
earth ascend upwards? how can a clod of clay move of it self toward the skies?
here must be a change of our natural properties, before these things can be
done.

Having thus described the properties of this stony heart, and how much the
word may purport. Let us now consider ^ome effects or signs, which do
abundantly The effects which demonstrate all men by nature to have a heart of
stone. 1.
discover, that men by nature have such hearts of stones.

And first, What can be a greater evidence, then the security, quiet, and ease,
which men naturally have, though thus obnoxious to guilt, and the wrath of God.
Do but consider what the word of God says of every man by nature, how it
aggravates his sin and misery, makes him every moment ready to fall into
eternal torments, that all within him and without him is hated of God all the
day long: Consider all this and believe it. Now what a stone and stock is man,
that for all this truth of God, thus informing, thus threatening, thus cursing,
is no more troubled and affected about himself! Certainly were not men like
Niobe, turned into very marbles and stones, they could never be thus stupid,
yea they would run up and down crying out, What shall we do to be changed? How
may this stone, this mountain be removed and thrown into a sea of tears and
sorrow? Do ye then doubt, whether men be thus by nature so stupid and senseless
about divine things? What need ye go any further, see how they can eat, drink,
rejoice, and be secure, when yet so many woes are denounced against them: Oh
then say, Lord give me a soft heart, give me a broken heart; yet Lord it is not
broken, yet it is not broken. Oh let any judgment fall upon me rather then
this hard heart. Oh let any affliction lie upon me rather then this heart of
stone.

Secondly, This stony senseless heart is manifested, in that Though in the
general they commend holiness and godliness, and so in the general detest and
abhor vice, yet 2.
when it comes to the particular, then they act and love that which they did
in the general condemn. As now, Come to any profane man wallowing in any
gross sin, and ask, Is it not an excellent, admirable thing, a life to be
desired, to live with the fear of God, to obey his law, to take heed of
impiety, to walk religiously, soberly and righteously? Oh without doubt they
will say: and yet the same men live in direct opposite ways to this piety. Now
if men were not stones and stocks; they could not but see their contradiction,
they could not but see, how vainly they oppose their own selves; for if
wickedness be to be abhorred, then thy wickedness, those lusts thou live in
are to be loathed.

Thirdly, That men have this heart of stone, appears, in that they consider
not the extreme contrariety that is in their wicked lives to that holy
profession they take upon 3.
them. Whosoever is baptized into the name of Christ, and owneth his law, does
thereby engage himself to live as Christ his Lord has commanded. The Apostle
James at large shows the vanity and insufficiency of such a faith as does not
make a man give an universal obedience to what God commands: and the Apostle
calls upon us, Phil. 1. 27. that our conversation should be as that which
becomes the Gospel of Christ, to be sheep and not swine. Now if men were not
mere idols, having eyes and see not, hearts and perceive not, it were
impossible they should join an unholy life to an holy faith, an impure,
profane life, to so satred and pure a profession. Can thou see or observe
any thing, and do thou not this? Why has Christ called thee out of the
world but to live in an unspotted manner?

Lastly, Herein we discover stony hearts, That neither the unexpressible wrath
4.
of God revealed in the Scripture, nor the love of Christ, and the joys of
heaven promised, do work us ont of our sins. Oh what can be a greater argument
of our stupidity then either of these neglected? The wrath of God manifested in
the word, how unsupportable is it! Is not hell described by every thing that is
terrible, fire and brimstone, chains of darkness, despairing horror; a death
without death, crying for death and it cannot be had? so that the damned in
hell can neither kill themselves, nor others destroy them, and this torment to
continue to all eternity, which is a perpetual woe, wherein there is no past or
to come. That all this fury should be made known to a sinner, yet he to go on
in his sins desperately venturing upon it, must you not cry out, Oh men, no
men, but stones! And then on the contrary, To consider the love of God
described in the Gospel, to see Christ, God and man, made poor, miserable,
ignominious, lying under spiritual agonies, grapling with the infinite anger of
God, and at last dying that cursed death for our sakes, would not this make the
very stones melt? and yet our hearts are not softened by this love. The Temple
clave asunder, the very sun was in a fainting eclipse, as historians say; and
thy heart is not rent, nor does thy spirit faint within thee. Besides the joys
of heaven so full, pure and eternal, which are tendered to thee, if thou will
forsake thy sin; might not they be like the hot sun beams that arise and melt
the ice? but with man naturally all is in vain. Earthly comforts they are most
loved and desired before the enjoyment of them, and when enjoyed they do not
satisfy and so are less esteemed; but heavenly joys they are less desired
and loved before enjoyment; but when partaken of, the desire will increase, and
love shall then embrace more then faith could believe, or hope desire.

Use 1. Not to wonder if men after much preaching, yea after many judgments
Use.
and mercies, remain obdurate and immovable in their wickedness. This text
tells you the cause of all. They have hearts of stone, yea how many are worse
then stones, for gutta cavat lapidem; continual dropping will make impression
upon a very stone, and consume it at last. But the word of God has often
distilled like a soft rain upon thee, and behold thou art not at all softened,
not one lust is yet washed away. And stones upon the change of weather will
stand on a dew, as if they were sensible of the alteration, but how many
changes and alterations does God make by his just judgments on sinners, and
thy heart is not affected? Oh then let this be thy daily prayer, Lord I find a
load upon me, a mountain, an heavy stone upon me, I cannot pray for it, I
cannot mourn for it: Lord whatsoever thou shall deny me, deny not the removal
of this.

SERMON LXXXVII.
Of Gods making a true Converts heart tender and flexible for every duty. Also
what Heart of flesh implies, with the effects and consequents of it.

EZEKIEL. 36. 26. And I will give you an heart of flesh.
WE come in the third place to consider the mercy, as it is positively set
down, I will give an heart of flesh. If flesh were taken here properly for a
massy part, then it could be no gracious promise, for every man's heart by
nature is of flesh; but flesh is taken improperly or metaphorically; for when
it is used in the Scripture improperly, it is either taken in a good sense, or
a bad sense: In a bad sense, it either denotes fragility, misery and vanity.
Thus All flesh is grass; and thine horses are flesh, not spirit. Or else
sinfulness and corruption: Thus, John 3. Whatsoever is born of the flesh is
flesh. And In my flesh dwells no good thing, Romans 7. It should greatly humble
us, that the Scripture calls sin in us by such names, for it argues sin to be
innate, inbred in us, that we and sin are all one as it were: as if we were not
so much sinners as sin it self; it cleaves to us as the flesh to the bones.
But secondly, this word [fle^^] is used in a good sense, though not so
frequently, signifying a tender, pliable and flexible heart to what is godly,
and is by way of opposition to a stone. Thus, 2 Cor. 3. The hearts of the
Corinthians which so readily received Paul's doctrine, are called fleshy tables;
and here it is used in this sense in the text, I will give an heart of flesh:
We may justly admire the mighty work of God in making waters to gush out of the
rock, in touching mountains, so that they melt like wax; but above all, this
mighty power of God, that makes hearts so story and impenetrable, to be ready
and capable for all duties.

That God in conversion does make a man's heart tender and flexible for every
duty he requires. Observe.


The example of all converts witnesses this; when Matthew is converted, he
leaves his custom feat, though full of profit, and follows Christ, which
could not be without much self-denial and persecution. Is not here a stone
made flesh? Zacheus the Publican, no sooner wrought upon by grace, but he makes
restitution and satisfaction: even above the exact command of the law; but his
heart is made so tender that he had rather be beyond, then come short of his
duty. Mary Magdalen a notorious sinner, called the sinner by an emphasis, when
wrought upon, this dry wilderness is made a fountain of water. The Jailer a
cruel harsh man to the Apostles, when his heart is touched, in what amazements
does he fall, how tender and compassionate to the Apostles whom he had wronged;
he that did cast them in prison, put chains and ^etters upon them, in a moment
is altered, and washes their soars. And let Paul close all, what a stony heart
had he! His heart was like the stones they stoned Stephen with, and although he
stoned not Stephen with his own hands, yet he was consenting to it, and kept
their garments, insomuch that Austin says, Omnium lapidantium manibus
lapidavit, he stoned him with the hands of all them that threw stones at him.
He that compelled the disciples to blaspheme, and was mad against them, see how
in a moment his stony heart is taken away, Lord, what will thou have me to do?
Oh tender heart, now he is willing to do and suffer any thing! Thus God
wheresoever he vouchsafes this converting grace, of an obdurate, averse stony
heart, he makes tender and pliable.

To open this, let us consider first, What is employed in this heart of flesh;
for that What is implied in Heart of flesh. 1.
comprehends several gracious qualities: And

First, A tender melting heart is principally intended. The heart of stone will
neither yield to threatenings, or be softened by mercies; but the fleshy heart,
that is tender under both. Thus Josiah is commended for his tender, melting
heart, while the threatenings of the law were read, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. and
certainly thousands of people discover, this promise was never effectual to
them; for how obdurate and wilful are they against the word of God! they rage
and roar like bears and tigers with vexation, rather then tenderly be softened
about the matters of religion. Oh then consider, how tender thy spirit is about
Gods commands, does it presently thaw? is it immediately softened when Gods word
comes to thee? this is a good sign. I know the people of God do much complain
their hearts are not so tender and softened as they desire: They complain they
are very stocks and stones sometimes; as the Church, Why have thou hardened our
hearts from thy fear, Isa. 63. 17. But yet because they feel this stoniness,
and they can tenderly bewail this, therefore it is a plain argument the work of
grace is in their souls, though it be imperfect, and so it is not to be
expected that all stoninesse should be removed out of the heart in this life.
Contra vitia pugnamus non ut penitus vincamus, sed ne vincamur, Seneca.

Secondly, From this tender softness of heart flows A quick sensiblenesse, 2.
and a lively apprehension of any spiritual thing that concerns it. The
tender skin does presently feel the least offense, whereas that which is brawny
and rugged is not so sensible. Thus it is in the true convert, he is very
sensible, he is quick in understanding, as the Scripture expresses it. And
this sensiblenesse is discerned in several particulars; as first, he can
discern between things that differ, Heb. 6. He has senses exercised, to
discern between good and evil. He is compared to an Eagle, his eye will quickly
discern afar off. He is the spiritual man that judges all things; so that the
true convert is not easily seduced by errors and false doctrines, for he has a
tender sensible heart: he is not easily enticed by Satan to sinful lusts, for
he is presently sensible. So secondly, his tenderness appears, in that the
least sins, the very motions, the very inclinations are an heavy burden unto
him: Thus Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, 2 Chronicles. 32. 26.
David when he numbered the people, though the act it self were lawful, yet
because he did not keep Gods order, he did it out of vain glory, and Gods anger
broke out because of it: See how tenderly be is affected, Let thy anger be upon
me and my fathers house, What have these sheep done? When he cut off the lap of
Saul's garment, his heart smote him. Paul, how sadly and miserably does he cry
out of the inward lusts of sin within him! Thus the fleshy heart is so tender,
that it feels the very weight of a mote, as well as of a beam.

Thirdly, The sensiblenesse of it is discovered, in that When he repents of
sin, he 3.
is much affected because of the unkindnesse that is in sin against God.
Against thee, this only have I sinned, Psalm. 51. These Israelites should loath
and abhor themselves when God was pacified toward them, Ezekiel. 16. 63. This
fleshy heart is so sensible of the ill requital that is in all sin, for God
his favor and love to them, that this affects them abundantly.

Fourthly, This fleshy heart implies Tractablenesse and dociblenesse in the
understanding, 4.
and flexibility in the will. Tractablenesse in the understanding, that whereas
a man naturally shuts his eyes against the light, he will not hear or
understand, but is froward, cavilling and always disputing against the things
of his everlasting peace; now he has obtained that religion which the Apostle
calls (...), easily to be persuaded. This is one great corruption in man, that
his understanding exalts it self against the word, and he has many carnal
cavils and and prejudices against grace: now when God works on the heart, the
understanding is captivated and brought into obedience, 2 Cor. 10. 5. The word
of God destroys all those strong holds, and they are glad that this spiritual
light should enter into their hearts. Oh there is little hopes of a proud,
froward, cavilling person, that loves to be arguing and contradicting those
things that make for purity and godliness: When a man is taught of God, he is
easily brought off to believe, to submit, A little child can lead them, as
Isaiah prophesies, Isa. 11. 6. As tractablenesse in the understanding, so
flexibility in the will, is also implied in this heart of flesh. The will of
man, that is the hardest part of the stone in a man, that is contumacious,
wilful, opposite; that is the King, the Lord, the governor; till that be
mastered, till that stoop, nothing in man will turn to God: but this converting
grace makes willing of unwilling, makes it to choose and embrace that which
once it abhorred; as Paul, What will thou have me to do? Oh it is th^se wills of
men, that are the great enemies to godliness. Hence God is said to work in us
to will, as well as to do, Phil. 3. To will, this is admirable; oh pray
importunately that God would give thee to will good, that God would give thee
to choose and embrace it. It Is wonderful to consider how this hard iron, when
melted by grace, will be put into any frame or fashion.

Fifthly, This fleshy heart implies, An obediential resignation of our selves
up into Gods hands. That now we stand at nothing, we refuse nothing, we object
5.
nothing, we do not pick and choose in our obedience, This (O Lord) I could do,
but excuse me in the other thing. No, a fleshy heart is that which is all over
yielding and submitting: He does not say, I will give them an heart partly of
stone, and partly of flesh; for although stoninesse be in the regenerate heart,
yet because it is not there by constant prevalency and universality, therefore
it is still an heart of flesh, so that nothing will discover this work upon thy
soul, sooner then an obediential resignation to all duties. He that breaks one
is guilty of all, in this sense, because he breaks vinculum obedientiae, the
bond of obedience, which is the authority of the lawgiver: For to be fleshy
supposes a capacity and easiness to receive any impression: wheresoever it
finds a command, there it cries out, Lo here am I to do thy will, O God: Thy
law is written in my heart. We shall not enlarge this particular more, because
the explication of a stony heart, does by way of contrariety illustrate this
fleshy heart. Let us therefore take notice of the several effects and
consequents of a fleshy heart, and they are remarkable. The effects and
consequents of a fleshy heart. 1.


First, This heart of flesh is accompanied with an awful fear and trembling
under the word of God, and his glorious Majesty. They have deep thoughts of
fear and reverence when they come before God. Thus Josiah, whose heart was
tender, and melting, did also tremble at the threatening in the word of God. If
Abraham was so deeply debased in his spiritual approach to God, because he was
but dust and ashes, how much rather because of sin! We may then quickly
discover grace in the tenderness of it, if it be not profane, careless, and
formal in religious duties. If thy heart be a melting heart, thy prayers are
melting prayers, thy hearing is melting hearing, thou would not be so
senseless, careless in these duties as most men a^e. Oh then cry out of thy
self, for the want of this gracious disposition. Thou find thy heart like
brass and Iron, not like flesh, when thou come to him.

Secondly, A gracious fleshy heart does readily bow and yield to God in all
afflictions and chastisements for sin. The stubborn oak, that will sooner break
then bow; 2.
but the tender with, that will move every way, as it is desired: and thus it
is here, Men of stony hearts, unbroken hearts, if any ways afflicted or
chastised for sin, how full of rage, discontent, fury, and all manner of
vexation, fretting even at God himself and all his instruments! but the tender
fleshy heart that presently accepts of the punishment of its sin, as God calls
upon, Levit. 26. 41. It says with the Church, I will bear the indignation of
the Lord, because I have sinned against him. It wholly studieth to clear and
justify God, but to condemn and accuse it self: O then let the people of God
in the midst of all the waves and tempests that rise in their soul, remember to
allay all by this, that they are fleshy and not stone. That as God made it an
argument to take off his afflicting hand, because it was frail weak flesh; Genesis
6. My spirit shall not always strive with man, because he is flesh: so he may
also abate his anger, because thou art gracious and tender flesh. This is a
precious symptom of grace, when thy soul afflicted, is like a box of precious
ointment broken, or like sweet flowers pounced, many precious and fragrant
graces discover themselves. As the fire does discover the metals, whether good
or bad; and tempests and winds, whether trees be well rooted or no; so do
calamities, whether men be gracious or no; and in nothing does thy grace more
manifest it self then justifying God, and abhorring thy self. Have any
frettings, any repinings made a commotion in thy heart? quiet all, and
remember, the work of grace is to make a man yielding and readily submitting.

Thirdly, The godly heart of flesh is so tender, that it does not only avoid
sin it self, 3.
but the occasions of it, the appearance of it. Abstain from all appearance of
evil, 1 These. 5. 22. David would not drink the water of Bethlehem, because it
had the appearance of men's blood, and thus the godly are to provide all things
honest in the sight of all men. Christ that would not wash his hands before
meal, though otherwise a civil custom, in it self lawful, yet he refused, that
he might not confirm the Jews in their superstitious conceit about it, did
hereby instruct us that we should not only keep from the fire of sin, but also
from the very flame. The first sin that proved so fatal to all mankind came
by occasions and temptations; Eve saw the fruit that it was good, and
desirable. God had not commanded her to forbear looking on it, but this became
a temptation to her, and by those windows of her eyes death comes in. This made
Paul keep down his body. This caused Job to make a covenant with his eyes; and
David to set a watch before his mouth. Look then to this, would thou know
whether this gracious tender heart be in thee or no; art thou then afraid to
come near the brink of sin, any thing that has the appearance of it, thou
runnest away from it, as Moses did from his rod, when turned into a serpent.
This you should especially observe who venture into the occasions of
wickedness, haunt the places where the profane lusts of the flesh are daily
committed: You do like the moth, that never leaves buzzing and flying about
the candle, till she has burnt her self. The Hebrews that were to eat no
unleavened bread in the Passover for seven days, were so careful, that they
did diligently search the house, to see none was there, yea they would not so
much as make mention of the word signifying bread, lest it should do hurt, and
tempt any. And wilt not thou be afraid to come where the infection of the
plague of any sin is? Do thou fear the infection of the body, and not that of
the soul? come not then near this mountain, least thou be destroyed.

Fourthly, A godly heart of flesh is tender and apprehensive of all inward
heart-sins, (...)
and secret sins, as well as public and notorious. Paul had a soft heart of
flesh, when he could find those motes in his eyes, and complains of them as
beams, Romans 7. and indeed because the dishonor of God, and offending of him,
is the great mountain and weight upon his soul, therefore whatsoever sin is
done in secret, he is as sensible of it, as if it had been done in the eyes of
the whole world. That is a known instance of the tender heart of Joseph, when
in the temptation of secrecy in sinning, he cried out, How can I do this and
sin against God! Oh then this discovers the many degrees thousands are off from
the tender work of grace: For its a shame to speak of what is done by many in
secret. Secret uncleanness, secret injustice and fraud, secret theeving,
secret drunkenness, if it can be carried so that the world may not know it,
that reproach may not brand them for it, they care not. Oh men of stony hearts!
Did not God behold thee? Is not darkness and light, night and day all one to
him? Never be encouraged to sin in hope of secrecy, for God will bring out
those deeds of darkness, without repentance, one time or other, to thy great
confusion. I know no such differentiall mark from an hypocrite and a true godly
man, as this. An hypocrite may have as great abilities and inlargements, may
have as external a strict conversation as a godly man: but then in this he
always fails, he does not humble himself for, or mortify inward motions and
lusts of sins. He is not affected with heart-corruptions, because God looks
into the heart, and beholds the heart. Oh then, that the word of God might
powerfully work upon you in this respect. Its not an heart of flesh, as long as
wicked, proud, earthly, unclean thoughts can lodge in thy soul, though they
break not out into action.

Lastly, A tender heart of flesh is greatly afflicted with the dishonor that
is done to God by other men's sins as well as his own. David must needs have a
very soft heart, 5.
when rivers of water came from his eyes, because men kept not Gods Law. Flesh
is easily wounded, it is easily pierced, and thus is a godly man's heart,
because God is not owned, is not magnified where he lives. The Prophet Isaiah
cried out, We is me because I dwell among men of unclean lips, Isa. 6. 5. How
then do other men's impieties work upon thee? are they like a sword in thy
bowels? Does the tearing and rending of Gods Name by blasphemous courses, even
tear and rend thy heart? Does the profane naming of the wounds and blood of
Christ, even make wounds and blood in thy heart? then thou may praise God,
that he has not left thee without zeal for his glory. Is thy soul grieved and
tormented with seeing and beholding the wickedness of men done in the world?

Use. 1. Of consolation and comfort to those to whom God has vouchsafed this
tender and soft heart. Its such a mercy thou could not help thy self to, nor
Use.
all the world could vouchsafe it to thee. Say, Bless the Lord O my soul, and
admire his grace, who has thus melted thee. The time was when thou wast
hardened and bold in sin, thou could swallow down great Camels, and it did
not trouble thee; thou could commit such and such impieties, and thy heart
would never smite thee for it. Oh but now if there be any distemper, any
rebellion, any unkindnesse in thy life to God; it dissolves thee, it moves thy
bowels: go on blessing God for this mercy. Do not think it a loss to thee, nor
a reproach to thee: Not a loss, for happily thou may say, If I had not such
a tender heart, if I were not so afraid to sin against God, I might get such
earthly advantages: If I were as bold and as large in my principles as others,
then I could thus enrich my self; but this tender heart of mine hinders me. Do
not judge this a loss but again; the later end of this will be a rich crop,
though for the present thou have but gleanings: God does with thee as Boaz with
Ruth; first he gave her but gleanings, and a little measure of Corn, but
afterward he gave her himself and all that he had. Thus God at last will give
the enjoyment of himself and eternal glory, when hardened sinners shall vomit
up their advantages, which will be like gravel in the mouth. Nor do not thou
judge it a reproach; the world judges it pusillanimity, a tender heart, a
foolish, scrupulous heart. But as it is said of God, He can do all things, only
he cannot sin, for that is an impotency, Potentissime hoc non potest; so it is
here, thou dare loose thy comforts, thy advantages; thou dare be hated,
persecuted, only thou dare not sin, Magnanimiter hoc non audes! At the day of
death, at the day of judgment, what boldness, what confidence will thou have?
when the great bold men of the world shall tremble like leaves, and have fear
round about them.

SERMON. LXXXVIII.
Holding forth Inducements to get this promised Heart of Flesh; Also showing
the Counterfeit of it.

EZEKIEL. 36. 26. I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and give you
an heart of flesh.
THe Doctrine about An heart of flesh, has already been explained, and some
practical use made of it: And the matter being so exceeding necessary; (for
without this Heart of flesh, we preach in vain, you hear in vain, Gods mercies,
and Gods chastisements are in vain;) I shall therefore add another Use, by way
of Exhortation, Not to have any rest or quiet in your souls, till God vouchsafe
this mercy to you: God here promises it, as the main mercy, to qualify and
sanctify all their temporal mercies; as if returning from Captivity, enjoying
their own Country, their Liberties, Houses and Comforts again, were nothing,
if this Heart of flesh was not also bestowed upon them. And to speak to our
condition; though God has brought us together, that by the last wars were
scattered one from another; though many of those fears and terrors that did
then overwhelm, are in some measure abated; yet if God give not this Heart of
flesh, a worm will quickly arise and consume this gourd: Be therefore as
importunate with God, as the Widow was with the unjust Judge; for God loves
importunity, he loves seeking, knocking, fervent praying; and if the unjust
Judge was overcome by importunity, how much rather will the bowels of a
gracious God move toward thee? How graciously did God reward that Petition of
Solomon's, because he did not ask for riches, long life, the life of his
enemies, but wisdom to discharge his trust: So will God say to thee, Because
thou have not asked temporal mercies, nor earthly greatness, but a tender soft
heart, be it according to thy desire. As David therefore resolved, He would
give no sleep to his eyes, or slumber to his eyelids, till he had settled the
Ark: So do thou resolve to have no rest in thy mind, or to let God alone, but
importune him day and night, till he has made that heart of stone flesh within
thee: Oh! why are you solicitous about earthly things! what you shall eat, what
you shall drink, what you shall put on? and not in a godly manner enquiring,
How may I pray, hear, live, dye, with this soft and tender heart? And if reason
may be any motive to you, consider, how much may be spoke for this particular.

First, This heart of flesh will be a constant Antidote, and Preservative
against 1. Inducements to seek for this heart of flesh.
sin: This bitter potion will kill all those worms of temptation, that may
crawl in thy breast; the Devil can never come and find the room of thy heart
swept and ready garnished for him; he is continually upon his Watchtower, that
has an heart of flesh. David's heart when it began to be stony and senseless,
see how wilfully he falls from one sin to another; whereas if his heart had
been as tender as at other times, the very entrance and appearance of sin would
have amazed him. As it is the nature of sin to harden, and to make obstinate,
so of grace to mollify and soften: Now there is always in every condition, in
every occurrence of providence, something that would stiffen the heart against
God, were not grace a continual thawer of the heart by the heat thereof: If
therefore thou would be preserved from those sad falls, and wretched
backslidings, which others have been tumbled into, Keep up this heart of flesh;
Oh it could never be that thou would entertain such monstrous Doctrines, or
do such unjustifiable practices, if thy heart were of flesh: No, it is of steel
and iron, of a rock, or adamant, and that makes thee bold to commit such sins,
which tender godly persons have their hearts ache at, and their ears tingle to
hear.

Secondly, As this tender heart of flesh preserves from sin; So from the
consequents, 2.
and the woeful effects of it; which are woes, wounds of conscience, horror of
heart, darkness and gloominess of soul, sad tears, lest God has for ever
forsaken them; the loss of all their former sweet peace and communion they had
with God: Oh! God of a gracious father, is now become a frowning enemy; their
hearts are made like an hell, wherein legions of sad unbelieving thoughts do
constantly lodge: This is the portion of those godly men, who by negligence,
carelessness and hardness of heart, come to fall off from their former measure
of holiness: Oh but a tender heart of flesh, as it prevents the cause of these,
so the effects likewise; it will keep thee from this roaring Lion: So that as
soon as ever thou find this soft heart abating in thee, do thou then fear
some grievous storm may be coming on thee, if God prevent not.

Thirdly, Without a tender heart of flesh, a man cannot perform any Religious 3.
duty, in an acceptable manner to God: Prayer without this heart of flesh, is
like a dry unsavory herb; hearing of the word, if it come not from an heart
thus softened, is but desperate boldness against God, and so an immediate
provocation of his anger. Hence a broken heart is preferred above all
sacrifices, Psalm. 51. above all outward worship; they are the body, this is the
soul; they must not be neglected, but this is the Benjamin, without whom, we
must not see Gods face: Oh then as thou dare not but pray, and hear, and come
to Church, so also be as much afraid, lest those duties be done without an
heart of flesh.

Fourthly, A tender heart of flesh is accompanied with patience, under the
sorest 4.
afflictions, and thankfulness under the least mercies: What a sudden tempest
and whirlwind of afflictions fell upon Job; and yet in all that he did not
charge God foolishly, Job 1. ult. but reproved his impatient wife with this
saying, Shall we receive good, and not evil from the Lord? And as for
thankfulness under the least mercies, see how the Church in the Lamentations
can taste a little honey in an ocean of gall; Its of the Lords mercy that we
are not consumed, Lam. 3. 22. and so the woman of Canaan, acknowledges her
self a dog, and is glad of the crumbs that fall from the table, Mat. 15. 27. Now
what a lovely and comely sight is this; to see a Christian patient under the
greatest trouble, and thankful under the least mercies! and there is nothing
will bring the heart to this admirable temper, but the fulfilling of this
promise.

Lastly, This tender heart of flesh, is the only fit soil, wherein the word of
God sown, will grow up, and bring a plentiful crop: For as they say of the
soul, Animae 5.
fabricat sibi domicilium, The soul fashioneth and prepares the body, for it
self to dwell in; as the Spider makes her own web, wherein she resides: Thus
the word of God at first makes the heart of hard and stony, fleshy and soft,
which when done, then is the heart ever afterward a fit room to receive this
spiritual guest: So that the word never thriveth or prospers, in respect of the
progress and increase of godliness, but where it meets with a tender heart.
Lydia's heart is said to be opened to attend to the words of Paul, Acts 16. 14.
Thus naturally men's spirits are bolted, the word finds a gate of brass upon
it, till it be made tender, and after that its careful to lose nothing: Oh then
that we could say of our hearers, what Paul of the Corinthians, The word is
written in their fleshy tables of the heart, 2 Cor. 2. Now for the better
clearing of these things, it may be demanded:

Whether all tenderness and softness of heart, be this work of grace here
promised? Quest. Whether all tenderness be this work of Grace here promised.
Answ. No: For there is a natural tenderness,
may not the soul be deceived about tenderness of heart?

Yes, very easily; for there is a twofold soft heart of flesh, which yet is not
the heart in the Text.

There is a natural softness or aptness to relent, and to be pitifully
affected; such as Austin speaks of in himself, when he read the History of
Dido, Lord (says he) I could not but weep when I read that, and yet at the
same time I could not weep for my sins. That tender heart of Joseph, whereby he
dissolved into tears concerning his brethren, was not so much an act of grace,
as of natural tenderness: And it should seem he was a tender father to all
Egypt, as some expound that name they gave Joseph, when they blessed him, and
called him Abrech, Tender Father.

Again, There is another tenderness or softness, whereby men are so melted
under And a Legal, neither of which are this heart here promised.
the consideration of sin, as they refuse, like Rachel, to be comforted: It
seems Mary Magdalene was too tender, by that remedy our Savior applied, when
he bid her Be of good comfort, her sins were forgiven, Luke 7. 48. To be sure
the Incestuous person was too soft this way, insomuch that he was even
swallowed up with sorrow, 2 Cor. 2. 7. For as the string of the instrument, if
it be too wet, can make no melodious sound; so neither can an heart overwhelmed
with sorrow, set forth the praise of God with faith and thankfulness.

It will be therefore worth the while, to discover this Counterfeit heart of
The Counterfeit of this Heart of flesh, viz. I. Natural tenderness discovered.
How it differs from gracious tenderness.
flesh, from a gracious one: And let us examine the first, which if put to the
Touchstone, will be thus discovered:

First, Natural tenderness arises from the bodily constitution, or natural
temperament of a man; whereas this gracious sofness is the work of God in a
supernatural way: Thus in the Text, I will give the heart of flesh: God as the
Author of grace makes this; so Zach. 12. I will pour upon them the spirit of
prayer, and they shall mourn for their sin, Romans 8. Those groans unutterable,
which came from an heart of flesh, are wholly attributed to the spirit of God;
so that the tender heart of the one, is like Egypt, that is not made fruitful
by rain from heaven; whereas the other comes only from above: If then you go
to the fountains from whence these streams flow, they are as far distant as
heaven and earth; and if ye see them both melting and dissolving into tears,
under the chastisements and judgments of God upon them; the one has a spring
from under the earth, the other from heaven above: Do not therefore presently
conclude grace is there, when you see a tender, soft, yielding disposition, for
this may come from nature, as well as grace; it may be a natural complexion,
not a principle of Sanctification within.

Secondly, The instrument by which this softness and tenderness of heart is
produced, is far different from the other: For the natural softness is wrought,
by seeing the objects of pity and compassion; but this gracious softness is by
hearing, and by the word preached: So that the instrument by which a man comes
to be thus changed from his obstinacy, is wholly by the word of God; that
received by faith, has been the furnace or coals of fire to the iron, that
does make it flexible for every shape; whereas the former is only by a natural
sympathy between the eye and the heart: The eye affects the heart, Lam. 3. 51.
and hereupon tenderness is wrought; its not a work of faith, which as it
purifieth the heart, so it makes the heart tender. By faith Noah was moved with
fear, Heb. 11. and by faith we find the rockiness of our heart subdued, and we
readily yielding unto God.

Thirdly, The motive, Which is the very same thing in Morals, that the
specifical form is in naturals; in this there is a great gulf between one and
another: For the 3.
only motive of this natural tenderness, is outward evil and misery, not sin,
or the displeasure of God: There are hundreds of people, that for the loss of
dear friends, or outward comforts, can weep till they are able to weep no more,
but are as a rock, and as hard as a stone, in respect of any consideration
about sin; yet sin is the greatest evil, and that which depriveth the soul of
the most excellent good: Thou art therefore very prone to sigh, to be troubled,
thy heart is like a fountain of water; But what is the reason? outward
discontents, want of such mercies as thou do propound to thy self: Alas,
this is not an heart of flesh, in the sense of the Text; indeed it is too much
an heart of flesh in another sense; for it is wholly carnal, and is carried out
upon carnal considerations: If therefore thy tenderness and softness of heart,
be in the want of Gods favor, and the apprehension of his displeasure, as
David's so often was; no doubt but thou have then felt the power of this promise
to thee.

Fourthly, A natural softness and tenderness, is flexible to any evil; it will
receive any impression of sin: But this gracious softness, though it be flesh
to what is 4.
good, it does easily receive that; yet its a stone and an adamant to what is
evil; and this is a remarkable difference: you have many soft and flexible
hearts, and that is their fault, for none so ensnared as they; they are like
wax, that receive the stamp of any seal upon them; they are like the reed that
is shaken up and down with every wind; now this is a great sin. It was Reubens
curse, To be unstable like water: To be for good in good company, and for evil
in evil company; to be such a Chamelion according to every company, is contrary
to those many commands, To be steadfast and unmovable in the work of the Lord,
1 Cor. 15. 58. And to confess Christ and his truth, in the midst of a crooked
and perverse generation, Luke 12. 8. Their yea should be yea, and their nay,
nay: Oh do not judge this the gracious heart of flesh; for he that has this
grace, though he be like a Lamb, and all sweetness of carriage be in him; yet
he is also like a Lion, in respect of courage and boldness for what is good: So
then consider, that as the work of grace is in one sense making man tender; so
in another sense it does establish and settle upon a rock.

Lastly, This natural tenderness can, and often does consist, without any
trouble and grief for the dishonor of God, wrought by other men's sins. Now you
have 5.
heard, that a gracious heart of flesh was easily wounded and torn asunder in
pain, for the wickedness of others: You heard, David had rivers of waters
running down his eyes, because men kept not the Law of God; but how many may ye
see of tender soft spirits, that are very senseless stones of the blasphemies
and impieties that others are guilty of! They have such in their families, they
have such in their company, and in their delight; How can he be called a godly
man, to whom a wicked ungodly man is not a torment and a burden: Horror has
taken hold on me, says David, because of the wicked, Psalm. 119. 53. Oh if thy
heart were sensible of Gods glory, horror and trembling would surprise thee, to
see or hear others commit iniquity, even as if thou did see them falling into
the fire, or deep waters.

Secondly, In the next place, let us consider the other sinful tenderness, and
II. (...)ate (...)ness in (...) that for (...)in are (...) (...)lness (...).
that is, When the heart is indeed godly for the main, but there is a
degeneration: This tenderness does go beyond its bounds: God indeed by his
grace does wound the heart, but then it bleeds too much, and so grows the
weaker thereby: Now the sinfulness of this softness will appear thus:

First, When it hinders a man from those other gracious duties that God does
require: All grace is consonant, and one grace is to be added to another, and
they are to cooperate one with another, even those that seem to be at the
greatest distance; thus Joy and trembling, faith and fear, are to accompany one
another: Now there are some graces, that it is very hard to have co operate
with this heart of flesh; and therefore we must take heed that our gold become
not dross, that we do not take even sin for grace: This is worse then to take
John Baptist for Christ, this is to take a false Christ for the true one: And
this is done first, when they cast both their eyes upon their sins only, not
at all eying Christ; as if the Israelite wounded by a Serpent, should always
have cried out of his pain and rosting, but never look up to the exalted
Serpent: This the incestuous person was blamed for, he was ready to be
swallowed up with sorrow: When thy soul is so dejected, that it refuses the
comfort of the Gospel, will suffer no oil to be poured in its wounds, this is a
sinful softness; this is as wetted paper, the moisture of it hinders any
writing upon it; and so the softness of thy heart makes the glorious promise of
the Gospel not to be writ on thy soul; for as God writes the Law of obedience
in the hearts of the godly, so also the Gospel of comfort in their souls: And
as hardness of heart hinders the former writing, so too much softness and
moisture the latter: Know then, that all tenderness and softness, which keeps
off from Christ, which rejects the promise of grace, is sinful, and is not of
God.

Secondly, If thy tenderness and softness make thee more unable and unfit for
any 2.
service unto God: If it weaken thee, that thou can not pray, do or suffer
for God, this is also sinful; when it makes thee have feeble hands and knees,
as the childrens bones and joints are so soft at first, that they cannot go,
this is sinful. The trees that have not their sap and juice excocted out, are
not able to bear up any building; and so the soul that is inordinately tender,
and sinfully softened, it cannot go through with the work of the Lord: See
therefore that thy tenderness makes thee not less serviceable.

Lastly, If this tenderness makes thee slavishly and ignorantly scrupulous,
that thou 3.
can not enjoy the Liberty of the Gospel, and the freedom of the spirit,
which Christ has purchased for thee: Though this may seem wonderful
tenderness, yet it is not so indeed: Its true indeed, as we told you, the godly
through their tenderness, abstain from all appearances of evil, and they fear
sin may be, where it is not; yet they do not encourage a slavish, scrupulous
disposition; but they labor for a sound mind, and a filial frame wrought by
the spirit of adoption: So that although there are too too few in the world,
that need the regulating or moderating of their tenderness; yet some there are,
and this may be a word of season to them, Do not take that doubtful, fearful
spirit of thine, for this heart of flesh; let not the water overflow the banks,
for then it presently gets soil, and is turned into mud.

Let the conclusion be by way of Information, concerning the cursed and
miserable estate of those, who have not this promised mercy of An heart of
flesh. As Ezekiels Scrol had woe and lamentation written within and without; so
has such a wicked man the inward and outward curses of Gods word belonging to
him: Oh thou rock and stone! that art neither by the instructions, exhortations
or reproofs of the word, softened; nor yet by his mercies or judgments
mollified: How could thy heart endure against all those ways God has used to
melt thee. Consider, that thy heart is naturally an heart of flesh, in respect
of the frailty and weakness of it; Why then should it not be an heart of flesh
in a gracious sense? Were thy heart of brass, and iron; were it immortal, and
such as could not dye; then thou might go on with boldness in thy sin, and
say, Who shall contradict? but it being an heart of flesh, fainting, miserable,
and always dying: Oh why should not this stir thee up to be partaker of this
inestimable mercy! Oh cry out, and say, Lord, my weak frail flesh, cries out
for that tender heavenly flesh; and further, thy heart being naturally of
flesh, how unable is it to combat with the wrath of God, who is an infinite
spirit? Thy heart cannot keep off those sharp arrows, which he shall shoot into
thy heart of flesh; Why then do thou not take that counsel, to agree with
thy adversary in the way; with God, who for the present is thy enemy, while
thou art in the way, before death come, and then there be no ransom: Oh that
you would meditate of the terror of God, how easily he can fill that heart of
flesh with hellish horror; how spedily he can make the Devils take thee by the
throat, and hale thee to damnation; and if so, there is no remedy, but to cry
out, Lord make good this promise to me: Oh it is this I want, this would make
me happy.

SECT. XI. Handling Grace under the Notion of Gods putting his Spirit within
us, and causing us to walk in his Statutes.
SERMON LXXXIX.
Of Gods giving his Spirit to a Man, and what that Promise implies. Also of the
Operations and Effects of the Spirit of God where it so comes.

EZEKIEL. 36. 27. And I will put my Spirit within you, etc.
WE have a further Description in this Verse of the Grace here promised; for
although it be the same thing, yet the different expressions represent
different notions about it. That which in the Verse before is called an heart
of Flesh, is here called, My Spirit: And in the Verse before, A new Spirit. For
the opening of the words, let us consider, the mercy vouchsafed; and secondly,
the subject receptive of it. The mercy God calls, My Spirit. The Subject is,
Within you. Of which in its due order.

At this time let us take notice of the mercy, My Spirit. It will be very
impertinent to give you a Theological, and Biblical use of the word Spirit,
which is of a great latitude in its signification. In this place a threefold
sense may claim to be understood, which also may easily be composed and united,
not opposed: For,

First, By Gods Spirit, may be meant the third Person in the Trinity: so that
they are promised here to be made partakers of it. Its a very grave and solid
dispute in Divinity, whether the godly, besides the graces and fruit of the
Spirit, are also made partakers of the Spirit it self: some affirm it, others
deny it. But no doubt several places of Scripture do evidently demonstrate
that we do receive not only the graces of the Spirit, but the Spirit it self;
and therefore the Spirit is said to dwell in us, and we are the temples of the
Holy Ghost: But yet this is in such a supernatural and mystical way, that
though the plain Texts compel us to believe it, yet the manner how is very
difficult to express: but this is not my work to do at this time.

A second sense may be by spirit, to understand the soul, or spirit of a man,
as renewed and qualified by the graces of the Spirit; and therefore its called
in the verse before, A new Spirit, which is the same with a new heart. So that
Spirit is here put for the soul of a man, enlivened and quickened by the graces
of Gods Spirit: and this sense we conceive to be the most genuine and proper.
Hence Ezekiel. 18. verse 31. where you have that commanded as a duty, which is
here promised as a gift: Make ye a new heart, and a new spirit; which cannot be
primarily understood of the Person of the Spirit, but the graces of the Spirit.
The last ense that may here come in, is to take spirit, for heavenly activity,
vigor, and holy impulses, and motions from God, which are as the wind to the
sails, to carry it to its expected Haven. Now the first and this latter sense
cannot wholly be excluded, yet the second is that, which I will pitch upon as
most proper, bringing in the other by consequence.

Doct. That Conversion is the enlivening, or qualifying of a man with the
graces of Gods Spirit. Doct.


Thus John 3. That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. Hence the Godly are
said to have the Spirit in them, and guided by it, led by it, and are said to
walk after it. I need not multiply places for this. As Christ's body was by an
extraordinary supernatural manner, the Holy Ghost over-shadowing the Virgin
Mary; In such a miraculous way as to humane power and strength, is this new,
holy, and spiritual Creature bogotten. The Spirit of God moving upon the waters
of the Ordinances, produces this spiritual man: As at first God made the Fowls
of the air out of water, which soar up to the heavens.

To improve this necessary point, let us consider, what is employed in this
promise, I will put my spirit into you: And,

First, It supposes every man naturally a mere dead lump, without life or
motion What is employed in this promise, I will put my spirit within you. 1.
of himself to any thing that is holy. For as God at first breathed into Adam
the breath of life, and he became a living soul; So God does still infuse into
us his graces, that make us live the life of the Spirit. Hence some Expositors
make this promise to be Parabolically represented in the next Chapter, by the
resurrection of dry bones, whereas the wind is called upon to come and breath
upon the Bones and sinews and all parts to be united together, that they may
live: So does God in the Conversion of men. But that Parable is to represent
the recovery of Israel out of their Captivity, and miserable estate; which as
to the eye of sense, had no more possibility ever to return again then those
dry bones to live. Yet by way of similitude, it may also represent their
restitution unto a spiritual life of Grace, unto which they had more
impossibility than to return unto their own Land. Oh then this very phrase, I
will put my Spirit into you, should fall like thunder and lightning upon all
those Doctrines and Opinions that maintain Free Will, or the power of nature in
Conversion. Can man cooperate to the infusion of Gods Spirit? The order of
nature, and the order of Grace, differ as much as heaven and earth, and one
cannot prepare for the other; so that this expression does inform that we all
are animal or sensual, destitute of the spirit. And as bruit beasts cannot
perform the Offices or acts of Reason; so neither can men naturally do the
actions of grace; he cannot pray or hear spiritually, he cannot love God, or
repent of a sin in a spiritual manner.

Secondly, This does suppose an elevating or lifting up the heart of a man to
those affections and actions, which otherwise are far above his power. For as
the Spirit of (...).
God, when it came upon men in other extraordinary ways of assistance, they
did those things they were never able to do before. Thus Sampson, the Spirit
came upon him, and gave him such mighty strength; so Paul had another Spirit,
in respect of Government: those gifts of Gods Spirit in the Church that made
them work miracles, speak with tongues, lifted them above humane power; so this
Spirit of God sanctifying, does also raise a man to such holy, spiritual, and
sublime duty, that in former times he was not acquainted with: neither did he
understand. Hence to be a man, to walk as a man, 1 Cor. 3. 2. in the Scripture
Phrase is a diminution, and a carnal imperfection, because we are to have the
Spirit of God who inables us to spiritual actions in a divine manner. Thus to
believe in God, to love God, to be heavenly minded, to be patient, even every
exercise of grace, are acts transcendent the power of a man, and God must put
his Spirit into us to enable us thereunto. And this is that which makes the
world so mistake about godliness, that makes them grossly err about serving
of God, and repenting of sin; They do these things as men, by custom, by the
principles they were born in; so that till this Text be made good in you, I
will put my spirit in you, our Congregations are but so many Golgothaes, places
of dead men's skuls.

Thirdly, To have the Spirit of God put into us, denotes, That we do all our
duties upon those motives which are by Divine Revelation in the Word man^fested
to 3.
us, For the Spirit of God works in his people two ways.

1. Effectually, By inlivening, and enabling of them to holy duties.

2. Directively. By his Word guiding and leading of them. Now in the Word of
God we are directed to such Motives in our actions, which humane light would
never discern, as to do duties. First, Merely because God commands, out of
obedience to his Sovereignty, because it is the Law of such a Lawgiver. Where
is the man that does not by custom, or because of the talk, and report of men,
good things, rather then out of obedience to God? Therefore observe the order
of the promise, I will put my spirit in you, and then I will cause you to walk
in my Commandments, and do them. Thou then that prayest, hear, abstainest
from gross sins; why is it? Is it because thou have respect to Gods
Commandment: God says it, and therefore I do it. This is to have the spirit in
us. But secondly, not merely because of Gods command, but from an inward
principle of love, and delight in God also, therefore we perform our duties: If
ye love me keep my Commandments, John 14. 15. Love to God, that presently makes
us do or suffer any thing for him. Now love, that is reckoned in the front of
the fruits of the Spirit, Ga^. 5. and the Spirit of God descended in tongues of
fire. Of fire, to represent the Nature of the Spirit of God: Hence we are
commanded not to quench the Spirit, 1 These. 5. 19. which is like burning fire
in our hearts. Oh this performance of duties from love, is that which crowns
them, is like the perfume and Frankincense at the Sacrifice. Thirdly, we are to
perform holy duties, not only out of love, but for holiness sake, because God
is holy, and the duty is holy. Hate evil, and cleave to that which is good, be
gl^wed to it, and made one with it. Be ye holy, for I am holy, says God, Lev.
11. 44, 45. Now as God loves holiness for holiness sake, wills good for
goods sake, (or rather good is good, because he wills it.) Thus ought we, to
imitate him, there may be earthly motives, and humane advantages, which may
incite the heart to what is good: but goodness for the beauty and glory of it
should make thee in love with it: Say then as Abraham to the King of Sodom, I
will not take so much as a Shoe latchet from thee, lest thou should say,
Thou have made Abraham rich: so do thou; I will not so much as entertain, or
consult with shy earthly advantage, lest that should say, I have made thee
pray, I have made thee profess the Name of Christ. Wicked men are carried out
to evil for evils sake: but there is more fullness, goodness and excellency
in God, then there can be appearance of these in sin: Therefore it is
unsufferable, if when Draff shall move for the sweetness it has to a
distempered swinish appetite, that honey it self shall not affect a sound
appetite. But I have somewhere else spoken of the nature of this spiritual
life: I shall therefore in two things more only instance the property of Gods
Spirit dwelling in the godly, and then speak of the concomitant effects of Gods
Spirit in us.

Fourthly, To have the Spirit of God put into us, as in duties to be done it
lifts 4.
us up above humane strength, or motives, So in matters of sufferings, herein
the Spirit of God does wonderfully demonstrate it self in the Converted. For
hereby they are more then men: God is plainly in them, that they can deny their
dearest comforts, endure the most exquisite torment, and that with joyfulnesse
and alacrity. Look upon Paul and the Disciples of Christ in the New Testament,
What reproaches, persecutions, spoiling of their goods, taking away their
lives, were frequently executed upon them? and yet with what gladness of
heart, with what patience, faith, courage did they endure all, rejoicing that
they were accounted worthy to suffer any thing for the Name of Christ, Acts 5.
41. The History of the Martyrs does abundantly declare the Spirit of God put
into Believers; and therefore this should support the godly, they are afraid
that in times of temptation and of great troubles they should never be faithful
to God, they find their hearts so weak and feeble that they shall never be able
to persevere. Why do thou not consider, that the same Spirit of God which
lifts thee above nature for active obedience, will also for passive? To love
God, to believe in God, to do any religious duty spiritually, flesh and blood
can no more do it then Iron of it self can swim: but the spirit of God takes
thee, and fixes thy heart upon heavenly things. So flesh and blood cannot be
persecuted, imprisoned, cannot dye for the glory of Christ, but the spirit of
God can and does enable hereunto. Sampson could not do those extraordinary
actions of strength as a man, but as having the Spirit of God mighty upon him
so he did: neither can thou do or suffer in a gracious manner as a man,
without any more power than thy own; but as spiritual, as having Gods Spirit
in thee so thou can. What man's power can do in the hour of temptation,
Peter's presumptuous expression will teach us, Though all men forsake thee, yet
I will not; and yet he forsook Christ more desperately then any else. Oh
therefore do nothing that may grieve, or chase away the Spirit of God; for who
knows what Conflicts, what trials God may reserve thee unto? and then without
the mighty work of this Spirit of God, thou will prove an Apostate, and so a
very Judas or Cain at last: for first a man is forsaken by the Spirit of God,
as sanctifying, and then as comforting: Not that the Holy Ghost is totally and
finally ever driven away from him that once had him graciously; but there are
many looked upon as godly and forward in profession, who are judged so by
others, and they themselves make account also they are godly; yet in the day of
trial make a woeful Shipwreck of their Faith, and a good Conscience. Lastly,
because the Spirit of God is thus put into them, they are therefore said to be
the Temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3. and if their bodies be, much more
their souls are. O what a strong Obligation is this to all godliness, You are
the Temples of the Spirit of God, No unclean thing might enter into the Temple!
How did God complain, when they made his Temple a Den of thieves. How angry
then must he needs be, if thou make this Temple a stye of Swine, or an hell of
Devils? This evidently proclaims that most men never had this grace in the Text
vouchsafed unto them: For what is there no unclean, no brutish and polluted
thing that enters in thy soul? Is thy heart as the Temple, an house of prayer,
an heart of prayer, thy soul a soul of prayer? Do thou not defile this Temple
every day by profane and filthy lusts? What hopes can thou ever have that
this is made good to thee? Do not hear these things, as if they did not at all
belong to theee. Does not thy own heart tell thee, that if the Spirit of God
did dwell and work in thee, thou could not do as thou do, nor commit such
sins as thou daily committest? It was the Devil that was in the Swine, and
hurried them violently into the Sea; but the Spirit of God appeared in a Dove:
With what holiness then, and all godliness should you walk, who have this
benefit vouchsafed to you? what manner of persons should ye be who are the
Temple of the Lord, whose souls are made an heaven? Is it for you to be vain,
earthly and immoderately affected unto any Creature? Have you not that within
which may be in stead of all comforts to you? Thy frail body is a Cabinet
wherein excellent Jewels are.

Now that we may the better know whether the Spirit of God be in us, Of the
operations of the Spin in a Man.
causing us to walk in his Commandments, consider whether the other effects
attributed to the Spirit in the Scripture be also in thee: for as the Sun
vouchsafes heat as well as light, and is not with either of these alone: so
the Spirit of God comes not alone, but has diverse and noble operations with
it. Hence some expound that place from the seven spirits in the Revelations,
Revel. 1. 4. of the holy Spirit in its manifold operations. As,

First, Its called the good Spirit, Psalm 143. Let thy good Spirit lead ^^e, in
1.
opposition to the evil spirit. So that as the evil spirit or the Devil in
wicked men is continually inclining and moving of them to all evil thoughts,
affections and desires: They think evil, they conceive evil, they act evil:
as the Spider does only vent poison, so the good Spirit of God in good men
does incline and move them to good thoughts, good affections, good actions:
Hence they are said to have a good Treasure in their hearts. And of what
consequence it is to have this Spirit of God, appears, in that its named for
all good things: For whereas one Evangelist says; If ye being evil, know how
to give good things, how much more will your heavenly Father bestow good gifts?
Mat. 7. 11. Another says, How much more will he bestow the Spirit? Luke 11.
13. So that the Spirit is in stead of all good things. If then it cannot lie
hid, it will be quickly discerned, whether this good spirit, or that evil
wicked spirit abides and dwells in thee. The fruit will discover the tree: Its
strange that people should no more consider what the Fountain is from whence
all flows, whether it be bitter or sweet.

Secondly, Its a Spirit of Prayer, and Supplication, joined with a tender 2.
mourning heart, Zachary 12. and Romans 8. Groans unutterable are said to come
from the spirit; yea in that place is excellently described the help, guide and
support, which is afforded to the Godly in Prayer, by the Spirit: We know not
what to pray, or how to pray: so that if thou have this mercy in the Text,
thou find it mightily working in the duty of Prayer, enlightening thy mind,
heating thy affections, softning thy heart, supporting thee against unbelief,
fears and distrust. Indeed the spirit of God gives a Gift of prayer, which
many unregenerate and hypocrites have; yea they may be admirable in it: but
there is the Grace of prayer, when the soul is powered out in a gracious manner,
and this is only in the godly. A natural man cannot pray acceptably, and they
trust in a broken Reed who put confidence in their good prayers, which yet they
have by Rote or Custom, not through Gods Spirit. Do not then scornfully pass
over this touchstone.

Thirdly, Its called The Spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation, Isaiah 11. 2. 3.
which was first communicated to Christ the Head, without measure, and then
like Aarons Oil descends to the Members of Christ. This Spirit of Revelation,
is to see and behold the Glory of those things Revealed in the Gospel, and the
discerning of things in a spiritual manner, which the natural man cannot do;
and the spirit of Wisdom is to make a man understand the matters of Religion
in a Godly and practical manner, so to believe and know, as to refer all to
Godliness. Now how destitute many are of the Spirit in this sense, the
ignorance and dullness about holy things does evidently Demonstrate; they know
and understand nothing in the principles of Religion, so as to have their lives
Transformed by the power of it.

Furthly, and lastly, Its called the Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8. 15. 4.
which puts a Filial boldness into us, and makes us call God, Abba Father:
Those slavish fears and suspicious doubts in thee, they come not from Gods
Spirit. These drive thee farther off from God, they fill thee with hard and
discontented thoughts against God: No, its the Spirit of Adoption; and as of
Adoption, so its a Comforter, and an Advocate, John 14. 16. As Christ is an
intercessor in heaven for us; so the spirit is in our hearts pleading Gods
love, his readiness to forgive, his willingness to receive: as the godly are
to pray for the Spirit of Sanctification, so also for the Spirit of Adoption;
you are to pray for the Comforts of the Spirit, as well as the Graces; for
these are wings to the soul.

Use of Instruction: How necessary this Grace is to all our Congregations. Oh
that God would breath this spiritual breath into your souls. Oh that Use.
you knew experimentally what it is to have the Holy Ghost descend upon you. We
speak not of an extraordinary Miraculous way, much less of fantastical
Delusions and pretended Revelations by the Spirit of Darkness; but the
gracious operations of the Spirit in a Sanctifying way. Oh where will you
Blasphemers and wretched Mockers appear, who scoff at the Spirit, and make a
jeer about it? This is not only to grieve the Spirit of God, which is a
grievous sin, but to do despite to it. Now if the Spirit of God be
vouchsafed to you, it will come with this twofold benefit.

First, Its a Spirit of Truth, its called so, and its promised to lead the
Godly into all Truth. Therefore let men never so much talk, or boast of the
Spirit; if they be Errors and Heresies which they broach, the good and holy
Spirit is not in them; or if they be Opinions that carry to looseness and
liberty; For its an holy Spirit.

The second benefit is to do duties no more in the oldnesse of the Letter, but
the newness of the Spirit; this the Apostle calls for. Now to do a Duty in the
oldnesse of the Letter, is customarily and formally to perform any thing
without Christ, and his Spirit inabling of us: This is a dead Religion, a dead
Faith, and yet few, even very few, go any further.

SERMON XC.
That the work of Grace is a deep, powerful, and inward affecting of the whole
man. And how far Grace may be tendered or received, and yet not be put
effectually into our Inwards. Also what this inward, deep work of Grace is,
with the signs and effects of it.

EZEKIEL. 36. 27. And I will put my spirit within you.
THe grace promised in this Text has been dispatched, viz. The putting of Gods
Spirit in the converted. The next thing considerable is, The subject recipient;
The subject wherein this grace is put, and that is briefly but very
emphatically expressed, Within you. And indeed the English does not rise up to
the efficacy of the Hebrew, which is, in the midst, or the inward deep parts of
you. Hence it is translated in intimo vestri: So that there is a great deal of
weight lies upon this Hebrew phrase, for it supposes the work of grace to go
deep into a man. Its an hearty rooted work, it excludes all superficial,
formal or notionall, and mere brain-work in godliness: And its good to
observe, how in parallel places this promise does still relate to that intimate
deep working of grace upon the heart, Ezekiel. 11. 19. there is the same promise
repeated, with this Emphasis; so that you may see the excellency of this
promise for conversion to God, in the repetition of it, as if the Prophet
delighted to mention nothing but this. The Prophet Jeremiah also does twice or
thrice declare this grace here promised in the Text; and Chap. 31. 33. with
this Emphaticall description, I will put my law in their inward parts. Oh this
is the main thing; All outward profession, all parts, all notions, all
inlargements, if these be not accompanied with grace in the inward parts of a
man, they are but a blaze: they are a tinkling cymball. Such men's Religion is
like David's great men in the world, compared to grass upon the house top, with
which the mower fills not his hand.

That the work of grace is a deep, powerful and inward affecting of the whole
Observe.
man.

The Spirit of God is put into their inwards; the law of God is written in
their inwards; and therefore the spirit of man as sanctified and renewed, is
called often the inward man, Romans 7. 22. 2 Cor. 4. 16. Alas, we may say of
many, It Is the outward man of their godliness, not the inward; because it
consists only in the tongue, and in expressions, and transient affections at
farthest, but as for the deep, constant and solid working of grace, that is a
mystery they understand not. Now that the work of grace is such an inward deep
changing of a man; is also plain, in that its called so often, life. Now we
know life is not the external motion, or speaking, or eating, or working; but
the inward fountain of these. Life is the actus primus, the first act, or
fountain, or rise of all other motions. The Painter he can give external
lineaments, and outward representations; but he cannot give this actus primus,
this life. And the hypocrite or unsound man, he can give many outward colors,
and glorious representations of grace, so that he may be admirable in the eyes
of others, and confident in his own goodness, but yet not at all acquainted
with this grace in the inward parts. This point deserves a powerful opening,
to go to the inwards of it, as well as that must go to our inwards. And first,
Let us show how far this grace may be either tendered or received, How far
this grace may be tendered or received, and yet not put into our inwards. 1.
and yet not put into our inwards.

And first, it is easily granted by all, That as long as the word of God sounds
only in the ear, and it pierces no further, here is no descending of it into
the bowels: and yet are not the greatest part of our auditors no further
wrought upon, then as to the ear! They come and hear, they sit and hear, it may
be; but still here is no work of the Spirit upon the heart. Our Savior in his
parable compares such to the highway ground; the seed fell upon it, and
presently the devil, like the birds of the air, fetches it away. Oh that men
should judge it a great sin if they did not come and hear, and not also think
it a greater sin to hear, and not inwardly to receive the power of the word.
For the end of hearing is to let the word fall down into the very bottom of thy
soul. Physic in the mouth, not received into the stomach, cannot do any good.
R^in upon the surface of the ground, and not soaking to the root, will never
make the plant grow; and thus it is here, Though thou hear a thousand
sermons, thou that neglectest not any Sabbath day; yet if thou hear and
hear, and only hear; the word does not like Aarons oil go from thy ear,
thy head, but to thy heart, thy inferior deep parts of thy soul; thou go
home as ignorant, as profane, as obstinate as thou came hither. Know then
that the perfection and fullness of every action lies in accomplishing its
end, without which it is in vain. Eating without digestion does not nourish,
but breed diseases; so the end of hearing, is to have a potent and divine
operation upon the very bowels of thy soul. As Saul when he was among the
Prophets, the spirit came on him, and he also prophesied. Thus while the word
of God, the instrument of the spirit, is displayed before thee, what a mighty
change and deep alteration should come upon thee! Thou should go home praying
as others, repenting as others, fearing God as others: Do not then give the ear
only, but the heart also; otherwise Christ only stands at the door and knocks,
thou do not let him in.

Secondly. A second outward and insufficient work is, When the word is received
with understanding, and the grace of God does indeed open his eyes so far, that
2.
his mind is enlightened, that he does both know and believe the truths of
Religion, but it goes no further. Although this work be inward, being upon the
mind of man; yet I call it outward, as in respect of the inward parts,
mentioned in the Text, for that speaks of more then a mind to know, or an
understanding to understand the things of Religion. Although inlightning be
sometimes put for the whole conversion, and light for grace, yet at other times
it is made a distinct work from it, and such even as reprobates have, and
apostates, as Heb. 6. where inlightning, though it be a good, yea and a great
gift of God; yet the Apostle hopes for better things of them, and things that
accompany salvation: So that knowledge, parts, understanding in Religion does
not necessarily accompany salvation; and we hope better things of men, then to
be able to repeat or remember Sermons, or with some understanding to give an
account of the principles of Religion; and many times knowing of Gods will, and
doing it, are put as two separable things; how far then are they from the fruit
of this promise, who remain in gross ignorance, who have blind eyes, know
nothing about their corruption and misery by sin, or about Christ, and faith in
him! To whom all our Sermons have been as a book sealed up; unto whom, though
in English, yet we have preached unknown matter: A people likely to dye, and to
be damned in ignorance; for it understanding, knowing men, who receive the word
with attention and knowledge; yet if they find it not changing their inward
man, come short of grace, where must the ignorant man appear? 3.


Thirdly, The retaining of the word of God in the memory, that is not this
grace in the inward parts: That indeed is very laudable; and a forgetful hearer
is blamed by the Scripture, James 1. 25. David's resolution is, To hide the word
in his heart: And this is a great cause to make it work so deeply; for a man
cannot carry coals of fire long in his bosom, but they will set all on a flame;
yet the mere retaining it there, does not attain to the inward parts in the
Text.

Fourthly, The transient and sudden working upon the affections and heart, are
not 4.
also the putting of his spirit within us, or the writing of the Law in their
inward parts: This comes nearest, but they want root and continuance, and so at
last wither. John's hearers did for a season rejoye in his light; the temporary
Believer does receive the word with joy, and yet he has no root: This is a two
edged sword, this truth makes divisions between the secret and hidden things of
the heart: Oh how nice a point is that, wherein the temporary and the true
convert differ! both pray with sorrow, both hear with joy, both perform duties
with some inlargements and sweetness: Simili fere sensu afficiuntur, said
Calvin: Yet as two high hills may seem very near together at the top, when
their bottoms are far distant one from another; so these inlargements,
affections, may seem very near, when the bottom and root do much differ. Oh the
Minister of God should never be upon this point, but even horror should take
hold on the hearer, and he be like one that looks down an high pinnacle, and
trembles to see how easily, and yet dangerously he may fall; and yet looking
upon the battlements he holds upon, the grace of God, and the promise of God,
which his soul has had experience of, have hope; so put faith and trembling
together!

Lastly, The mere external cleansing of a man's life, from former lusts and
gross 5.
impieties, is not this putting the spirit within us? As the Angels, when they
took humane bodies, they did but seem to eat, and seem to do vital actions of
life; they could not indeed, because they were not personally united to the
assumed body: so all men who have their lives cleansed, and they set up a form
of Religion, they do not these things as vital actions of grace; they move, as
the wheel of the mill is moved, by the force of the water, not by an inward
principle of life: These are compared to Swine washed in the water, but
returning afterward to the mire: Though the Swine be made as white as the
sheep, yet because not inwardly made a sheep, therefore she turns at last to
her former impurity; but I hint only these things, because treated on before.

Let us in the next place come to consider positively, what this inward deep
work What this inward deep work of grace is. 1.
of grace is, wherein it does consist: And

First, It is then fulfilled in us, when the things of Christ, his Glory, Will
and Command lie closest, and nearest to the heart: For that is indeed within a
man, and intimate, which is next to his heart, as we say; and this our Savior
requires in every Disciple, He that loves father or mother more then me, is
not worthy of me, Mat. 18. 37. We know the love of father and mother is a most
natural thing, it comes not by teaching, by custom, its inbred in us as soon as
we are born; and yet the love of Christ, his Glory, and his Commandments should
be more intimate then this. Hence the Apostle, to express this innate and
inward life, says, I no longer live, but Christ in me, the life that I live is
by faith in Christ, Gal. 2. 20. What an emphatical expression is this, I do not
live, but Christ; I live not the life of sense, I eat not, I drink not, I
breathe not bodily breath; that is, comparatively to the life of faith: So that
you see our very natural life, which is the most inward and deep thing in a man
that is, is said not to be lived, in respect of this life of grace, which is
more inward then these: Oh then examine, how close and dearly heavenly things
lie to thy heart: Is there any thing more prized then God, then Grace, then
Godliness? then know, God has not put his spirit in thee, but the Devil, or
the world, and sin have put their lusts in thee: Now this is a sure discovery
of the woeful and sinful estate of most people, God is not in all their
thoughts, Christ is not in their affections, they choose other things rather
then him. Furthermore, as God and Christ is the beloved of their heart; so that
which is most hated and abhorred from the heart, is sin and all evil; its more
loathed then any other thing, more feared, more avoided; so that they choose
affliction and all misery rather then sin, their heart is most sensible and
apprehensive of this: Oh what then can they think of themselves, who harbor and
nourish sin? they no longer live, but sin in them; this is their meat and
drink, to do the works of the Devil: Oh then that at last men secure and bold
in sin, would be awakened: How comes that to be embraced in thy bosom, and
practiced in thy life, which thou should (...) avoid as hell it self?

Secondly, This inward work of grace is seen, when the work of humiliation is 2.
laid low enough: We read of the Parable of him that built an house, and when
the tempests and storms arose, all fell to the ground immediately; and why?
because this was not diged deep enough: Now our repentance and humiliation is
then deep enough, when its for sin as sin, when its for sin because its an
offense to God, and displeases him; when they loath themselves, and count
themselves abominable in this respect. To be humbled for sin, as Ahab and the
Israelites were often times, because of the temporal judgments following sin,
was not to go deep enough: Oh! herein people come too short, they cry out of
their sins, in the fear of death, in the extremity of pain: Alas, this is not
to go to the bottom; there is a worse thing in sin, then all the temporal
calamities it brings with it; and that is, to offend God, to separate between
his favor and thy soul: Its therefore very meet, that thy humiliation should be
for that which is the worst evil in sin. Again, in humiliation men go deep
enough, when they do not only stay upon actual sins, but go to the very
original and fountain of all: Thus David, Psalm. 51. he went deep, when beyond
his actual sins of Murder and Adultery he also bewailed the native corruption
of his soul: Oh! the grace of God must indeed have a close and inward work in
that man, who discovers the root of sin, as well as the branches; the fountain,
as well as the stream. God in the universal destruction of the world, did not
only look to the actual impieties then committed, but to the imagination of
the thoughts of a man's heart, which were only evil, and that continually, Genesis
6. and thus he that will make a sure and good issue of his humiliation, must
still dig deeper and deeper; and see more and more abominations, till he go to
the foul and bitter root of all.

Thirdly, Then the word of God is put in our inward parts, when we do truly,
sincerely and unfeignedly, perform all the duties God requires: This is to do
it with 3.
the whole heart; and if we had any thing better then our hearts, they should
be offered up to God: Thus David, Psalm. 51. Thou delightest in the truth in the
inward parts: Oh this a man should have in all the service he does for God! So
that all those, who by Religion accomplish their self-interests; all those who
seek themselves, have carnal movtives in the profession of Religion; these are
but pictures, not living creatures in the way of grace: Great is the number of
hypocrites, even among those that profess the name of Christ: Its damnable
blasphemy to charge it upon all, as wicked men do; this is to condemn the
generation of the godly, to blaspheme Christ and the Gospel; yet it cannot be
but that through the hypocrisies of many, grievous offenses and scandals will
fall out: None of those who follow Christ because of the loaves, or who tread
out the corn merely because they may feed on it, set up in seeming manner the
ways of Christ, that they may get outward advantages, can by experience witness
this promise made good to them: They pray, they hear, they perform holy duties,
but still they want something within, still the soul of all is wanting; but its
not the appearance of Good, not the name or profession of it, will bring thee
any true or sound comfort: The time is coming, when all things without will
fail thee, and leave thee; it must be something within that may support thee.
Signs and effects of this inward deep work of grace in a man. 1.


In the next place let us observe, What are the signs, or the effects of this
inward deep work of grace in a man; and they are excellent:

First, He does not rest in the external outward performance of any holy duty;
if all within him be not moved and excited thereunto: He has no comfort, no
content, in praying, hearing, or any Religious duty, if all the inwards of his
soul, and the depths of his heart, have not also been moved therein: Thus
David, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and let all within thee praise his holy name.
Psalm. 104. 1. All within thee, observe that: Thus the godly, as the Cock
stirs up himself before he crows, do prepare and stir up themselves to every
duty: Hear the word of God, O my soul, and let all within thee give ear
thereunto; so that the dull, sleepy, and formal performances of holy duties,
discover a man void of grace, as well as gross impieties: Not only
profaneness and ungodliness abroad, but dull, lazy, and formal duties, and
that in a constant manner, discover a man devoid of this work of Grace: Oh if
this were in the depth of thee, in the^ midst of thee, it would break out more
vigorously then it does.

Secondly, Where this deep work of grace is, there a man's inward thoughts and
meditations are often about holy things: The tree that is deeply rooted, has
several 2.
strings, as it were, whereby its fastened to the earth; as the young infant in
the womb is to the mother: So that thou art to observe, what thy inward
thoughts, thy inward meditations do most run about: If grace be deep within,
thy soul will be like an heaven, such holy thoughts, holy meditations, holy
affections do lodge in thee: Thus the godly is described, By meditating in the
Law of God day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. As the Psalmist describes the wicked man,
by his thoughts, God is not in his thoughts; and his inward thought is to leave
himself a greet name. Thoughts are the first born of the soul, they most
discover what a man is, they come nearest to the fountain. As the liquor tastes
and smells of the vessel, so thoughts have either filthiness or godliness in
them, as they come immediately from the heart; Oh then consider, what thy
inward thoughts for the most part are, for such art thou as they are.

Lastly, A man that has this deep grace, he is will rooted and established; he
is upon the rock Christ, and so he can abide all temptations: If there come 3.
the temptations of persecution, he can show his patience; if of error and
heresies, his godly wisdom and soundness of mind: When men want a bottom, or
are not built upon a rock, they are like children tossed up and down with every
wind of Doctrine.

Use of Examination: This Doctrine should even amaze you, and put you into Use.
a godly fear; for do not most men content themselves with the externals in
Religion? is not all the whole worship and godliness of many in the mere form?
others place it in disputes, in opinions; but to have grace in the inward man
is rare: Oh consider that place, Every man's way is good in his own eyes, but
God pondereth the heart, Prove. 21. 22. And God is often described by this, He
tries and searches the hearts of men: Not that these outward duties of
Religion and Worship are to be neglected; but we are not to judge of godliness
in our selves by these; the soul and excellency of them lies in the inward
man: Oh remember, that if there be not a good treasure within, thou will roar
and tremble one day, when all things else will fail. Hezekiah comforted himself
in this, That he had walked in truth and uprightness of heart: Then something
within, will be a joy to thy soul, even then, when all outward things will
leave thee.

SERMON XCI.
Of the Order and Method that God takes in our Conversion; First, Working in us
inward Principles, and then causing us to walk in his Statutes, opposite to the
Doctrine of Pelagians, Papists, Arminians, and Moral Philosophy; Also signs to
discover whether our outward Duties proceed from Grace within, or from Humane
respects.

EZEKIEL. 36. 27. I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes.
THe precious and great mercy of conversion promised in this Text under several
Titles and Notions, has been fully considered of and improved. There remain
several other particulars, which are not without their great weight and moment.
As in the first place, The Order and Method of the promise is to be taken
notice of; for he works in the same method as he promises: the Method is
this: First, He promises to give the inward root, then the fruit; first the
fountain, then the streams: He first promises the inward principles, and habit
of grace, a new heart, a new spirit, and then he will cause them to walk in his
commandments. God is both the Author of Nature, and the Author of grace; now as
the Author of Nature, he first works the principles of life, he gives the
principles of Motions, and all vital Actions, and afterward the exercise. So
it is here, God does in the way of grace bestow a supernatural principle upon
men, and then being Obs. Gods method is first to give the inward principles of
holiness, and then grace to live holily. The point illustrated by some
considerations. 1. Grace does not come into the heart at first, as sin came
into the world.
First made good Trees, then they bring forth good fruit. The Observation.

That God does first work the foundations and principles of holiness, and from
them men walk and live holily. Thus the Apostle says, We are his workmanship,
created to every good work, Ephesians 2. 10. We do not first do good works, and so
become Gods workmanship; but we are first his workmanship, and then we exercise
our selves in good and holy works.

This Doctrine has its great use, both in matter of information, and
exhortation; and there is more consequence in it, then an ordinary apprehension
will at first conceive. Therefore to clear this, we will first illustrate this
Truth, by the opposite of it, or contrary opinions.

And first, Grace does not come at first into the heart, as sin came into the
world; for Adam was not made a bad tree, and so brought forth bad fruit; his
person was not made wicked, and his nature, and then that infected his Actions;
but God made him after his own image, in righteousness and true holiness: So
that his soul being furnished with all graces, as the heavens are adorned with
several stars, he might have continued in all holy actions suitable to his
original perfection. Adams sinful disobedience, did not as outs, flow from a
polluted unclean nature, but from the mere liberty of his will: and when he had
thus actually transgressed, then that actual sin infected, and poisoned his
whole nature. Thus you see the actions of sin were before the habits, and
principles of sin: there was a branch before a root; there was a sweet
fountain, and yet a bitter stream^ but God in converting and changing of us,
does take the contrary course; he first sanctifies our Natures, all the
faculties of the soul; lays a spiritual life as a foundation, and then being
thus inwardly enlivened and established, we are carried out to all holy
actions: So that all the glorious outward actions of religion, that are visible
to the eyes of the world; if they be built without this inward foundation they
will prove but a Babel: They are but like Sodoms apples, glorious for show, but
indeed dust and Ashes. It is good to observe, How that God in the Creation of
the world, both in vegetative, and sensitive creatures, still created the
principles first, and that in perfection, Seminative, able to beget and
propagate others; and thus it is also in conversion, he works these holy and
excellent principles, which afterward are operative and vigorous.

Secondly, God working thus a new Nature, and thereby enabling to new actions,
2. God takes another kind of course to make holy, then the Philosopher teaches.
takes a far other course to make holy, then Moral Philosophy teaches: For if
we read all the Moral Philosophers, persuading us to be temperate, just, or
prudent, if you ask them, How shall we come to have the habits of these things?
They will tell you, by frequent actions, justa agendo sumus justi, by doing
many righteous actions frequently, so we come to have habits. Thus they know no
other way, and there is no better Divinity in most people; for they think by
doing godly actions, they are made godly: and so they think by walking in Gods
commandments, to get a new spirit, which is the clear inverted order to the
Text; for God first gives this New spirit, and then causes to walk in his
Law; we indeed are commanded to be diligent in the use of the means; we must
attend to the Ordinances of grace; but till this spiritual life be infused,
there is not one good action done by us in a good manner: All that thou do
till this new principle be put in thee, has but the body of a good action, not
the soul of it. Nothing thou do is pleasing to God, Heb. 11. 6. God is angry
with thee all the day long, All things are become polluted, and unclean to
thee, Ti^. 1. 15. Oh were not men hardened in their sins, and led captive by
the D^vel according to his pleasure: they could never eat, or drink, or take
any rest till they got out of that damnable estate, wherein all the day long
they were treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath. Belshazzar saw but one
handwriting in the wall against him, and he knew not what it was; yet it
struck him with terror and trembling: But now thou have many hand-writings, and
Ordinances against thee, even the whole word of God; and thou can not but
know what they are, yet thou art not affected with fear. What was written of
Belshazzar, Thou art weighed, and found too light; The same Gods word says of
all thy Duties, performances, and seeming religion, It is weighed, and it is
found too light: And the reason is, because all thy religious duties are like
leaves fallen from the tree dried, and without s^p or moisture.

Thirdly, This work of grace is in a far other manner then Pelagians of old, or
3. The work of Grace far otherwise then Pelagians, Papists, or Arminians teach.
Papists, and Arminians of late, do confidently aver, for they attend not to
this Order in the Text. But they say, that man by the power of Free Will, does
join with the grace of God, and cooperate with that; and so partly from
free will, partly from Gods grace, comes this new spirit, this new grace. But
this does directly contradict many places of Scripture, which makes
Regeneration and a New Birth necessarily to go before all holy actions; and if
a man cannot make himself a man, much less like God, as grace does: But say
they, Ezekiel. 18. 31. there the Scripture says, Make ye a new heart, a new
spirit; Therefore we by our working obtain a new heart; But this is answered
thus, That the same thing may be both our Duty and Gods Gift: when the
Scripture says, Make ye^a new spirit, there it declares our Duty, what we
ought to do: but when God says, I will give it you, that shows our Impotency,
we are not able to make new hearts; and therefore God graciously works it for
us. Augustine did admirably and orthodoxly defend this truth, That we were not
made holy by doing holy Actions, through Grace and Free Will; but God first
made us holy; as says Augustine, The Wheel runs round, not to make it self
round, but because it is round, therefore it runs round. Indeed our Savior
says, Make the Tree good (Matthew. 12. 33.) and then the fruit will be good; but
he does not there describe our power, but that excellent order all should look
unto in Religion; the Pharisees, like most people in our days, they looked to
the outward Actions, did not dare to omit them, They washed the outside of the
Cup; but says our Savior, not the outside but the inside must be first
cleansed: The Tree must be first made good ere the fruit can. Oh there is no
Doctrine more necessary then this. Who looks to good insides! Many dare not
neglect the outward Obedience unto Gods Commandments, but who minds the new
heart, the new spirit within; and hence they set most preposterously upon the
work of Conversion; they think by good Deeds, by outward Duties to obtain a new
spirit from God, not considering this is to build the top of an House before a
Foundation be laid, Non per opera venitur ad fidem, sed per fidem ad opera; We
do not come to Faith by Works, but to Works by Faith; Oh then be affected with
this excellent Order and Method that God takes in our Conversion, begin where
God begins. What the Apostle said about his Preaching, As a wise Builder (1
Cor. 3. 10.) I lay a good Foundation: So do thou as a wise Builder for Heaven
lay a good Foundation; Tempests and Storms will arise; God will have his
winds and waves to assault you, so that unless you be built on a Rock, you
cannot continue immovable.

These things premised, let us consider the Reasons why God takes this Reasons
of the point.
order, first giving a new heart and spirit, then causing us to walk in his
ways, and

First, Otherwise our Duties would be dead Duties, there would be no Life in 1.
them. If a Ball or Wheel move, this Motion is not a vital Action, because its
not from a Principle within, it comes wholly from without; so all thy Obedience
to Gods Commandments is but a dead Obedience, a dead Work, if this new Heart be
not first in thee. God in the Old Testament accepted of dead Sacrifices to be
offered to him, but now we must give up our selves, as living Sacrifices, Romans
12. 1. The Scripture delights to call the Work of Grace, a Life, and the Graces
of Gods Spirit are compared to living Waters. And thus indeed it is, Every
Prayer must be a living Prayer, thy Obedience living, or lively Obedience, but
this cannot be till God begin in the inward man first. As therefore thou
can not delight in a dead Wife, dead Children; so neither does God in thy
dead Religion. We Ministers while preaching of these things, may say our Hearts
are inditing of good things, and our Mouths drop like the Honeycomb; for how
glad should thou be to hear of a way that may put life into all thy dead
Duties. If those that lived in Christ's time, did so exceedingly rejoice to
receive their Friends from the dead; what joy should it be to have all thy
Duties arise as it were from the dead? How necessary is this for such who live
in a mere formal customary way of Duties! We read of the Egyptian Plague,
that the firstborn in every Family was dead; and thereupon in the Morning
there were great outcries in every Family for a dead son. Oh how should this
truth make many Families mourn for their dead Duties, their dead Religion!
There is no life in any thing thou do, till God begin within and so cure thee
outwardly.

Secondly, As there is no life in thy Duties, so there is no worth, no
excellency, up 3.
solidity in them, if first Gods Law be not written in our inward parts. We
read in the Canticles of large commendations that Christ gives the Church,
viz. every godly soul, and how her graces are commended for the loveliness,
sweetness and fragrancy in them; whereas if she had only paintings, a mere
outside without the inward substance of Grace, there might have been some
glittering but no true worth. What worth is there in an Image of clay and dirt,
though covered over with gold? Godliness is aurea not deaurata; the Churches
Glory was within: What worth is there in straws or flowers, when their juice
and moisture is dried up? The hypocrite is compared in his fastings to a
Bulrush, and such a Bulrush is every man's Godliness without this inward
foundation; its empty and light. Therefore weigh your Duties in the balance of
the Sanctuary, do not judge that godliness and holiness which the Scripture
rejects as refuse. As the Prophet speaks of the Israelites, Reprobate Silver
shall men call them, Jer. 6. 10. So reprobate Duties, a reprobate Godliness,
shall both men and God call these. As God by the Prophet complains of his
defective and deformed Sacrifices, Go and offer such to your Governors and
Rulers; so we may say in this case, Go to men and serve them without an inward
heart, without inward affections, and will they thank you or reward such
service?

Thirdly, As there is no worth, so there is no sutablenesse in such Duties to
God; 3.
for God is a Spirit, and he searches and tries the hearts of men, our
Savior from this consideration inferred, that those who worship him must
worship him in spirit and truth, John 4. Now then if God have not begun this
foundation in thee of a new heart, a new spirit; here is no congruity between
God and thy worship. Oh how remote are these things from the common
understanding of most men, who know no further in Religion then a bodily
praying, or a bodily hearing! Sursum corda, was the ancient acclamation at the
administration of the Sacrament, to take them off from the Elements of Bread
and Wine; and this should be a daily Memento, Lift up your hearts on high in
every Duty you go about. But men that would be thus elevated in their hearts,
and fasten upon God himself, must go out of all their low and bodily
apprehensions. As God bad Abraham come out of his Tabernacle, and then to look
up to Heaven to number the Stars if he could; thou must be drawn out of the
Tabernacle of thy bodily affections, before thou can set thy heart upon God
himself. Oh then consider that as long as this new spirit is not in thee, there
is no more proportion between God and thy soul for any holy Duty, which is
nothing but a familiar communion with God, then is between Earth and Heaven.

Fourthly, Therefore God begins here before the outward man be sanctified,
because 4.
the greatest power and strength of corruption lies in the inward parts. As
the Law of God is in the inward parts of the godly; so the Law of sin, as the
Apostle calls it, is reigning in the members of every wicked man; so that the
godly have a good Law in their inward parts, and the wicked, the Law of sin.
If therefore God should only enable us to outward Obedience without this new
spirit, his greatest work of Grace would be left undone; for its not the body
so much as the soul that the Devil possesses, and takes for his own. The
greatest part of wickedness lies there, where most men do neither perceive or
feel it. Though sickness when it come to the heart be presently felt, yet sin
when it comes to the heart, and lies at the heart, is not felt as a burden
till Gods Spirit convince a man; seeing therefore that this converting Grace is
vouchsafed as an healing, and a medicinal cure, it is necessary that the
greatest operation of it should be upon the vital parts within. So that as in
unregenerate men, the imaginations of the thoughts of their hearts are only
evil, and that continually; so the imagination of their thoughts should be
godly and heavenly. As the wicked swallow down iniquity like water, so rivers
of living water should flow out of their bowels. As in the wicked no man can
bring the clean out of an unclean, so it should be hard to bring an unclean
from a clean. In these things lies the marrow and quintessence of Religion,
men are but in the porch, and never enter into the Holy of Holies till they be
experimentally acquainted with these things: O that all our Congregations were
understanding of these things. If Ministers preach against outward gross
impieties, such as the light of nature condemns, with that you can go along;
but concerning this new spirit and new heart, or the old heart and old man;
which the Scripture so much speaks of, you know nothing of it.

In the next place let us consider, What are the Signs that may discover when
we Signs to discover when Duties proceed from this new Spirit within, and not
from other grounds.
perform holy Duties from this new Spirit within, and not rather as most do
from Education, Custom or carnal Respects to the good or ill will of man. For
this is certain, All men perform holy Duties, either from inward principles of
Grace, or outward principles of humane respects; now how shall we know when a
man does them from this inward new Spirit?

First, He that does them from an inward principle; is constant, and uniform,
and immovable in them, for this is made a divine Nature in him. Now as all
natural 1.
principles in the creatures do carry them on in a constant settled way; The
fire does always ascend upwards, the stone descend downwards; so the wicked
man he is constant to his principles of sin, you shall never find him
checking or stopping himself, but by some extraordinary power; Thus the godly
man, his heart and soul does carry him on to the things of Godliness, and if he
be at any time stopped in it, or hindered, it is, as they say the disease is to
the body, Praeter Naturam, besides the nature and inclination of a godly man.
Hence Paul makes such a miserable complaint of those lusts that did stir, and
move in him, as those that had led him away Captive against his will, Romans 7.
Look to this then you who are inconstant, and are for holy Duties in some fits,
in some sad moods. So that it is accidental, and wholly inexpected, if thou set
upon any religious Duty, we may by way of wonder cry out, is they did, Is Saul
also among the Prophets? What makes thee pray, come to Church? What puts
thee in this fit? What good Disposition art thou in so suddenly?

Secondly, Men that perform outward Obedience from inward principles, they do 2.
it with delight and joy. There is nothing so pleasing and connatural to them.
All principles have a kind of delight in their connatural actions and objects.
Thus the voluptuous principle is for the pleasures of the flesh, the ambitious
principle for honors and earthly greatness, and the godly principle is for
holiness and godliness. David how often does he profess his delights, and even
ravishments in the Ordinances of God, and the enjoying of him! Christ called it
His meat and drink to do the will of his Father; and why? because the Law of
God was written within his heart. Indeed the godly sometimes find dullness,
listlesness, and even a wearisomness upon them in the ways of God. But yet
their main and chief delight of soul is in God and the Ordinances that lead to
him, rather then in any thing else; Thou have put more gladness into my heart,
then they have had, when their wine and oil increases, Psalm. 4.

Thirdly, Where inward Principles are, they will carry to the Obedience of Gods
Commands, though there be no outward Encouragements to allure and draw on. 3.
The Father and Mother love their Children, though they have no outward
advantages by them, because it is a natural principle. You do not hire and
entreat an hungry man to eat his meat, or a wearied man to take his rest.
Natural appetite calls for these things. Thus he that has the new heart and
spirit within him, he is godly, and lives holily, though there be no favor,
no encouragement, no honor to such men.

Yea fourthly, Where inward Principles of Grace are, They grow the more
powfuller and active, by how much the more they are opposed. Thus the water
that is 4.
stopped does swell the higher. The colder the weather is, the hotter the fire
burnneth by an opposition; And so the people of God have been most holy in
times of Troubles, and Oppositions: They have born the best fruit, and looked
most green in the Winter time: whereas when men have not inward principles of
grace, then they presently wither as soon as the Sun rises; because they
have no root. The godly are Stars, that shine most in the night, in dark times.

Use of Exhortation, Still and still to look from whence all thy external
Obedience comes. Whence is thy Hearing, thy Praying, thy Family Duties? Use.
Yea, what advantage is it to set up Dagon? he will fall down again and again;
as long as he has no inward life in him, and it will be no profit to thee, or
Comfort at thy Death, or at the day of Judgment, to say, I have prayed, I have
heard, I have been diligent to come to Church; if first this new Spirit have
not been put in thee. But Oh! How long shall those things be dark Parables, and
hidden Mysteries to most men? Who will give you understanding in these things?
Remember your inwards of Nature decay every day, and your outward body; lay up
then some enduring Treasure.

SERMON XCII.
That true Principles of Grace within must needs Demonstrate themselves by an
Outward Godly Life.

EZEKIEL. 36. 27. I will put my Spirit within them, and cause them to walk in my
Statutes, etc.
WE desire not to lose one jot or tittle in this gracious promise, a drop of
this cordial is of great prize. The Order and Method which God uses both in
promising and working, has afforded us one Observation already; but its so
fruitful as to bear a second Crop. We may in the second place observe a
Practical Doctrine; which is,

That wheresoever God works the principles of Grace within, there they cannot
but Doct.
show themselves in the outward life and conversation.

For thus God promises, he will first put his Spirit within them, and then
cause them to walk in his Statutes. There is a necessary Connection between
these two, God has put them together, and so neither man or Devil must put
them asunder. Thus our Savior shows, that the heart within is either the
good Treasury, or the bad, out of which flow either good thoughts and actions,
or bad, Mat. 12. 34, 35. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks,
the mind thinks, the hand works.

To open this Doctrine; consider Considerations to open the Doct. 1.


First, That there are many in the world, who flatter and bless themselves
with the goodness of their heart, when yet their lives are full of noisome
lusts. You would wonder men should be so bewitched; and yet how often is it?
Take the profane man, and the most ungodly wretch that is, yet he will say, He
has as good an heart as the best of men; not considering how impossible it is
to devide a good heart, and a good life one from another. As men do not gather
Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles: so neither can Thorns be gathered from
Grapes, or Thistles from Figs. As we cannot expect a clean thing from an
unclean; so neither an unclean thing from a clean: so that the lives and
constant wicked actions of most men, do declare it to their faces, that there
is no new heart or spirit within them: and as there are such kind of
Self-Deceivers: so there are another sort of Persons, called Nicodemites, such
who thought they might lawfully communicate in any raise or Idolatricall
Worship, or might deny the outward profession of the truth of Christ, if so be
that they kept their Conscience clear to God. This grievous error did much
prevail when the outward profession of Christ and his Truth was accompanied
with great and imminent dangers: they thought they might give up their bodies
to any outward pollution: so that they kept their souls for God; but God will
be glorified in soul and in body also, 1 Cor. 6. 20. And as we must with the
heart believe, so we must with the mouth make Confession to salvation. Romans 10.
10.

Secondly, Even in the godly, the heart many times may be desirous of that good
2.
which yet through the power of corruption they are not always able to
perform. So that although a new heart be within them, yet much corruption, and
many ^railties may be in their life Romans 7. Paul exceedingly groaned under this
misery, That the good he would do, he could not do; and although out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, yet the mouth cannot speak all the
abundance of the heart: There is more strength of Grace in the heart then
possibly can be expressed outwardly. As no child can express how much it
loves its father; so neither can any soul manifest how much it loves God.
Howsoever therefore a new heart is in the godly, yet because it is not
perfectly and absolutely new, it fails in many outward performances; some
outward or inward temptations make it come short of the grace it desires. Thus
the Apostle, The Spirit and the flesh lusts one against another, so that ye
cannot do the things ye would, Gal. 5. 17. A godly man then must judge wisely
concerning himself; they are ready to think, Oh if Grace were in my heart, if
the spirit of God did dwell in me, how could I be overtaken with passions, with
dullness and sluggishnesse; they must remember, that though the spirit be
willing the flesh is often weak; yea many times both spirit and flesh also may
be weak: But why do we speak of this as a strange thing? That where the
Principles of Grace are men may fail in outward duties; for sometimes we see
where they have been, yet foul and gross sins have been committed, yea and for
some season continued in. David had the Spirit of God within; yet in his Murder
and Adultery he did not walk in the Lords Statutes; and so of diverse others! So
that we must not absolutely condemn those as hypocrites, and without any true
principles of grace, who living after a godly manner, yet sometimes fall in the
mire, and tumble in blood: for although such a condition is very terrible, and
greatly scandalous; yet the seeds and inward principles of grace are not quite
extinct; and therefore when we say, A godly heart, and a godly life are
necessarily conjoined together, that is to be understood for the most part, and
according to the nature of things, though accidentally, through sudden
temptations, the clean contrary may appear.

Thirdly, There may be inward principles of Grace, and yet no outward fruits of
3.
righteousness: When either the subjects are not capable of actions, or they
have not time and opportunity to produce them; No doubt but in Infants that are
elected, the inward principles of grace are infused, and therefore they are
made Members of Christ: yet as they have a soul, but that soul cannot put forth
any actions of reason; so they have the principles of grace, but they bud not
forth into fruit. The Thief also that was Converted at the last hour, there was
a new spirit in him, yet he had not time to bring forth the fruits of
righteousness: so that it is one thing not to bring forth the fruits of
righteousness, because there is no inward root within; and another thing,
because there wants an opportunity, or the objects about which such graces are
exercised are not present. Paul speaking of the Saints care and love to him,
excuses them, because though they were ready to do good to him, yet they
wanted an opportunity, Phil, 4. 10. A godly man is indeed a tree that is
planted by the waters side, and brings forth its fruit, but it is in due
season. Though Christ cursed the Fig Tree, that had no fruit on it, although it
was not the season; yet hereby (happily) he would admonish the Jews, of how much
sorer curse they have cause to be afraid, who had the season of grace, but
neglected it.

A Godly man therefore ought not to be dejected, if he do not abound in such
plentiful exercises of graces as others do, if his mind be willing: Only he
has not such opportunities, nor such Instruments, whereby to make his light
shine before others, as many of the Children of God have.

Lastly, consider this, Although a constant practice of ungodliness be a sure
demonstration 4.
of a graceless heart, yet a constant abstinence from gross sins, is not
presently a sure evidence of a good heart. Understand this, that thou do not
deceive thy soul; for many think, if they indeed should wallow in the Mire and
Filth of sin, it were sure they were beastly Swine; but because they keep
themselves clean from the gross Transgressions of the wicked, therefore they
conclude this new heart is within them: but you have heard that men may be
restrained from sin, by the providence of God and otherwise, who yet have not
this spiritual life infused in them. For this Spirit of God does not only
cause a man to forbear from sin, but in such a manner also, and upon such
grounds, that the most painted Sepulcher, the most exact Formalist can never
reach unto. These things laid as a foundation, it is good to consider, why a
man cannot carry this coal of fire, this principle of grace in his bosom, but
it will break out into a flame. And,

First, The reason is evident from the nature of Grace, or this new heart
within Reas 1.
men, its of an operative, and spiritual vigor, it will not let a man alone,
he can have no rest, or quiet within himself, if he should not outwardly
practice that godliness, the root whereof is in his heart. Hence the
principles of grace are compared to active and vigorous things, to seed sown,
which though little in quantity, yet is great in efficacy: Thus John says, A
man born of God, does not, nor cannot sin, because immortal seed abides in
him, 1 John 3. 9. And so the Word of God received by faith in the heart, is
compared to seed sown, that brings forth much fruit. Thus Jeremy and David,
when they were withheld sometimes from good, they felt a fire kindled in their
breasts that burnt and scorched them, and could not but speak: So the Apostle,
We believe, therefore we speak, 2 Cor. 4. 13. And grace is compared to a
Fountain of living waters, always springing out of the belly of the Godly, John
7. 38. The love of Christ constrains us, says the Apostle. This is the new
Wine that the Spirit of God puts into the Converted, whereby they are heartned,
and cheered within. O then be afraid of thy negligence, carelessness, and
neglect of an holy life! If grace were like seed, like fire within, it would
set thy whole conversation on a flame. Now grace in the heart must needs be a
sharp Arrow to wound sin, seeing that it is in the hand of Christ, and the
spirit of God; so that it cannot but conquer sin in the life, seeing Christ and
his spirit dwells in those that are his. Greater is he that is with you, then he
that is against you, says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 4. 4. And though Satan be the
strong man, that keeps all things in quiet, before conversion, yet Christ is
stronger. No wonder then, if grace in the heart rest not, till it reformeth the
life, and subdueth the most strong corruptions in a man; for Christ and his
Spirit sets these on working: and therefore the Apostle says, If they be led
by the Spirit, they shall not fulfill the deeds of the flesh, Gal. 5. And sin
shall not have dominion over them, because they are under grace, Romans 6. 14. So
that as the house of Saul did wax daily weaker and weaker, and the house of
David stronger and stronger, because God had forsaken the one, and was with the
other; Thus it must needs be, that a new heart will make a new life, because
the new heart has God on its side, Christ and his spirit is with it. We may
see the Combat of sin and grace excellently represented in the Israelites
fighting with the Canaanites, how wonderfully did they subdue all their
enemies! no adversaries, though they were of the most terrible Giants, were
able to stand before them: so its here in Conversion: No sin, though never so
pleasant, so sweet, so powerful, is able to stand before the spirit of God,
Crucifying the deeds of the flesh; and therefore let none excuse themselves,
saying: Such a sin, or such distempers I cannot overcome, I am not able to
master such infirmities: Why say thou so? for grace inlivened by Gods Spirit,
is able to destroy all thy stoutest corruptions; Though they be too strong for
thee, yet not for him.

Secondly, A new heart within, must needs have an outward godly life, because
that is the end and the perfection of it. In Moral Philosophy, acts are
accounted the perfection 2.
and end of their Habits; and they use to say, That power is in vain, which is
never reduced into act: and thus it holds in Religion: God gives us the
principles and inward abilities of grace; that they may be in action and
exercise. Hence God requires actions principally, and the inward principles by
consequence. Thus God requires the act of Faith, and the act of Love: Thou
shall love the Lord, viz. actually: So that all inward principles of grace
being for this end, to be in outward action and exercise, it cannot be that
they should be frust rated of this; yea in the Scripture to have a Talent, and
actually to improve it, is all one; and they are said to receive the grace of
God in vain, who do not put it forth in exercise; so that every godly man, who
is not diligent in the daily exercise of grace should consider, Why God has
given him the principles of grace, why a power to believe, a power to be
heavenly-minded, when this is not demonstrated in his life: and all those who
live in gross: impieties, yet boast of a good heart, may conclude they have a
good heart in vain; for a good heart is to have a good life, especially the
people of God, who have indeed the principles of grace, yet walk dully and
negligently they should startle at this saying, Have I received all my grace in
vain? has God wrought all these great works in me in vain? How severe was that
servants Master to him, who took his Talent, and hid it in a Napkin! Even as
they buried their dead, tying them in Napkins, Cast that unprofitable Servant
(says he) into utter darkness, Mat. 25. 30. Not profuse, deceitful,
thievish, but unprofitable servant. May thou not fear this doom, thou who
happily host enjoyed the principles of grace within thee, but thy outward life
is like a barren wilderness. Stir up thy self therefore and say, All
principles of Grace are to act with, are to be daily exercised and improved.

Thirdly, therefore principles of Grace within will demonstrate themselves in a
godly life, Because God at the day of judgment will make our actions and works
the measure of his judgment. The judicial process will not be according to
what is 3.
within, but what is without. Thus Paul, We must all appear before the
judgmentseat of Christ, to receive according to what we have done in the flesh,
2 Cor. 5. 10. whether good or evil, Why then have thou any hope, who live in
all manner of ungodliness? Think not the cry of thy prayers, nor the groans of
thy heart will be above thy crying sins: At that great day God will not only
enquire what thy thoughts, or thy desires have been, but what thy actions have
been. If therefore any grain of wisdom be in thee, thou will be sure to look
to that against which the Judge will most surely manifest himself, and that is
thy actions. It will be then no plea to say, Lord I had a good heart, a good
meaning, I desired to do otherwile; if thou have not indeed done otherwise.

Fourthly, The Scripture does expressly declare such to be Hypocrites, who
having a profession of Christ, and of faith and love of him, do yet roll
themselves 4.
in all impieties: Let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from
iniquity, 2 Timothy, 2. 19. And the wicked man's Sacrifice, the wicked man's prayer
is an abomination unto the Lord: the Apostle James does at large vehemently
press this, That Faith without the good Fruits and works of Righteousness is
altogether dead, and he calls that man a vain man, who reasons otherwise. Thou
then who are so apt to brand those who endeavor to walk strictly, and in an
unsported manner from the world, with hypocrisy; see thy self the most
notorious hypocrite of all; for thou say, Thou believe in Christ, thou
say thou love God, and yet thy life is full of profaneness, and enmity
to his holy will: Sincerity is the sweet accord and harmony of the heart, and
actions together; and it is hypocrisy to pretend heart and affections for God,
when with thy works thou do deny him. As the Prophets of old complained of
such, who would come into Gods Temple, call upon his Name, yet curse, swear,
steal, and commit Adultery, Ier. 7. With no less zeal may the Ministers of the
Gospel complain, That men will be Christians, will come to Church, will hear,
and yet their lives are full of such noisome sins.

Fifthly, Therefore Grace in the heart will break out into action, because the
godly 5.
are to endeavor the conversion of others. They are to be examples of
holiness, to win others thereunto: now this can never be without holiness in
the life: For men cannot try, or discern the hearts of men, they judge of the
tree by the fruits; so that if ever we would be instruments to reclaim others
from a wicked life, we our selves must be exemplarie in our own: Thus the
believing wife is exhorted to walk in such an holy manner, that her unbelieving
husband may be brought to the faith thereby, 1 Cor. 7. 16. Our Savior exhorts
his Disciples, That their light should so shine before men, that they beholding
their good works, may glorify God in the day of their visitation, Mar. 5. 16.
Oh what a sad thing is it for thee by thy wicked and ungodly life to harden
others in impiety! They see that, a rich man, a great man, a wise man, scoffing
and opposing the way of godliness, and this confirms them the more in their
impieties.

Sixthly, Therefore the Spirit of God within, will cause us to walk in all
holiness, 6.
Because the daily exercise of Grace affords a great deal of sweetness,
comfort, and a good assurance of our interest in Christ. Though good works and
and a godly life are not a cause of our justification or sanctification, yet by
these we come to have comfortable evidences of Gods love to us, and ours to
him. As Leah said, Her husband would love her, because she was fruitful in
children; and thus it is here, Our Election is made sure to us, by adding one
grace to another, one godly action to another: Barrenness in the knowledge of
God is reckoned a great curse by the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 8. and hence it
is, that the more Gods own children fail in a daily and diligent practice of
Godliness, the less comfort and assurance they have in their own Consciences.

Lastly, principles of grace, will have the acts of grace, that so they may stop
the mouths of all those who would reproach and blaspheme the holy profession of
his Gospel. David 7.
by his wicked action of murder, had opened the mouths of Gods enemies to
blaspheme him: And the Apostle complains, Romans 2. That by their ungodliness,
the Name of God was blasphemed among the Gentiles. Oh then, if nothing else,
yet let this make thy heart and life accord in the power of Godliness, that
the name of God may not be blasphemed, that his pure honor may not be wounded.

Use 1. Of Instruction: How vainly all those do comfort themselves, who plead
duties or opinions, or any high thing in Religion, whose lives are not
cleansed: Its a vain thing to plead the spirit of God in thee, if that cause
thee not to walk in Gods statutes, and to do his judgments; yet this has been,
and is a great deceit; men think duties, and external acts of Religion are
enough to save them, though their lives be full of noisome filthiness.

Use 2. What a wonder it is, That that there should be any in Christian
societies, that have their lives stained with any gross sin; for who is there
that does not think and hope that he has this new heart, the Spirit of God
within him, when yet his life speaks nothing but open rebellion and enmity
against God? Its not what thou art here in the Church, with the appearance of
piety and devotion upon thee, but what thou art with thy Companions in the
temptations of sin. Oh who would think that thou would ever go from the Word
preached, from Gods presence, to commit any lewdness more? yet nothing is more
ordinary: Oh how will thou endure the trial at the day of judgment? thy
works, thy ways, what thou have done, they will be examined.

SERMON XCIII.
Gods not only infusing the inward Principles of Grace, but also vouchsafing
his Quickening, Actuating, Assisting Grace unto his people, inabling them to
walk in his Statutes; maintained against Pelagians, Arminians and Papists;
Also, the happy condition of those who have this latter grace, as well as the
former.

EZEKIEL. 36. 27. I will cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments.
THe method that the Spirit of God uses in promising these great mercies, has
afforded us profitable observations.

In the next place you may remember, that in the general division of this Text,
there was the grace of God vouchsafed in the root, and in the fruit; in the
principles or habits, and in the actual exercise of grace. We have already
dispatched grace in the root, in the principles, which is called A new heart,
and, Gods spirit put into us: Let us now admire the goodness of God in the
fruit; for the Text bears both an holy root, and holy fruit; and this is
expressed in this promise, I will cause them to walk in my statutes: This is a
further d^^finct mercy of God; it is the first and principal mercy indeed, To
put his Spirit in us; and its the second, and no less necessary mercy, when
this is done, To cause us to walk in his statutes: So that the former part of
the promise, is for the principles of grace; this latter part, for the acts and
exercise of grace. We read in Scripture, that David, Peter, and others, who had
the inward principles of grace, yet for want of the actual exercise of them,
did grievously wound their own souls, and sadly dishonor the name of God: So
that here we have a special remarkable point afforded us, viz.

That God does not only at first infuse the principles of grace in his
children, but Observe.
its necessary he should also enable them to act and improve those principles.

He does not only give us power to holy actions, but he works also the holy
actions themselves: So that not only the principles of Believing, Repentance,
etc. are the gift of God, but the very acts also of these graces: Thus the
Apostle says, That God works in us, not only to will, but to do, Phil. 2.
13. not only the power, but the action it self. This point in the explication
of it, will much manifest and exalt the grace of God as all in all; and then it
will set forth the exact duty of Christianity, whose glory lies in the daily
exercise of grace, not in the principles or root of it: And

First, We will open the sense of the Dostrine, and then prove it by several
Arguments; 1.
for Pelagians, Arminians, and several Papists, are against this excellent and
glorious truth, attributing indeed the sufficiency and power of doing a good
action, to Gods grace, but the actual efficacy of it to a man's will.

In the first place therefore, consider, that there is a twofold grace of God,
as to Considerations to open the sense of this Doctrine.
our matter in hand; There is grace Regenerating, or Converting; whereby of men
dead in sin, and wholly senseless, we come to have a life of Grace, and a
Divine Nature we are made partakers of.

Secondly, There is after this a quicking, preventing or exciting grace;
whereby 2.
that former principle of grace is stirred up, and provoked to action. I shall
not strictly attend to the School distinctions of grace, Prevenient,
Concomitant, and Subsequent, of grace operant, and co-operant: I shall use the
Scripture phrase, Quickening Grace; which is not only at first of men dead in
sin, and giving life unto them, in which sense Paul uses it, Ephesians. 2. but
also for the exciting and stirring up those principles of grace in us, both to
act, and also to increase; as David, Psalm. 119. prays many times, especially
verse 88. Quicken me after thy loving kindeness, so shall I keep thy
testimonies: This is a blessed temper, and happy are those who do not by
negligence, or any other sin, provoke God to withdraw this exciting grace; for
although a godly man loose not his principles of grace, yet if he loose this
quickening, this acting of grace, he is for the present like a barren
wilderness: So then you see, God has a twofold grace, Initial and Converting,
Exciting and Quickening, which we need every hour, every moment, and must pray
for more earnestly, then we would for our daily bread.

Secondly, You must know, that there is a great difference in man, while he
receives 1.
the one, and while God enableth him to the other: These are not speculative
notional points, that tend not to edification, but are exceeding profitable;
for if we consider man as the subject of that first converting grace, so he is
merely passive, he does not at all cooperate or work with the grace of God;
for you heard, he had A stony heart, and he is dead in sin; and grace
converting, is compared to the Resurrection: So that as Lazarus, when he was
raised to life, did not contribute any help thereunto of himself, but was
wholly passive; so it is in every man that is at first converted to God, he
does not further this great work, he does not desire, he does not set it on;
yea, he uses all the power and resistance he can against it, till God conquer
the heart by his Omnipotent power; but it is otherwise in this exciting and
quickening grace, for there being the supernatural principles of grace before,
when he is stirred up, he is not merely passive; but being first acted by the
grace of God, we then act and move also; so that we are voluntary and free in
those exercises of grace; though grace moves, yet we also move: This is
excellently expressed by the Church, Draw us, and we will run after thee, Cant.
1. 4. The Church was listless, unprepared; therefore she desires the grace of
God to draw her, and then she would run after him. Draw a dead man, and for all
that he cannot run; but the Church had the life of grace in her, only she
wanted this quickening, exciting grace.

Thirdly, When we say, That God does not only work the principles, but also 2.
the acts of grace, that is to be understood as an efficient, not as a subject:
So that although we say, God works in us our Faith, our Repentance, yet we
cannot say God believes, and God repents; for they came from him as an
efficient merely, but from us as subjects in a vital formal manner, Deus non
potest supplere vicem formalis aut materialis causae: So that we are the formal
causes, as well as the efficient. Even as God in the order of nature, works
all natural actions for us, In him he we live and move, says the Apostle; yet
we cannot say, God lives, or God moves, or God eats or God walks; because
he is the efficient cause of these only, not the formal.

Thus you have the sense of the Doctrine; let us observe the grounds: And
Grounds of the Doctrine. 1.


First, Its clear, that God does not only give a new heart, but cause us also
to walk in the ways of holiness, because these are two distinct mercies, and
are very separable one from the other: It may be, and experience tells us, it
does too often fall out, that where the former mercy is of Gods spirit, and a
new heart in his people, yet the latter may not be. David you heard, even while
he committed those foul and gross sins, yet had not the principle and seeds of
Grace quite dead within him; no more then the tree in winter, that is stripped of
all its ornaments, is dead at the root; yet he was far from this latter mercy
in the Text, To walk in the statutes of God: And so at any time, when the
children of God fall into sins of lusts, or carelessness and negligence, they
are not fallen from the Root Christ; but yet this exciting and quicking grace
they have lost for the present. Seeing therefore, that this latter is separate
from the former, and you may see even one of Christ's sheep for the time,
wallowing like the Swine in filthy mire, it is necessary that God should not
only do the one, but the other also for us: Therefore the people of God are to
consider this: please not your selves that you have had the experience of
conversion upon your souls; you can tell, that God has made a wonderful change
in you; for how does God accompany you with this exciting, acting grace? Are ye
not all over rusty, as it were, are you not very often unfit for holy duties,
unprepared to hear, to pray? Are not your hearts like a barren mountain, yea,
like a noisome dunghill sometimes? Do you not refuse to open the door, that
Christ may come in, who has stood all night knocking at the door, while his
locks are full of dew? Is it not thus, and far worse with you many times, who
yet hope of your conversion to God? And whence is all this? you have not this
acting, this exciting grace, and so thou art like one in a deep sleep.

Secondly, The people of God have earnestly begged for this acting grace, as
not thinking the principles of grace enough: Thus David often, Quicken my
heart, incline 2.
my heart (says he) to keep thy testimonies: That man prayed, That Christ
would increase his faith; yea, all the prayers that you read any godly men have
made for the acts of grace, that they might repent, believe, walk holily, all
these do plainly convince, that God does not only give the life of grace, but
the constant motions of that life afterward: So that if God did not work these
exercises of grace for us also, it would be a vain thing to importune God in
prayer for them.

Thirdly, God does this latter, as well as the former, Because he encourages
the godly to set upon the exercise of grace, because he will enable them, and
assist 3.
them therein: Thus the Apostle, Work out your salvation with fear and
trembling: Why? because its God that works in you to will and to do: This
argument may seem very strange, Work, because God works in you; but its the
greatest reason Phil. 2 24.
and comfort that can be: Do thou set thy self upon the works of Faith,
Repentance, Mortification of the dearest and strongest corruption, though thou
art apt to be discouraged, and savest, It cannot be, yet God is ready to help
with his hand. Paul speaking of those high expressions of grace, To know how to
abound, and how to want, he adds, I can do all things, through Christ that
strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. A godly man has a kind of Omnipotency; he can do
what God can do, because he has the help of God inabling him thereunto: A
Christian then should not dishearten himself with such thoughts as these, What
shall I do when death comes? What if such sudden calamities should overwhelm
me? for he must remember, that God uses to put forth his hand at that time;
and then Peter is imboldned to go upon the waters to Christ.

Fourthly, There must be such acting and inlivening grace, as well as the
principles, Because otherwise God would lose great part of his glory, in
bringing a 4.
man to heaven: For not only Justification, but Salvation is attributed unto
Grace; and Romans 9. Its not of him that wills, or runs, but of him that
calls and electeth: Now grace could not have the glory of all from the
beginning to the end, if God should not constantly enable and help in the
progress of godliness, as well as at the beginning: So that if God did only
give principles of grace, and not daily assist and enable; we might indeed be
thankful unto him for what once he did for us, but we might thank our own
power, and sacrifice to our own will for what is done afterward: But what have
thou, says the Scriture, that thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4. 7. Its a
general assertion, Every good and perfect gift comes from the father of lights,
James 1. and we cannot think a good thought, much less have any good affections
or desires, though already converted, of our selves, if grace were not always
ready at hand: So that this truth should put the soul into daily and constant
thankfulness, because it has daily and constant supply from the throne of
grace.

Fifthly, If so be that in natural things, where God has given natural
principles of actions, yet they cannot act, without daily concourse of God, how
much more 5.
must this hold in supernaturals: Take the fire, that is a natural Agent, and
so determined to one action; viz. To burn, yet if God does suspend his
influence, his actual motion, as in the example of the three Worthies, then it
cannot burn; and this is much more seen in natural creatures: In him we live,
and move, and have our being, says the Apostle; we do not only live by him,
but we are not able to move or stir without him. Now if it be not enough for a
man to have God give him life once, but he must daily enable him to move and
stir, will not this follow much more in supernatural things? Cannot we stir the
hand or the foot without him? and can we stir the heart or affections to God
without him? So that as God, though he did rest from the works of Creation, yet
he does not from them of Conservation: But hitherto, says Christ, I and my
father work: So neither in the spiritural new creature does God cease from
daily conservation, and constant help in all its actions.

Sixthly, The Dominicans arguing against the Jesuits in this point, reason
thus, 6.
Every thing that is potential, must be reduced into act, by some thing that is
it self in act: Now, say they, God he is Actus primus, and purus, he is the
first and pure act. The principles and habits of grace are potential, and
therefore they must be determinated and actuated by God, who is always in act:
This Argument has much strength in it, but it is too metaphysical: I come to a
more popular one; And

Seventhly, God does not only bestow principles of grace, but also excites 7
and quickens, as is plainly evidenced, In that two godly men, living under the
same means of grace, yet one does not profit, but grows colder and colder;
the other grows and thriveth more and more: How comes this difference to be?
but that one has the grace of God assisting and inabling of him, the other
has not; not that he who falls into sin may blame God; for his slothfulness,
negligence and carelessness, makes God to withdraw his helping hand in that
need: So that although the cause of one man's fall, is his own sin: Yet the
cause of the other man's standing, is Gods grace vouchsafed unto him, yea, the
same godly man: as David, finds a great change in his own heart: sometimes he
is able to trust in God, to overcome temptations; at other times he is cast
down, and has no strength within him; Whence is all this? but from the ebbings
and flowings of exciting grace: And this is a clear experimental demonstration
of this truth, At sometimes the least temptation, the least snare, is ready to
make a godly man fall; at another time, though strong winds and tempests blow
upon him, yet he is able to stand like Mount Sion, that cannot be removed. Now
this difference comes not from within a man, but from without, as this
assisting and exciting grace is ready, or afar off.

In the next place, let us consider, how blessed and happy a thing it is, to
have What a blessed state it is to have both these graces. 1.
not only the principles of grace, but the actings and causations of it: And

First, Hereby the soul will be kept from negligence, dullness, and all
abatements or falls in our love to God: All the while grace is thus causing
thee to walk, causing thee to be always doing, no dullness or stupidity will
enter upon thee; all the while a man is in exercise and motion, he does not
take cold; all the while the streams run, they cannot grow muddy: Now a godly
man is said To have Rivers of living water flowing from his belly; he is not a
fountain sealed up, they are daily flowing, and then they cannot grow noisome;
the iron that lies still grows rusty, and is not fit for use: Now what a
comfortable condition is this to the godly, to have thy heart never lie still,
but always hungring, thirsting, or moving after God and good things one way or
other! As the heart it self, you see, never lies still, but is always in
motion; so grace in the heart, when stirred up by God, it is always working,
putting on, drawing out the soul: What makes the godly so grieved, so dejected
many times? its the decay, the fall they find within themselves, but this
causing grace makes all things flourish.

Secondly, This causing grace, as it preserves from decays in the degree of
grace, so much more from gross and foul sins: Oh David and Peter wanted this 2.
help in the midst of their temptations, and therefore they were so dangerously
overcome: This is the only Preservative and Antidote against sin; not the
principles of grace, but the actings of grace: This is called by the Apostle,
Grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4. 16. (...). Oh this is admirable, when
grace comes in the very need thou were in! thou were even falling into such a
sin, thou were even drowning, and this comes and lifts up thy head.

Thirdly, This actuating grace will make a man in a prepared frame for every
duty; and to resist every kind of temptation; And what can be more desired
then 3.
this? Ask this of God, and you beg the whole Kingdom of grace: He that is
prepared to do every duty, and to resist every temptation, though he should
drink any deadly thing of sin, though a Viper of lust should fasten on him, yet
it would not hurt him: Thus the Scripture speaks often of being prepared, and
ready for every good work: When God commands Faith, Patience, Zeal, to say, My
heart is prepared or fixed, I come to do thy will, O God: The heart of it self
is no ways fitted for any good action; and though the principles of grace be
within, yet a man may be very indisposed to what is holy: Now this causing
grace is the file to take off the rust, its the whetting of the edge, its the
stirring up or blowing of the coals into a flame; and the excellncy of this
grace, is no less seen in the confirming and corroborating of the heart against
temptations: We are taught to pray constantly, That God would not lead us into
temptations. Temptations have discovered the rottenness, guile and falsehood of
men's hearts: It was a temptation discovered the second kind of ground to have
no root; who knows his heart in temptations? Peter in a temptation, differed
much from himself when without it. Now there is nothing does so fortify and
make the heart in flexible, as this grace, to help in time of need.

Fourthly, This actuating grace will make a man fruitful and profitable in his
4.
place: This is the trading and merchandising grace, this makes a man redeem
the time, take the present seasons of grace, observe all opportunities, that he
may serve God in his generation; so that no good thing will be wanting to that
man, who has this daily influence; whereas men lie like lumps of earth, or
stand like dead and dry trees in the garden of God, if this grace does not
always water them.

Fifthly, This causing, exciting grace, puts a man in a comfortable posture;
insomuch, 5.
that whenever our Lord and Master shall come, he will be pronounced faithful
and blessed: Thus our Savior, Blessed is he, whom his master when he comes,
shall find so doing, Luke 12. 43. He must be doing, he must be in his masters
work: This will make a man have oil enough; Oh therefore that the people of God
would hunger and thirst more after this working, living and quickening grace:
How many opportunities do thou neglect? how many prises are put into thy
hand, and thou like a fool do neglect them? how often is thy heart sluggish,
dead, and very much indisposed, if Christ should come at this or that hour? All
is from want of this grace, which puts thy heart in tune, but this would wind
up thy soul, so that thou would be ready for the work of the Lord.

Use of Conviction, unto the greatest part in our Congregations, that they are
Use 1.
such who never felt the power of this Text upon their souls: Where God renews,
there he causes men to walk in his statutes, he will overpower their hearts,
he will subdue their contumacy, he will remove their unwillingness: But alas,
woe, and again woe for thee! thou find the Devil, that unclean Spirit ruling
in thy heart, he causes thee to walk in all the lusts of sin, be moves thee to
serve this corruption, and thou do it; that sin, and thou do not refuse
it; what is more plain and evident, then that yet this mercy is not vouchsafed
to thee? and yet how confident, how secure art thou? what, art thou not afraid
of Gods word? do thou not believe? do thou think to mock God, and to
find his word false? Oh miserable and wretched men! the more to be pitied,
because they pity not themselves, neither consider how near they are to eternal
woe.

Use 2. Of Admonition to the children of God: you have the principles of Use 2.
grace, know, that is not enough, but the sweetness and comfort of these, lies
in the exercise of them. In all good things of this life, thou do judge the
use and improvement of them all in all; why not then in the principles of
grace? Be always ready to say, My heart is prepared, O Lord, I can do and
suffer thy will; especially take heed of all those sins that may drive or chase
away this exciting grace; take heed thou do not provoke God to withdraw this
assistance and strength from thee, for that is easily done; and know, nothing
does sooner bereave you of this assisting grace, then neglect of the
Ordinances, or the careless and sluggish performance of them; for in and by the
use of these, God does discover his power: He bids us wait for this strength,
and expect it in these.

SERMON XCIV.
Showing that true Converts make Godliness their ordinary Practice; And what
to walk in Gods Statutes implies.

EZEKIEL. ^6. 27. I will cause you to walk in my Statutes.
THis latter part of the promise contained (as you have heard) grace in the
fruit, and the exercise of it, I will cause you to walk, in my Statutes. To
subdivide this Promise of actuating grace, consider the action promised, and
the object about which it is conversant. The action promised, is, To walk. The
object, My statutes. I shall speak only of the action vouchsafed, To walk. Its
so known a thing, that I need not spend time, to enumerate places, that to walk
does denote the constant course, endeavor, and practice of a man's life, and
that whether in good or evil. Many examples of Scripture might be produced, to
evidence this, even as the word Way also in Scripture does signify that Form
of Doctrine, Worship, or manners a man accustometh himself to. And this
expression of Walking is excellently transferred from the body to the soul; for
by faith, love, and other graces, the soul walks as well as the body, by
fe^t, and does signify not sudden fits, and transitory a^ffections about
Godliness, but a daily settled, steadfast, and unmovable way in godliness: so
that the Doctrine is:

That a Man Converted makes Godliness his constant, ordinary practice.

Its a walking, yea the Scripture calls it, (...), Ephesians. 2. 10. To walk round
Doct.
and round in the whole circle of good works. All Christians are of the
Peripatetick Sect in this sense, Gal. ul^. The word to walk is (...), (who walk
after this Rule) and that denotes an exact methodical walking, as in a word a
man does carefully put one letter after another to make sense; but the opening
of particulars will give life to this matter: Let us therefore, first consider,
what is employed in this expression or Metaphor, to walk in Gods Statutes. And,

First, It signifies, that we make Religion and Godliness our business, our
(...), our main work, our Joseph, our Benjamin; whatsoever is neglected that is
not: What to walk in Gods Statutes implies. 1.
Thus our Savior, Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven, and other things shall
be added, Matthew. 6 33. Grace is the principal; things of this life are but
accessory. Hence 1 Cor. 7. We must buy as if we bought not, we must marry as if
we married not, and do all earthly things, as if we did them not; that so we
may serve the Lord without distraction: Christ gave us a good example in doing
Gods will, when he did so attend on it, that sometimes he refused natural
refreshments, to promote Gods glory, giving this remarkable assertion, Its my
meat and drink to do my Fathers will, John 4. 34. And David describes the
godly man by meditating in the Law of God day and night. That phrase does not
imply, we should give over our Callings, and read norhing else but the Bible,
it only shows that we make it our chief business and employment to attend
to that rule. Therefore, the Rabbin took it too literally, when being asked,
whether a man may read Greek Authors, or any humane books but the Bible? He
swered, If there were any time, that was not part of day, or night; he might an
take that time and spend it in reading such Books: but this was too strict; it
commands us to give the Principality, to give the fat, as it were, to the
matters of God. Oh, but who then is converted, if this be so? Where is the man
that makes Godliness his main work and business? Who rises up early, and
goes to bed late to get this bread of life? Look into Persons, into Families,
are not the matters of the world preferred before the matters of godliness?
Do not earthly things make you pray, as if you prayed not, serve the Lord, as
if you served him not? You that are godly think of this truth, and mourn; it is
a two-edged sword: Does not thy own heart tell thee often, that thou do not
make godliness thy main business; The cares, the snares, and the temptations
of the world makes thee many times seek the things of the earth in the first
place.

Secondly, It implies voluntarinesse, delight, and pleasure in the ways of
Godliness. 2.
Its not only our imploiment, and labor, (for we may be haled to that) but it
is our delight, our joy, our greatest pleasure we have in this life. To walk is
a voluntary action, and frequently used for the expression of a man's delight.
He is gone to walk, or He walks in his Garden. Thus God to express his
protection, and delight he has in us, he promises to walk with us, or amongst
us, and set his Tabernacle amongst us, 2 Cor. 6. 16. So that those who are
converted, find it more than honey, riches, or all advantages, to be doing the
will of their Father. Hence Psalm. 110. they are called a willing people, or
willingnesses. David does many times express that great delight and pleasure
he takes in the Commandments of God: And Paul, Romans 7. I delight in the Law of
God, in the inward man. If therefore Grace and Godliness be thy walk, how
great will the joy and gladness of thy heart be in all approaches near to him?
Every duty will be like the Mount of Transfiguration, of which thou will say,
Its good to be here. As our Savior said, He that drinks of the old Wine, would
not care for the new. And thus the godly man that has tasted of the goodness
of God, and the sweetness of grace, will forget his earthly pleasures. This
Manna will make a man despise Egyptian Garlic: This fatted Calf will make a
man regard no more any Husks: So that you who look upon all godly duties
constantly as a wearisomnesse, a burden, how can you say God has wrought this
new heart in you? Indeed the dullness, sluggishnesse, and partial wearisomnesse
that surprizeth even the godly many times, does argue Conversion is but in
part, and imperfect: and therefore they should be in an holy manner grieved,
and shamed in soul to hear and think of these things, saying. These holy truths
have too much luster and dazeling in them, more then my weak infirm eyes are
able to behold. Oh then hunger and thirst more after this sweetness and
pleasure, which is to be had in holiness. This will be On to the wheels; yea
like the spirit in Ezekiels wheels to make the soul move swiftly.

Thirdly, To walk denotes diligence, frequency and Customariness. There is a
great 3.
difference between setting a man's foot accidentally or occasionally in a path,
and walking in it: Ahab occasionally humbled himself, but it was not his way.
Balaam desired to dye the death of the righteous; but did he ever do so
before? He did not walk in the way of righteousness. To walk is a constant,
frequent, customary exercise of a man, and does not signify what a man in some
fits, or some occasions may do, but what he is accustomed to: Even as the
godly man, he sometimes turns aside out of the path of righteousness into
ways of wickedness: David and Peter did so: yet we do not say, they did walk
in wickedness; wickedness was not their constant customary practice: so it is
with the wicked man, they sometimes, especially under calamities and fears,
step into the ways of Godliness, they do some godly and righteous things: but
this is not their way, its not their custom: So that its not the bare doing
holy and righteous actions: but are these thy way? do thou walk in these? Is
it not by mere accident, some sudden occasion; as a contrary wind sometimes
drives in the passenger to another Port then he expected or desired.

Fourthly, To walk, implies progress and increase in godliness. To walk is a
progressive motion, and every step a man takes he gains more ground, and is
nearer 4.
to his journeys end; and thus it is in godliness. The Converted man he
gains, he grows, he is nearer the top of the hill than he was. Thus Paul
you may see him not only walking, but even running (...), I press hard after,
I forget the things that are behind. Oh this is a necessary point: for who
attends to growth in Grace? To get more of this treasure, though the Scripture
does so often press it. The old rule is, Non progredi, est regredi; Not to go
forward, is to go backward. Yet how many are at a stand, yea decay and abate in
former graces! Is this to walk in the ways of God? like Hezekiah's Sun, thou
art gone so many degrees backward. Into what a Consumption art thou fallen? who
would take thee to be the same thou were once? Every duty and grace is so
withered, that as David said of his body, Thy bones stand out through
leanness. It may be indeed even a Converted man's condition, not to walk on
forward, but to fall backward, and be many degrees short of what others are,
who set out at the same time with him, but then they recover again to their
great advantage. As Children after a disease has pulled them down, when they
recover, they shoot out higher. As stombling makes a man get more ground, so
that even in their very sins, though they be extra semitam, yet not extra
viam; for the grace of God recovering them will make this very letting a
whetting to them, and be more zealous and active, by how much they have been
negligent. Howsoever therefore there may be accidental obstructions, and checks
to grace in its walk: yet the Nature and inclination of Godliness is to be
always carrying us on to further perfection. This walking is still nearer and
nearer to our journeys end: Faith is increased, Love and heavenly-mindedness
are more promoted. Remember therefore, thou art a Traveller, thy godliness is
a walking; sit not down, and say, Soul take thy ease, for thou have grace
enough, godliness enough: This is an Argument thou have none at all. When
Laodicea said, She was full, and rich, and wanted nothing, then she was poor
and miserable, and wanted all things, Rev. 3. Apelles when he had drawn his
line, would write faciebat, in the imperfect Tense, and not fecit; to show that
still he did intend to perfect, to complete it; still something is wanting; and
this may be written upon all our graces, Credebat, not credidit, amabat, not
amavit, There is some imperfection, yea many defects which are constantly to be
amended. I earnestly desire this truth might be fastened upon the godly. They
are not in growing postures: they come not and say, Lord this Talent of five
has gained ten; they say not, This mustard seed is grown up into a great tree;
they speak as a child in grace, and not as perfect men.

Fifthly, As to walk implies Progress, so it supposes that in this life we
can never attain to a period, to a full rest; all is walking here in this life,
in heaven there is rest, 5.
then we are set in our Thrones after victory and conquest over our lusts, and
the world. As God in the old Testament first had his Tabernacle, which was not
fixed, but ambulatorie, removed from place to place; and afterward his Temple,
a place of rest, where his people were to sit down and enjoy God: so it is with
his Children in the New Testament, they are in a Tabernacle here, their Temple
is in heaven: This should comfort the people of God, as the former might
provoke and inflame them; they have not such masterie over their hearts as they
desire, they are in continual combat and conflict, they are exceeding short
of those excellent graces propounded to them; let not this dismay them, they
do but walk as yet in the way of godliness, they are not come to their
journeys end, they are not yet to sit down. The godly would havean have an here
upon earth, whereas God has made this life, and that to come in two distinct
dispensations.

Sixthly, This walking in the way of Godliness does suppose a guide, a light to
direct 6.
and inform them, that they may not stumble and fall. There are Land marks and
Sea-marks for Passengers; and so the Word of God that is the guide, that is the
light to walk by. As many as walk according to this rule, says the Apostle.
There are many walk in a disorderly, loose, and lawless manner. They have no
Law but their lusts, no guide but their blind passions, and affections: but the
walking of the godly is in an exact, orderly and godly manner. Now only the
Word of God can direct and guide herein. Hence David does so often commend it
for a Lanthorn to his feet, and a Lamp to his paths. No man can tell how to
live, or how to believe, or how to worship God, without his Word: We cannot
tell how to pray, how to hear, how to live godly, and righteously without this
rule: so that thousands of people discover they have none of this mercy in the
Text vouchsafed to them; for, do they not live like bruit beasts? Are not their
lusts, their fancies the rule they live by? Give me the man that lives by the
Scripture, that walks by the Scripture, that thinks, that speaks, that
does by Scripture directions. There could not be such walking in darkness,
and stumbling therein, if men did attend to this light. Oh that this truth
might enter into you; My life is a walk, and I must have some Rule to guide me;
and what is that but Gods Word? How then can I lie, curse, blaspheme by that
information? Where does the word allow, or command me such things? Be no longer
like the Horse and Mule that have no understanding, but remember you are men,
and so must have a rule of reason and piety to live by, and that is Gods Word.
Men are convinced that they must have no other faith or Religion then what the
word commands: but they do not consider this is as true also for their lives:
They must live no other lives, do no other actions, then this word requires.

Seventhly, As Gods Word is the rule they walk by, so God himself is the
companion 7.
that they ought to walk with. You are not alone in this walk, but God is with
you. The Scripture has a threefold phrase: There is walking with God, walking
before God, and walking, or following after God, and they all have their
peculiar Emphasis. To walk with God; Thus Enoch is said to do, Genesis 4. 22, and
that implies an heavenly, holy, and humble, yet familiar enjoyment of God in
our way. Can two walk together except they be agreed? And therefore no wicked
man can walk in these paths of godliness, because not agreed with God: God is
an adversary and an enemy to them: but the godly in this their journey to
heaven have sweet communion with, and enjoyment of God: As God spoke to Moses
as one friend to another, by way of apparition; so does God in a spiritual way
to the godly; God is graciously present with him, he supports him, comforts
him: And if he said, Come^ jucundus pro vehiculo est, A pleasant Companion is
in stead of a Coach in the journey; How much more admirable is it to have God
our Companion in the way. Then there is to walk before God, Genesis 17. 1. Thus
Abraham is commanded, and that is so to walk in the ways of Godliness, as to
eye God, to have a respect to please him, to take heed of the most secret
sins, knowing God has an omniscient eye, and therefore that is the ground of
sincerity, which the Scripture calls Perfection; Walk before me and be perfect.
Lastly, the Scripture has the expression of walking after God, in opposition
to that phrase, of walking after their Idols, or other gods, or the imagination
of their own hearts, Jer. 18. 12. And that is, when men follow the directions
and guidance God vouchsafes, especially in matter of worship: God goes before
us, as it were, with the light of his Word in his hand, and we are to follow
after. This truth has been too spiritual, even for all the ages of the Church
almost, who have not followed God in their worship; but the Customs and
superstitious Inventions of men. Now among other qualifications in walking that
the Scripture may speak of, there are four observable.

First, To walk uprightly. He that walks uprightly, Prove. 10. 9. walks
boldly. Contrary to this is halting in the way of Godliness. The Apostle, Heb.
12. 13. 1.
exhorts them to make straight paths for their feet, lest that which is lame be
turned out of ike way. Its not enough to be in the way of Godliness; All
Hypocrites are so: but we must take heed we halt not between God and Baal, as
the Scripture speaks. Judas was in Christ's way, but he halted between Christ
and the affections of the world. As the Heifers taken from their young ones,
they went straight on with the Ark, but they bellowed and moaned for their
young ones: so it may be thou art driven on in the external ways of holiness,
but thou moanest, and thy heart runs after sin, or the world.

Secondly, To walk by faith, and not by sense; so the Apostle, We walk by
faith, 2 Cor. (...). 7. And this is such a walking that the world does not
understand, 2.
To walk by faith is to be above all principles of sense, carnal reasonings,
wordly fears, or delights, eying the Promise, beholding Gods favor in Christ.
This is a comfortable, peaceable, and secure walking.

Thirdly, To walk, requires that our feet be sh^d with the preparation of the
Gospel, Ephesians. 6. 15. That was part of their Armor in former times, to have a
defense 3.
or munition for their feet; and this the Apostle makes the preparation made by
the Gospel of peace. We have many doubts, fears, and other discouragements in
the way to heaven; Not sluggishnesse, but truth it self may say, There is a
Lion, yea, many Lions, and such as go roaring to devour in the way: and the
guilt of Sin may make every man a Cain to go up and down trembling. Now the
Gospel makes a sure and good preparation against this.

Lastly, Its required that we should walk circumspectly. So the Apostle, (...),
Not as fools, but as wise, Ephesians. 5. 15. And were this the main intent of the
Text, it 4.
would have been profitable to show the grounds of this circumspect walking; we
may hint them to you. The way you walk in is a strait narrow way, its easy
stepping out of it into the pit. Godliness is bounded with limits, but sin is
a broad way. Now how difficult is it, so to order our steps as to step aright
continually? Tertullian calls Christians, Funambuli, Rope-walkers, Those that
step in the least manner awry are in danger of killing themselves. How apt are
we to take that for faith, patience, and zeal, which is not so. Secondly, walk
circumspectly, because we have a great journey to go, and a little time; our
walk is a very long one, and night is suddenly coming on us; if he said, Ars
longa, vita brevis, we may say, Pietas est longa, lata and prefunda. Thirdly,
there are many enemies, thieves, and Robbers in the way, spiritual and
invisible adversaries in heavenly places; and these watch to intercept thee in
the journey: They do not lie in wait, as those spies to kill Paul, but damn the
soul. Thy Grace is a precious treasure, and they strive to ^ob thee of it.

Use of Examination, Try thy self by this Touchstone, what is thy walk, thy
way, thy employment. Is it not to make provision for the lusts of the flesh:
The Use. 1.
Scripture says, Some men's hearts walk after their own imaginations, others
after covetousness; some men's tongues are said to walk through the earth. Oh
do not think, if thou walk in such ways, that heaven will be the journeys end.
Neither may thou take Sanctuary under thy Duties, thy Devotions on some
solemn occasions; for these are not thy walk, thy way; and so they will not be
owned for the paths of godliness: we that walk and pass away as shadows, how
should we lay up for an enduring treasure?

Use of Exhortation to the godly: Make Godliness your chief employment, your
business, and your great delight. Oh take heed of every thing that shall steal
Use 2.
away thy heart. Though grace indeed be such a Treasure, that Thieves and,
Robbers cannot by violence steal it away, yet there are spiritual thieves,
that are sweet and sugared enemies, either temptations within or without; and
these may deprive thee of thy choice Jewels, if thou watch not. Oh say, I am
not my self, I am not as I would be, all the while I am hindered or opposed in
the work of godliness. Is thy heart at any time overcharged, and even drunk
with the comforts of this life? Reprove and chide thy self. Count every day and
hour lost that does not make for Heaven one way or other.

SERMON XCV.
That Converted Persons are very Careful and Tender of the Worship of God,
observing that and only that which he has commanded.

EZEKIEL. 36. 27. I will cause them to walk in my Statutes, and keep my
Judgments, and do them.
WE subdivided the Grace here promised in the later part of the Chapter,
wherein was considerable, The Action, I will cause you to walk. 2. The Object
of the Action, In my Statutes; and this we are to treat upon at this time.

Now although there are three words in the Scripture, which often are used for
the same thing, Commandments, Statutes and Judgments, yet there is also in
many places a difference between these.

Commandments being properly those perpetual rules of the moral Law, which
Commandments.
enjoin the same Duties in all ages of the Church.

Judgments are strictly used for, those Duties of the Judaical Law, which
concern Judgments.
Justice and equity one to another.

Statutes are all those Rites, and that manner of worship which God had
commanded; Statutes.
and howbeit we may in this Text make Statutes and Judgments. all one, yet its
better to distinguish them, because the holy Ghost does here seem as it were to
branch out the whole practice and life of a converted person, which lies in
two things, His Duty to God, and that is, To walk in Gods Statutes; His Duty to
man, and that is, To walk in his Judgments to do them. And although in the New
Testament, we have not the same Statutes of worship as they had, nor the same
judicial Law for justice and equity between man and man, yet the meaning is,
that God will cause his people to walk in all that worship and equity which God
at any time shall command: And it is very usual in the Old Testament to
express the Worship of God, which shall be used in the times of the Gospel,
under these names, which were proper to the legal Administration. This then is
the sense, That when God has put this new heart and new spirit into his
children, he will make them diligent in all that worship which he has
commanded, they will be careful to worship him in that pure and holy manner,
which is appointed: All their Worship will be Statute-worship, there is the
Statute Law of the Scripture for it. They dare not take up any form or manner
of workship concerning of which God may say to them, Who has required these
things at your hands? From whence observe,

That converted Persons are very careful and tender in the worship of God,
observing Doct.
all that, and only that which he has commanded.

You may discover the work of Grace in a man, as much about h^s principles and
practice in the worship of God, as about moral principles and actions.
Idolatrical and superstitious worship grossly practiced, is no more consistent
with grace, then profane and ungodly ways. I grant indeed that even godly men
may for want of light and better information live in some rel^ques of
superstitious worship. As in some good Kings Reigos, the high places were not
taken away; and John's Disciples, yea and Christ's Disciples they were but old
bottles, they were not able suddenly to receive such pure and spiritual
worship, as Christ intended for them: Nay in the Infancy of the Church how much
were Believers led aside with their love of, and doting upon the ceremonial
Worship! they would be circumcised still, they would observe meats and days
still, yea the worship of Angels was brought in under pretense of humility.

To open this point consider, Considerations to open the point. 1.


First, That Divines make a twofold Worship, Internal and External, Internal
are all those spiritual graces of the soul, which are immediately terminated
upon God himself. Thus faith in God, and love of God, to give him the
preheminency and chief room in the heart, is the worship of God: This is
spiritual and inward, and this Worship is commanded in the first Commandment.
But the external Worship of God consists in all those visible parts and means
of worship which God has appointed, as in the Old Testament praying, reading
the Word, offering of Sacrifices, and many bodily adorations; and these are
commanded in the second Commandment: for when God forbids the worshipping of
him by Images, he does thereby forbid the making to a man's self, without the
Commandment of God, any part or means of Divine Worship. In the New Testament
Gods external Worship lies in prayer, reading and hearing the Word,
administration of the Sacraments, sanctifying of his Sabbaths, and singing of
Psalms; so then he who is truly godly, he will be careful to perform all those
Duties of Religious Worship, which are commanded in the New Testament. He does
not take up the vain customs of men, neither does he follow the traditional
worship of his Fathers, but he worshippeth as it is written, he knows God is
most jealous of his Worship; God is very sensible of any abuse of his Worship,
any corruption or mixture of it by humane presumption.

Secondly, Although God has commanded this Statute-worship, yet that golden
Rule of our Saviors must always be remembered, John 4. where Christ taking off
2.
the woman of Samaria from her old traditional worship, thinking that such a
Mountain was better to worship God on, then other places, God (says he) is a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth, and my Father seeks such:
By this we are admirably instructed, that all external worship of God must yet
be spiritual: It is not the bowing of the body, nor the external humiliation
that God looks after, God is a Spirit, and so does chiefly require
Spirit-worship: This Text would have been like the flaming fiery sword to have
kept off that intolerable burden of false worship which afterward crept into
the Paradise of God. It is a sin that we are very prone unto, to rest upon an
external worship, not lifting up our hearts unto God, and that made the Apostle
speak so contemptibly even of the ceremonial Worship, and all those Jewish
Ordinances though appointed by God, calling them carnal and beggarly elements.
The superstitious Jews made them Elements, even the first principles and
foundation of Religion, but he calls them beggarly, because they were without
Christ; so that all thy outward service and worship of God is but an empty,
beggarly Religion, unless it be spiritually performed, and that is mainly by
resting on Christ in those Ordinances. But I do not intend an exact treating
upon the religious and divine Worship of God; I shall therefore in the next
place instance in two or three of the New Testament Statutes which God has
commanded to be religiously observed, and then show the grounds of this pious
and religious disposition in converted persons.

And first one of Christ's main Statute-worships is Prayer. Not in the Socinian
sense who make Pryera new instituted worship by God, and that it was not a
Prayer.
Duty commanded before; Not so, only Christ continues and confirms this
Duty, revealing the manner of it more clearly. Thus you have many Precepts and
Examples for prayer, yea and this is to be done fervently, humbly, incessantly;
and it is recorded as a sign of Paul's Conversion, Behold he prays, Act 9. 11.
and Zach. 12. The Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, with mourning and hearty
grief is promised under the Gospel: Insomuch that you cannot have a surer sign
of a graceless man then one who is not diligent in this Duty and worship of
God, Prayer. For although our own manifold necessities of all sorts might
provoke us to this Duty, God has also so diligently enjoined it, that there
might be an opportunity to open the fountain of his mercy to us. Oh then how
few are there that partake of this benefit? Where is he of whom we may say,
Behold he prays, constantly, fervently, effectually? nay in stead of Prayer
there is cursing, swearing and blaspheming; if they do pray, they have some
short prayers of rote, which they utter as Parrats understanding nothing of it,
and so irreligiously discharging of it: Now Prayer is threefold, Private,
personal Prayer, of which David speaks much, and Christ went many times apart
to prayer. Tell me then, Do thou take Christ's command, Enter into thy closet,
and shut thy door after thee, Matthew. 5. Does God see thy secret groans, thy
secret tears, thy private debasements? if grace be in thee, thou will be
diligent in this course. Then there is public prayer, of which the Prophet
Jeremiah speaks, and Christ alleges it, That his house shall be called an
house of Prayer; and our Savior speaks of two or three, any company gathered
together, Matthew. 18. 20. to ask any thing of the Father in Christ's Name. Now
this public Prayer is also much observed by the new heart, for therein is an
united strength and force to lay hold upon God, and God is in the midst of his
people so gathered together, to open his hand plentifully to bestow on them his
mercies.

Lastly, There is Family Prayer, so Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord,
Josh. 24. 15. And God takes special notice of Abraham, He knew Abraham would
make his Family to serve the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. Jeremiah prays, That God
would pour his wrath upon those families that call not on his name, Jer. 10.
25. You may read of the Churches in some Christians houses, because of the
spiritual worship of God therein. If then God had ever wrought this new heart
in thee, how diligent would thou be to walk in all the statutes of Prayer,
Private, Public, Family Prayer; Thou dare not for a world so sinfully
neglect this worship of God, as thou do; Think not that any civil and honest
conversation in the world is enough without this worship. Oh but what unclean
dens, yea noisome hels are some men's families! Is prayer there? Is there
constant religious calling upon God? No, in stead of these, dissoluteness and
profaneness; Oh the pillars of the house, and the walls thereof will one day
witness against such.

The second Statute for religious duties, I shall only instance in, is of The
Lords The Lord's Day
day, and the strict holy Observation of that: Where godliness is, there they
will call the Sabbaths a delight, Isa. 58. 13. and not speak their own words,
or think their own thoughts; that is a promise to be fulfilled in the times of
the Gospel. That the observation of a seventh day is not Jewish, is plain,
because it was instituted for Adam in innocence; so that although Adam was made
so pure and holy, that in all his works of his calling, viz. To till the
garden, etc. he could not but have an heavenly heart, yet God would have him to
have one day, which God blessed and sanctified, for the wholly applying of
himself to the immediate worship of God; and for the continuation of a seventh
day, though the Jewish day be altered, you have upon Christ's Resurrection plain
examples of the altering of it to the first day of the week, so that we read
of their Church Assemblies on that day; and John calls it, The Lords day, Rev.
1. All which conjoined make it appear, That there is a moral and perpetual
obligation lying upon us to the diligent observing of it. So then, Where God
puts his new Spirit, there he makes a willingness, a tender conscience and
delight to sanctify it; Oh then take heed of those licentious Doctrines that
cry down the Lord's Day, for by the holy sanctisying of it, thou will come to
delight in the Lord more, thy graces will increase and flourish; As some from
corrupt principles neglect it, so others from vicious and profane affections,
or from worldly covetous desires. Thus they in the Prophet asked, When will the
Sabbaths be over, that they might buy and sell and get gain? Amos 8. 5. Thy
tender conscience therefore about the holy sanctisying of the Sabbath, will
much demonstrate the savoury work of grace upon thee. This may suffice for two
examples of the Statute-worship of God in the New Testament.

Now let us see, why the godly are so careful and tender about Gods worship.
Why the godly are so tender about Gods worship. 1.


And first it is, Because God himself is so tender about it. There is no sin
about which Gods jealousy is so much said to he provoked, as in matter of
false worship: Read the Prophets, you shall see the great controversy God had
with his people, was for the corrupting of his worship; This in every Chapter
is almost complained of; therefore the common word the Scripture uses for
Idolatry and false worship is Abomination: And Christ using that expression,
What is highly esteemed amongst men is abomination unto God, speaks it
chiefly to that pharisaical instituted worship, wherein they did place all
their righteousness; now this, that was so highly advanced as the only
religion and serving of God, was abomination unto him: Seeing therefore that
Gods worship is the apple of his eye; the main thing he is so jealous about,
and his judgments have been so terrible upon men, who have in any manner
violated his order about religious things; as his punishing Nadab and Abihu for
offering with strange fire, and striking Uzzah dead for not keeping merely to
order, makes a godly man very careful about the worship of God, to see he
gives nothing but that and all that which God requires.

Secondly, He therefore is diligent in this, because the word of God is the
only Rule of worship, and so every one must be able to give a reason from
Scripture, because 2.
of such and such religious Duties. Those that have a new heart are made light
in the Lord; They take the Scripture for the way to walk in; and whatsoever is
not Scripture-worship, what Religion is not Scripture-religion, they dare not
own it. Tell a godly man of the Antiquity of such worship, of the universality
of it, of the excellent fitness it has to keep humble and devout, all these
are but fig leaves. Is it commanded worship? Is there the Statute Law of the
Scripture for it? Alas, let thy Fathers and Grandfathers, yea let all the
world admire such and such worship; if it be not Gods command, it is a vain
thing: How clear is our Savior, In vain do they worship me, teaching for
Doctrines the traditions of men. Our Savior told the woman of Samaria, She
worshipped she knew not what, because she had not the Scripture, Joh. 4. Oh
then, how might this put to silence all the cavils and foolish pleas many
people have, for superstitious false ways of worship, bring thy Scripture for
it, show Gods word for it: Thy doting and raging for these things, where Gods
word is no light to thee, is as great an argument of a carnal heart devoid of
grace, as well as profaneness, and they for the most part go together; Those
that are for such superstitious worship are commonly profane, and ungodly in
their lives.

Thirdly, Therefore the people of God are careful of worship, and that only
which God has commanded, because they are a spiritual heavenly people, endowed
with knowledge 3.
and wisdom out of Gods word, and so able to discern of things that differ. The
Apostle Col. 4. uses this argument against observation of superstitious
worship, which he had spoken against in the Chapter before, If ye be risen
again with Christ, seek those things that are above, and set your affections on
things above; which Calvin does solidly understand, not only of lusts and
earthly things, but also of those humane Ordinances and will worship he had
immediately spoken of before; so that he is of a brutis, blind mind, an
unclean beast that never cheweth the cud, who does not consider and well advise
about the worship of God, but takes every thing out of custom, and what is
obtruded upon him; but a godly man is of a more noble rational spirit, he will
search the Scripture whether such things are to be done or no.

Fourthly, Therefore the godly are diligent in the pure worship of God, because
God 4.
draws nigh in those religious Duties; where every thing is done according to
his will, there he delights to be present; How many glorious blessings did God
promise to his pure worship in the Temple, till they defiled it by
abominations; and then he destroyed both the Nation and the Temple. Where
therefore the pure worship and ordinances of God are, there he walks, there
he pours out his love. The Church is then in no strange habit, but the
beautiful ornaments God has decked her with; and when Gods worship is thus
purely performed, he adds to their graces; None seek Gods face in vain, his
promise and institution go along together; let a man a thousand times over use
such Ceremonies and worship God has not commanded, he will never be the more
holy. There cannot be any spiritual effect communicated unto him, because God
will only work where he has promised, and his promise is only to his own
institutions.

Fisthly, They are careful to observe his Statute-worship, because it is a Duty
to God; 5.
He is their Lord and God, their Sovereign from whom they have all, and outward
worship is a paying of homage to him, as an humble and submissive
acknowledgement of God; Come (says the Psalmist) let us fall down and worship
before him, because he has made us and not we our selves; All solemn religious
Duties, they are not only instituted means of grace, but solemn testifications
and acknowledgements of our humility, submission, dependence upon God, and
exaltation of his great excellency; so that if the godly man should be
negligent here, he should not give unto God that which is Gods: And hereby is
greatly discovered the falsehood and arrogance of those spirits who think they
are above Ordinances; for suppose (which is not in this life) that thou were
already so holy and perfect, that thou were above any benefits by the
Ordinances, that thou did not need the benefit of the Word preached, and the
Sacraments; yet thou can not be above them, as they are testifications of thy
duty toward God. Hence the Angels in Heaven they worship and serve God
according to their Men that say they are above Ordinances.
way; and will thou (O vain man!) set up thy self on so high a pinnacle, as not
to worship God? Remember Ordinances are not only means of grace, but solemn
testifications of our humility and dependancy on God.

Use of Examination, Try the work of grace in you by this particular, how Use.
tender and careful are you about the worship of God? Are you such who pray
for the purity of Ordinances, to have every thing in Church Assemblies done
according to the pattern in the Scripture? David cried out, How amiable are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord of hosts? In what zeal was Christ, when he saw the Temple
of God turned into a den of thieves? What holy invectives does Paul in his
Epistles make against superstitious worship? yet how few are the men that mind
the pure instituted worship of God, that would have the fountains of Israel
without the mixture of any mud in them? Outward oppressions in Popery were
nothing so heavy upon the godly, as the corrupt mixtures in Gods worship; but
if you observe the general disposition of men, they are wholly carried out to
some sensible superstitious ways of worship. They love not the simplicity and
purity of Gods worship. It is great proficiency in Christianity not to have our
minds corrupted herein. As children delight in babies, so do men in some
worships of their own that they have made. What is Popery but a mere stage play
in the worship of God? And if you ask of hundreds of Ceremonies they have,
Whose Image and Superscription is upon them? you shall find none of Gods
imprinted on them. There were the Statutes of the Heathens, Levit. 20. and
these the people must not go in, Ezekiel. 20. There are statutes of our fathers we
must not walk in: Oh there is too much of this superstition still in men! Men
by false worship, manifest they have not spiritual hearts.

SERMON XCVI.
Of Righteousness and Equity between man and man: And how tender and
conscientious a true Convert is therein.

EZEKIEL. 36. 27. And ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.
I Am now upon the latter general Branch, into which the whole work of
Conversion divides it self. Religion to God, and Righteousness to man, are the
two pillars upon which this spiritual Temple is sustained: God has put these
two together, yet how often does the Devil and man's corruption divide them!
some attend wholly to the Religious Worship of God, but are grossly neglective
of righteous and just things; others glory much in their righteousness to man,
but show no piety at all in their lives to God. Now where God gives this new
heart, there is a tender conscience of both: And the first has been
dispatched, under the notion of Statutes, which strictly taken, relates to the
purity of Gods instituted Worship.

We come to the second particular; viz. Righteousness and Equity to man,
contained in these words, Keep my judgments, and do them: It cannot be denied,
but that the word Judgment in the Scripture, is of a vast and large
signification, which I shall not enumerate at this time: Here I take it
strictly and distinctly, as in other places, for obedience to those Laws of
God, which contain righteousness and equity between man and man; in which sense
the Prophets often call upon the Israelites, To do judgment, and justice, and
to break off the ways of violence, oppression, wrong, and all unrighteousness.
So that we may observe:

A Converted person is very conscientious and tender in all the duties of
righteousness and equity to others. Observe.


He dares not pray, hear, make a strict profession of Religion to God; and yet
lie, cozen, deal falsely, wrong or defraud any man in his dealings; He has a
respect to all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. he knows the same God who
commanded the Precepts of the first Table, containing duty to, and worship of
God; does also equally and indispensably require duties of faithfulness and
righteousness to men. This point is of singular use, for wherein does Religion
get greater wounds, the Gospel more dishonor, then when men in repute for
godliness, are found guilty and blameworthy in the ways of dishonesty? To have
wicked men lie, swear and forswear, to defraud and injure others, the world
expects no better, looks for no other; but for thee, a professor of Religion,
it expects all truth, fidelity, righteousness, else thou art a dead fly in the
box of ointment, a scandal and reproach to the ways of God; and thou had
better never to have been born, then to prove such a stumbling block in the
ways of piety. Indeed, there are passive scandals, when men will maliciously
and falsely raise slanders and false reports of the professors of Religion,
laying to their charge things they never did, believing lies, and
misinterpreting their words and actions; and these will be, as long as wicked
men are in the world: And hence it is, that all godly men are looked upon as
Hypocrites, as such as will lie and do falsely, yea, do any thing for their
advantages: But these are passive scandals, and these offenses come from the
venomous disposition of wicked men; and the godly may rejoce in their
innocence, while such crimes are laid upon them. But then there are active
scandals, when men of strict profession, do indeed walk in such unjust and
unrighteous ways, that thereby the name of God is blasphemed among wicked men:
Our Savior says, Woe be to that man, by whom such offenses come, Matthew. 16. 7.
So that we desire this truth should sound aloud in the ears of all those, who
take themselves for Converts; their faith and piety must be accompanied with
all righteousness and honesty. Hence whereas converted persons have several
Titles and Attributes, denoting several qualities in them; there is nothing
more frequent and ordinary, then to call them Righteous, this is in every page;
How then is a Liar righteous in his words? how is a breaker of his word and
promise, righteous in his fidelity? how is a cheater or an overreaching man
righteous in his dealings?

To open this, consider, That there is a twofold original fountain of
Righteousness The fountain and rise of all righteousness between man and man.
Humane laws.
toward man: 1. There is the immediate command and word of God, and that is
called Jus Divinum, Divine Righteousness. 2. There is the Law and Command of
Nature, and that is Jus Humanum, An humane Righteousness, or Right: And this is
either general, the first and immediate principles of nature, such as the
Apostle speaks of, Romans 1. concerning the Gentiles, That they had a Law
written in their hearts, verse 7. about just and unjust things, and their
consciences accusing or excusing, upon the omission or commission of such
things, or else they are more remote and particular dictates, such as the good
and wholesomes Laws of all Lawgivers, in respective Nations: So what is
righteous and just between man and man, is to be determined by the Laws of that
Land where they live: Indeed, if any Lawgivers (as some Heathenish have)
commanded or allowed any thing that is against the Law of God, or the universal
dictates of right reason; such commands are not worthy the name of Laws, they
are rather unjust decrees, and so do not bind: But otherwise, the Laws of a
Land determine what is righteous and just between man and man: for although it
be Gods command, That a man should not steal, yet they are humane Laws that
give the bounds and proprieties of estates to men: So that we Christians, and
the Jews, do something differ about the Rules of Righteousness and Equity; for
God was the immediate Lawgiver unto that people: Moses as a messenger from
God, received from Gods mouth the Judicial Law, which he delivered to them; so
that the Judicial Law appointed by God himself, was the Statute Law of that
Realm: Their Laws were not Humane, as all the Laws of Kingdoms and States are
since Christ's coming, but they were Divine: Their Laws about a Theif, a
Murderer, the Buyer and the Seller, were all Divine Laws, because immediately
commanded by God, though the matter was merely humane: Now its greatly
disputed, how far these Judicial Laws, commanding Judgment and Justice between
man and man, do bind us Christians; and whether all Lawgivers and Statesmen,
are not bound to bring in those Judicial Laws? for who can determine what is
Righteousness and Equity better then God, a righteous and wise God? Its not
pertinent to wade into this excellent Question at this time: Though some in
this point are very rigid, to make all Obligatory, that are not expressly
repealed by Christ; and some again are very remiss and lax; yet all conclude,
That the Moral Equity and Reason that was in every Judicial Law, does bind
Christians as well as Jews; and with that we shall conclude this particular,
whatsoever Law God made about Justice, Restitution or Punishment to the Jews,
the Equity and reason of that Law, does still bind us, though not the
particular manner. As for the New Testament, Christ's Kingdoms was not temporal,
or of this world; and therefore he only commands Righteousness in the general,
and commands that excellent Maxim, which an Heathen Emperor did so much
admire, saying, He received it from Christians, What ye would have men do to
you, do ye to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 7. 12. that is,
All the duties commanded by the Law, or required by the Prophets, are comprised
in this Maxim, Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them: Oh the world would not be full of such wickedness, unrighteousness as it
is, if this were observed: And further mark, when our Savior had pressed them
to earnest prayer, and encouraged them therein, he adds this as a necessary
condition to their prayers: So that let men be never such Angels in duties and
expressions, let them pretend never so much Piety and Religion, if they walk
not by this rule, they follow not Christ's directions: Christ therefore he has
only given us general rules of Righteousness, and for the particulars, he does
command Christians to obey and submit to the wholesome Laws of that place where
they are; as Romans 13. Pay tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom: And
this the Scripture does often press, that none might think that the freedom
they had by Christ, did take them off from Humane Obligations and Relations:
This was a great temptation, they thought because they were Freedom by Christ
takes no man off from Humane Obligations.
Christians, and made free by Christ, that this also did take them off from
obedience to Civil Magistrates, and from the Laws they lived under: No, the
Scripture is diligent to teach this, That Christianity and the Gospel does not
abolish Political and civil Government, but rather greatly advances it as an
institution of God, pressing obedience thereunto for conscience sake.

Thus I have opened unto you the fountain and rise of all Righteousness and
Equity between man and man.

Now let us consider, what are the grounds why converted persons are tender
Reasons of the Doctrine.
to do what is just and righteous; yea, the Doctrine may be heightened, They are
not only tender about righteous things, but they are very conscionable to do
them, though to their external loss. The Psalmist describing who shall ascend
into the holy hill of Sion, a type of Heaven, gives such Characters, most of
which relate to duties of honesty and righteousness, Psalm. 15. 2. 3, 4. Verity
in words of assertion, and veracity in Promises and Oaths. Our Savior is
large Mat. 5. in convincing and heightning those duties against Murder,
Adultery, Perjury, condemning all the subtle distinctions the Pharisees had
invented to palliate their guilt. And you may read of Zacheus, when converted,
the first thing that works upon his conscience is, to restore fourfold where he
had wronged any: He went above the command of God, that required not so much;
but a godly man is so tender in matters of wrong and injustice, that he had
rather do above then under his duty.

Well, Let us see what is the cause of tenderness herein: And

First, Because this new heart promised in the Text, is nothing but that which
in 1.
other places is called the image of God: Now the Apostle says, The image of
God, which is renewed in all converted persons, consists partly in
righteousness, and partly in true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. Holiness, that lies
properly in the things that belong to God. Righteousness, in the matters that
belong to others: So that wheresoever the image of God is, there is
Righteousness as well as Holiness; so that as we are called upon To be holy, as
God is holy; so to be righteous is our duty, as God is righteous. The Scripture
does much celebrate this attribute of Gods righteousness, that his nature is
righteous, his judgments, his word, his actions, yea all his ways: And now
every converted man, labors to write after this copy: If then you see a man
unjust, unconscionable and false in his ways, say, How is the image of God in
this man? how is God the father of such an unrighteous man? Oh its not thy
prayers, thy parts, thy abilities, all thy spiritual inlargements, can witness
thee to have Gods image on thy soul, unless this also be accompanying thy
conversion.

Secondly, A converted person cannot but keep the judgments of God, and do
them, 2.
because God does expressly reject all his worship, though performed never so
zealously and fervently, if we do not also the things of Justice and Equity:
Should thou walk in the Statutes of God, the Ordinances of his Worship, and
not keep his Judgments, God will not own thee, Jer. 7. Will ye lie, and steal,
and swear falsely, and come into my house, and say, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord? See with what indignation God rejects such hypocrites, Will
you come to my Worship, to my Temple, and yet live in those sins of fraud and
injustice? Oh then think God speaks to thee, if such guile and falsehood may be
found in thy life: Will thou cozen, lie, deal falsely, overreach others? and yet
pray, repeat sermons, speak of God and Christ? Oh thou vain man, know, God is
not mocked. The Jews who were more forward in outward Worship then others, they
proffered ten thousand Rams, and Rivers of Oil, yea, the first born of the womb;
But what says the Prophet Micah, Cap. 6. 8. He has showed thee, O man, what
is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly? Oh notable
place! worthy all your considerations that profess Religion in a strict manner:
Its not parts, opinions; no, though thou had reve^ations, and the high
admirable points of Religion, that will advance thee, unless thou do justly
also; and verse 11. Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances, and the
bags of deceitful weights: See, God accounts no such pure, or to have purity,
that use any fraud or deceit in their dealings.

Thirdly, A godly man must needs walk righteously, because such outward actions
between man and man, are objects that work upon the conscience, or are matters
3.
wherein the conscience is concerned as well as in any thing else: Consider
what Paul says, Herein I exercise my self, to keep a good conscience both
toward God, and toward man, Acts 24. 16. He exercises himself, that shows
his diligence, his industry, his setting of himself apart with all his might to
keep a good conscience, and then observe a good conscience toward God; for if
I be never so just and righteous toward man, yet if I do not also perform all
that Worship, and all those Duties that immediately belong to him, I have not a
good conscience: And then toward man: see conscience is exercised in things
toward man as well as toward God. A man of conscience is seen as well in
humane affairs, as in religious; he abhors that speech, Quicquid libet,
licet, What is pleasing to a man's desire, that is also lawful: Conscience is
not only seen in matters of Religion and matters of worship, but also in civil
and worldly matters; yea how many cases of conscience do learned men handle,
about the righteousness and unrighteousness of civil actions: De Jure, and
Justitia, what exact disputes are there? do not then think, that Christ has
purchased any such freedom, as that thou need not make conscience about
civil things; its no matter for them, if thou keep the Doctrine and Worship of
Christ: This is a sinful delusion; For the grace of God which brings
salvation, has appeared, teaching us to deny ungodly lusts, and to live
righteously and soberly: So then, not only the things of God are matter of
conscience, but the things of man; yea, the things of man work more upon a
natural conscience, because they are discerned by the natural principles of
reason: Hence the sins of unrighteousness and injustice, do more trouble the
conscience, if once awakened, then any other sins: The pardon of them, or the
sense of the pardon, is difficultly obtained; and such sinners have much ado to
get comforts, because they have sinned against the plain and clear light of
Nature; and therefore for such sins that a natural conscience would condemn, a
catalogue whereof the Apostle gives in Rom, 1. 29, 30. 31. men have had more
terrible wounds of conscience then for other sins: It must needs then be, that
a converted person abounds in all righteousness, because his conscience is
tender, Its An heart of flesh.

Fourthly, Therefore they walk righteously, because there are so many promises
4.
in Scripture made to righteousness: That must needs be a duty in an eminent
manner, to which so many great and glorious promises are annexed: Now you shall
scarce find any action so encouraged by God, nor any men so much as righteous
men: If a righteous man have but a little estate, yet that little is better
then many riches of the wicked, Psalm. 37. 16. To have great estates, to have
large revenues in this world, and not by righteous ways, by fraud, oppression,
violence, either by thy self or Ancestors, is like Ionahs gourd, that gave him
some ease and shelter for a season, but presently there arose a worm within it
that consumed it: So that a righteous man with his little Cottage, little
morsel of bread, with his little cruise of drink, is better then rich Dives,
that gets his wealth unjustly. The rich man may fare more deliciously every
day; but the other fares with more true joy. Lazarus may be glad of his crumbs,
but Dives may be glad of the crumbs of his spiritual joy and contentation; yea,
the righteous man has that promise, which the greatest Potentate in the world
Prove. 10. 2, 3.
has not, Verse 22. The righteous shall never be forsaken, nor his seedbeg
bread* Thus you see righteousness has Gods spiritual bonds for his outward
happiness; and then for outward calamities, if they overtake a Nation, who is
looked upon but a righteous man? Noah, a righteous man, and a preacher of
righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 5. God makes an Ark to save him: And from Lots
example, see what a comfortable conclusion Peter makes, The Lord knows how
to deliver the rightecus, 2 Pet. 2. 9. So that if thou art never so forward in
any Religious parts and duties, if thou art not a righteous man, thou can nor
lay hold on any temporal mercies, neither may thou expect deliverance in
time of public calamities; yea, righteousness in evil times, is better then
all policy, all wisdom: Men think if they take this side, or that side, then
they are sure to do well; Oh! remember, righteousness is the surest wisdom, and
the surest safety, Prove. 4. 18. The path of the just is as the shining light,
that shines more and more unto the perfect day; yea, righteous men are the
Saviors of a Land, of a Nation: For as injustice and violence destroy it, so
righteousness exalts a Nation.

Use of Admonition, To all those who have a tender respect to Gods Worship;
they long for a Reformation in the Church, they pray for godly order, they Use
1.
observe the Sabbath, they are diligent in family duties; Oh take this along
with you also, Remember righteousness, let thy words be righteous words, void
of lying, guile, falsehood, let thy actions be righteous actions, without fraud,
oppression, or overreaching thy brother, else God will cast all thy duties and
Religion as dung upon thy face: Oh let the world blush, and be for ever
ashamed, to take up such reproaches, As that those who will not swear, will
lie, will overreach, will deal unjustly; Oh let all men be ready to say, They
regard thy word, more then other men's oaths.

Use of Instruction, How far most men are from this new frame of heart: May Use
2.
we not with the Prophet, go and search for a righteous man, and find none:
What lyings, falsehoods, what fraud, what unjust trading and overreaching of
other men! Oh that many men can sleep in the houses they are in, can walk in
the fields alone, for horror of soul, for their unconscionable dealings, for
their unjust bargains, for their secret fraud they have used to get wealth?
Do thou not hear the very timber in the wall groan against thee? Does not
the rust of thy money witness against thee? The cries and sighs, and groans of
those whom thou have wronged, cry aloud for vengeance.

SERMON XCVII.
The Hammer of Arminianism: Demonstrating; That God in Converting and Changing
a Sinner, works after an Omnipotent, Efficacious and Irresistible Manner.
Against the Patrons of Free Will and Power of man to Supernatural things.

EZEKIEL. 36. 26. A new heart also will I give you, and I will take away the heart
of stone and give you an heart of flesh.
ITs now time to draw nigh to a conclusion concerning this full and
quintessentiall Text. There remain two particulars only to be improved, that
were taken notice of in the main division of the Text. For as we told you, here
was observable, the precious mercy promised, described both positively, and
oppositely. Here was also the efficient cause of this mercy, and the fruit
thereof: So we told you there was a twofold m^dus, or manner observable about
this mercy: There was modus rei, and modus dicti; The manner of Gods working
this grace in those whom he Converts; and that is, By his mighty omnipotent
power, efficaciously, insuperably, irresistably: For consider with what
authority God speaks it, I will take away the heart of stone, I will give an
heart of flesh. God will do it, and Man's will shall not hinder: Here is no
conditionate, suspended operation, as if God would not convert, or turn our
hearts to him, till we also by our Free Will began to turn to him: So that this
Text is an Hammer to beat in pieces all those Doctrines of old, and which now
of late multiply, concerning Free Will, and the power of man to super natural
things. May not this Text satisfy every man? Does it not make every man's
heart by nature a stone, insensible and stupid about holy things? Does not God
here appropriate the whole work of Conversion to himself? I will give an heart
of Flesh, I will take away the stony heart: Yea does he not also declare the
manner how he will do this by his Sovereign, Omnipotent, and irresistible
power, so that the heart cannot but bow and yield, and give it self up. Whereas
now, if the Patrons of Nature and Free Will, who are enemies to Gods grace, did
speak truth, then God should have said no more but this, I will give you an
heart of flesh if you will; I cannot do it alone, unless your Free Will go
along with it also; (...) must suspend, or stay my work till I see what you
will do. This is the first manner observable. Then there is modus dicti, the
second manner how God will vouchsafe this, and that is by way of Gift, by a
free absolute Promise, I will do thus, and thus; he does not suppose any
previous, or antecedent Conditions on our part. I shall at this time pitch
only upon the manner how God works this glorious mercy in us. And from thence
observe,

That God in Converting and changing our hearts works after an omnipotent,
efficacious, Observe.
and irresistible manner. When God speaks to the soul to believe, to repent, to
reform, it cannot, it will not but repent, he makes of unwilling willing: Even
as at the first Creation God said, Let there be light, and there was light:
There was no power in the Creature to reject Gods Omnipotency: so it is, when
God sees a man wallowing in his blood, or dead in his sin: if he say, Arise
and walk, Come forth out of the grave of sin, as he did to Lazarus, presently
the soul obeys. This point both Doctrinally, and Practically, is very
necessary. The Orthodox handling of it, makes much for the excellent praise of
grace, and the utter overthrow of those dangerous and proud errors that advance
Free Will, giving it either all, or part, in the work of conversion. Contrary
to the whole scope of the Scripture, which continually debaseth man,
discovering his impotencie and unworthines, but giving all to the power of God.
Let us first explain this Doctrine, and then prove it. The Doctrine explained.
1.


First therefore, we distinguish between a man in his first Conversion, and
afterward in the progress of it. In the first moment and instant of
Conversion, which is the taking away the heart of stone, and giving an heart of
flesh; there we say man Man in the first work of conversion is passive and does
not cooperate.
is merely a subject passive, and receiving the work of God, he does not any
ways cooperate, he has no strength or power to join with God; but as Austin
says well, These things are wrought in nobis, sine nobis, in us, yet without
us, God works this spiritual life, this tender heart in us, without our help
or strength; Even as when Christ raised up any dead men, he put natural life
into them, this was done in them, yet without their help; Life was put into
Lazarus, and Lazarus had no helping hand to effect this: I shall prove this in
the grounds of the Doctrine, I only now explain it. This then is the truth of
God, and plainly grounded on Scripture, that man in the first instant of
Conversion, has no Free will, no power working with God, but is a mere passive
subject, receiving the mighty work of God upon his soul: but if you consider
man in the progress of Sanctification, thus having received this heavenly
supernatural life, he is not a mere patient, but being acted and moved by God,
he also acts and moves: Then indeed we need grace to quicken and inliven those
principles of grace, as before was proved; but yet we do not need a new life
to be infused into us.

Secondly, Although this is the good truth of God, yet hereby we do not take
away 2.
the nature of a man, and make him a beast, as the Adversaries calumniate. Oh
say they, this is to turn man into a stock or stone, to deprive him of reason
and liberty of will. No, we deny the consequence; for although we say, That he
is thus Hereby man's will is not taken away.
passive for the initial working of Grace; yet we say he has his
understanding, his reason still, he has a will still; only, to discern, or
will what is good, that he cannot: So then we deny not but a man has
understanding, has a natural liberty of his will, he cannot be a man if he
have not these: but yet in respect of that which is holy, so his mind is blind,
his will is obstinate, and rebellious against it. So that in man here are these
three things; To be able to understand, to be able freely to will; this is of
mere nature. To have a corrupt understanding, and a corrupt will, is of defiled
nature. To understand and will what is good, is of sanctified nature: So then,
what is the true state of the question, not whether there be an understanding,
and the natural faculty of Free Will in a man, or not. None denies that, every
man has Free Will in natural and civil actions; only the question is about
the object of these, whether he has power to understand or will things that
are merely spiritual and supernatural; and this the Scripture does expressly
deny.

Thirdly, When we say, God does work grace thus powerfully and irresistibly,
the meaning also is not, as if the heart of a man in conversion did not resist
and 3.
reject the work of the Spirit, in some measure, and in some degrees; for there
is no question but the heart of a man does naturally refuse and oppose the
Spirit of God. Stephen told the Jews, They had always resisted the Spirit of
God, Acts 7. and the word of God is said to cast down those strong holds, and
every high thing that exalts it self against God, 2 Cor. 10. So that as there
is a natural contrariety, and active opposition between fire and water; thus
there is a constant enmity and active resisting of Gods Spirit by our spirit;
for if this combat and conflict remain still in a godly man, how much more in
natural men that are altogether carnal? You must therefore distinguish between
a prevalent, conquering resisting, and a graduall: God in Conversion so works,
that he takes away the prevalent, but not the graduall resisting. Though a man
before he be converted, is froward and full of cavils and prejudices, is
unwilling to be saved, cannot abide the truth, does what he can to stifle all
good motions; yet if he belong to Election, God will at last over-master his
heart, and make him of unwilling willing: his hard heart cannot refuse this
Converting grace, because the first thing it does, is to take away the
hardness of heart.

Fourthly, Therefore its not every kind of grace that a man may acknowledge is
enough, 4.
unless it be such a grace as is antecedently efficacious to our will, and
omnipotently bowing, and changing of it. Austin said, That the Pelagians did
use the word Grace, ad frangendam invidiam, to decline the hatred that their
opinion might get; so those that cry up Free Will: They will acknowledge grace,
and God forbid they should speak against grace: But thou must know, there has
been in this point an horrible abuse of well-meaning men, by acknowledging
grace, but not such a grace as we told you, that is efficacious of it self by
its inward power, not depending upon man's will. Pelagius of old, when he saw
his opinion was universally distasted, as if he disputed against grace; he then
to avoid such an odium, began to use the word, and to acknowledge it: insomuch
that he deceived an whole Counsel, by his ambiguities and generalities, who
acquitted him: yea Austin himself who was so diligent an opposer of him, was
almost deceived by him. If therefore any who dispute for Free Will, speak also
of grace, and they say they are for grace; remember its not every kind of grace
that is enough, but such as shall mightily change the heart; not that shall
work with Free Will, but first make the will free, which was a Servant, and a
Captive to lust: Tunc est liberum, quando liberatum, Then are ye free if the
Son has made you free, John 8. 32.

Fifthly, Although God thus omnipotently bow the heart, and grace be
vorticordis, 5.
as Austin called it, yet there is great use of the Ministry; of exhortation,
of reproof, of commands, of promises and threatenings; for presently men are apt
to cavil and say, If God work all, why then is the Ministry? Why are we
exhorted, when we have no power! why does God command, when we have no ability?
For exhortation and the Ministry is necessary, because its the instituted
means, by which God will work this, as Christ did not in vain say to Lazarus,
Lazarus come forth, because it was a practical powerful word, and thus it is
here; the Ministry speaks not in vain, we exhort not in vain, because in and
by this, God inflames the heart, and quickens it to Good. And so the commands
to turn to God, to love him above all things, are not in vain, because they are
not to demonstrate our power but our duty. The Creditor may lawfully demand of
his prodigal Debtor the sum of money he owes, though he be not able to pay,
especially we being full of self-righteousnesse, carnal confidence, and earthly
adherence, these commands are the more earnestly to be pressed, that we may be
ashamed and confounded.

Sixthly, It cannot be denied but that this Doctrine of Gods sole power, and
efficacy of 6.
Grace in Conversion, has been and may be abused, and that two ways, either
to sluggishnesse and negligence, men thinking, that if God take away the stony
heart, what need I care? I may sit down and take my ease: Or to Enthusiasm,
such as will not pray, nor go to the Ordinances, they will only stay at home,
and expect the Spirits immediate working on them; and these were two reasons,
says Chemnitius, why Pelagius a Brittan, otherwise an ingenious man and
famous, as also very innocent in his life, did fall into his error on the other
side. But there is no truth of God can be preached, but carnal hearts will
abuse it. Paul does abundantly testify this, when he speaks of those corrupt
inferences some made from his preaching of grace: and the best truths corrupted
prove most dangerous: as when they did not use the Manna according to Gods
Institution, it degenerated into noisome worms.

Let us discover the grounds of this truth: And First, All those places of
Scripture which do describe the total, and universal pollution of man,
making him not 1.
so much a sinner, as even sin it self; does plainly argue, that Gods
converting grace is all in all; that man is a mere patient, and cannot actively
consent to the least good thing. Thus Genesis 6. The imagination of the thoughts
of a man's heart are only evil, and that continually: What can be said more,
Every imagination or thought that stirs in a man, its evil, and only evil,
and that continually! How then can this consent, or be active to God? so Ephesians.
2. You has he quickened that were dead in sins: What does a dead man do to get
life again? Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one. That is, no
man, God only does: Our Savior says, A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good
fruit; especially Romans 8. A natural man perceives not the things of God,
Neither can he; he does not, and he cannot. See what pregnant places of
Scripture here are; Mark them because that unsavorie error does so much spread.
If these Texts be true, all our thoughts and affections are only evil; we are
dead in sin, we do not, we cannot so much as perceive the things of God: how
then dare any think of the power of nature, and her ability to what is holy?

Secondly, This is fully proved by those excellent and empharicall similitudes
which are used to declare the work of Conversion; which the Spirit of God on
purpose uses 2.
to declare Gods glorious power in us. As its called often A Creation, and
Grace is A new Creature: we are said to be Created to good works. Now Creatio
fit ex nihilo, Creation does suppose nothing pre-exsistent, either physically
or morally. Was the world when it was created any ways co-operant to its
Creation? Neither is it here. Remember then i^s he that has made us, and not
we our selves: If we did not make our selves men, shall we make our selves new
Creatures, better then men? so its expressed by the similitude of a new Birth.
He has begotten us by his word. A godly man is said to be born of God. Now
these are full expressions to show that we are not born by our free will, or
consent, but by Gods sole power; as John 1. Lastly, its compared to the
Resurrection; You that were dead has he quickened. Now was there ever any man
that could raise up himself out of the grave, and give life to himself? yea
Eph^s. 1. Its compared to that glorious power of God in raising up Christ, the
very self same power is ^here said to work in those that believe. Now how can
any man answer these comparisons the Scripture uses? for howsoever similtudes
must not be stretched beyond the scope of him that uses them: yet the Holy
Ghost does for this end use such expressions, that we should attribute all to
God, be debased in our selves, saying, Not unto us Lord, not to our free will
or our power, but to thy Name be all glory.

Thirdly, All those places prove this, which take all ability of good from man,
and attribute it wholly to God: So our Savior likeneth every man out of 3.
him to a Branch separated from the Vine John 15. The Branch out of the Vin^
can bring forth no fruit; Thus every man out of Christ: Hence our Savior
concludes, Without me ye can do nothing. He does not say, You cannot do any
great thing, but nothing: And again, 2 Cor. 3. the Apostle says, We are not
sufficient of our selves to think one thought, viz. In reference to the good
either of others, or of our selves. Thus you see how man is made utterly
impotent. Well, then see those places that positively attribute all to God; Its
God that works in us both to will and to do. You see all is given to him. And
again, What have thou that thou have not received? But above all, how plain is
this Romans 9. Its not of him that wills, or him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy. This is a noble place, for who is likely to have it, but him
that wills, or that runs? yet it is not of him, but of him that shows
mercy; whereas if Free Will, or man's power had any co-partnership in this work,
we might as well say, Its not of him that shows mercy, but of him that
wills or runs. So that this Doctrine robs God of all that honor and glory
that is due to him both in the prayers and praises of his people. For how will
the Patrons of Natures Free Will deport themselves in this Duty? Must they not
in effect come to this? Lord, I pray thee mollify and soften my heart, if I
will. Again, Lord I praise thee, that thou gave me an heart to repent, when I
consented and was willing; And is not all this highly derogatory to Gods glory?
This made profound Bradwardine encourage himself to write against P^lagius,
because he could heartily pray for the grace of God to help him in that work,
whereas his adversaries could not do so.

Lastly, If so be that the will and power of man, did make grace effectual to 4.
us, so that Gods grace should not take away our stoninesse, till we consented,
Then the greatest glory of a man's Conversion would belong to him: For we may
suppose God offering grace equally to the same men; They both live in the same
Family, both under the same Ministry. Now what is the cause why one receives
the Word, and not the other? Shall we say, because he by his free will
entertained the grace of God, and not the other? What derogation would this be
to Gods glory? Does not the Apostle say, Who has made thee to differ from
another? 1 Cor. 4. 7. Why was Peter converted, and not Judas? They both enjoyed
the same means, they both saw the same wonderful miracles: Shall any man say,
Because Peter used his free will well, and not Judas? This were to make Peter
no more beholding to Christ then Judas was. Oh a gracious heart knows not how
to digest such presumptuous opinions! God made me to differ from others, By the
grace of God I am what I am. So then, have all these arguments in your eyes,
they are plain and easy; and then though error be never so subtly painted,
yet it will not make you inamoured with it, especially if to all these places
of Scripture, thou can set to thy own experience of Gods wonderful change
upon thee. Art not thou able to say, That though ten thousand teachers should
come and preach free will, yet thine own experience in thy Conversion will make
thee not believe it, for thou were so far from consenting or agreeing to the
work of grace, that all thy shifts and care was how to put off the work of God?
How often did thou labor to blind thy own eyes, to harden thy own heart,
how unwilling to be convinced, how sorry to part with thy dear lusts, how often
did thou put off and defer; saying, Yet a little more and still a little
more, that had not God by his mighty power opened thy heart, made thee of
unwilling willing, to this very day thou had still been wallowing in thy
blood!

Use of Instruction. Concerning a threefold duty: 1. Of deep debasement Use*
and humiliation, How vain, weak and unprofitable are we become? Of rich to
become pooor, of honorable to become debased, is nothing to this; of holy and
altogether holy, to become altogether sinful: Oh why does not this wound thee?
Is there any room left for pride, carnal jollity; and confidence, while in this
polluted estate?

2. Of daily thankfulness to God, who has put forth his great power on thee;
Oh call upon thy soul, and all within thee, to speak for the grace of God.

3. Here is encouragement to pray to God for the subduing of any strong
corruptions or passions: He that did the greater, take away the heart of stone
at first; cannot he do the less?

SERMON XCVIII.
The Freeness of Gods Grace in Conversion displayed and maintained against
Arminians and others.

EZEKIEL. 36. 26, 27. A new Heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I
put within you, etc.
I Shall now make an end of this Text, whose matter like our Saviors loaves
has multiplied and increased in the breaking and distributing of it. The last
thing observable is the manner of the conveyance and bestowing of it, which is
by an absolute free promise, I will do thus unto you, here is nothing spoken of
what they should do, but what God will do; here is no speech of their
preparatory dispositions, but Gods gracious operation. Now although it be true,
that immediately and directly this promise is made to the exiled Jews;
therefore with the promise of Justification and Conversion, is joined that of
restitution into their own Land again, with all their former temporal mercies;
yet the Apostle Paul makes it plain, that this is an evangelical promise, or
the Covenant of Grace for all ages in the Church, Heb. 10. 16. So that this
promise is not to be understood of those only in the Captivity, as the
Remonstrants would evade, whom God should convert, but of all that in
successive ages, shall be brought home unto God. So that as Isaac is said to be
a child of the promise, because he was not born by natural power, but by the
mere promise and power of God, so all the godly are in this sense as well as in
another, like Isaac, the children of the promise, being not born by the power
of flesh and blood, but by virtue of this promise. It is this Text that gives
spiritual life to all that receive it. It is because of this promise that the
word of God has any succesful effect at any time.

That the Promise of Conversion and Regeneration is an absolute free Promise.
Doct.


Thus you see the Text runs without any Ifs; God will take away the heart of
stone, nothing shall frustrate his intention. The Lord has said it and it will
come to pass. Iter ad gratiam is per gratiam, perque ipsam venitur ad ipsam.
Grace makes way for it self. As by the light of the Sun, we come to see the
Sun, God does not only offer grace to the heart, but sanctifies the heart to
receive it. He does not only give the oil but the cruise to receive it. He
gives the bread of life, and the stomach also to eat it.

To open this Doctrine, Consider

First, That a promise is a far more comfortable thing then a mere
prediction. God does many times merely foretell what he will do, but at other
times he does also promise what he will do: a prophecy of what will be, and a
promise differ very much. This Text is not a mere prediction, or a mere
prophecy, but it is a gracious promise: Now a Promise is only of that which is
good, either temporal or spiritual, but a Prophecy or Prediction may be of
that which is evil, as well as what is good: All the desolations and calamities
that came upon Jerusalem, were prophesied of; but we cannot say they were
promised, for Promises are to be embraced, as Paul excellently expresses it,
Heb. 11. 13. to show how hearty, joyful, glad and ready the heart should be, to
receive them: Oh remember, thou that art exercised with diffidence and
discouragement, a promise is to be embraced, as thou would the dearest,
welcomest friend in the world! Again a Promise does induce some tie and
obligation in him that promises, but so does not a mere Prediction; and
because God promising cannot properly be said to be bound to us, or tied to us;
Therefore he is by his Promise a debtor to his own fidelity; he cannot deny
himself or his own word, Reddis debita nulli debens, so that the soul urging
God with a promise, may say, O Lord, it was in thy choice whether thou would
do such a thing or no, but since thou have promised it, and the word is gone
out of thy mouth; Thy truth, thy constancy, thy fidelity must needs make good
thy Promise.

Secondly, The Promises of God as for the matter of them they are two fold,
some 2. Of Promises.
are temporal, and some are spiritual; so for the manner they are either
Absolute or Conditional; Absolute Promises are such as God has made, and he
will fulfill, though we believe not at all. Such Promises do not depend upon
any Grace in us foregoing, neither do they suppose any good qualification in
us; Thus that temporal promise, that God will not drown the world, is
absolutely determined, though men do not believe it, yet God will make it good:
So Isa. 9 The promise of sending a Christ, a Messiah into the world, was an
Absolute Promise. The calling of the Gentiles, and the calling of the Jews
again after the destruction of the Gentiles: These are absolutely promised. For
as God has some absolute Threatenings for a destruction of a people; and then
though there were Noah, Job and Daniel, they were not able to deliver that
Land; so he has many absolute Promises, which all the wickedness and unbelief
of men shall not make void; and of these Absolute Promises it is that Paul
says, He is faithful and cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. and that our
unfaithfulness shall not make void the faith of God, Romans 3. 3. For it is
plain in many Promises, if we do not believe God does not fulfill them; as if
we do not believe, we cannot be justified: but he speaks there of such absolute
Promises, as God will certainly accomplish, taking away all obstructions that
hinder.

2. There are Conoitional Promises, but that must be understood in a right
sens^, not as if there were any Conditions to be performed by our strength and
power, as if these Conditions were causes and merits of the grace promised. No,
they are only Qualifications of the subject, without which he could not be
partaker of the grace promised. Thus Justification is promised to Faith, pardon
of sin to Repentance, overcoming of temptations to him that persevereth,
growth and increase of grace to him that improveth the grace he has, and
finally glorification is promised to him only that is sanctified, Here you see
are some Promises made only to such as have grace already, Grace is the
Condition for Grace, only there is no Condition or Qualification required,
which is not the Absolute Gift of God at first; for although Justification be
promised to him that believes; If you ask, How a man comes to believe, here
that we may not sun in infinitum, we must say it is absolutely promised and
wrought by God himself. I do not here curiously dispute about a Qualification
and a Condition, nor of the Nature of Conditions; that is to be expected in the
controversal part. Now this Promise in the Text, is of the former sort, an
Absolute Promise, making way for its own self; As Kings use to carry their own
Furniture for their entertainment; So it is here, Grace does qualify and work
the very initiall preparations so, that all is from God in a Promise. Nothing
is our plea, but a Promise; all our spiritual riches and treasures are bound up
in a Promise.

In the next place, let us consider what is comprehended in this, when What is
implied in this free gift. 1.
we say, Conversion is absolutely promised to the Converted, and that implies:

First, The free grace of God bestowing this inestimable benefit, Where he
pleases, and When he pleases. Who can give any reason, why God takes away
Jacobs stony heart, and does not Esaus? Who can give a reason, why God softens
Peter's heart, and not Judas, but only the mere grace and good pleasure of God?
See Paul Romans 11. even ravished with the depth of Gods unsearchable wisdom in
this matter; and Christ himself greatly affected herein, Matthew. 11. I thank
thee, O Father, that thou have revealed these things to babes, and hidden them
from the wise. And To you it is given to understand, Matthew. 13. but not to
others. So that God making this absolute Promise to some, and not to all, does
thereby make his free grace perspicuous, that every mouth may be stopped that
would boast of it self.

Secondly, It supposes, that we cannot so much as prepare, and fit our selves
to 2.
receive Grace. God finds an heart of stone in every man, and a stone is
impenetrable. It was a Doctrine received a long while, Facienti quoa in se est,
Deus dat Gratiam, though differently explained. Let a man do what he can by
natural strength and power, and then God will vouchsafe Grace and
supernatural Mercies to him; yea this is too much divulged at this very day;
let a man use his Naturals well, and God will give Supernaturals; but first
there is no such Promise in all the Scripture; you cannot in all the Scripture
find any Promise of Grace made to Nature, or the improvement of Nature; God no
where says, Do as much as you can, what you are able by your own power, and
then I will come and help you. There is no such Promise in Scripture, but
either it is absolute, as you have heard, or else Conditional to some Grace
wrought by God already in us.

Thirdly, This Promise is of a most excellent and precious Nature, it far 3.
exceeds all temporal Promises: Should God promise thee all the glory of the
World, all that thy heart could in this life desire, yet it is nothing to this
Promise of a new Heart. Hence Peter calls them Precious Promises, 1 Pet. 1.
whereby we are made partakers of the Divine Nature. God to this people in
Captivity, promises a new and a tender heart, as that which would qualify or
put a luster upon all other Mercies; Their return from Captivity, Their
enjoying of their former Houses and Mercies again would be nothing, if God gave
not this Mercy also; Oh then that the hearts of men were made more spiritual
and wise, to look after and prize this Promise; Let thy Condition be never so
miserable, thy state never so distressed, yet if under this Promise, thou art
in an Ark, when others are tosted up and down in the uncertain waves of this
world. Even the Virgin Mary that was called Blessed among Women, was more
blessed that Christ was spiritually formed in her heart, then that the body of
Christ was corporally fashioned in her Womb: Oh then! How wretched is thy
estate even in the midst of all earthly prosperity? when thou can say, These
new houses, these new honors are mine, but thou can not say, This new heart
is mine.

Fourthly, This Absolute Promise is sure and certain: For there is Truth in
God, 4.
and so he cannot lie; and there is Power in God, and so there cannot be any
thing to hinder him, Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass away, then one Iowa or
Tittle of this Promise fall to ground. How angry was God with Sarah, because
through unbelief she laughed when God told her in her Old Age, she should
conceive and bring forth a Child? Do not thou think thy heart, thy lusts are
too strong, too naught for God to conquer and subdue? Now the ground why this
Promise is so sure, and cannot be frustrated, is, because it is the execution
of Gods Election from all Eternity; and the Election of God, that is Absolute,
and that cannot be frustrated; Read Romans 11. where the Apostle in a grave and
profitable way handling this sublime Mystery of Predestination; he argues,
That Gods Will and Purpose must take effect, Election has obtained, and it
will obtain; If then the Election of God be Absolute, and that must stand, then
the Promise of Conversion, which is nothing but a gracious Manifestation of
this Election, must also be Absolute. And this shall suffice for clearing the
Nature of this Absolute Promise; but because this Doctrine is subject to
carnal Cavils, I shall Answer one or two Objections which a froward Heart not
humbly submitting to the Authority of Scripture, is apt to raise. And

First, It may be said, If this Promise of Conversion be Absolute, God Object.
1.
will work it, and there is no Condition on our part, that we can by our Nature
perform: Then what need we come to hear the Word preached? What need we wait
on the Ordinances? if God will take away the heart of stone, he will do it
though we be eating and drinking, and making merry, as well as if we be praying
and hearing the Word preached. But take heed of such destructive conclusions,
for they do not follow from this truth. For

First, Though we say it be an Absolute Promise, yet the meaning is not, as if
Answ.
it were accomplished without such means God has appointed. Therefore the
Promise may be said to be Absolute, either in opposition to Conditional, as if
it required something as a Condition to be done on our part, and in this sense
it is Absolute; or else it may be called Absolute, as it does oppose that which
is to be ordered by some means, and in this sense it is not Absolute. Paul had
absolutely foretold, That none in the Ship that were with him should die; yet
he also said, That they must use the means, keep in the Ship. And thus God
told David many times before he went to the Battle, That he should have the
Victory, yet he was careful to order his Army, and to prepare the Soldiery:
So that Gods Promises though they are many times Absolute, yet they also
include Means for that end. Now there are Means of two sorts, The one
External having no immediate influence upon Grace, only it is the necessary
way that God has commanded every one to walk in, and such are coming to the
Ordinances; and hearing of the Word. A man has Free Will or Power of Nature to
do this, as any other civil Actions. Indeed to hear with Faith, to hear with
godly Attention and brokennesse of Spirit, that he cannot; but simply to come
to hear, and in a general manner to attend to what is delivered, that by Nature
he can do; Now even this very hearing, and this bodily presence God has
required, as a Means wherein he will dispense his Grace; So that whosoever
does wilfully neglect the use of these, cannot promise to himself any
Conversion; yea he may certainly conclude God will not convert him; so that
here is no place for thy profane Cavil; What need I come and hear? what need I
frequent preaching? Yes, every way; for though God has absolutely promised
this Mercy, yet it is in the use and exercise of these Means: Oh then that
those who customarily and wilfully absent themselves from the preaching of the
Word, would consider, that they turn their back upon God, and in effect say,
They will not be converted, We will not have this new Heart, this new Life. If
a man shall wilfully refuse to eat or drink, will he not be accounted a
self-murderer? and if thou carelessly or obstinately refusest the Word of life,
will not God judge thee for a self-damner?

But then in the next place, There are formal and internal Means that do
(...).
immediately receive Christ in the soul, such as Faith, or hearing in Faith,
and these a man has no power of himself to perform, Faith being the gift of
God. So then although internal Means of obtaining Christ, cannot by natural
strength be performed, yet there are external Means, which whosoever shall
refuse, he does reject the counsel of God, and pronounces himself unworthy of
Salvation. Therefore harbor no more such thoughts, unless thou will violently
throw thy self into the mouth of hell.

But secondly, It may be said, If Gods Promise of Conversion be Absolute, This
is discouraging and may easily cast men into despair; for though I desire, and
groan Object. 2.
after Conversion, yet if I be not in this Absolute Promise, I can never be
partaker of it.

But first consider, Though it be Absolute, yet it is also Indefinite, it does
not exclude any particular man; So that no man in the world living under Answ.
the means of Grace, can truly say, he is not intended in this Promise, as
well as others. Seeing therefore God has no where excluded thee by name, there
is no clause that shuts thee out; it is a grievous sin in thee to shut thy
self out. So then, Know those dejecting and discouraging thoughts they arise
from Hell; It is the Devil and thy own black heart, not this Doctrine that
discourageth. If there were a Malefactor among many others, and the Magistrate
should make an indefinite promise that he would spare them and pardon them, and
does not by name exclude any man, would any be so injurious to himself, as to
question, whether he be intended in the pardon or no? No less injurious art
thou to thy self, in disputing against this promise.

Secondly, If thou live under the means of Grace, and where the word of Life
is tendered, then thou have much more cause to hope that this Promise of
Conversion 2.
does belong to thee. Indeed all those who sit in Heathenish darkness, to whom
the Gospel was never yet made known, they are a hopeless people, while so;
there is no Promise without the Church of God: But to those who have the grace
of God tendered to them, they may plead this Argument, Lord, thou have given us
the outward means, we have the Ministry, that sounds daily in our ears, Oh
give us the inward Grace also!

Thirdly, If thou art one who groanest and desire after Conversion, and art
afraid lest God has excluded thee, be of good comfort, for those sighs and
pantings 3.
after Grace, are a sure sign that thou art included, yea that this work of a
new heart, and a tender heart is already begun in you. Where you hear a Sigh
or a Groan in a man, it is a sign there is a natural life; and so where there
are inward Groans and Affections for this new heart, there are the beginnings,
and the foundation is already said, God will not break the bruised Reed, nor
quench the smoking Flax. Even hunger and thirst has a promise of being
satisfied, Matthew. 5. Therefore let this turn thy water into wine presently.

Fourthly, Although the Promise of Conversion be in a well explained sense
Absolute, yet there is no man damned that would have been converted, only he 4.
wanted the Promise, God would not put his name in there, and that is the cause
of his utter perishing. No, this is a firm truth, O Israel, thy destruction is
of thy self; And As I live, says God, I will not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he should live. Turn ye, turn ye, Why will ye die? This is a sure
truth, Every man's Damnation is of his own self; he does wilfully and with
delight go on in destructive ways, he cannot say, Lord, I would have been
converted, but the Absoluteness of thy Election, or thy Promise hindered, yea a
man's own wilful lusts they destroy him: Insomuch that were it not for this
Promise of God none at all would be converted: It is well we are not left to
Free Will, for then not one would be converted: And the Adversaries to this
Opinion cannot instance in one Heathen ever since the world was made, that did
use his Naturals so well, that God vouchsafed Supernaturals; insomuch that the
Doctrine of Free Will may well cast a man into Despair; for if my Conversion
cannot be wrought till I go along with God in it, I am for ever undone.

Lastly, Let it be granted that there are some Difficulties in this Doctrine,
that humane reason cannot untie all the knots, yet this is no more then Paul
acknowledged, Romans 9. and reproves man for such bold Disputing with God: Gods
ways are wise and just, even when they are hidden and secret to us. There is
no end when humane wisdom talks against heavenly Dispensations.

Use. Is this Promise, though Absolute, yet ordered in the use of means to be
accomplished? Then be diligent in hearing the Word: Oh pray that this new heart
may at last be found in thee! Oh why is it that we should leave this Text
before every Auditor find the power of it upon his soul! Oh that the leaving
of this Text might not leave one carnal stony heart! Oh that as we have done
the Text, so God had done this work in you! But oh our barrenness, our
barrenness! Oh the just anger and wrath of God against many persons, to whom
God says, Let them alone in their sins!

SECT. XII. Handling the Work of Grace under the Title of Vocation or Calling.
SERMON XCIX.
The Nature of Vocation opened in respect of the Efficient and Instrumental
Causes of it.

ROMANS 8. 30. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called, etc.
WE have considered the Work of Grace under several eminent Titles that the
Scripture gives to it. The next I shall pitch upon, is, Vocation or Calling;
for Conversion is often notified by this term. And this Text will afford a just
occasion to treat of it. To understand the Text, let us consider the divine and
admirable Connection of this verse with the precedent Matter at the 28th verse.
The Apostle after other Consolations administered to afflicted believers, he
gives them this sovereign Cordial, All things work together for good to them
that are called according to Gods purpose. This promise or faithful saying is
enough to bear up the heart of any troubled believer, for what can he desire
more? If this will not satisfy, what can? Though thy adversities, temptations
are called evils in respect of sense, yet in respect of thy spiritual
advantage, so they are good adversities, they are good evils without any
contradiction; and see how emphatical every word is. We know, not only Paul,
but all the godly by their experience, and wise comparing of things together,
come to know this. This is such a truth, that no Christian should be ignorant
of; And then All things; he does not say Some, but all things; not only
prosperity, not only spiritual mercies, but even all miseries and afflictions
whatsoever, yea sins themselves by Gods goodness being repented of, make them
more wary and humble; as fire drives out pain by fire: and then they work
together; though this or that particular affliction of it self may seem to make
thee worse, to cause thy Sun to go many degrees backwards, yet all together
promote thy good; They do that in a Constell^tion, which a simple aspect would
not do. So that this true and faithful saying if embraced by all acceptance of
believing, is enough to make a man in a continual transfiguration. Such a
believer may truly say, Soul, take thy spiritual ease, for ^ere is much
spiritual good treasured up for thee; but this bread is only given to children;
This pearl is not cast to dogs and swine; for in the next place we are told who
they are, to whom this privilege belongs, and they are set out,

1. By their Duty or Grace, They love God.

2. By Gods mercy vouchsafed to them, They are called according to his purpose.
Whereupon the Apostle makes a golden chain of all the causes of Salvation,
inseparably linked together, that none may be taken away one from another. It
was a saying that A man might sooner wrest Hercules his Club out of his hand,
then divide one of Homers verses from another, the matter was so dependant and
connexed together; but certainly all these causes are so divinely joined
together, that none can part them. And the first Round in this Chain is Gods
foreknowledge, or rather Gods fore-acknowledging; For by foreknowledge is not
meant any prescience or prevision of such as would use their free will and
natural power well. No, that to repugneth the whole current of the Scripture,
which makes all good works the fruit and effect of Predestination, not the
motive or cause of it, otherwise it would be Postdestination, rather then
Predestination; but to foreknow is as much as to approve of, and to love,
according to that rule, Words signifying acts of the understanding, are many
times put for the concomitant and subsequent affections and effects thereof.
Thus the simple word To know, is many times put for approbation, care and love.
Thus Psalm. 1. The Lord knows the way of the righteous. John 10. I know my
Sheep; and the compound to foreknow also is used in this sense, Romans 11. God
has not cast away the people whom he for^-knew, i. e. did approve and love. So
1 Pet. 1. 2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God; And so it is applied
to Christ verse. 20. in that Chapter. Upon this foreknowledge succeeds
Predestination, and these are acts of God from all eternity; and from these as
the fountain, streams the first effect in time, and that is Calling, Whom he
has predestined he has called.

There is a twofold calling, one External only, consisting in the tender and
offer A twofold Calling.
of grace, inviting of men to come in; in which sense our Savior said, Many
are called, but few are chosen. The other internal and efficacious also, when
God with the outward offer changes the heart, making it to embrace Christ; and
in this sense it is said here Called; upon this follow two further benefits,
Justified and Glorified. It is not my purpose to insist on them, nor to dispute
the order, Whether Calling or Justification precede; or, Whether Sanctification
be included in this word Calling. These things are not within my compass;
only take notice of this, That the phrase in the Preterperfect Tense, He has
justified, does not imply a Justification from all eternity, no more then that
we are called and glorified from eternity; but the Apostle speaks in the past
time, either to show the certainty of it; or else because we are glorified
already in Christ our Head, and have the sure pledges of it in this life; or
else because he had begun in that Tense when he spoke of Predestination, and
could use no other, he continued the same expression in the other privileges.

The Text thus opened, I come to that particular benefit I intend, viz. Called;
and for the sense of the word, you must know it signifies to have a being and
existence, yet such, as that it is celebrated and publicly taken notice of.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons of God; Matthew.
5. 9. And, behold what love he has shown, that we should be called the sons of
God, 1 John 3. 1. And we read of a threefold Calling;

First, That external and civil condition of life which a man lives in; in
which sense every one is bid to continue in the calling he is called unto, 1
Cor 7. 20.

Secondly, For any spiritual function or office in the Church. Thus the
Apostleship is often styled a Calling.

And lastly, for that grace of God whereby he calls us out of the state of
ignorance, Paganism and profaneness, to a state of truth, godliness and
glory; which is either merely external, vouchsafed even to hypocrites and
reprobates, or internal, bestowed on the godly only; and this the Apostle
means in the Text. From whence observe,

That whom God has predestined from all eternity, and will glorify in the
world Observe.
to come, he does in this life powerfully call out of their sins and ignorance.

As they are regenerated, or converted, so they are a called people: I shall
first treat of this powerful calling which the godly only have: And to
consider this distinctly, let us open the nature of it:

1. In respect of the efficient cause. Effectual Vocation opened. 1. In the
efficient cause God. 1.
2. The instrumental. 3. The nature of it. 4. The terms from whence we are
called, and to which we are called.
And for the efficient Cause, God is he that calls us with this powerful
lively calling: and herein consider,

First, The omnipotent power and strength of God, who by his word can make such
a wonderful change; He does but call, and man who is naturally such an enemy
and adversary to what is good, does presently become a friend; so that the
Scripture expressing this work of conversion, does therein allude to Gods
Creation at first, when by his Word all things were made, he said, Let there be
light, and there was light; Verba Dei sunt opera, said Luther, Gods words are
works; this made the Apostle say, He calls those things that are not, as if
they were, 1 Cor. 1. Gods call gives a ready being to those things that had no
existency at all before. So that herein is declared the sovereign power of God;
God at the first Creation called for those things to appear which lay in the
dark womb of nothing, and they presently came out; Even as if a Master should
give a call to his servant who stands in the next room ready to receive his
commands. Behold then and admire at the great power of God, who has made this
wonderful change on thee. Christ did no sooner call from Heaven to Paul, but
he presently answers, Lord, what will thou have me to do? So that Gods call
even to the deaf is not in vain, because at the same time he gives ears to
hear. Oh then let the godly consider, How comes grace, any godly affections or
desires to be in thy heart? It had been impossible for such things to lodge in
thy soul, had not God given this mighty call, saying, Let there be faith,
repentance, godly sorrow; and presently there is.

Secondly, Take notice of the full sufficiency and happiness of God, who thus
calls 2.
thee to communion with him. It is not for any want or indigency, that day by
day he thus calls and invites thee to come in: No, God is blessed, and
all-sufficient: had he not created Angels, or the visible world, he had been
gloriously happy in the enjoying of himself, but yet out of his goodness he is
willing to invite and call in men, that they also may be made happy; Christ in
his Parable expressed this, when he sent out his servants to invite men unto
the feast, and when they refused then he sent for the lame and blind, Luke 14.
21. such as he could have no need of, but they did exceedingly need him; and so
there is no day that God sends us his servants to invite you to this spiritual
feast, but this consideration should wound thee and make thee ashamed: Oh why
does God thus call me? Why am I thus invited? Is not God happy and glorious
enough? though I perish and be damned in my sins? What is man, Lord, and the
son of man that thou should be thus mindful of him? as if God could not be
a God, a happy, blessed God, unless thou also were brought into happiness.

Thirdly, In Gods calling of us, consider the freeness of his grace, and the
absoluteness of his purpose and good pleasure therein. He calls some, and
leaves others; yea the far greater part of mankind, and those who have the
greatest pomp and glory in this world, on whom the eyes of the world are most
open. Thus the Apostle, Not many noble, not many wise has God called, 1 Cor.
1. 28. but the poor and despicable things of the world has God chosen. Indeed
God partly by his Word to some, and partly by the works of Creation to others,
has left every man without excuse; he has given to all men pregnant witnesses
of his goodness, wisdom and power, that they might seek after him; but this is
not the call of grace that is the fruit of Election; for that takes effect and
cannot be totally and finally resisted; Thou therefore who have been thus
called, cry out, Oh the depths and unsearchable riches of Gods mercy! There are
two in a bed, one is called the other is left: Two in a family, one is taken
and the other left. As in Paul's Conversion, when there was a voice from Heaven,
Paul heard distinctly, but his companions did not; so in the same Sermon, which
is Gods call, one hears it distinctly, receives the power of it in his
heart, knows the experimental meaning of it; but others hear only a general
sound, they understand nothing of it. Certainly this freeness of Gods grace in
calling thee and not others, who happily have not been such sinners as thou
have been, never committed such foul abominations as thou have done; that has
not called others of better parts, abilities and greater wisdom, who thereby if
converted, might have brought more glory and honor to God then thou ever art
likely to do. This free arbitrary grace (I say) of which a man can give no
reason in the world but his own good pleasure, may justly fill thy heart with
all astonishment and ravishing amazements. This is the mystery of Gods grace
that thou should always be contemplating and beholding, Oh Lord! Why am I
called and not another? Why does the Word of God come home to my soul, and
others feel and understand nothing at all? It was a great favor of God to
little Samuel, 1 Samuel 3. 9. when God called him twice or thrice, and did reveal
his will to him, and took no notice of Eli the Priest and Judge in Israel. Oh
has not the Lord done as wonderfully in visiting thy soul, calling unto thee
often, when those of greater parts, and greater pomp, and glory are passed by?

Fourthly, This Call of God it does always speed. There is a present hearing
and obedience in those that are thus called. Indeed there is an outward
calling, and many who are so called do sinfully and wickedly reject it, and of
such, few are saved comparatively; but of those who are called according to his
purpose, as the Apostle here speaks, there God gives a ready ear, a ready
heart; that they stand up presently and say, Behold I come to do thy will; My
ears have thou opened; Thy Law is written within my heart: So that however for
a long time thou may not either understand this Call of God, as little
Samuel did not, but give a little listening, and then lie down to sleep again;
after that a second time to give a little listening, and then lie down to sleep
again; so thou have some affections and desires, then presently they give over,
and thou go to thy lusts and thy sins again, then God a second, a third, yea
many a time, who knows how often, gives thee further calling, and that makes
thee more startle and more awakened, but thou do again return to thy old
lusts, thy old follies, thy old distempers, yet at last God takes away all that
blindness and wilfulness which is upon thee, and makes thee readily and
fully give up thy self to obey him.

Lastly, This Call of God is very various in respect of the time when it is
vouchsafed to them: Some are called in their infancy, some in their youth, some
in their old age; even as in the Parable, Matthew. 20. some were hired in to
work in the Vineyard at the ninth, others at the eleventh hour; not that this
should make a man procrastinate and put off his conversion to God; for by the
12th hour in that Parable, is not meant the later days of a man's life, but the
later days of the world; The Jews they were called at the 9th hour, the
Gentiles they were called at the 12th, yet God gives the same Heaven to both,
that is the proper meaning of that Parable. Indeed we have an instance of one,
and but of one called at the end of his days, the Thief on the Cross, of whom
Austins observation is obvious; There is one, that none should despair,
thinking it impossible for him to be converted, who has put off this work till
death has arrested him: and yet it is but one, that none may presume: Of many
men that have poisoned themselves it may be one does recover, but this would be
no encouragement to thee to swallow down poison: How many dreadful and sad
examples may thou see and hear of those who as they lived wickedly, so died
as desperately? Howsoever therefore Gods calling be various, to some sooner, to
some later, yet happy are they who are called out of sin betimes in their
younger years, they have less wounded their consciences, dishonored God, and
they have the longer time to do him service, and the best service: Oh how happy
is it when the days of thy youth have been filled with the strength and power
of God! Oh therefore that the younger sort of people, would expect and look
after this call of God! Do not think its for old men ready to drop in the
grave, for them only to repent, and to leave off their sins, but you must enjoy
the pleasures and lusts of youth: Oh Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth! When God calls thee in thy tender years, thou will not then make those
sad shipwracks of thy soul, as others do.

In the next place consider, The instrument of Gods Call, and that is the
preaching 11. In the instrument. Gods word.
of the Word. You may say, Where does God call, and when does he call, we have
no immediate voice from Heaven speaking to us, How then can this be? The answer
is, God calls you by the Ministers, we are Ambassadors coming in his name to
you; so that you who refuse them speaking the word of God, you refuse God
himself calling to you. They are the voice of God crying, Prepare ye a way for
the Lord; so that every Sabbath Day God calls you by the Ministers, and you that
think that if you should have an immediate voice from Heaven calling to you,
then you would obey and submit; know you would not do it, if you refuse the
word of God delivered to you by the Ministry: Our Savior said, That they who
would not believe Moses, nor the Prophets, neither would if one should rise
from the dead, and come unto them, Luke 16. 29. It is neither our calling or
speaking, but Christ by us that you refuse and contemn; and how great and far
your judgment will be who neglect this great salvation, the Scripture bids
every man think within himself, Heb. 2. 3. Indeed there are many things have a
voice to call us besides the Word; The Heavens and all the creatures are so
many tongues calling unto us; The rod of affliction, that has a voice, The
creatures afflictions.
and we are commanded to hear what that speaks; but the preaching of the word
that is the powerful voice, and the immediate motions and inspirations of the
Spirit accompanying it, these give life and quickening in speaking: That as God
has a voice of the Trumpet and the Archangel, to raise men from the dead; so
he has also of the Word, to raise men out of their security in sinning. Thus
you have the efficient and instrumental cause of Gods calling. Many practical
Uses may be made of this: As

First, To magnify and adore the love of God to mankind, that does vouchsafe
Use.
such a gracious and merciful call to man fallen. This is more then he has
done to the Apostate Angels, Heb. 2. 16. To which of them has he appointed a
word of Ministry and Reconciliation? not only the Priest and the Levite, but
even the good Samaritan has passed by these, and taken no notice of them: yea
come we to man, Is there not far the greater number of mankind, that though
they have a witness enough to condemn them, yet have not the external offer and
call of God? The name of Christ and faith has not sounded within their coasts;
yea come we closer still, How many thousands and thousands are there who have
the outward call, but are wholly destitute of the inward call? Now if God pass
by so many thousands of Angels, and ten thousands of men, and give thee this
inward call, May not this fill thy heart with hot burning love to God? Can
thou contain thy self? As a wicked tongue, set on fire from hell, does also set
the whole creation on fire; so thy tongue set on fire with this heavenly love,
should make thee cry out to all creatures, To bless God for his mercy. David
had his heart thus burning within him, when he calls upon the whole creation,
and every creature by name to praise God. The Queen of Sheba fainted to hear
the wisdom, and behold all the glory of Solomon; how much rather may thy heart
sink within thee, through admiration of Gods love in this particular!

Use 2. Of terrror to those who wilfully resist the outward call of God. Use 2.
God speaks once, twice, yea many times, and thou hear not; Oh consider,
that if thou call thy servant again, and again, if yet he will not come,
thou presently judge it disobedience and rebellion; How then shall God
account of thee otherwise? Again, remember this time of Gods gracious calling
is very uncertain; this may be the last day, the last hour: To day, if ye will
hear, harden not your hearts; you have put off many days already, tremble
exceedingly, lest this day of grace be setting in a black dismal night. Lastly,
consider, now God calls you, and you hear not; the day of death, and other
miseries will be coming on thee, when thou will call on God, and he will mete
thy own measure to thee: See Proverbs 1. and the latter end; then thou will
call to God, to Christ, to Angels, to Saints; And none will hear.

SERMON C.
Holding forth the Nature of Vocation, or Divine Calling.

ROMANS 8. 30. Moreover, whom he has predestinate, them he has called.
THe efficient and instrumental cause of this Divine Calling mentioned in the
Text, has already been declared. We come now to consider, The nature wherein
it consists; and the terms from which, to which, in it: And first for the
nature of it, because you heard it was partly external, and partly internal;
even as man consists of an external body, and an internal invisible soul; so
this heavenly calling has that which is visible, sounding into the ear, and
that which is invisible and internal, reaching with a mighty power, even to the
heart.

Because, I say, it consists of these two parts, we must consider the Nature I.
The nature of vocation. As external it lies 1. principally in the preaching of
the word.
of it first as external, and then as internal.

First, And as its external, so it does primarily and principally lie in the
preaching of the word: The merciful and gracious invitation of sinners to come
in by the Gospel, is the very essence of external calling: So that the word of
God preached to you, whether it be in Commands, Promises or Threatenings, is to
be received by you as the voice and calling of God from heaven to you: The
Scripture commanding to leave such a sin, and obedience to such a duty; is as
truly the voice and call of God, as any immediate extraordinary call that God
ever vouchsafed to any; its as truly and as really, and with as much faith to
be obeyed, though it be not so immediately and miraculously: As for example,
Paul had this wonderful voice from heaven, Paul, Paul, why persecutest thou me?
Now every profane, ungodly man, has as really Gods voice from heaven by the
word speaking to him, Turn, turn ye, why will ye dye? Its said, when Jerusalem
was so near its destruction, they had a call from heaven, saying, Migremus
hinc, Let us depart hence: No less does every ungodly man hear every day, when
he is bid to depart from iniquity, and have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness. Its noted as a great mercy of God to Lot, that he sent an
Angel to call him out of Sodom, when fire and brimstone was immediately to be
poured from heaven upon it; and whereas Lot delayed and delayed, the Angel even
pulled him out, who was unwilling for his own good; This is a fit
representation of our spiritual calling out of sin; the Angels are the
Ministers of God, that cry daily, Come out of the world, lest you partake of
the judgments of the world; and men are so unwilling, they do so dearly love
their Sodom, though it will cost them fire and brimstone, that we are to compel
you out of it: This then is a main fundamental principle, introductory to our
conversion, when we consider God as speaking and calling to us by his word, to
look upon it as truly and really the call of God, as if there were immediate
voices from heaven speaking to us by name: Heb. 10. Christ is said still to
speak to us from heaven; And how is that but by the word? and the Scripture is
called the The word of God; God speaks it now, as well as at first when he
commanded it to be written: Oh then tremble, lest you should be in the number
of those who reject God calling of you: Should God send innumerable company of
Angels from heaven to you, to call you out of your lusts, to the state of
grace, it would not be more really (though more immediately) the voice of God,
then what we out of the word declare unto you: This then undoeth you, you do
not believe God himself by the word speaking to you, you do not think this is
Gods voice, that he speaks thus and thus to me, and therefore you are still
settled in a willful way of sinning. Now the word preached is Gods calling:

First, Instrumentally, as its the word of God, the word that comes out of his
mouth: All the Ministers of God, faithfully discharging their trust, are voices
crying unto you, Prepare a way for the Lord; and (...), to preach, is to be the
Lords solemn Herald, to offer peace to Rebellious enemies, if they will come
in; and if not, in a solemn and dreadful manner, to denounce his heavy wrath
and curse: Look not then on Ministers in their Embassage, as weak frail men,
subject to the like passions with others, butas Ambassadors, as coming in the
name of God, that cry out, Thus says the Lord, Oh thou sinner, wash thee from
thy iniquity; thus says the Lord, and not man. And

Secondly, The word preached does call men objectively; the matter of it is so
precious, good, excellent and necessary, as that it does strongly invite every
man. Some Grammarians say, That that which is good and excellent, is called
(...), because it does (...), it does call and invite men to be in love with
it: This is sure about the matter of Gods word; How Divine and Supernatural is
it? what purity, what heavenly affections does that require? insomuch, that no
humane precepts concerning piety and honesty ever came near to the Bible: And
than the good things promised, are wholly transcendent man's capacity; they are
such as never entered into the heart of man to conceive: Justification, the
light of Gods countenance, Eternal happiness and glory in heaven, were not men
so bruitishly earthly, would ravish them, and make them run after them; as the
Church said Cant 1. 2. Because of the savor of thy ointments, therefore do the
virgins love thee: If therefore ye would consider, both how great that infinite
majesty is, who does call you; and what that bait is he does invite you to,
even great and admirable privileges, this would excite in you such vehement
and impatient desires after them, that all the lusts and pleasures of sin,
would be accounted as dross and noisome vomit: Oh then think more and more, and
consider of this calling. Shall the Devil and lusts call, and thou runnest
after them, though into hells mouth? but God calls, and thou refusest him:
Come unto me all ye that pass by, says the whorish woman; and in the same
manner, every kind of sin, and how many venture into her snares! But come unto
me, says Christ, all ye that labor, and you shall find rest unto your souls,
Mat. 11. in this men are refractory.

In the Second place, The call of God consists in those things that are less
principal, and such, as without the former, would do no good; but when ^oyned 2.
with it, is very subservient and instrumental. And here we may speak of three
tongues calling aloud to us, two without us, and one within us; which I call
external, though within us, because of it self it does not internally change
the heart of a man.

And the first less principal, Is the whole Creation: All the Creatures are
like The whole Creation.
like so many tongues, as they declare the Glory, Power and Wisdom of God.

As for that dangerous opinion, that makes Gods calling of man to repentance
The voice of the Creatures of it self, not sufficient to call men to repentance.
by the Creatures, to be enough and sufficient, we reject, as that which cuts
at the very root of free grace: A voice, indeed, we grant they have, but yet
they make like Paul's Trumpet, an uncertain sound; men cannot by them know the
nature of God and his Worship, and wherein our Justification does consist:
Therefore whereas Psalm. 19. the Psalmist had spoken of the sound of the
heavens, and how they all declare the glory of God, he comes in the latter part
to commend the Law of God, for that which has spiritual effects indeed; viz.
To convert the soul, and to forwarn from sin: Thou can not then look up to
heaven, or down to the earth, but there is some imperfect voice calling on thee
to glorify that great and wonderful Creator, who made all these things: But
then

Secondly, There are the Judgments and Chastisements of God upon men The
Judgments of God.
for sin; these have a louder and more distinct voice: Thus the Prophet, Hear
ye the Rod, Micah 6. 9. The Rod speaks: There are no judgments, either
public or personal, but by them God calls aloud to thee to leave thy sins:
Every blow-thou have, every stroke thou feel, say, Now God speaks, Oh let
me hearken and hear what God would have me do. Those Psalms that have this
Inscription, Maschil, or To give Instruction, do for the most part contain the
Chastisements and Afflictions of God for sin: And so thou may say of every
affliction, This is an affliction to give instruction; of every loss, This is a
loss to give instruction. Take heed then of that deaf ear, that when God
smites thee once, twice, yea, many times, yet thou hear nothing at all; as
deaf men do not hear the most terrible thundrings that are.

Lastly, There is a voice that calls aloud, and that is the conscience God has
planted in thee; for that is Gods lamp put into thy breast: All the bitings The
voice of Conscience.
and accusings, and smitings that gives thee for thy sins, its no less then God
calling thee by that; Indeed this is a natural call, and so reducible to Gods
external calling, yet it is more peremptory, more quick and lively then either
the Creatures or Afflictions are: Hearken then to the calls, to the voice that
speaks in thy bosom; How often does that say, O vile and beastly sinner, when
will thou leave these lusts? when will thou depart from these evil ways? Is it
not high time that thou were changed from these noisome courses. Take heed of
putting out this light, do not stop the mouth of it, for it will one day cry
louder, That will be the gnawing worm, which will never dye. Thus much for the
first part.

We come to the Second, wherein the marrow and life of this Holy calling II. As
Internal.
does consist; and that is in internal works upon the soul, which are carefully
to be observed; that so every man may consider, whether he be in the number of
those called ones or no, that shall also be glorified; for its no mercy, yea an
aggravation of misery, to be called here outwardly, and to enjoy the
privileges of grace, and hereafter to be damned finally.

Now the first particular, wherein this inward calling consists, Is to open the
ear of 1. It consists:
man, to give him a spiritual hearing, so that he does readily close with the
call: Every man naturally has a deaf ear to Gods call: Though he has a
natural ear to hear the sound of the words, yet he has not a spiritual ear;
whence is that phrase so often, He that has ears to hear, let him hear: So
that God in effectual calling of his people to him, does not only cause a
sound of words, but changes the ear, so that it hears spiritually: This is
called An awakened ear, or A revealed ear, Isa. 50. 4. Men naturally have their
ears stopped and filled with earthly and mucky lusts: So that as deaf men cannot
hear the most terrible noise of thundrings; so neither do such the dreadful
voice of God threatening in his word: So that in this powerful calling, God
says Ephaphtha, to every deaf man, Be thou opened. Consider then with thy
self, if thou art thus called, God has given thee a quick ready ear; no sooner
does God speak, but thou say, Lo here I am, O Lord, to do thy will; and
although lusts, and the cares of the world make a noise, yet thou hear Gods
voice above alll: You may hear with affection, with delight and understanding,
and yet not have this gracious ear.

Secondly, This effectual calling is opening the heart chiefly, so that it
gives up it self in obedience unto God: Where there is this calling after Gods
purpose, there 2.
the heart is so mollified and softened, that the first thing it pitcheth upon,
is with Paul, to say, Lord, what will thou have me to do? This is so natural a
consequent from spiritual hearing, that (...), hearing, is often put for
obedience in the Scripture: Thus, as Paul, I was not disobedient to the
heavenly vision, Acts 26. 19. so is every man when inwardly called, he does no
longer resist and refuse the gracious offers of God, he stands it out no more;
yea it grieveth and troubles him at the very heart, that he has withstood the
call of God so often; it might now be too late, God might justly refuse to hear
him, as he refused to hear God. Now this obedience unto God calling, has these
properties:

First, Its a ready obedience: When once this powerful call manifests it self,
there is no more disputing, there is no more arguings; Its God that calls, I
must obey: Indeed, the outward offer of grace is too often rejected, and many
Antecedaneous motions to conversions are suffocated; but when God gives this
last call, then the dead come out of the grave and live; then says Paul,
Immediately I consulted not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1. As Christ called from
heaven to Paul, so Paul had flesh, and blood on earth calling him the clean
contrary way. Carnal consultations, they invited to safety, ease, pleasure; but
the holy calling of God, to self-denial, zeal, and suffering for Gods sake,
prevailed: Behold then the mighty power of God, that as soon as his word is out
of his mouth, to such a soul embracing and desiring its old lusts, immediately
he throws all away, though pleasures, profits, carnal friends, all hang upon
him to be the same he was once: Thus Matthew the Publican, as soon as Christ
called him, Come and follow me, immediately he leaves his profit and
employment, going after Christ: So that this calling has a speedy obedience.

Secondly, It has a cheerful and willing obedience: They follow this call with
delight, yea they bless and greatly praise God, that has made them partakers
of this Heavenly calling, as the Apostle calls it, Heb. 3. 1. Hence it is that
Calling in the Text is reckoned among those other inestimable benefits of
Predestination, Justification, and Glorification. How gladly did Zacheus
receive Christ, when Christ called to him! and the Apostles whom Christ called,
how willingly did they part with all to accompany him! So then, if thou art
thus effectually called, there is a willingness, a delight, and exceeding great
joy put into thy soul: Oh thou blessest God that ever he took notice of thee,
thou art even ravished with the admiration of Gods love and kindeness to thee,
its no grief or trouble of heart to leave thy former lusts; yea, they are a
burden, a shame now to thee. As if a poor Peasants daughter should be called
to marry a great King; how does this transcendently affect her? it does not
trouble her to leave her old Cottage, to put off her old rags, to eat no more
of her course food, but rather rejoices in the change that is made: Thus it is
here, when God gives thee this call, then thou abhorrest the profane,
ignorant, and ungodly life that thou did once live: then thou say, I have
found Manna for those husks I fed upon; I have found gold for that noisome dung
I had before.

Thirdly, Its an universal obedience: This effectual calling has diverse duties
to which a man is called, and it refuses none. When God called Abraham out of
his own Country, from his kindred, and from the Idolatry he lived in; What an
illimited obedience did Abraham demonstrate? He went, says the Text, not
knowing whither he did go, Heb. 11. 8. God called him out of his Country, and
did not tell him whither he should go, nor what he should do, yet Abraham's
obedience is ready to all this: This then cuts off the hopes of hypocrites, who
run hastily after Gods command in some particulars, and in some duties, where
self-advantage, self-interest or applause may show it self; but universally to
obey in every command, in every call, that they cannot yield unto.

Lastly, Its a pure obedience: This calling has a pure obedience, that is,
obedience for obedience sake, because of the Authority and Sovereignty of God
who commands; as you see it was in Abraham, in Paul, in Moses, in the Apostles:
There was no reason in the world of their obedience, but merely because God
called them: And then is obedience acceptable, when it is because God requires
it. But

Thirdly, This effectual calling gives a spiritual understanding and abilities,
to know how to perform the duties and parts of this calling: Hence they are
said to be 3.
made light in the Lord, Isa. 4. God never called any man to a particular
calling, either in Church or State, but he also gave him abilities and fitness
for it; as Moses, Aaron, Joshua, yea Saul had Kingly, though not gracious
abilities bestowed on him: Now God will much more do thus in a general and more
noble calling. Oh then consider, how art thou qualified with abilities to be a
Christian, to be a Believer? God has called thee out of darkness, out of
profaneness, to be a Saint, to walk as a member of Christ; now, have thou
abilities for this calling? Do you not deride those that are in any calling,
and have no abilities for it? do you not think such men unworthy of their
place? No less art thou of this calling, who know not how to believe, to
pray, to live, to worship God as thy calling does require.

Fourthly, This effectual calling denotes a separation, or setting of a man
apart unto that which he is called: So that he must not live as he has done,
but he 4.
must solely busy himself in that to which he is called: Thus the Apostle
speaking of his calling to be an Apostle, he says, He was set apart: And in
all worldly callings, you see men are set apart betimes unto it, and that they
wholly give themselves to what their calling is; and its a sure forerunner of
poverty, to be negligent herein: And thus it is in our spiritual calling, God
has set apart the godly man for himself, he calls him out of the world, and
from all his former lusts, to live wholly unto him: Oh how little do men
consider, that they are separated and set apart by their calling, unto God
only, not to live to sin or the world any more: Thus you have heard wherein
the nature of this spiritual effectual calling does consist.

The first use is of Instruction, That most men in the Church of God have but
an Use 1.
outward calling merely, they have no inward at all; for where is the opened
ear, the opened heart? where is the ready, speedy and pure universal obedience
unto all that God calls upon us to do? where is the spiritual abilities for all
the parts of our Christian calling? where are men separated and set apart from
their lusts to holiness only? and yet no man is inwardly called, till he have
all these: Oh then let thy soul make bitter lamentations in secret, let it pour
out tears abundantly, saying, O Lord, this heavenly calling has been no
further then hear yet, it has not gone to the heart; How often have thou
called upon me to leave these sins, to love those duties, and yet I have
wilfully been disobedient. Oh it is this inward effectual calling, that will
only make thee happy; yet from this very day, from this very sermon that
calls you at this time, how many will go to their former lusts and
wickedness? what may not God and his Ministers say, We are weary with calling
any more, as God told Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 3. 6. If he did send him to a people of a
strange speech, and a strange language, surely they would hear, but the
Israelites would not: So if God should send us to call the Heathens and Pagans,
surely they would regard the call, they would entertain it; but you have lived
long under this mercy, and so neglect it: Non respondere pro convitio est, What
dishonor is it then to God, not to answer him, calling so many years together.

SERMON CI.
A further Explanation of the Nature of Effectual calling, by showing from
what, and to what God calls us. As also, the Epithets the Scripture gives it.

ROMANS 8. 30. Whom he has predestined, those he has ^^ll^d.
THe next thing considerable, that will further explain the nature of this
Calling, is the Terminus a quo, and Adquem: And this is manifold. Gods people
are called: 1. From blindeness into light.


First therefore, Gods calling is from a state of blindeness and ignorance,
into mavelous and wonderful light: As if a man in a dark dungeon, where there
was not the least beam of light, should be called out of that to the glorious
Sun: Ye were once darkness, but now are ye light, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.
8. yea, its called Mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. for the wonderful glory and
excellency of it: A man without this holy calling, is like hell it self, a
place of utter darkness. Now the call of God brings a twofold light with it, as
you heard; one external, inlightning all without us; and the other internal,
inlightning the mind and soul of a man.

In darkness there is, first, Danger of stumbling and fall; a man knows not
where he goes: Thus, while not effectually called, men are ready to fall into
hell every step they take; they see not the hell that is open to devour them,
they do they know not what. And

Secondly, In darkness There is great uncomfortableness: The Scripture
expresses misery, and gloomy calamities, under the name of Darkness; and
certainly the life of every unconverted man, is a very uncomfortable life; for
though he may have carnal, transient pleasures, like the blaze of thorns, yet
he has no enduring joy: The very name of death and a day of judgment, is like
Belshazzars Handwriting on the wall to him, it puts him into trembling and
quaking: But this effectual calling of God, has the contrary to these, its
directive to a man's steps; he knows how to live, how to dye; he knows how
to abound, how to want: The word of God being his Counselor, gives him wise,
safe, and holy counsel; and hereupon he is never confounded, he is never fallen
into the pit, unless when he forsakes this light: And then for the second
effect of comfort, they are called To rejoice, and again to rejoice, Phil. 3.
1. they are called To peace with God, Phil 4. 4. to serenity in their own
consciences, like the upper Religion that is not disturbed by any Meteors;
insomuch, that it is both a sin, and a great dishonor unto our holy calling,
for a godly man to live in discouragements and dejections: Its as if there were
not that comfort, that happiness, that joy in possessing of God, as the
Scripture informs us.

Secondly, We are called from a way of profaneness and ungodliness, to live 2.
From ungodly to holy lives.
pure and holy lives: Thus the Apostle, God has not called us to uncleanness,
but unto holiness, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7. By Uncleanness, he means any gross sins;
insomuch, that none can conclude he is partaker of this Divine Calling, that
still walloweth in the filthy lusts of sin. Oh then what terror should this
strike into every profane man! If I am thus ungodly, I am not effectually
called; if not called, I cannot be justified, I cannot be glorified: How then
dare I live as I do? has God called me to live like a beast? is it not said,
That we are Saints by calling, not wicked and ungodly by calling? Oh shame and
confound thy soul; saying, Where has God called thee to lie, to swear, to be
proud, covetous? it cannot be lamented enough, to see how Christians forget the
nature of their Holy Calling: Fasten and fix this meditation upon your hearts;
how does this wickedness and dissoluteness of mine, consist with my calling?
The Apostle exhorts, That they would walk worthy of their vocation, Ephesians. 4.
1. do actions beseeming such an holy, heavenly privilege; therefore thou
should always reflect on thy self, saying, How does this agree with my
calling? how does this become my calling? A man grown up to years, will not
still use his childish tricks, he says, it becomes not his gravity; how much
rather may thou say, Such follies, lusts, do not become my Christianity?
This is to make my self a monster, and spiritually deformed.

Thirdly, Gods call is from all our former ways of idolatry, superstition, or
false 3. From false worship to true.
worship, to the pure and commanded worship of God: All men by nature are said
To walk according to the course of this world, Ephesians. 2. 2. but the godly are
converted from serving their dumb Idols: Thus Abraham, God calls him from his
own Land, a place of idolatry, to serve him. Gods people are called To come out
of Egypt and Babylon, that they might worship him according to his own way: The
Churches name is Ecclesia, A company called together to serve and worship God;
now who shall prescribe that worship, but God himself? not the servants, but
the master of the house, must set down the orders to be kept therein; so that
the pure and spiritual worshipping of God, is one main end of our calling; for
God would have a select company out of the world, who should own him, give up
themselves to him, and glorify him, which is manifestly done by a sincere,
pure worshipping of him: Its strange therefore that people should be no more
inquisitive about Gods pure worship, wherein it consists; not to dote upon, or
affect customs and traditions of worship, but to look for the institution and
command of God.

Fourthly, Its a call out of the world, and all things therein, to the
enjoyment 4. Out of the world, to enjoy God.
of God, and applying our selves only to him: And herein lies the excellency
of this call. All the world lies in wickedness, their principles, actions and
ends are all wicked; now God calls us out of this Sodom, out of this Egyptian
darkness, to enjoy him. Hence pure Religion is said to be, In keeping a man
unspotted from the world, James 1. 27. that expression denotes, That the world,
and worldly things are like pitch, there is a readiness to defile, to pollute;
and a godly man labors to keep his garments clean: So the Apostle exhorts, That
we should not be conformed to the fashion of the world, but transformed through
the renewing of the mind, that we may know what is the good and acceptable
will of God, Romans 12 2. And thus the world and the Church are two distinct,
opposite things; its therefore defined to be Coetus evocatorum, A company
called out of the world: Though we be men made of the earth, yet our Christian
being is by a Divine call and power: As precious stones, though their materials
are of the earth, yet the precious nature they have, is only from the heavens;
as the clouds, though they be vapors arising from the earth, yet they fly up to
heaven, and follow the motions thereof: So it is here, The people of God,
though consisting of flesh and blood, and living an animal life, as others, yet
they have a spiritual life; insomuch, that though they live in the world, yet
they are not of the world: So that our calling is not only from gross foul
sins, but also from immoderate and inordinate affections, even to lawful
things; called therefore An heavenly calling, because its from heaven, and
lifts up to heaven. Hence the godly have their conversation in heaven, Phil.
3. 20. heaven, and not the world, is that Corporation and City they are of;
they live by the Laws of heaven, not the world; their comforts are heavenly
comforts, not earthly; their privileges are heavenly privileges, not worldly.
Art thou effectually called? herein it will discover it self, if thy heart and
affections be set on heavenly things, where God and Christ are, who are the
beloved of thy soul: Its not enough to cast off all the noisome rags and
menstrous clothes of impiety, but to throw away all burdens, and any heavy
weight that may hinder thee in thy race to heaven: The Apostle supposes this,
when he prescribes us such a spare diet upon these things: They that marry,
must be as if they married not, 1 Cor. 7. so they that buy, and have the world:
God has called you to look upwards; and as man cannot at the same time look
with one eye up to heaven, and another toward the earth; so neither can a man
have his heart toward God, and also toward the world: Live not then, as if
thy soul were made of dust, as well as thy body, as if thou were a worm in this
sense; for feeding on the earth, as well as for contemptibleness: The Devil
feeding on the dust of the earth, is the Devil possessing earthly men.
Consider, that God has called you to enjoy himself, to be made one with
Christ, and to have communion and fellowship with him: Oh how should this sun
put out the stars; this Manna, that Garlike.

Fifthly, This calling is from a state of quietness and security in the world,
to a 5. From a state of quietness, to a state of affliction.
state of trouble and affliction: The very calling of a Christian, is
accompanied with many oppositions and sufferings, which formerly he was not
used unto; and herein our Savior dealt very faithfully, when he invited men to
come unto him, He bid them prepare for the cross, for all evil-intreating in
the world: The world loves his own, but it will hate those that are Christ's;
and again, He that will be his disciple, must take up his cross, and follow
him; this Christ admonishes aforehand: That as the Devil inticeth by the
present pleasures, but concealeth the future miseries; Christ does take a
contrary way, he reveals the future glory and happiness, but does also
instruct them concerning the present afflictions and troubles they shall have
in this world; so then, sad and grievous exercises they must look for: The
Apostle Peter speaks excellently to this purpose, 1 Pet. 2. where laying down
admirable directions about sufferings, that it must not be for any fault or
imprudence in our selves, but merely out of conscience to God, so that we
suffer wrongfully in all we suffer; he tells them, This is acceptable unto God;
And hereunto we are called; observe that, to unjust and wrongful sufferings he
is called: The Scripture uses an equivalent phrase, Hereunto you were
appointed; yea, God from all eternity did predestinate us to be conformable
unto Christ in his sufferings; therefore as our Savior says, Let every one
that sets out against the world and the Devil in Christ's name, that will take
up his profession, let him first consider, what he can do; Can he leave all,
forsake all, deny all, and part with every dearly beloved object for Christ's
sake? then he may take much comfort: The Hypocrite, the temporary Believer; he
proves an unfaithful Apostate, because of this, he did not forecast what he
should do, when the scorching heat of the Sun should arise; and this made our
Savior even refuse the offer, that some tendered to be Disciples, following of
him, because he knew what unsted fastness and unfaithfulness was in their
heart. Now as this has some disheartning in it, that while we lived slaves to
our lusts, all things were quiet, and we lived secure lives; but since we gave
up our selves to God, every thing has risen up against us, we have procured an
universal odium: I say, though this may discourage, yet in that the Scripture
says, we are called to it, it denotes, That these things come by the gracious
providence of a merciful father; and that where he calls, he gives also
strength and proportionable abilities: so that the very expression, To be
called to trouble in this world, has much sweetness. and hopeful encouragement
in it. And

Lastly, This holy calling is from a state of danger and misery, to a state of
blessedness 6. From an estate of misery, to a state of blessedness.
and happiness: God does not only call us out of the sinfulnes of the world, but
also all that wrath and vengeance which is prepared for men of the world. As
Lot, you heard, was called out of Sodom, or as Noah was called into the Ark,
when the waves of water did overwhelm others: Thus God he calls his people from
that fire and brimstone, and from that deluge of fury, which is to fall upon
others: so some make this expression of calling to be a metaphor or allusion,
to one that calls such a man to come out of an house, when the main pillars
are ready to break in pieces. Oh then, never think much to be called out of
this Egypt, this Babylon; for its Gods mercy to thee, when thou shall see the
beams fall upon others, the fire and brimstone burn others, and thou escape;
this must needs fill thee with much astonishment and joy: Stand not then
consulting, How shall I part with these pleasures, these profits? How shall I
depart from the custom of evil doing? for its a mercy to be snatched from them:
Oh say rather, How can I endure those everlasting burnings?

In the next place, let us consider, what Epithets or Properties the Scripture
gives this calling. And What Epithets or Properties the Scripture gives this
calling. 1.


First, Its a calling according to his purpose, and his good pleasure, as here
in this Chapter: And this denotes, That God does not foresee any merit, or any
motive in us, but its merely of his pleasure; therefore its in the passive
sense, we are called, viz. By God; its never said, We call our selves; and
withal, it being a calling according to Gods purpose, it supposes the sure and
powerful efficacy of it: God cannot be disappointed in his purpose, The counsel
of the Lord will stand; so that all this debaseth man, makes him an impotent
and undone man to all eternity, if God help not: Oh then let this take thee up,
as it were, into the third heavens, let it mightily rejoice thy heart, who has
had this compassion and pity on thee: Alas! God from all eternity had a purpose
to be thus gracious unto thee; when thou had no being at all, long before the
foundations of the world were laid, God had thoughts of love and kindeness to
thee, when thou could not desire or beg for such a mercy: Its no wonder that
Paul does often run out in large expressions concerning Gods Love, his
Predestination from all eternity, when he has occasion to praise God for the
calling and conversion of any in time; for this is to trace the stream, till we
find the wellhead: This is, as it was with Ezekiels waters, to go from waters
that rise up to the ankle, at last to that which will cover the head: What can
then be able to discourage the heart of a godly man? what can disquiet? Here is
a Catholicon for all diseases: Art thou afflicted? God has called thee from
all eternity? Art thou despised by men? God esteemed of thee from the beginning
of the world.

Secondly, Its an holy calling* This is a frequent adjective; so that there is
nothing in this calling, but what comes from an holy God: The matter of it 2.
is holy, and the end altogether holy; insomuch, that all profane, ungodly men
should blush to own this profession: Thou art called to be a Saint, to be in
the world, as a bright star in a dark night; But, is to be proud, covetous,
profane, malicious? is this to be a Saint? Oh how should our bowels roll
within us, to see how God is dishonored, his Laws are broken, and that by
those, who glory in the call of a Christian! Oh let not such gross sins be any
more practiced or named among you! As in the Temple, every vessel was holy, so
every part of thy soul and body shall be holy; an holy mind, holy thoughts,
holy affections, holy eyes an holy tongue, an holy body: Thy calling being thus
an holy calling, all within thee, and all that flows from thee, should also
be holy.

Thirdly, Its an heavenly calling: Whether you do regard the efficient cause, 3.
God from heaven calls to these dry bones to live; if the matter of it, it is
to be heavenly in our conversations; to go through this world as pilgrims, to
be as the fowls of the heaven, which though they pitch upon the ground for
their food, yet they presently fly up to heaven: The privileges are heavenly,
pardon of sin, assurance of Gods favor, increase in grace, communion with God,
and enjoying of God in heaven for ever. We see how David prized being son in
Law to a King: There are callings to great outward glory in this world; but God
vouchsafes a greater mercy to those who have this heavenly calling.

Fourthly, Its an high calling, Phil. 3. 14. The Apostle there compares
himself 4.
in the progress of Christianity, to one striving and running in a race; there
should be no dullness no wearisomness in this way: now as in those race, they
who judged sat in an high place, and by an Herald called out every man to run;
so he says, God from heaven calls out every man to make haste in this way of
godliness; so that thou art to hear him from heaven, calling thee to press
forward, to think nothing is yet done, as long as so much remains behind;
and if they were so earnest for a corruptible crown, how much rather should we
for an incorruptible?

Lastly, Its a calling dispensod in a very contrary way to humane expectation;
which makes that Doctrine of Congrua vocatio to fall to the ground: You see 5.
your calling (says Paul) not many wise, not many noble are called, but he
has called the foolish ana w^ak things of the world, to confound the wise:
Herein God 1 Cor. 1. 26.
has manifested his dreadful power, and glorious wisdom; It has not been of
him that runs, or wills, but of him that calls, that so there might be
no glorying or boasting in the arm of flesh: If you consider who they are that
God has called in all ages, they have not been the learned men, the great men,
the wise men of the world, but the poor and the contemptible; some, indeed,
there have been, therefore he says, Not many, which implies some: Julian
objected against the Christian Religion, That they were Maids and Nurses, and
Eunuchs, and such contemptible persons that were Christians; not considering
that God does not call according to outward appearance.

Use of Admonition; Let all those particular terms from which, and to which in
this calling, be so many vehement motives and strong goads to obey this call.
Does God call thee to thy loss? Does he offer thee any wrong, when he invites
thee? He calls thee from a dungeon to a Palace, from hell to Heaven, from
slavery to liberty, and yet will thou refuse? Oh thou art a man of no reason,
no consideration, no faith, else thy heart would echo presently to Gods Call!
Oh consider that as God has this gracious call inviting thee; so he has
dreadful terrible calls for those that refuse him! The Scripture tells of Gods
calling for a Famine, of his calling for a Sword; God calls for Judgments as
well as for Mercies; He that calls thee now graciously, will one day call to the
devils to torment, to the flames of hell eternally to scorch thee.

SERMON CII.
Contains some choice Properties or Effects that accompany Effectual Vocation,
whereby men may examine and try themselves whether they be so called or no.

ROMANS 8. 10. Whom he has predestined, those he has called.
I Shall conclude this Text with an instance of some choice properties or
effects that do accompany this calling. For seeing to such only belong
Predestination, Justification and Glorification, Our life and eternal happiness
lies in this, to he found in the number of these called ones. Our Savior told
the Disciples, That they should not rejoice in that they wrought miracles, that
the devils were subject to them, but rather that their names were written in
the book of life, Luke 10. 20. Much less then may men rejoice in being rich,
honored and blessed in this world, if they be not also called to grace and
glory. The former are good things of this life only, the later of the life to
come.

First then, Would thou know whether thou art inwardly called, as well as
outwardly, 1.
then examine thy self in thy real answer and obedience to it; For to be called
according to Gods purpose, is to have the event accompanying it. God no sooner
calls but they hear. What God bids them do they do, what God bids them forsake
they forsake. Oh but to how many do the Prophets stretch out their arms in
vain! To what deaf men do we call? In what a Babel and confusion has sin
cast men, they are commanded to live holily, but oh the profaneness! God calls
them to purity, but oh the uncleanness! Thus in stead of answering, there is
the contrary disobedience, God looks for grapes, and behold wild grapes. Think
not then it can be well with thee, that there are any hopes of thy
Justification o^ Glorification, as long as thou stoppest the ear against Gods
call: if effectually ^^lled, thou would cry out, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears; when God gave Abraham a call and command to sacr fice his only Son,
he rises early in the morning, and can lay his kinfe to the very throat of his
only child; Even thus when God commands thee to mortify such a sin, to
crucify such a lust, spare it not, kill it, else it will kill thee, it will
damn thee; now the effectually called person, he gets up betimes, he lays his
knife to the throat of his dearest lusts, and now he hates this Tamar more then
ever he loved her: Oh, he cries out, I must either part with God or sin, I
must either leave Christ or this lust, I cannot keep them both together, and
then with much zeal and detestation, he casts away his beloved transgressions,
God then cares not for thy formalities, thy complements, thy duties, but is
thy obedience ready? God calls thee to love him, to hate sin; Is this command
obeyed? Obedience is better then Sacrifice: Did thou obey God in giving over
thy swearing, thy drunkenness, thy lusts; This would be more acceptable then
ten thousand Sacrifices, or outward duties of Religion. Even the very inanimate
creatures have obeyed when called upon, as when the Prophet cried, O Altar,
Altar, hear the word of the Lord, and it rent in pieces; but thou continuest
obstinate.

Secondly, The effectually called, they do carefully observe and watch against
all those contrary calls, that would turn them out of the way: For you must know
as 2.
God has his voice calling; so sin and the devil they have their sweet
Syrenian Songs; They have their calls also, one calls one way, the other a
contrary way. Solomon tells us of wisdom, that is, Godliness uttering her voice
in the streets, crying aloud, Pro. 1. 7. To the simple and unwise that they get
understanding: and then again he tells us of the whorish woman, as diligent to
call in the simple man that passes by, to defile himself. Our Savior bids us
Be wise as Serpents, Mat. 11. 16. Now as he stops his ear that he may not
hear the charmers, though charming never so wisely, because it is for his
destruction; so much rather ought we to close up the ear against all those
sweet allurements of sin, and temptations thereunto: Ulysses his companions
were all turned into beasts, (as they feigned) because they would drink of
those enticing cups, and hearken to the Syrenian Songs. And therefore men are
degenerated into all lusts and beastliness, because they hearken to sense, to
lusts, they attend to their call and cry. As Eve giving ear to the Serpent, and
not refusing him at first, was immediately destroyed; now then the truly called
ones, they stop the ear against the world, against carnal wisdom, and hearken
only what God says, what the Scripture says. It is many times the profession
of a Christian; Oh if I could but know when God calls to me! If I could but
understand his will what he would have me to do, then I would run after him;
now there is no such way to find out God calling of thee, as to bid all carnal
reasonings, all fleshly consultations stand aloof off. If a man would see the
true representation of his face in a glass; he must wipe off all the dust and
filth, and so if thou would discern Gods calling of thee from all other false
calls, be sure that earthly considerations be not laid in the scale: Thus Paul
refused that consulration which flesh and blood proffered him, Gal. 1. 16. and
so Christ bid Peter, Depart for he was a Satan to him, Mat, 8. 33. an adversary
to him.

Thirdly, He that is effectually called, is careful to walk in a worthy and
beseeming 3.
manner of it. I beseech you, says Paul, that you walk worthy of your calling,
Ephesians. 4. 1. Every man in any condition or estate, is to look to the (...) quod
decet, what is fitting and becoming him. Those actions are beseeming a child
which are not an old man; men of better breeding have a suitable deportment: And
thus it is in Christianity, Thy holy and heavenly calling should raise up thy
spirits, ennoble thy conversation. As Nehemiah argued from the office and trust
that was committed to him, Shall such a man as I flee? Thou should then
consider, Shall such an one as I tumble and wallow in the mire? Shall I that
have such an holy and heavenly calling, live like a beast? I here is nothing
should so confound and a shame a man for all sinful and ungodly ways, as that
they are not suitable unto, nor worthy of his calling. Michal did in a sinful
way despise David in her heart, when she saw him dancing before the Ark, Thou
have made thy self (says she, 2 Samuel 6.) like one of the vile fellows this
day; like one of the base ones of the world. She did this maliciously; but thou
may truly say to thy soul, when overcome with unruly passions, inordinate
affections; Thou have made thy self like the vilest of men to day. Do then
things that are beseeming your calling, that are a grace to it, that may bring
an honor and a glory to it in the eyes of the world. Shall the Sun send forth
no more light then the dunghill? Shall a Rose smell no sweeter then a noisome
weed? Dead Flies are not fit to fall in a box of ointment. As Jacob said of his
two sons, when they had committed such outrageous wickedness on the
Sichemites, You have made me to stink before the inhabitants of the Land. Thus
also may thou say to all unmortified affections, uncrucified lusts, You have
made me to stink, to be loathsome and abominable before God. Therefore above
all things look to this, that your conversation be as becomes this heavenly
calling, you may not live as you list, walk as you please, make your lusts and
your pleasures a rule to walk by; but consider what you are called to.

Fourthly, He that is effectually called, does always desire to go after Gods
calling of him: For as in Philosophy, we are nourished by those things we at
first consist 4.
of, Thus it is here. By what means at first we come to be holy, to be godly,
viz by Gods calling of us, we did not hearken to other calls. So it is still in
our progress. God still calls us by his Word to every duty, to avoid every
sin, and herein we follow God. Oh it is admirable wisdom in all things to
consider what call we have! Those servants are blamed for their rashness, and
not commended for their forwardnes, who come or go before they are called,
before they have their errand. Ps. 25. 9. The upright he will teach and guide
in his way, Ps. 32. 8. And so David, Thou will guide me with thy eye: As a
father by his eye does signify what he would have his son to do; so it is
here, God does by his Word either particularly or generally give him a call to
every action or condition. And he that was at first wrought upon by Gods
calling, does still look after this Star to guide him. He that undertaketh
any thing, does any thing without Gods calling, does as the devil tempted our
Savior, Set himself upon a pinnacle, and throw himself headlong. For this is
the only support and encouragement under any assaults, that all is done in
obedience to Gods calling us. Thus Moses, Isaiah, David, Jeremiah and Paul,
with many others, could never have conflicted with all the difficulties they
did, had not this calling of God supported them; so then as at the first our
spiritual life came by a divine calling, thus the progress also is by Gods
calling; we do not iutrude our selves, we go not before we have a command, we
hearken to what God will say; and hence it is that the devil does so
industriously imitate the voice of God; Even as the beast Hyena imitates the
voice of the Shepherd to destroy the sheep; he pretends revelations from God,
he brings forcible interpretations of Scripture; so great a matter is it
especially in doubtful things, and where the Scripture has only general
rules, and not particular determinations, to distinguish the voice of God from
the voice of Satan, or our own desires. How many are apt to take the dictates
and desires of their own spirits for the voice of God! As the old Prophet
counterfeited a voice and call of God contrary to what the other Prophet had
received, and thereby seduced him: It is then a sure and good sign of a called
person, in all matters, specially of great concernment, to regard Gods calling,
whether it be to do or to suffer: whereas wicked men they never attend to Gods
directing of them, Gods guiding of them, never pray about this, or study and
meditate about this, but as their lusts and profits carry them, so they run
headlong.

Fifthly, He that is effectually called is greatly thankful even to
astonishment 5.
and ravishment, for this high mercy vouchsafed to him. The grace of the Gospel
wheresoever it does powerfully work, does so soften and melt the heart, that
praise and thankfulness is the great duty he studies; Oh how shall I be
thankful! and the Lord enlarge my heart to praise him! What am I that God
should call me! Oh, Why is my Soul so barren, so straightened! Why do I not
run all over? Why does not my heart boil within me? Thus a man partaker of
this heavenly calling is affected; See the Apostles aggravation of Gods mercy
herein, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who has called us with an holy calling, not according to
our works, but according (...) his own purpose and grace. The Apostle melts
himself into ravishing thoughts about this, The God that needed me not, yea the
God that was so greatly offended, and provoked by me, he out of his free grace
calls me from sin and danger, from all that eternal wrath I was obnoxious
unto; and therefore Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and let all within thee bless
his holy name. You may observe the Apostle Paul's disposition, when he has
occasion to speak of Gods converting and calling us out of the former lusts of
sin he lived in, he is so transported that he never satisfies himself with a
thankful remembrance thereof; Wherein men are affected, and what they account
extraordinary mercies, there they will always be speaking; Their Meditations
are sweet and burning about it. So that it is a sure sign thou wast never yet
effectually called, if thy soul many times break not out with joy and
thanksgiving herein. Shall outward mercies, safety, wealth, honors, so work
upon thee, as we see they did on Haman, and shall it not much more prevail with
thee to be called to be Gods friend, and Gods favorite? How should all the
afflictions and discouragements in the world be easily subdued, when this
consideration prevails with thee!

Sixthly, He that is thus called according to Gods purpose, he is careful not
to apostatize or to go back again into that course of sin and wickedness, out
of which he was 6.
called. As a man called out of fetters, and a dark dungeon, by all means takes
heed that he be not thrown in there again. The Israelites were called only
bodily out of Egypt, not in their affections and heart, when they so desired
to make themselves a Captain, and to return thither again; yea when they
loathed that admirable Manna, and desired their former Onyons again: Oh it is a
sign thou wast never powerfully called! who for a time indeed have given over
thy beastly lusts, wilt commit them no more, but not long after do return to
the practice of them again; This makes it worse with thee then if thou had
never begun to cleanse thy self. Our Savior has a notable Parable to this
purpose, of a man out of whom a devil was cast, but he returned again, and
brought seven worse with him. Mat. 12. 45. Oh look to this then you who
formerly have given some hopes of being called, you heard a voice within you,
saying, Do no more such abominable things. You begun to pray, to weep, to be
greatly affected; oh the conflicts that your souls formerly felt, but now all
streams are dried up, you are as barren, as profane as ever! Know to thy
terror and trembling, thou have cause to examine whether the mighty power of
God has not yet called thee. No man that puts his hand to the plough and
looks back is sit for the kingdom of Heaven: Our Savior did always attend
to this, to lay such principles in those that would be his Disciples, that they
might never revolt: Therefore he told them of the worst before hand, and daily
instructed them about the danger of not persevering: He that is truly called
does stand immoveably like a rock, Like Mount Sion that cannot be removed; and
indeed there is great reason for it, Can he be better then he is? Does not God
make up all things to him? Are his former lusts and the pleasures he took in
them equal to God, and the enjoyment of him? Was there not bitterness and gall
even in the sweetest honey of any of his sins? But at Gods right hand there are
rivers of pleasure for evermore.

Lastly, He that is thus called does keep up his heat, and comfort himself with
that hope of eternal life, and glory to which he is called. Hence Paul says,
He presses forward for the mark of his high calling. As a man in a race
attends not to any Phil. 3.
directions, but fixes his eye upon the crown that he runs for. Thus Paul
did, No earthly or worldly temptations do hinder him; but his heart, his
thoughts, his affections are set upon that eternal glory: Therefore we are said
to be called to this hope. A man never has true hopes till he be thus called.
Alas, What becomes of wicked men's hopes? they place their hopes in outward
greatness, in outward power, in outward glory; now these perish like the
grass of the field: When Death comes, when Judgment comes, then all his hopes
perish: but the righteous has hope in his death; and it is a lively hope,
death and the grave cannot quell it. We say, If it were not for hope the heart
would break; but what hope have thou who live in thy sins, not forsaking of
them? Will the world, will thy lusts, thy carnal friends be any longer a
comfort to thee? Oh it is much that every wicked man does not tear himself, and
roar out with horror, I have no hope! God is offended, Christ did not give
himself for such as I am, living in, and loving of my sins. Till I come out of
this estate, there is laid up no hope for me. Go then and conclude with thy
self, I have no hope as yet but about worldly things: Oh miserable man that I
am! There is but a step between me and death, between me and hell, and yet I
look not out; but when thou art called, then thy hopes will surely be
established.

Use of Exhortation. Are the called of God thus qualified? then what matter Use.
of Lamentation is here, to see so few such among the number of those that are
outwardly called? Where is the man of whom we may pronounce all these things,
that he readily obeys, that he honors this calling. that he desires to follow
God in all things? Who is the man that does this? Now the truth is, the
tempations of sin and the world, they call so violently, so pleasingly the
contrary way, that it is no wonder if so few follow God. But to persuade you to
refuse these Dalilahs always tempting of you,

Consider first, What sin and the world calls you to, ^s i^ not to those ways
that end in death, in hell? You will see your folly, when you find it too
late, when the arrows of Gods anger have darted through your Liver and Heart,
then you will howl and cry out; Oh how have our sins deceived us! Even as Ja^l
called in Sisera to her house, Come in my Lord, Come in my Lord, but it was his
death. Do then any lusts call to thee and invite thee? say, Whether will these
lead me? Whether will they carry me?

2. Consider these pleasures of sin that invite thee, they are but for a
moment, they are but a blaze, though they may tickle for a while, yet the smart
and torment will endure for ever. O Atheists, if we believe not these things!
And oh fools and mad men, if when we do believe them, we labor not to escape
them! As Saul spoke about David, Can the son of Jesse (says he) make you great
or honored. why then do you follow him? Oh remember, Can the devil, can the
world make you for ever blessed? Can they put on robes of glory? Does not God
only these things for them that obey him calling?

SERMON CIII.
Stirring up to serious and fixed Meditations upon this Calling, in respect of
the manner and time of it, and the persons called.

1 COR. 1. 26. For ye see your Calling (Brethren) how that not many wise men
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, etc.
THe Apostle at the 18. Verse, begins an excellent discourse about the manner
and way which God takes to convert and save men; for whereas the eye of reason
does look for some Wise, Eloquent, and Externally glorious manner; the Apostle
shows, that God takes the clean contrary way, by that admirable position,
verse 26. to be engraven on all our hearts, and which is of daily use, both in
Religious and Civil Affairs, The foolishness of God is wiser then men; and the
weakness of God stronger then men; the Apostle calls the foolishness and
weakness of God, that which in humane thoughts and respects is so: Now he
considers, that the things of God, which have this outward despicable
appearance, yet have glorious operations; whereupon the Apostle amplifieth this
transcendent method of God, as in the manner of preaching the Gospel, so in the
persons that are converted thereby, in the Text read: where First, we have the
introduction to observe. Secondly, The matter to be considered. The
introduction, For ye see your calling; some read it imperatively, See and take
notice of your calling; which way soever you take it, it amounts to this, That
Gods calling of men from a state of sin, to grace, is like Ezekiels waters,
that rise up higher and higher; we may still take notice of some more excellent
and admirable aggravations in it: The looking upon the Creation, and
considering of the Creatures, it may justly stir up men to glorify the Wisdom
and power of God: But this much more; and that which the Apostle does
especially take notice of in this Text is, the persons whom he has called, and
they are described, first, Negatively, then Positively. Negatively, Not many
wise, not many mighty, not many noble; where he does not absolutely deny, no
wise, no mighty, no great ones; for examples in Scripture are recorded, of some
few such, but not many: This is a serious consideration, to shame and confound
all flesh; Who do not look upon these things, as making men happy and glorious?
but God overlooketh them all. Now to fix us the more upon this consideration,
he illustrates it on the contrary, God has chosen foolish and weak, and base
things in the world: The Apostle in this Argument, makes calling and choosing
all one, because they necessarily agree, as the cause and effect together,
Election and efficacious calling follow one another. Lastly, the Apostle
instructs us about the end of Gods dispensation in all these things; and that
is twofold; 1. To confound the wise, and to bring to naught the mighty things
that are. 2. Which is a consequent of the former, That no flesh should glory in
his presence; that none may say, It was his power, wisdom, or any humane
excellency that did thus advance him, but Gods grace only. Let us first
consider the introduction, You see, or, See your calling: And observe,

That Gods calling of us, is worthy of many serious and fixed meditations.

Its like Tapestry folded up, which when opened, makes a glorious show. If
Observe.
the Queen of Sheba had her spirit faint within her, with admiration of
Solomon's wisdom, how much rather may we, in beholding of the wisdom and
goodness of God herein? Our Savior says, The kingdom of heaven comes not by
observation, Luke. 17. 10. that is, the excellent works of grace, which are the
Kingdom of Heaven; and the Gospel, which is the instrument of these; they come
not as In respect of the invisibility of it.
great Kings and Emperors to a place, with a great deal of pomp and
ostentation, to say, Here it comes, and there it goes; but it is after a
spiritual and invisible manner; even as the wind, which seems to be nothing,
we cannot see it with the eye, or feel it with the hand, yet it has mighty and
powerful operations: As it was with Christ himself, he was in a despicable
form, a worm and no man, accounted amongst the wicked, when yet he was at the
same time a glorious and infinite God; but yet because of that outward
appearance, they despised him, Is not this the Carpenters Son; And he was
accounted of no reputation: Even so it is with the called ones of God, they are
such that the world despises, contemns, the learned ones and great ones of
the world, they do none of these things; not considering what rich jewels are
in these course Cabinets: So that as our Savior says, Blessed is he that is
not offended at me; so also, blessed is he that is not offended at the way and
manner of Gods calling: But now let us go into this Temple, and behold the
wonderful works of God. And

First, The grace of God it self in calling any, though never so few, is with
heart and mouth to be always acknowledged: God who had his only 1.
son to delight in, and millions of Angels to serve him, that he should call
thee so poor, so weak, so inconsiderable, this should set thee upon the very
pinnacle of admiration. How often do you see Paul gathering up this manna, and
every day, like a true spiritual Dives, he fares deliciously upon comfortable
meditations, sometimes the grace of God, sometimes the riches of his grace,
sometimes the unsearchable riches of his grace: Oh how unexcusable are the
people of God for their unthankfulness, dullness, and unbelief in this
particular! They are not affected to ravishment with the grace of God calling
them, they do not aggravate every meditation, they do not set home every thing
that may make their souls run over, to make them say, O Lord, my heart suffers
violence within me, I can hold no longer; thy love, thy grace in calling me,
does even overwhelm me.

Secondly, The time and season when God calls his people, deserves meditation:
Not only mercies themselves, but the times and seasons of them, are wisely
ordered 2. Meditate of the time and seoson when God calls.
by God: Some God calls in the morning, some in the noon, some in the evening
of their age: And to every one, this grace of God has its full matter of
consideration; he that is called betimes, he may consider Gods goodness to him
so early, that God thought on him so quickly; he might have gone on and
provoked God, carrying guilt and a sadded conscience, even to the very grave:
He hears others cry out, O Lord, it troubles me I loved thee no sooner; Oh
how much time have I lost! how shall I recover and redeem those lost hours, and
lost days? but as for thee, God instructed thee betimes to take heed of sin: He
that is called at the latter end of his days, having the guilt of many sins
upon him, he also may be quickened to glorify God, that he would not despise
him for all his rebellions, that he would not remember all his unkindenesses,
that such a long and old enemy of his should be taken into favor: yea, at that
very time when they have been in full pursuit of their lusts, has God called
them, as it was with Paul, yea, and is to every man; When, Lord, I was thinking
and working evil against thee, thou wast preparing good for me; when I, Lord,
had no delight, but in my lusts, and those things that did grieve thy spirit,
even then thy thoughts of kindeness were to me: Oh think on these things! what,
is there nothing but your children, your husbands, your wives, your temporal
mercies to be delighted in? Yes, that grace of God calling thee should possess
thy whole man.

Thirdly, The persons whom God calls: They afford many considerations; As 3.
The persons God cal^ls. I, The meanest.


First, They are the meanest in outward condition: If you read the Evangelists,
you shall find, that the greatest part of persons called, were of no pomp, no
noise or fame in the world: Though the material Temple was built of precious
stone, and excellent wood, and adorned with gold, whereby it was the
magnificentest wonder in the world; yet there is no such beauty in the
spiritual Temple of God, in his Church and children: This has always been
objected against the ways of Christ. Julian objected it, the Papists objected
it against our Martyrs, that suffered by their cruel violence: Now God has
delighted to take such a way, not only in heavenly things, but even in the
Government of the world, he has many times showed such remarkable passages:
Joseph a contemptible prisoner, has his irons taken off, and he is admitted to
the greatest honor in the Land: Moses, from what contemptible originals, did he
arise to be the chief Governor of the people; and thus David also! So that as
God to make himself glorious in the outward Government of the world, has
advanced men of no degree; thus he makes heirs to the incorruptible crown of
glory, men accounted as dung and offscouring of the world: Take heed then,
that as the Pharisees looked for a glorious Messiah, and that was their
stumbling block; so thou also look for the great, and rich, and mighty men of
the world, to be as they are, to live as they do, and that prove thy spiritual
undoing: Oh the wisdom and goodness of God! how unsearchable his ways? those
who have scarce clothes to cover their nakedness, shall have the crown of
glory, and the robes of immortality upon them; those who have scarce a cottage
to live in, shall be set on thrones of glory; those who are despised and
contemned by men, are highly prised by God, and loved by Angels: This honor
have all the Saints.

Secondly, Consider also, That the persons called, are many times the worst of
men, great and heinous sinners: As they are the meanest for their external
condition, II. The worst.
so the worst for their Moralities, that all the world may be convinced, and
say, It was not such a man's goodness, his ingenuity, his honest endeavors, his
willing desires, but God spoke unto him, while wallowing in hit blood, To live.
The Pharisees, who gloried in an external strictness, and knew no further then
an outward godliness, did upon this consideration, labor to defame Christ and
his Doctrine, that he kept company with publicans and sinners; as the
Israelites murmured that Moses married a Blackamoor, and as the contemptible
and vilest of men followed David; so it was a great stumbling block, that
Christ called great sinners to repentance, that he rejected the Pharisees, the
seeming glory of the world. Our Savior in many places he discovers, that
profane and open sinners, did sooner obtain the kingdom of heaven, then those
civil, moral men; and if you diligently eye Gods way, you shall find it still
true, That the rich he sends empty away, and the hungry he fills with good
things; that none are further from being effectually called, then such who say,
They are full, rich, and want nothing; their own righteousness, their own
goodness, their own self-sufficiency, is that which bears up their hearts;
and being thus whole in their own apprehensions, they seek out for no
physician: Oh its worthy of our serious consideration, to take notice of how
many thousands are forsaken and passed over by God, who are persuaded all is
well with them. Despairing men are but few to presuming men, they are like the
sands upon the sea shore; go from one man to another, and you shall find them
all contented in themselves; there are no groans for Christ, there are no
pantings for a Savior; there are no restless and unquiet complaints of the
soul, Oh who will ease me, who will cloth my nakedness, who will satisfy my
hungry soul! Oh that this truth might burn like fire; you that have the best
thoughts of your selves, are, it may be, in the worst condition; you that have
no trouble, deserve to have the greatest; you that eat, and drink, and live
without any inward checks of conscience, have the greatest cause to fear and
tremble: Oh think, God does not use to call such self-flatterers, such
self-righteous men as I am: Who is further from the Kingdom of heaven then I am?

Thirdly, God calls such men that have the least worldly abilities and
sufficiency; III. The foolishest
which besides their external meanness, makes them more contemptible; that the
Apostle means by the following phrase, Not many wise after the flesh; that
is, not such who are endued with Political wisdom in humane affairs; those that
have wisdom to rule and manage the affairs of this world, are many times very
ignorant fools about heavenly things: The children of this world are wiser in
their generation, then the children of light. said Christ, Luke 16. So that as
the Apostle says about preaching of the Gospel, We preach not the wisdom of
this world, so neither are those who are called, the wise men of this world: So
that as worldly politicians laugh at the plain simplicity of those who truly
fear God, and d^^e not sin against him for the greatest advantages in the
world; so on the other side, godly men may pity and bewail such wise and
conceited men, that can every way promote their own advantages in this life,
but yet are wholly ignorant about faith in Christ and repentance: Take the
choicest wits, and the profoundest understandings that are, about worldly
matters, and propound any thing about Regeneration, the work of Grace, and life
of Faith, the very babes in Christ will understand more, and give a better
account then they do.

Lastly, This is no mean thing to observe in Gods effectual calling, That he
IV. The fewest.
chooses the fewest number of mankind: As God has not chosen many wise, or
many great ones, so not many men, comparatively to those millions of men, that
he lets alone in the dungeon of their dark lusts: And truly this matter is full
of terror, we have cause to tremble while we think of it, that such a little
flock Christ should choose to himself; that the remnant of mankind that shall
be saved, should be no more then the remnant after an harvest or vintage: This
our Savior does often press as a truth, that has a sharp edge to enter into
every man's conscience; if any thing in the world may startle thee out of thy
security, it must be this, That few are chosen, God has effectually called but
a very little handful of men to eternal glory: You that make multitude an
argument for your evil ways, and think its good to say, The most do this, the
greatest part go this way: Oh the Scripture tells you, what will become of most
men; its not for us presumptuously to pry into the secret ways of God, neither
may we impudently expostulate, Why God should leave the greater part of
mankind, in their desperate and undone estate; it is enough for us to
acknowledge Gods sovereignty herein, with fear and trembling. So then, has God
called but few? how possible is it for thee to be none of that small number;
but eight persons were preserved in the Ark, when all others were drowned by
the overflowing waters: Thus we have cause to behold the manner of Gods
effectual calling of his people.

Use therefore of Exhortation, To take notice of the ways of God herein; Use.
it has been the Rock that many thousands have split themselves at, they have
not wisely considered of this: What is the reason so many presume of their
salvation, think its but putting out the hand, and they may when they will take
this crown of glory? Why do the greatest part of men eat and drink in security,
blessing themselves, saying, If death comes, if sickness comes, it shall go
well with them; all is from this, they consider not that, that God calls but a
few, the greater part of men will be damned: This should make thy heart quake
for fear; its the Scripture truth, not our Scarecrow, you do not love to hear
this spoken of; but Christ thought it fit to reveal it to the world, that the
very foundations thereof may shake. Again, what is the reason so many are
offended at the condition of godly men; that the ways of God are such a
stumbling block? They do not rightly consider of Gods calling, they look that
Christ's Kingdom should be of this world, they expect the wisdom of the world,
the greatness of the world, the wealth of the world; and God has determined a
clean contrary way. When John sent to Christ, to know whether he was the
Messiah or no, he returns this Answer, The blind are made to see, the lame
are healed, the poor receive the Gospel, and blessed is he that is not offended
at me. Prejudices and carnal cavils against godliness, are the destruction of
many thousands. Now it we will wisely consider of Gods calling his people out
of sin, we shall attain to these notable Instructions:

First, We shall never judge our selves happy by any external greatness; and
the Summum bonum, which humane wisdom pitched upon, will be found sometimes
Magnum malum, an hinderance of that which is the greatest good indeed; yet when
will the world be persuaded otherwise? How contrary are Gods thoughts to thy
thoughts? how opposite are thy apprehensions, to his purposes? He lays aside
the wise things, the great things, the glorious things of the world: Oh you,
that have these external advantages, fear they be not spiritual disadvantages!
Little cause there is to boast of these, if thou knew all; These are the
bunches in the Camels back, these are the snares to thy feet, the milstones
about thy neck: Be then afraid, and think, If I had been poor, and were
afflicted, I had been in a more hopeful condition. Disciples must follow
Christ, and they can best follow, who have the least burdens: Oh judge nothing
great outwardly, that may make thee little spiritually; count those things
cursed, that may hinder thee from being blessed.

Secondly, Give God the glory of all the grace and spiritual mercies that he
Use.
vouchsafes to thee; For who art thou, and in what to be accounted of, that
art called by God? did thy greatness procure it? thy goodness deserve it? does
not God all things, to stop the mouths of men, that there may be no boasting,
That none should glory in his presence? Humility and thankfulness is beseeming
a Christian called, nothing does so become him; For what has he that he has
not received? who has made him to differ from others, that hapl^ had not
sinned against God, so much as he has done? And therefore should God be
exalted, because this is his very end why he lays aside all humane glory,
that he himself may be magnified.

Thirdly, From hence learn, never to despise things, because outwardly weak
(...)
and vile, no rto be too confident, because they are great and potent; for you
see its Gods way, To make things that are not, to confound things that are;
dead things live, and live things dye; as God put back many of the Israelites,
when they went to war, they were too many. God in all his mercies, whether of
grace or civil things, delights to make himself only known, he will not have
his glory taken from him, and given to another: This gives hope in low things,
and fear in lofty things.

SERMON CIV.
Of true spiritual Wisdom, the Nature and Properties of it, discovering who are
the real wise men in the world.

1 COR. 1. 26. Not many wise according to the flesh.
THe passage introductory of the matter contained in the Text, has been
dispatched. Let us observe the particulars of the distribution, which the
Apostle here intends: And

First, There is that which is a Goddess, as it were, in the world, admired by
all; Not many wise men. Several Countries have heretofore striven about the
appropriating of the famous seven wise men to themselves; some striving to make
this man their Country man, others to make that: But here you see God passing
over such, and choosing the babes and foolish ones of the world: So that you
have the persons passed by, described, first, By their absolute quality, Not
many wise, 2. By a restriction or limitation of this wisdom, Not many wise men
after the fiesh. Now wisdom after the flesh may have a twofold sense; as flesh
has, 1. That which is earthly, corrupt, and sinful craftiness, which the
Scripture in many places speaks against. 2. For Humane civil prudence; as flesh
is sometimes used for man, denoting indeed weakness, because not God or Angel,
but not sinfulness: And this political civil prudence, is a natural perfection,
and a good gift of God; yea, its a duty, to which the people of God are
exhorted; but even of such political wise men, God does not choose many, though
some he does: Thus Solomon had such wisdom to admiration; and Daniel God
chooses some wise men
is noted for a wiseman, because Tire is reproved for her foolish confidence,
thinking her self wiser then Daniel, Ezekiel. 28. 3. and Heman, that made the
famous Psalm of one troubled and afflicted in conscience, distracted with the
terror of the Lord daily, 1 King. 4. 31. yet the Scripture speaks of him as one
of the great wise men in his time. We read of Achitophel, a man so politically
wise, that his counsel was accounted as the Oracle of God, yet he was rejected
by God, and his wisdom proved fatal to him; but of this more in time. For the
present consider, how the Apostle does imply a distinction of necessary use,
about wisdom, only he names one part of the distribution, A wisdom after the
flesh, the complete sense is this, There is an heavenly wisdom, a wisdom after
the spirit, highly esteemed by God, which all that are called do partake of:
And there is A wisdom after the flesh, in an earthly, carnal, and worldly
manner, when Of the wisdom of the flesh, and wisdom of the spirit.
men savor not the things of God, but what makes for their own advantages;
insomuch, that the Scripture sometimes describes them by this, That they are
wise to do evil, Ier. 4. 22. I purpose to speak something largely to this head;
for godliness is reputed of, as folly, madness, and simplicity; and fleshly or
crafty practices, or sublime and high reaches, these are judged the only
wisdom in the world. Let a man set upon the powerful way of godliness, let him
endeavor to walk uprightly, not conforming himself to the present course of the
world, he is presently branded for an unwise man; he immediately loses all
his reputation: As Tertullian said in his days, when a wise considerable man
turned Christian, they would say, Miror quod Cajus vir bonus and sapiens fit
Christianus, I wonder such a wise and prudent man will turn Christian.

Observation is that which is an employed Doctrine by the Apostle; Observe.


That there is an excellent, heavenly, and spiritual wisdom.

He that speaks of a wisdom after the flesh, necessarily supposes a wisdom of
a more excellent and admirable nature, even that which is after the spirit:
Though you call a man able to transact matters of great importance, who is
apprehensive of the times and seasons for all things to be done, a great wise
man; yet there is a wisdom far transcending all this; and that is, in heavenly
matters, to know how to walk in a pleasing way to God, and at last; to partake
of everlasting happiness by him: The Theme of wisdom has been often treated on
by the Heathen, but their eyes were upon this glorious subject, like those of
the Ba^s or the Owls to the resplendent Sun beams. Aristotle when he speaks
more strictly, makes wisdom to be the knowledge of more excellent and heavenly
things, with the causes of them; but at other times, he makes wisdom to be the
knowledge of any Arts or Sciences. But I shall speak of wisdom, as the
Scripture uses it: And

First, It is taken for original and substantial wisdom; and thus God is said
To be the only wise God, Romans 16. 27. Why art thou repining and discontented
at the hand of God, though never so heavy on thee? God is the only wise God;
none has wisdom but he? And thus Christ is often in the Parables called
Wisdom; he is the increated wisdom; and as he was the Mediator, the treasures
of wisdom were hid in him.

Further, in the Scripture, wisdom is sometimes used, for those abilities men
have to discharge their callings and relations; so Aholiab and Bezaleel are
said To be filled with wisdom by God for that work of the tabernaele; and
Solomon had wisdom given him, to be a skillful Pilote, to govern the ship of
the Commonwealth committed to his trust.

Sometimes wisdom is taken for the worldly crafty shifts and abilities men have
to contrive mischievous designs, or save themselves from danger.

Sometimes for an opinion or conceit that men have of themselves, as wise, when
indeed they are but empty shadows. And

Lastly, For true godliness, in which sense the Scripture often uses it, making
the fear of God the beginning of wisdom; and condemning all wicked menfor
fools, Deu. 4. 6.

In the next place, let us observe in what this wisdom is discovered: And

First, Its not acquired by study, and experience, and a prompt quick nature
much working with these, as humane prudence is; humane wise men are both born
and (...). Wherein spiritual wisdom is discovered.
made so^born, because all the book-knowledge and consulting with those dead
counselors, cannot produce wisdom, if a man have not a dextrous inclination
thereunto, yet an apprehensive nature without those helps, proves also very
insufficient: Now this heavenly wisdom, it was neither bred in our bones, or
acquired by our endeavors, but it comes from God only: If any man want wisdom
(says James) let him ask it of God, who gives to all men liberally, James
1^5. and therefore its called Wisdom from above, James 3. 17. both originally,
because it comes from above; and finally, because it carries a man up to God:
Hence also its called The spirit of wisdom, Ephesians. 1. and Paul prays, God
would bestow it upon the Ephesians: So then, those that are partakers of this
heavenly jewel, they are wrought upon by God; they were foolish, and even like
beasts that understand nothing, till God makes them spiritually wise.

Secondly, The rule of this wisdom is the word of God: The Scriptures are able
(...).
to make even a Timothy, wise to salvation, 1 Timothy 3. 15. Though Tacitus and
Maehiavel, are the politicians Bible, and they follow the instructions
delivered by these Authors; yet the child of God deriveth all his wisdom from
the Scripture: Those Proverbs of Solomon may be called a Treasury of wisdom;
What has a man to do as a man, as a Christian, as in any Office, Relation or
Condition, for which he may not fetch Divine rules from thence? Thus in Deuteronomy.
4. 6. a place alleged before; all Nations would wonder, and say, What a wise
and great people were the Jews, who had these wise and holy Commandments to
walk by? and needs must the word of God be the rule of all wisdom, because its
the word of a wise God, he knows all things better then we can: Oh then take
heed of leaning to thy own understanding, of harkening to carnal counsel,
against the word of God; for what that bids thee do, and what that bids thee
foroear, thou will find to be the wisest counsel that may be. Our Savior
says, What will it profit a man, to win the whole world, and loose his own
soul? yet thou despisest this counsel, if thou had many souls, thou would
damn them, to get a little part of the world; now thou think thy self so
wise in this, thou blessest thy self, and applaudest thy own wisdom: Oh
remember, Gods word is wisdom, he is a wise man, that thinks and believes,
and practices accordingly.

Thirdly, Wisdom from above, is seen in the discerning and judging of what are
the most excellent things: What is true, and what is false, what is good, and 3.
what is evil; what is to be embraced, and what is to be shunned, Sapiens est
cui res sapiunt prout sunt, He is a wise man, to whom things are represented
and perceived as they are. That is a distempered palate, which judges the most
sovereign and excellent meat bitter and loathsome: Its a great glory attributed
to the spiritual man, The spiritual man judges all things, and he himself is
judged of no man, 1 Cor, 2. 14. A spiritual man, so far as he is spiritual, is
endowed with that admirable knowledge, as that he can judge between good and
evil; they have their senses exercised to make this difference: And herein
lies a great part of heavenly wisdom, it quickly discovers what are the sins
that will prove deceitful or dangerous to him: If the very beasts have a
natural instinct to difference that which is good to them, from that which is
hurtful; how much more does God give such necessary wisdom to his own children:
To every wicked man we may say, Thou fool, who swallowest down thy poison, who
desperately woundest and damnest thy own soul, yet take no notice of it; when
will thou be wise? when will thou seek out for understanding? We say of the
bodily health, every man is either a fool, or a Physician; its certain, every
ungodly man is a fool, and no Physician about his soul; he knows not what is
good for him, he does not wisely consider what is for his advantage, and
spiritual welfare: Give me (says he) that which is pleasant or profitable,
though it damn me.

Fourthly, True wisdom lies in propounding a good and happy end to a man's 4.
self, the enjoyment whereof will make a man indeed happy: The ultimate end of
a man, is that wherein his happiness does consist; now we read, even among wise
men, how much this has been disputed; some placed it in riches, some in
honors, some in pleasures; and certainly, there are many men, who propound the
same happiness with beasts, even an earthly, sensual pleasure: The Apostle
describes such, Whose belly is their God, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3.
19. and David on the other side, describes his utmost end, when he says, Whom
have I in heaven but thee, and whom in earth in comparison of thee? And often
he makes God his Portion, his Shepherd, his all in all: So then, consider with
thy self, its the great part of wisdom, to propound some end to our selves in
all our actions, otherwise we act irrationally: Its the first question in good
Catechisms, What ought to be the chiefest and highest end of every man in this
life: Hence, as Aristotle in his Moral Philosophy, does first treat of the end
of all humane actions as the chiefest thing, and if that be not first
determined, we shoot at rovers: So some Divines say, because Divinity is wholly
practical, we must first inform, what is the chief end of all our duties, why
we live and move, why we eat and drink, why we have a being in this world, and
at what mark we are to shoot: Is it then the glory of God, the enjoyment of
him, and salvation of thy own soul, that thou aimest at? If from morning to
evening, and again, from evening to morning, thou art set upon this; then art
thou a wise man: But O the folly and simplicity of most men, who have no
greater ends, then to be happy and glorious in this world! and although
experience teaches them the vanity of riches, the uncertainty of honors, and
the Tragical ends of all earthly greatness, yet they are resolved for no other
course: Oh that you who read the Bible, profess your selves Christians,
acknowledge a day of judgment, believe a resurrection of the dead, should yet
be bowed down to these earthly things! O boast not any longer, in that thou art
wise for to get great things in this world! for that should not be the utmost
end; and nothing is happy, but in proportion to its ultimate felicity: Show thy
self a rational man; To what end do I labor and weary my self all day? What is
it that my soul would have? what does it desire? Can any thing but God satisfy
it? can I have any rest or quietness in my spirit, till the light of his
countenance shine upon me? Can thou sit down with Jonah, though not with such
impatiency, and seeing a worm devouring thy gourd, something or other consuming
thy outward hopes, cry out, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity; the Lord only
satisfies and suffices my soul.

Fifthly, True wisdom lies in the election or choice, and full execution of
all those means which conduce to that end: Election is a great part of wisdom
concerning means, as well as intention about the end: Now as God, and the
seeing of him, is the only end, thus godliness and holiness is the only way:
See you a man studious of godliness, careful not to sin or to offend God; this
man is a wise man, because he keeps in the direct way to his end: The paths
of godliness end at last in happiness; and therefore godliness is so often
called wisdom, and The fear of the Lord. by which men depart from sin, and dare
not offend him: though accounted a foolish precise thing, yet its the beginning
of all wisdom; Who then is a wise man, and a prudent? even such an one who
chooses those ways, and is diligent in those actions that make for eternal
happiness: Oh if thou could leave off those pleasures of sin, if thou could
pray more frequently, reform more studiously, thou would find this the sum
of all wisdom.

Sixthly, True heavenly wisdom lies in circumspection, and a diligent caution;
and that two ways: First, To let go no opportunity that may advance grace or
happiness: Walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, Ephesians. 5. 15. and
wherein is that seen? By redeeming the time, because the days are evil: Oh thou
art then wise, when thou considerest, My days are short, the opportunities of
grace are few, I have been too long already a servant to sin, I will therefore
take all occasions to further godliness; What hurt and hindrance is thy
spiritual folly and imprudence to thee? He is accounted the wise Merchant, that
takes the seasons and opportunities for his traffiquing: And thus it is for
heavenly things; there is a season and opportunity, which if thou neglect,
which if thou let pass, it may never be recovered again: This is called wise to
do good. Secondly, This circumspection, lies in the avoiding of all the
temptations of sin and Satan, which are very subtle; and unless a Christian be
an Argus, all over eyes, he cannot escape destruction by them. The little Horn
in Daniel, was said to be full of eyes: Some Interpreters make that the Turkish
power and government, which was base and contemptible at first, but by their
care and industry, and diligent watchfulness, signified by those eyes, did
presently biggen into a great Dominion: Thus even a godly man is to be full of
eyes; for the deceits of lusts are many, and the methods of Satan are wilely
and crafty; therefore its an high degree of wisdom to escape all these, whereas
the fool goes on blindefold. Every sin, every temptation of Satan, is a pit
and snare to entrap him.

Seventhly, Wisdom consists in foresight and providence: To look to present
pleasures or present advantages, not considering the future, is a part of a
fool: He is blind, not able to see afar off, says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.
Hence the life of a Christian is compared to Watching. A Watchman on the Tower,
is able to discern the Enemy a far off approaching: Now this foresight consists
in two things:

First, To prevent after-repentings, that will be full of horror and
perplexity, 1.
but wholly vain: Thus the damned in hell are brought in, calling upon the
hills and mountains to cover them, that they may avoid the wrath of the Lamb:
Insapientis est dicere non putabam: Fools use to say, I did not think this, I
never thought the miseries and guilt of sin, the flames of hell, the horror of
conscience would have been thus horrible: He then that is wise, looks upon sin
and the world, as one in hell would look on them, with amazement and
astonishment, endeavoring to fly from it.

Secondly, Foresight lies in attending to our latter end, that the present
time 2.
quickly flies away: Oh that my people were wise, says God, that they would
remember their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. This is heavenly wisdom, to consider,
that the present pleasures and advantages will immediately dye: The time is
coming, when thou will, lie languishing on thy deaths-bed, that all friends and
worldly comforts will take their leave of thee: This consideration would be a
special preservative against sin; though the thoughts of death, and making up
thy account, are for the time bitter, yet they will make for thy future good: O
then how foolish and brutish are the greatest part of men! they never consider
what will become of them, when dying, when standing at Gods Tribunal: Oh they
think not what confusion will be on their faces, to see themselves cast into
utter darkness, when others are received, to be commanded to depart, as those
that are cursed, into everlasting fire.

Thirdly, Herein lies provident wisdom, to forecast for eternity, that we may
3.
be happy for ever: Alas! no man's happiness consists in enjoying the great and
glorious things of this life; no more then the Malefactor in the prison, that
fares deliciously, may be called an happy man, when he is immediately to be
called out to the place of execution: Yet who can ever persuade the world, that
there is any other wisdom, then to get the good things of this life? Give me to
day (says the profane man) take thou to morrow; give me this life, take thou
eternity. O beasts, rather then men! yet such worms are we, and no men: The
Scripture does represent eternity so distinctly, whether of happiness or
misery; that its a wonder men should no more meditate about it, that they cry
not out, O Eternity, eternity, to be with the Lord for ever, or the Devils and
damned for ever: Oh this for ever, what an overwhelming word is it.

Use of Instruction: Who is the true wise man? not a man of the greatest Use.
parts, of the greatest reach and craft; but one who is made wise by God, has
the Scripture the rule of his wisdom, and performs all those forementioned
acts. This man is more wise then Solomon in some respects; yea, if all the
learning and prudence of all the men in the world were put into one man's head,
yet without grace, he has not so much knowledge and wisdom as the weakest babe
in Christ: Oh when all accounts are cast up, and there will come to be a final
decision of all things, then all the world will see, who is a wise man, and who
is a ^ool: Thou may lay thy car to hell, and hearken how the damned roar
out, Oh their folly, their madness! they did not believe these things, which
now bitter experience makes them feel: Now, indeed, the godly ^eem fools, are
judged so by the world, but when you see them set on the Thrones of glory, and
crowns of immortality put on their heads, then their wisdom will be published
to all the world.

SERMON CV.
Wise men after the flesh uncharacterized, and (by God for the most part)
rejected.

1 COR. 1. 26. Not many wise men after the flesh, etc.
YOu have heard of a wisdom secretly implied by this distinctive expression of
the Apostle, Wise men after the flesh, viz. That there is an excellent heavenly
wisdom, which is a wisdom after the Spirit. And this is indeed the true
proper wisdom. Humane wisdom, like the Glowworm, may cause some luster in
the night; but heavenly wisdom is like the Sun, glorious at noonday. Now
concerning these earthly and carnally wise men, see the dreadful dispensation
of Gods providence, Not many wise men after the flesh has God called. Those
that by their crafty wisdom are able to get the good things of this world, are
denied the good things of the world to come. Those that we use to say of, Let
them alone, they will save one, do commonly hereafter lose two, viz. their soul
and body. The worlds wiseman at the day of Judgment will be Gods fool.
Observe then,

That wise men after the flesh, though of great repute in the world, are for
the most Observe.
part rejected by God in respect of eternal glory.

The Devil at first made use of the Serpent to deceive mankind, as being more
subtle then any beast of the field; but God he takes the foolish things of the
world to confound the wise. That as our Savior in another case said, That
which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abominable before God; So it is here,
That which the world magnifieth, which it adoreth; is cast away as refuse and
dross by God. Those things which the world reverenceth as Idols of gold, God
many times makes firebrarnds in hell: So greatly do Gods thoughts and man's
differ.

To open this let us consider, What are the Characters and Properties of wise
The characters and properties of wisemen after the flesh. 1. They relish only
wordly things.
men after the flesh. And

First, They are such who have a deep judgment and savoury taste about worldly
things, the pleasures and profit of sin, but no apprehension or relish at all
about heavenly things. Sapiens a Sapore, because he finds a taste and
experimental sweetness in the object he is conversant about. Now as the
heavenly wise man he finds a sweet relish in heavenly things, as you see by
David's many expressions about the word of God, and the enjoyment of God; So the
earthly wise man he has a savoury pleasing taste in these inferior comforts:
As David says, Thou have put more gladness in my heart, then they have had
when their wine and oil increases, Psa. 4. So these have more joy in the
increase of their profit and pleasures, then in any Ordinances or religious
Worship of God: As David says, His soul breaks for the longing it has
always to the Commandments of God: So his soul even breaks for the longing it
has to the accomplishment of all its lusts and desires. If you then would have
a true description of the worldly wise man, it is eminently in this, He has a
delight and sweet savor in the enjoying of all fleshly lusts. He finds no
delight in God, no sweetness in Ordinances, no joy in the holy Ghost. His
affections are set upon earthly things and not heavenly. As the Swine delights
not in pleasant gardens and medows, but in dirty and miery places; so neither
does the fleshly wise man take any joy in the acts of Religion, he knows not
the meaning of the sweetness and excellency of any grace, but is carried out
in all the delight of his soul upon these earthly objects. His thoughts are
there, his affections there, his discourse and words there; and herein you may
even admire to see what parts, skill and discerning many men have in the
matters of the world, but in matters of Religion mere Idiots and very fools. Oh
they will one day see their madness! Could I tell the way to grow rich, and
not the way to Heaven? Could I tell how to save my self here, and not to save
my soul hereafter? Oh then be ashamed all you who have knowledge and parts
about worldly things, but stark ignorant men in matters of godliness.

Secondly, Wisemen after the flesh as they savor only the things of the flesh,
so 2. They have an incurable enmity to the things of God.
they have an irreconcilable enmity to the things of God. The more fleshly
wisdom and humane craft a man has, the more wretched enemy and adversary he
is always to what is good; they are the great politic wise men that do most
abhor and scorn Religion. Thus the Apostle Romans 8. The wisdom of the flesh is
enmity against God; what a brand and black infamy does this Text cast upon all
subtle wise men; Their wisdom (that which they boast of, they glory in, the
best they have, which the world admireth them for) this is enmity, not dislike,
not distaste or averseness, but enmity the highest degree of opposition; and
enmity in the abstract, nothing but enmity: There is not a crum or a drop of
any love or compliance with the things of God. That as the Serpent, though a
wise creature, yet is full of poison and venom; such are all men of parts, and
wit, and quick abilities, if not sanctified; They have wisdom but against God;
they have wit but against godliness; they have craft but to oppose godliness: So
that many men would have had easier condemnation at the day of Judgment, if
they had been fools and mad men, rather then such wise men; better thou were a
man driven out of thy wits, raving and talking thou do not know what, then to
be so advisedly and deliberatly opposing of the ways of God: O then consider,
whether the more wisdom and the more parts thou have, thou art not the more
atheistical, the more crafty adversary to what is holy. Whether that be not the
only obstacle, why thou do not submit to the ways of God; Thy lusts do not
hinder thee, thy profaneness does not hinder thee, but thy carnal policy, and
thy fleshly wisdom, because godliness is a way of self-denial, of danger and
opposition in this world; therefore thy heart cannot comply with it.

Thirdly, The wise men after the flesh they are subtle to invent distinctions
and excuses 3. Subtle to cover sin.
to palliate and cover their sins. God tells the Israelites by the Prophet, That
they dug deep, and did hide their counsels low, covering themselves, but not
with the covering of Gods Spirit, Isa. 30. 1. This wisdom after the flesh, Adam
immediately upon his fall gave a testimony of, when he put off his sin from
himself to Eve, and Eve again upon the Serpent. It was Saul's wisdom after the
flesh that made him disobey Gods Commandment, making fair pretenses; And the
Prophet Hosca brings in the Israelites, who by unjust and unlawful ways did
heap up treasure, comforting himself with this, There should no iniquity be
found in him, Hos. 12. 8. And those false teachers who brought in the
worshipping of Angels, They had fleshly wisdom, as the Apostle calls it, Col. 2.
23. All the evasions, distinctions and palliations that men have either to
cover their sins, or to extenuate them, or to make them no sins, are the sole
issue of fleshly wisdom; Therefore you are exceedingly deceived, if you think
drunkenness, fornication and such sins of the flesh are only damnable; no
there is the wisdom of the flesh; There is a fleshly mind, a corrupt mind,
which the Scripture makes damnable as well as these. Those many distinctions in
Popery about worshipping of Images, which are so subtle that a Papist himself
says, A man must have Ingenium valde metaphysicum that can tell how to
understand them, are nothing but wisdom after the flesh. All superstitious
worship is a wisdom after the flesh. And as in matters of Religion, so in
matters of morality, all subtle pretenses, all specious evasions that men have,
when they commit any sin, or do any unlawful actions, these are poisoned
streams from that poisoned fountain of fleshly wisdom. Oh then take heed of
pleading for thy sins, of distinctions in sinning, of endeavoring to make that
lawful which thy conscience tells thee is unlawful! This seeming carnal wisdom
will turn at last to horror and despair of soul. Thou will then see thou did
but mock God, and delude thy own conscience.

Fourthly, Wise men after the flesh they are subtle, crafty and industrious to
accomplish 4. Crafty to accomplish their wickedness.
all their evil designs, and effect all their wicked purposes that they have
contrived within themselves. Thus they are said to be wise to do evil; and they
are said to study and contrive mischief, and that they cannot sleep till they
have wrought it. Their hearts are compared to the Bakers Oven, (Hos. 76, 7.)
that is heated, wherein all their mischievous intents are perfected: David
often complains of such crafty deceitful men, whose tongues were sharper then
swords, when their words were smoother then butter. The Apostle calls it (...)
and (...), Men that can deceive; they make it their work and business, and they
do it with much easiness, because corruption does prompt them, and the devil
is at hand ready to assist them: Glory not then in being crafty and politic to
bring about the sinful lusts of thy heart. Thou can overreach, cosen,
deceive others: Oh remember, Christ has called us to be sheep and not foxes!
Remember this thy wisdom will prove folly; for does not God say, He will
destroy the wisdom of the wise, 1 Cor. 3. And does not the Lord take the wise
in their own craft? Do they not dig their own graves? Do they not fall in the
pit they make for others?

Fifthly, Wise men after the flesh they are conceited and puffed up with this
wisdom, 5. Proud.
They are swollen bladders puffed up with the empty wind that is in them. He
that thinks he knows any thing, knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1
Cor. 8. 2. Oh it is a great matter to know as we ought to know; now the carnal
wise man knows nothing as he ought to know; He knows not the matter as he
ought to know, nor the manner; Not the matter; for Paul desired to know nothing
but Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. And again, He accounted all
things dung and dross, for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ,
Phil. 3. And the Apostle would not have men glory in their riches, or in their
might and power, yet in this, that they know God; now the wisdom of the flesh
does not enable us to know God or Christ, not God as revealed in his Word,
therefore such wise men do so often dishonor him and break his Commandments,
and are refractory under his judgments, not Christ; for none can know him, but
such as Paul that account their own righteousness dung, that go out of
themselves, as poor, naked and miserable: But alas, wise men after the flesh
cannot do any of these. And then for the manner, they ought to know all things
two ways: First, Humbly, with sense of their great ignorance, as Agar though
so wise, says, He had not the knowledge of a man, Prove. 30. 23. that he was a
beast and no man; Now the carnally wise are proud and arrogant, deserving that
Motto which the Romans gave to their god Terminus that bounded their goods,
Nulli ced^, I give place to none. And secondly, we must know truths
practically, to do them, to find the power of them upon our hearts: ^f ye know
these things, happy are ye if ye do them; and without this, knowledge and
wisdom is but oil to make the flames of hell hotter. The Apostle speaks of
knowing Truths as they are in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 1. and that is, when they make
us put off the old man, and put on the new; And again, there is the
acknowledging of truth after godliness, Tit. 1. 1. Now of all men in the world
none are so hop^lesse and remote from grace, and in such opposition to Christ,
as carnally wise men, because the first foundation that is to be laid in
Christianity, is to cast off all our own wisdom, our own knowledge, He must
become a fool that he may be wise, so the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 18. Now to become
a fool by way of conception in the worlds account, and by our sense and feeling
is, when we see our sins, the aggravations of them, the eternal misery
accompanying them, and that all this is done by our own madness and folly: Oh
what a fool, what a beast is such an one become in his own thoughts! He could
even with Nebuchadnezzar forsake the company of men, and hide himself with
beasts, because he has so greatly sinned against God; such a fool must a man
become ere he is spiritually wise; and further he is to become a fool, because
all the way of believing, of comfort, of duty, of obedience, he must fetch
only from directions out of the Scripture. He is such a fool that he knows
not how to believe, how to go to Christ, what way to take to be justified: Thus
every man is to become a fool: But oh what indignation and scorn is in a wise
man's breast to become thus annihilated, as it were! yet our Savior also does
pregnantly confirm this, when he said, Unless a man become as a little child
(Lnk. 9. 47.) he cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven. You see then, that of
all men in the world, those who have great parts, abilities and deep reaches,
have the greatest cause to tremble. Thou art too wise to be godly; Thou art too
wise to be a babe of Christ's; Thou art too wise to deny thy self, and take up
thy cross and follow him. Take heed the devil has not got thee on a pinnacle,
and he will not leave till he has thrown thee down headlong into hell: Oh then
take heed of self-conceit, of boasting in thy own parts, of leaning to thy
understanding. There is more hope of the prophanest beast and most ungodly
wretch that is, then of such an one. Such the Pharisees were, and very few of
them ever got any spiritual good by Christ.

Sixthly, The wise man after the flesh he uses to measure all duty by safety,
himself 6. They measure all duties by safety.
and his own safety and advantages, are of his privy counsel. Thus because
Peter persuaded Christ to avoid the cross, Christ sharply reproved him,
telling him, He savoured not the things of God, but of men, Mat. 16. 23. Peter
speaks as a wise man, but not as a godly Christian. Paul denied this crafty
wisdom, when he would not consult with flesh and blood: And David when he made
the word of God his counselor: Our Savior in many directions would break
down this wisdom after the flesh, as when he said, What will it profit a man to
win the whole world and lose his own soul? And He that will save his life will
lose it. Here you see that he dehorts from this wisdom, because it is indeed
folly, and it will prove the greatest undoing of a man: So our Savior at
another time tells them, His Disciple must deny himself, must take up his
cross, must look for nothing of comfort or advantage in this life, That the
servant cannot expect to be above the Master: Now the very Birds of the Air,
and beasts of the field had better provision then he had; What harsh Doctrine
then is this to wisdom after the flesh? Will they be persuaded to cut off their
right hand, to pull out their right-eyes? No, they are wiser then so: Oh then
take heed of this devil in thee! for so our Savior called that carnal wisdom
in Peter, run from it, as Joseph did from his Mistress: Say of it, as Jacob of
his wicked sons, Oh my soul, enter not in this counsel! Bid carnal wisdom be
gone before thou will consider what God requires of thee.

Seventhly, Wise men after the flesh they will choose sin rather then
affliction: 7. They will choose sin rather then afflictions.
Whereas the Scripture makes the evil of sin infinitely greater then any
outward evil; carnal wisdom asserts the clean contrary. Oh beloved, we should
fear nothing but sin! not to be outwardly miserable and undone, but to sin,
we should cry out with Joseph, How can we do such things and sin against God?
We should pray, Lord, Whatsoever thou will keep me from, keep me from sinning:
But alas, sin is but a mock, a nothing to a carnal wise man. Tell him of
provoking God, of sinning against his conscience, of eternal damning in hell.
He makes but a bold derision of such things. Oh the patience of God that
causes not the thunderbolts of his vengeance to strike such immediately into
hell: Oh then take heed of this fleshly wisdom, whereby thou will choose to
commit a thousand sins, rather then lose the least earthly advantage! This will
prove gall and wormwood at the later end. This will roar like a Lion in thy
conscience hereafter. We shall one day hear thee cry out with Judas: Oh I have
sinned in betraying my soul, in betraying my conscience, in betraying the truth
of God, unless Faith and Repentance prevent such wounds and blows!

Lastly, The wise man after the flesh so lives and orders all his affairs, as
if God 8; Lives as if God did not rule.
did not rule and govern in the world; as if it were of man to order all his
own affairs; as if God kept himself within the circle of the heavens, and let
the sons of men do what they pleased; and from this it is that mere carnal
wisdom discovers it self remarkably in two things:

1. It trusts only to outward helps and humane refuges, as for faith in God,
and trust in the promises, they regard it not, but as so much breath out of the
Ministers mouths. You have the Prophet Isaiah and Jeremiah debating this case
with the Israelites, They would not trust in God, They would have the Arm of
Assyria, They would go into Egypt, and they thought this was the only wisdom;
in how many places does God perstringe this? and the Prophet by way of a sharp
irrision tells them, Yet God is also wise; They regard no wisdom but of man, yet
God is also wise, Isa. 31. 2.

2. Under the judgments of God in the world not to be humbled, not to look on
them as the strokes of God, but to be like senseless beasts under Gods anger.

Use of Instruction. Learn what censure to pass upon all worldly wisdom. Never
Use.
call that saving of thy self, which is indeed such infinite loosing of thee:
Oh pray that God would give thee the true heavenly wisdom which is from above.
We may say, This fleshly wisdom is that which sets hell on fire; Take that
away, and there would be no hell; as he said of self love, Oh kill this Serpent
that crawls in thy breast! Thou had been godly long before this time, but for
carnal wisdom. Thou had been as forward as any other in the way to Heaven,
but for this fleshly wisdom. Thou would not have defiled thy conscience, and
gone against it, but for fleshly wisdom: Oh how is it, that after so much
hearing and reading, thy sins are not cast away! thy conscience is convinced,
thy heart many times trembles; Oh it is this carnal wisdom hinders thee!

SERMON CVI.
Reasons why God passes by Humane Wisdom, with the Difference between it and
true spiritual Wisdom; Also the Commendation of Humane Learning, and how
necessary it is for a Minister.

1 COR. 1. 26. Not many wise men after the flesh.
THis Text has discovered two sorts of wise men, The wise man after the
Spirit, and The wise man after the flesh; as also, Gods determination about the
later, which is full of admiration and terror. He has not chosen many wise men
after the flesh. The characters of carnal wise men, you heard the last day. I
shall conclude the first subject here enumerated at this time, and that which
remains to be considered in the first place is, What are the Reasons why God
passes by this humane wisdom, and makes no account of it, Would it not have
made much for the honor of the Gospel? Would it not have been a greater credit
and ornament to Religion, to see all the great wise men of the world, to have
done like the wise men of the East that came to adore Christ, though lying in a
stable? Is not this History famous, that wise men should come so far, and
bring their external oblations, and testimonies of high respect to Christ, in
that mean and contemptible way, and that in danger of their lives by Herod? In
outward judgment these might have been called, The fools of the East, rather
then the wise men. This did wonderfully celebrate the name of Christ; and may
not a man say, If God would thus affect all the wise men in the world, would
not godliness and religion be freed from those blemishes and scandals that
have been and still are upon it? They are the simple and more foolish sort of
people, that set themselves to the power of religion: None of the subtle
profound and wise men of the world will venture too far this way. This I
confess is a very plausible pretense, and might have deceived many, did not
one example of our Savior wonderfully confound such objections, where you may
see him wonderfully affected with this divine dispensation, his heart is
greatly moved with it; I thank thee, O Father, that thou have hid these things
from the wise, and have revealed them to babes, Mat. 11. 25. The Text says, he
made this confession in a public and solemn manner by way of thanksgiving unto
God. So then, if this riddle of Gods dispensation be unfolded by
Scripture-direction, we shall see matter of great praise and joy, not muttering
or repining at Gods providence. And in this way of God there may be reason on
Gods part, why he rejects such; and reasons on the carnal wise man's part, why
he is refused.

And for the first, One eminent and visible reason, why God lets not the
destroying 1.
Sword, as to the Israelite, but the Scepter of Grace pass over this wise man,
is to teach us that humane wisdom has no merit or causality, yea has no
disposition or preparation to the enjoyment of Christ. For when we see God so
ordering it, That not many wise, not many prudent and subtle men are advanced
to this crown of glory, all the world sees it, That it is not humane wisdom or
prudence, but the mere grace of God that makes the difference. The Apostle does
often inform those that were converted, That it was not for any works they had
done, but by grace only: So then, God who aims at his glory in all things,
that every mouth might be stopped, that no man might say, I had a better
understanding, I had a quicker insight then others, therefore God chose me, he
takes such as are Babes and foolish comparatively, and bestows immortality and
glory on them. Had the wise men of the world been called, then Achitophel,
Whose counsels, were as the oracles of God had not been refused. The Heathens
many of them gave a large testimony of their great wisdom; yet none of the
Platoes, the Aristotle's, the Tullies of the world did God make use of; but
Piscatoria simplicitas, the mean things of the world were the fittest way for
God to make his own greatness known; and hence it is that by sad experience we
see men of the quickest parts, the nimblest wits, the most constant memories,
yet to be the furthest off from the Kingdom of heaven. Its Gods way, he alone
will have the glory, and to him only it does appertain, and therefore he takes
not those who may plead any internal worth in themselves.

Secondly, God will hereby teach us; that he does more regard the least degree
of a 2.
true humble and saving knowledge of him, then he does all the humane wisdom in
the world. That as the Scripture calls that tongue, Isa. 50. 4. The tongue of
the learned in the Preacher, who is able to speak a word of comfort in due
season to a contrite broken heart for sin; So that man is a wise knowing man,
who has the fear of God in his heart, and thereby departs from all evil; and
indeed as in beasts, that is their proper wise instinct they have; whereby they
are able to avoid that which is evil and hurtful to them; so in man, that is
his proper wisdom to avoid that which is his greatest evil. Now the greatest
evil of a man, as a man, is sin. For he being made rational and after the
image of God, and for that glorious end of eternal happiness, that is his
proper evil which depriveth him of this, and only sin does that: Oh consider
then thou art wise, when thou can refuse all those sins that do so easily
beset thee! Thou can cry out, as they did of the deadly herb in the pot; This
is death, yea this is damnation. Observe what is that which makes a man
approved of by God, it is not his great wisdom, his great learning, but a
practical knowledge of himself and of Christ. Aristotle said concerning the
natural knowledge of the heavens in their nature and motions, that a little
knowledge that way is greater then much knowledge of the sublunary things, but
certainly the practical knowledge of heavenly things is far more necessary
then the speculative knowledge of all Arts and Sciences. Let him that glories
glory in this, that he knows God. Do not then boast thy self either of
outward greatness or inward excellencies of the mind, for thou art not to be
compared to the meanest person in the world, how contemptible soever, that does
in a saving manner know God: This is eternal life to know God, Joh. 17. 3. You
cannot say, wisdom, honor, riches are eternal life.

Well, as these may be reasons on Gods part, so if you consider the earthly
wise Reasons on man's part.
man, There is more hope of a fool then of him; His wisdom is like a Sword in a
mad man's hand, his wisdom is the continual offensive weapon that he lifts up
against God. For

First, A man of carnal wisdom is depraved and defiled there where the first
motions 1.
of conversion should show themselves, and that is in the understanding. Light
is first made by God in the new Creature, as it was in the old creature of the
world: Now, says our Savior, If a man's eye be dark, the whole body is
darkness, Mat. 6. 23. Were it not then that thou art so wounded in thy mind,
that it is so fleshly and so corrupt, there were greater hopes of thy
Salvation. So then, how necessarily must this wise man perish, whose whole
wisdom and understanding is only to damn himself! His wisdom is against God,
all his arguments, all his reasonings they are against his own soul, against
that way of godliness, in which only he can be happy. Aquinas observes, That
faith is more difficult in a learned man then in another that is more ignorant,
because the learned man knows more objections against the truth, is able to
raise such arguments, he does not well know to solve again; and this is much
more true in a carnal wise man: Oh the many cavils, froward objections, subtle
reasonings that he has to put off the commands of God! This right eye then
must be pulled out ere thou will walk in Gods way.

2. No marvel if God refuse such, for they are his greatest enemies. They
oppose his 2.
glory, the kingdom of Christ, and his people; and howsoever God indeed does
sometimes lead Captivity captive, and triumph over his enemies, by changing
their hearts; yet there are others whom he does oppose, and crusheth into
pieces; and thus commonly God does with wise men of the world, The Lord knows
that their thoughts are but vain: He catches the crafty in their own thoughts:
He will destroy the wisdom of the wise, 1 Cor. 3. So then no wonder if God
pass by such men, for there are no greater enemies in the world to him then
such. The Apostle Jam. 3. gives three properties of this carnal wisdom, Its
earthly sensual, devilish, It has all the wickedness of men and devils in it.
Its earthly, that is, wholly intent to get all earthly advantages, whatsoever
is profitable and great in this world, that this wisdom reaches after. Then
its sensual, destitute of the Spirit of God, as Jude argues it, being wholly
fixed upon the lusts and pleasures of sin.

Lastly, Its devilish; as godly wisdom is a beam of the divine Light; so this
carnal wisdom is part of that devilish wisdom that is in the Devil. The Devil
he 3.
is called (...) because of his knowledge. So that you see, the more knowledge,
the more understanding a man has, if not sanctified, the more devilish he is,
the nearer he comes to a devil. So that as the devil is called the red Dragon
for his subtilty and cruelty against the sheep of Christ, Thus you have many
carnal wise men, Dragons rather then men; So violent and bitter are they
against all the ways of holiness.

In the next place let us consider an Objection, for this Doubt may arise, If
God reject wise men after the flesh, Does not this condemn all humane wisdom?
How Object.
can any man in any prudent and discreet way manage his affairs, especially in
evil and dangerous days, if no prudence be allowed? Yea does not our Savior,
though he command all spiritual fortitude and courage, all self-denial and
readiness to take up the crosle, all integrity of aims and ends, yet withal
he bids us, Be wise as Serpents, Mat. 10. 16. and commands us to beware of men,
Mat. 10. 7. Did not Christ himself when his adversaries came with captious
questions, as in that about paying tribute to Caesar, Mat. 22. wisely prevent
their ensnaring of him; and so Paul, though as ready to lay down his life for
Christ, as men are their clothes when they go to rest, yet in those troubles he
had about his enemies, he discovered much civil prudence, did by his wise
carriage put his adversaries to it, that they were often frustrated, and Paul
both kept his innocence, and yet saved himself.

To answer this, It cannot be denied but that discretion and civil prudence is
Answ.
an excellent gift of God; and to have zeal but not knowledge and wisdom is to
have strong legs, or body, as Samson had, but no eyes. The men of Issachar had
this great commendation, That they were wise men, and knew the times and
seasons, and what was fit to be done. And certainly prudence (though there be a
danger of it, lest it should degenerate into craft and carnal policy) yet of it
self it is an excellent grace and ornament to Religion; It preserves
godliness from that contempt and scorn it is apt to receive in the world; In a
man's sufferings its the great comfort, that its not for my rashness, for my
unadvisednesse, my busy sinful meddling, but for a just and necessary duty I
suffer. How then may the wisdom of the flesh that is sinful be distinguished
from lawful and commendable The dif(...) b^ (...) wis(...) ^n^ (...) ^n
prudence. 1.
prudence?

And the first palpable difference is this, Lawful prudence is always
accompanied with integrity and innocence; but carnal policy has hypocrisy,
guile and guilt with it. Let a man be as wise as he can be, only let him commit
no sin, let him not play the hypocrite, let him not violate his conscience.
Thus our Savior gives that excellent rule, Be wise as Serpents, be innocent
as Doves, Mat. 10. 16. If thou have much of the Serpent in thee, but none of
the Dove, thou have none of this commendable wisdom; Let not the Serpent eat up
the Dove: Oh but where is this happy bounding of prudence and integrity! Many
men have not only the prudence of the Serpent, but the poison of the Serpent
also. Never then think that is any lawful wisdom which runs thee into a sin.
Its as if a man to prevent a disease should eat a great deal of poison. The
losing of thy integrity, thy innocence or peace of conscience, is a greater
folly then any acts of thy prudence will commend thee for wisdom. So far
therefore as prudence can find out a way to escape, and yet keep integrity,
this man does hit the mark, and is like those skilful Benjamites that could
shoot to hit a very hair.

2. Lawful true prudence has for its end the glory of God, the promoting of
his 2.
truth, the advancing of Christ; but now fleshly wisdom has no other end, but
selfpreservation, self-advancing. We read of Paul, who did so wisely carry
himself that he could without any sin or hypocrisy become all things to all
men; But what was his great end? it was to gain some: It was not to make his
advantages of them, but Christ's. And thus in another place he says, He had
caught them by guile, 2 Cor. 12. 16. But how? Not for himself but for Christ.
So that all the prudence Paul used in the preaching of the Ministry to
preserve his liberty, and to save his own life, was only to further the Gospel,
and to propagate the truths of Christ, That the Church of God might receive no
detriment, thy ends will abundantly distinguish what kind of wisdom it is thou
have. If a carnal earthly wisdom, thou matterest not Gods glory, not his truth,
not his worship, but thy own safety; whereas godly prudence regards this most,
and says of the truth of God and his glory, as they did to David, Thou art
better then ten thousand of us, thou shall not go into danger; and by this it
appears, that only a godly man is wise, for he only can propound such divine
and public ends to himself.

3. Carnal wisdom is only the ability and enlarging of the intellective parts
of a 3.
man. His judgment, his invention, his memory; but then for the heart, the
will and affections, they remain wholly in sin, so that such men have no
inclination, no delight in any thing but what is evil. But now godly prudence
is accompanied with the sanctification of the heart and affections, they are
made obedient and flexible to God, they are set upon no earthly thing beyond
the bounds God has prescribed, and this is a main difference; for according to
some Philosophers opinion, and the Scripture seems to incline that way, The
heart is the seat of all wisdom, Cor sapit, pulmo loquitur, is the old saying.
So that if the heart be carnal and polluted, then the wisdom thereof is so; and
commonly the corrupt will and affections bribe and defile the understanding; so
that we may say in fleshly wisdom the heart and affections they are corrupted,
and then they corrupt the understanding, that whereas the understanding should
go before them, they go before the understanding, and it is with such a man, as
Copernicus says it is in the great world, the earth moves, and the Sun stands
still, so their earthly affections they move, they work, they do all, and their
reason or wisdom stands still, not directing at all; but godly prudence that
sanctifies a man's will and affections, it begins in the head, and so
descends to the heart, I pray God ye be sanctified in spirit, soul and body; It
begins first in that which is most sublime and intellectual in a man. So
then fleshly wisdom is like a Glowworm upon a dunghill, there is some luster,
but on a noisome dunghill; they have parts, abilities, but like a jewel in a
Swines snout; whereas this wisdom is said to be first pure, Jam. 3. 17. and
then follow the other properties, its first pure.

4. This godly prudence, as its very active in doing, so its as patient and
admirable 4.
in suffering Holy prudence walks by lawful rules to avoid danger; but if God
will exercise them, then its as wise to bear them with the flourishing exercise
of all graces. Now fleshly wisdom is subtle to escape miseries, but if fallen
into them, then toileth and vexes a man like a wild bull in a net. He has no
skill, no understanding to lay himself low before God: Now wisdom is as much,
if not more seen in suffering then in doing. Therefore Jam 1. speaking of the
afflictions Gods people would be plunged into, he adds, If any man lack
wisdom, let him ask it of God, that is, wisdom to bear afflictions, to account
it all joy when they are beset with them. Howsoever Christ has commanded his
Disciples prudence, that they may escape all dangers, yet he has withal told
them, That all their wisdom, and all their godliness shall not preserve them
from persecution, but they must go many of them at least through the red Sea of
their own blood into the Land of Canaan; now when all this does befall them,
they take it thankfully, they rejoice they are accounted worthy to suffer for
Christ; they are not weary of Christ and his ways, though they cost them so
dear; but now the carnal wisdom of man, if after all the shifts and subtle
plots he has used, he fall into danger, then he is confounded, then he cries
out, then he roareth and curses, and is like the Sea foaming out its froth.
And thus for the first Objection, I shall a little touch upon another, and that
is, Some may think from hence Object.
may be gathered a very popular Argument against humane learning: for if they
are not many wise men after the flesh that God takes, then this humane learning
is not at all to be regarded; Those that have the wisdom of the Spirit, they
ought to be exalted only.

Briefly to answer this, That although humane learning without the Spirit of
Answ.
God, and the power of Sanctification be nothing but a tinkling cymbal, and is
the greatest enemy Christ has, and the only pillar of the devils kingdom, yet
in it self its a necessary qualification, especially to those that are in the
Ministry, and although God chose fishermen, who at first were rude and
illiterate, yet he afterward endowed them with the knowledge of the tongues,
and miraculous abilities of wisdom and utterance; and Paul had all that kind
of learning the Jews used to have, and besides was conversant in humane
Authors, as appears by his quotations out of humane Poets; and Moses he was
skilful in the learning of Egypt, which was then the only famous place of
learning. Now that learning of it self is a necessary qualification to the
Ministers of the Gospel, appears by these Arguments;

First, The knowledge of the original tongues is a great part of humane
learning, Learning necessary in a Minister, why 1.
yet how necessary that is, all the world sees, for without that the
Scriptures could not be translated into a known tongue and interpreted. The
Bible would have been a sealed Book; how could men, and women, and children be
able to read the Scriptures, had there not been learned men, who by great pains
and study obtained the knowledge of originals?

Secondly, Its requisite, because a Minister is to divide the Word aright,
(...) 2.
which cannot be without the help of those arts, Logic and Rhetoric, which
are properly subservient to that end; for although it be the Spirit of God that
helps us to the sense of the Scripture in a spiritual saving way, we are not
by our wit able to believe it, to apply it, to conform to it; yet as its a Text
consisting of words, and a coherence to make up the sense; so the instrumental
way to discover that, is by the help of the arts, and therefore those that are
unlearned they are said to wrest the Scripture, 2 Pet. 3. 18. to mangle and
torture them to their own destruction.

Thirdly, The adversaries are learned, and every Minister ought to be able to
gainsay 3.
them.

Lastly, Experience teaches us, That when the arts and humane learning
revived, 3.
then truths were discerned from falsehood: Which made the Pope hate learning,
and account it Heretical to understand Greek; yea, one Pope would not suffer a
man to name the word Academia, University; but this is by the way.

Use of Instruction: How happy and excellent a thing it is to have godly
prudence Use.
and integrity to embrace each other; not to let thy wisdom degenerate into
earthly, carnal wisdom: Oh be afraid, when you are wise for earthly things, and
have no understanding for heavenly! Oh! at the day of Judgment this will be
thy folly, thy madness: Thou have been wise to heap up riches, but have not
been rich in faith or godliness; thou have been wise to get the favor and love
of the great ones in the world, but have not been wise to obtain the favor of
the great God: Sapiens non est, qui sibi non sapit: Now thou have no wisdom for
thy immortal soul, thy eternal happiness, for that which is of the greatest
consequence: Therefore thou art not truly wise.

SERMON CVII.
Of the Consistency of Earthly Greatness and Nobility with Godliness; And yet
notwithstanding, how rare it is for such Men to be called and saved.

1 COR. 1. 26. Not many mighty, not many noble are called.
THe first subject enumerated by Paul, whom God is pleased to reject, and to
say, They shall not be mine, in the day I make up my jewels, has been
dispatched. We proceed to the other two remaining; and because they agree in
one common consideration, I shall handle them together. The first part, of
those who for the most part are overlooked by God, Are wise men after the
flesh, such as are eminent and admirable for internal excellencies. In the next
place the Apostle instanceth in those that are exalted for external greatness:
And that is twofold, either such which is acquired by humane industry, in the
word (Mighty) or such which is natural, that we have by our birth, in the other
word (Noble.)

The first sort of persons are called (...) and in the next verse, (...),
answering the Hebrew Generim; and does signify any that are mighty and strong
in this world, either by their power, or their wealth, or their honor, that are
tall cedars, when others are but shrubs.

Secondly, The other are (...), which word, though sometimes applied to the
gracious disposition of the godly; as the Bereans are said to be more noble,
because they did search the Scripture (observe that, its true nobility, and
true honor, to be diligent in searching the Scripture) yet here its applied
unto that humane excellency and prerogative some have above others by their
birth; for although there is none so nobly descended, but he is born a child
of wrath, and so has no more privilege from hell, then the child of the
meanest Beggar, yet in a political and civil consideration, they differ far
from others: Now when you see God in the disposing of eternal glory, not much
mattering these persons, it should be like a thunder bolt in the very heart of
all those who boast themselves in their wealth, power and nobility, for they
are the less likely to be made glorious hereafter: So that as God when he chose
David to the Temporal Kingdom of Israel, commanded Samuel to call all Jesses
Sons together, and chose clean contrary to Samuels expectation; for when he saw
Eliab the first Son, he said, Surely the Lords anointed is before me; but God
said, Look not upon his countenance, or the height of his stature, for God
sees not as man sees: So it is here in Divine Election, he chooses not, he
approves not, as man by worldly respects does: Observe,

Although men temporally great in this world, are greatly exalted by men, yet
Observe.
God chooses not many such to eternal glory.

The Pharisees made it a great argument against Christ and his way, John 7. Do
any of the Rulers believe in him, but the people that do not know the Law? Here
you see they triumph; What? believe in Christ? see who they are that do it, the
multitude, many of the poorer and contemptible sort; Do any of the Rulers, any
of the great men, and rich men, do they believe in him? The Aposile James, Cap.
2. 11. speaks excellently to this purpose, reproving their sinful partiality in
exalting a rich man for his gold ring, and goodly apparel, but despising those
that were truly good, because poor; Hearken (says he) i. e. Consider what I
say, Has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith? Oh consider,
thy wealth, thy greatness does not make thee happy, unless rich in faith and
grace also, unless we may say, O man, O woman, great is thy faith, as well as
Great are thy earthly advantages.

To open this; Consider

First, That there are four things especially, which are the great things of
the I. The four great thin(...) of the world. 1.
world; and if the Devil show the glory of any of them, its an hard thing not
to fall down and worship him, if they be had thereby.

The first is, Earthly Power and Dominion: Est natura hominum avida imperii,
said Tully, The nature of man being ambitious, is greedy of power; and its
Omnibus affectibus flagrantius, more hot and burning then any other lust,
unless the heart be so sanctified, as to account nothing great but God; Though
Histories do abound with the Tragical ends of many, who were in their time
great and terrible in power; yet few are of that man's mind, that would not
vouchsafe to take up a Crown from the earth, if he should find it, because of
the cares accompanying of it, Every Crown of gold, being also a Crown of thorns.

Secondly, Another admired thing in the world is Glory and Honor: For this 2.
many Civil, and many Religious attempts have been undertaken: A poor empty
reward, yet the Heathens have busily disputed, whether this very nothing be not
the chiefest good.

The third thing admired is, Riches and Wealth: Dives fared diliciously every 3.
day: The Psalmist speaks, how the world blesses such, that heap up to
themselves innumerable riches, even like the sands of the sea shore: And
although some say, they are called Divitiae a dividendo, because they so divide
and distract the heart with tormenting cares; yet they find nothing but
happiness in them.

Lastly, There is Nobility, which is by blood and birth: This temporal
excellency 4. Temporal greatness not in it self inconsistent with godlness and
salvation.
is apt to make men swel, as being stars of the first Magnitude. hereby ready
to forget, that they are but dust and ashes, as other men are. Now the Apostle
by these two words, does intend all these, and if there be any other thing,
that has temporal glory in the world.

Secondly, Consider, That this temporal greatness, is not of it self
inconsistent with godliness and salvation. Julian objected against Christians,
That the precepts of Christianity, and of Civil Government, were clean opposite
to one another: No such matter; none of those enumerated excellencies are of
themselves contrary to godliness.

First therefore, We read of godly Governors, godly rich men, godly noble 1.
men, not only in the Old Testament, for that is very evident, but in the New,
as Joseph of Arimathea, Nicodemus, the two Centurions, Paulus a Proconsul,
Theophilus a noble man, to whom Luke dedicated his History, as most judge, and
John writes to the elect Lady: so that the Apostle does not say, None of these,
But not many, viz, Comparatively to those of the meaner sort that are called:
Indeed, of the twelve Apostles, there was not one of them wise after the flesh,
or mighty and noble; for that is a Fabulous tradition concerning Barthol^mew,
that he was born of Royal blood, and went in his purple and jewels every day;
the Evangelists imply the contrary.

Secondly, It must also be confessed, That the outward good things of this
life, 2.
are so far from being contradictory to godliness, that godliness only has
the promise of them: How often did God promise Israel, That if they would
diligently keep his Commandments, They should conquer their enemies, One should
chase a thousand, They should be the head, and not the tail; and Abraham, in
that great promise God made to him, there was not only promised a numerous
posterity, like the sands of the sea shore; but also, that Kings and Princes
should come out of his loins; and thus it holds for other worldly comforts.
Godliness has the promise of this life; and the Apostle makes an unanswerable
argument, If he has given us Christ, how shall he not with him give us all
things else: Thus we cannot instance in any temporal good thing, but in one
place or other there is a promise made of it to the godly. And if you say,

Why then are not the godly possessed of these things? why have not the godly
Quest.
all the greatness and glory of the world, seeing they are heirs to it by the
promise?

I Answer, We must not take those promises single, but compare them with Answ.
other Texts, that do also tell us of the misery and trouble that the godly
shall have: Now these places are not contrary one to another, one promises all
good, the other does foretell of much evil; for these things are not to be
understood absolutely, but conditionally: So far as these things are furthering
of their main good, and are not hindering of their everlasting welfare, so far
they are sure to be made partakers of them; but when they cannot have these and
Christ also, when they must either lose these or heaven, then no wonder if God,
out of his love, give them not those things which prove hurtful unto them. A
father will promise to give his child meat and drink, but if his child fall
into a disease, that these things will increase his disease, then out of his
love he keeps these things from him.

Thirdly, When God does call any of the wise men, and great men, and noble men
of the world, They become eminent instruments of his glory; they are 3.
worth ten thousand of those that are in an inferior way; for they do not only
credit the Gospel, as the Gospel does them, and as they honor God, so God
honors them; they lose nothing of their greatness, by having goodness: but they
by their power, by their wealth and interest they have in the world, may
greatly advance the ways of God. What Reformations did the godly Kings and
Magistrates bring about in the Kingdom of Judah? How did Constantine by his
power and greatness, arise like a Sun, that dispelled the dark night of
Idolatry and Paganism? and therefore such are compared to Nursing fathers, and
nursing mothers. Temporal power, when sanctified for the use of the Church, is
like the Elm that bears up the vine: Oh then, its an happy time, when great
men, are good men; when men of power, are men of godliness. And thus also men
of wealth and estates, how many ways may they be serviceable to God, wherein
others cannot be? Rich men are the greatest men in debt, for they owe more
duties to God then others; and as such have wherewith to be more instrumental
to Gods glory then others, so by their example they may bring on others. If the
chief and great men in a place, do earnestly seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and
promote that, this makes all inferior persons to do the same: They are like the
springs, if the springs be poisoned, then all the streams will be, but if they
be sweet, then the streams will be. When Elisha was to cure the bitter waters,
he takes salt, and throws it, not into the streams, but into the springs,
because that was the way to cure the streams: And thus, if the great ones, and
chief ones in a Parish, if they love God, and good men, and good things, their
example will even compel others to do the like; and certainly, you that have
more greatness and wealth then others, be afraid, lest you have not other men's
sins to answer for; other men have been encouraged to be profane, because they
have either seen you so, or at least, you have not showed your self an enemy to
such ways. Seeing then God takes this way, few rich men, great men, honored
men, comparatively to others; let us consider,

The Reasons why, as they be either on Gods part, or on their part who are
Reasons why God leaves great men. On Gods part. 1.
refused: And

First, On Gods part; Therefore God may reject these, to declare his absolute
Soveraiguty and Sufficiency; that he needs no men, that he is God, and able to
carry on the great things of his Counsel, without the wisdom of wise men, the
strength of great men, the repute of noble men in the world; that is the reason
why great men in Authority, need wise men for counsel, and mighty men for
execution thereof, because they know not how to do without other men's eyes, and
other men's hands; but God, he is the only great and mighty God, none is his
Counselor, neither does he need any help: Therefore that God might demonstrate
this Sufficiency and Independency of his nature, he chooses those that all the
world sees he does not want; for if God had wanted the gifts, and parts, and
power of men, he would have chosen other men: Oh then behold the wisdom and
power of God in calling of men! he calls the foolish, the weak, the nothings
of this world, that so all may be convinced and see, God needs not the
creatures, but the creatures him; and no wonder of this, for the world is not
enough sensible of Gods greatness, its ready to count every thing great but
him, to fear every thing but him; but God by this will teach us, that we are
but as clay in the hands of the Potter; as the Apostle presses it at large in
the Discriminating act of God, and therefore will not suffer a man to be so
presumptuous, as in those things to say, Why does God so?

Secondly, God therefore does not take many great and noble in this world, 2.
that so men may see the falseness of that position and conclusion, which men
do so often make to themselves; viz. That God gives them this wealth, this
greatness, this honor above others, because he loves them more then others:
This is the sweet poison that many drink down, God has given me this success,
this wealth, this prosperity, this outward happiness; and certainly if God
would destroy me, he would never have done so much for me: God foresaw such a
Self-flattery in the people of Israel, and therefore he does again and again
bid them take heed of so much as thinking in their heart, that they had
conquered their enemies, and possessed themselves of Canaan, for their own
righteousness, as if there were more in them then in others: Nay, thou see
this Text and the like, may be like the Handwriting on the wall, to make all
thy joints tremble. Thy greatness, thy plenty, thy abundance, is no sign of
Gods gracious and special love to thee, if while he bestows these things on
thee, thou may be one ordained to eternal destruction; therefore see what
the Wise man observes, No man knows love or hatred by these things, Eccles.
9. 1. We cannot conclude of Gods Electing love, or his Reprobating hatred by
these outward mercies David once began to make such conclusions, but he called
himself a beast for it, and said, Thereby he condemned the generation of the
just.

Thirdly, Therefore God may not choose many of these, because he would not 3.
leave those who are externally miserable and contemptible, in despair and
total despondency of mind: For if God had dealt the contrary, and had not
chosen many of the inferior, and the more despicable condition in this world,
they had then been in a double misery, miserable here, and miserable hereafter:
Indeed, if you do regard the poor men of this world, that are in extremity, you
will find, God has chosen few of them neither, none being more profane,
atheistical, and like bruits then they, but they are of the middle rank that
God commonly makes his choice of: And hereby God would teach us, that the
meanness and lowness of a man's condition, should not be matter of grief and
discontent to him: Oh how hard is it to rebuke these waves and winds of
discontent, that are apt to rise up in thee, because God has not done as much
for thee as for others! others they are richer, they have their hearts ease and
desire; this is apt to make all on fire within thee: Oh! but what a good
temperament may this put thee into, to consider, that the lower in the world,
does not hinder thee from being the higher with God: Heaven will receive more
of a mean condition, then of a glorious: God does not judge as the world
judges: Oh the great alteration that the day of judgment will make! Lazarus
received into eternal glory, and Dives, who fared deliciously, tormented in
hell: If then thy poverty, thy meannesse, were a stop to Salvation, then it
were to be lamented; If Election and Salvation were to be had, as the Popes
Indulgence, for money; then as Albertus says about Purgatory, Its better with
a rich man, then a poor man, for he can give enough to redeem his soul; but its
not so, thy cottage may be as near heaven, as a palace.

Fourthly, Another Reason why God passes by temporal greatness, may be 4.
that in the verse following, To confound the great and mighty things of the
world; for so says the Apostle, He has chosen the weak things, to confound
the mighty: How are wise men and great men confounded, when they see that their
temporal glory and greatness cannot do that, which the grace and godliness of
meaner men does! Every great man in the world, he thinks to ruffle it out,
scorneth that those who are inferiors, should compare with him; but O the
terrible confusion that will cover such men's faces, when at the day of
judgment God shall say, Lo, thy wisdom, thy power, thy great revenues, have
not brought thee to that glory and happiness, which the prayers and tears of
meaner men have done. Our Savior told the Jews, it would be their confusion,
when men should come from far, and sit down in the Kingdom of heaven, and they
themselves shut out: Oh what heart can conceive the rage and madness thou will
be in! when thou shall see such neighbors whom thou hatedst, mockedst for their
strictness and forwardness in Religion, sit upon Thrones of glory, and thou
with all thy earthly pomp cast out! As Austin cries out, by way of blushing,
Surgunt indocti and rapiunt caelum, etc. Illiterate men they rise and take the
Kingdom of heaven by violence, when learned men with all their books and
learning are shut out: So the meaner sort of men, they rise, and by strictness,
forwardness, get the Kingdom of Heaven, when others find their outward
greatness, like a millstone about their neck, pressing them into the bottom of
the sea.

Fifthly, The last Reason on Gods part may be, to make all the rich and great 5.
men of the world to walk humbly, with fear and trembling, lest God give them
all the good things they shall ever have, in this life only: Thy heart is apt
to swell with pride, when thou considerest thy prosperity, and thy abundance:
Oh but it should rather tremble within thee, lest God put thee off with this
only;

Abraham told Dives, when he begged that Lazarus might come and cool his tongue
with a drop of water, Remember thou had thy good things in this life, and
Lazarus evil: So God may say to thee, Thou had thy pleasure, thy ease, thy
jollity in this life; now thy torments and thy miseries they begin: There is
such a change made between Dives and Lazarus, as in Gideons fleece, one time
that was wet and the floor dry; then the floor was dry and the fleece wet; thus
one while Dives, he is in prosperity, and Lazarus is a begging for crumbs; and
afterward Lazarus he is in glory, and Dives is begging for a drop of water.
Take heed then, lest God do, as Abraham with Ismael, he gave him many gifts,
but the inheritance was bestowed only on Isaac: So God, he gives the wealth,
greatness, and such gifts, but the inheritance of heaven, that he bestows
upon others.

In the next place, I shall briefly instance in the Reasons on their part who
art Reasons on man's part. 1.
rejected; And they are evident:

First, All earthly greatness and advantages, they are apt to fill the heart
with pride and loftiness: Charge the rich, that they be not high-minded, 1 Timothy
6. 17. Now there is no disposition does so immediately offend God as this; God
resists the proud, but he gives grace to the humble: God does not give grace
to proud men; as your high mountains are often barren.

Secondly, All these earthly advantages, when possessed, They do take off the
heart 2.
from God many ways:

First, Inordinate affections toward them, make us refuse God: Ye cannot serve
God and Mammon; the hand full of earth, cannot receive gold, though offered.

Secondly, There is the deceiveableness of their pleasure, they dead the heart
to good things; men find not that sweetness and delight in heavenly things, as
otherwise they would.

Thirdly, Solicitude and distracting cares about them, they make the soul full
of fears, full of diversions, they are Tares among the good Corn.

Fourthly, The seeming profitableness and necessity of them: They cannot live,
or be without them; and thereupon they venture the loss of God to enjoy these.

Use of Admonition, To men of great place, and great wealth: Oh! know Use.
how hard it is for such to be saved; there is a Camels bunch to go through the
eye of a needle: Let not these great things become a snare to you; consider,
there is better Greatness, and that is, To be strong in the Lord; better
Riches, To be rich in faith; better power, To be able to prevail with God in
prayer: Can thou say? The Bible makes me see better things, makes me loose
from all things to serve God.

SERMON CVIII.
The Gospel Feast, and who are welcome Guests, and who not.

MAT. 22. 14. For many are called, but few are chosen.
THis Text though short in words, is vast in sense, and has this ground for
its special observation, that our Savior used it twice, Chap. 20. 16. And in
this place, Pulchra sunt bis dicenda. The first word in the front, For, shows
its connection with what was precedent, and is a Parable largely propounded by
our Savior for this end, to show the goodness of God in offering the word of
grace to a people, and the different event of this in the hearers, some
rejecting it, and that with great malice; others receiving it, but not in the
full power and efficacy of it, which makes our Savior infer this dreadful
conclusion, that may make our ears to tingle, when we hear it, Many are called
but few chosen. Think not it was a speech directed only to the Jews or those
that lived in that time. No, its of perpetual truth; and we see it daily
experimentally confirmed, that of those who are called few are chosen. My
intent is to speak of external calling, as I have spoken of internal; and this
Text will give a good occasion. Our Savior delighted to speak Parables, and
that was the custom of wise men in the Eastern parts so to do. For these have a
popular way of teaching by the things of sense, representing heavenly matter to
the understanding; For by the feast here made, described to be a marriage feast
of a Kings Son, where all glory and pomp uses to be shown, is meant the
privileges and grace of the Gospel that are tendered daily by the preaching of
the Word unto you: sometimes that eternal blessedness and heavenly glory is
compared in the Parables to a great feast, made by a chief and mighty man; but
here the Gospelpriviledges vouchsafed in the Word are thus called; which is
plain, because one came to this Feast without a wedding garment, and was cast
out; which could not be, if this Feast were eternal glory in heaven, for none
shall be excluded from thence. So then, you see to what excellent and choice
things the preaching of the Gospel is compared. Sometimes it is called The
Kingdom of Heaven, sometimes The rich Pearl that a man is to sell all for to
obtain, and here to a great Marriage Feast. By which resemblances the Spirit of
God would raise up our thoughts and hearts, that we should have an high and
great esteem of the Gospel preached. Now though thus great and admirable, yet
see the rebellion and disobedience of the persons invited; some matter it not;
some make excuses; some maliciously and cruelly handle the messengers: If you
ask, Why? what is the matter? What is the wrong done to them? Nothing at all.
Its because he gives this honor to them, to invite them to a Marriage Feast.
He does not come as an oppressor to them, requiring their estates, and goods,
and lives, but he tenders them all comforts and refreshments; and for this
kindness and condescension, they do thus ill requite him; but all do not
refuse, for there is one who comes and sits down at the Feast, is as
confident and bold, as any of the other Guests; till the Master of the Feast
come, and expostulates with him for the want of a wedding Garment, and then he
is so convinced of his guilt, that presently he becomes speechless, upon which
his Master adjudgeth him to eternal torments, where there are weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth. If you ask, Who is meant by such an one? I
answer, All those who do outwardly accept of the faith of Christ, and profess
a general obedience to him; but yet in truth, and indeed they do not thoroughly
and fully walk according to Christ's rules. As for those who wilfully reject and
refuse Christ, not so much as owning any thing of him, they were the Jews and
others; but then there are a world of people, who out of custom give an
external obedience unto Christ, and will be judged Christians, but yet retain
nothing of the life and power of Christianity; such are all ignorant and
profane persons, yea and all civil unblameable men in their lives, yet
destitute of the Spirit of God, and his grace. Therefore howsoever it be hotly
disputed by some, What is meant by this wedding Garment? some saying faith,
some good and holy works, yet we may conclude, that by it is meant the whole
life of a man ordered in a gracious and suitable manner to the Word of God. It
does not then mean one grace, but the comprehension of all. And as it would be
an high contempt and scorn of a great man, and the company invited to a great
feast, if a man should not come in decent and fit apparel; So it is an high
neglect and dishonor unto God and his people, for thee to take the name of
Christ in thy mouth, and to be called by him, to be looked upon as a Christian;
and yet to live in any such ways that Christ does condemn. Our Savior having
laid down the sin and punishment of such an one, closes up all with this
Text, Many are called but few are chosen.

Before the words are opened, here is one material Question, Why our Savior
Quest.
makes this inference, For many are called, and few chosen, seeing in this
Parable of those many who came in at the second call, there is one man only
found without a wedding Garment; so that the clean contrary might have been
asserted, Many are chosen, and of those who are called few are rejected. But
the Answer is twofold,

First, This may relate to the former part of the Parable, as well as the
later; Answ.
and then you see all those who were invited by the first call, did refuse, and
none did answer.

But in the next place, which is a true Answer, by this One man is represented
a multitude of persons of the same way and transgression, it being ordinary in
the Scripture by an instance of One, to represent Many of the same kind; this
is necessary for the coherence.

The words themselves absolutely considered contain a vouchsafing of a great
mercy, but an exclusion of a greater. The great mercy is in these words, Maxy
are called, (...) is here put for (...), for otherwise Romans 11. and in other
places (...) and (...) are all one, the Called and the Chosen are all one; but
here by those that are called are meant such who are called, and openly refuse,
give no consent at all, or else such who do give a general answer, but yet come
not up to that fullness and exactness, which Christ requires. The exclusion
of a greater mercy is, But few are chosen; that is, of those many who have the
outward calling, and give a general Obedience to it, there are but few that are
elected to eternal life. If then any matter may put you into a serious and
earnest trembling about your condition, this has cause enough to do it. God
may give the preaching of the Word, the means of Grace, and people give a
formal and express con^ent to it, yet few of these be within the number of
election. If it had been said, Few or none of those, who reject the Gospel of
peace, and means of salvation, are chosen; it had been no wonder but to say
thus of those, who have Lord, Lord, Christ, Christ often in their mouths, Oh
hard saying! Who can bear it? The first Doctrine to be raised from the words is,

That there are many outwardly called, who yet never partake of the power and
benefit Doct.
of this mercy.

There are those who sit down at Christ's feast, yet for want of a wedding
garment are excluded.

To consider this point let us observe, What this outward calling is, and the
event of it. And because I have already shown, wherein the Nature of the
outward calling of God does consist, I shall only take so much as is implied in
the similitude this Parable does hold forth; for when we see Christ himself
fishing with such a suitable bait as this is, when he that is truth it self does
use such expressions, Who can but believe? Who can but receive?

And first in that the word of God calling men to Faith and Repentance, is 1.
thus described under the notion of a great Feast, it implies, There is in it
a satisfaction to every soul, that is spiritually hungry and thirsty. Ho every
one that thirsts, says our Savior, let him come and drink, Joh. 7. 37.
Christ says, He is the bread that comes down from heaven, Joh. 6. 35. He was
born in Bethlehem. the house of bread.

Now these expressions imply two things:

1. That there ought to be in all men an hungring and thirsting after Christ,
and the privileges he offers. For if you tell a full man of a great feast, he
matters it not; because such an one loatheth the very honeycomb; but a thirsty
man, as you see by Samson; or an hungry man, as you see by the Lepers, and
those that lived in the time of famine in Israel, Oh what would not they do?
How did they rejoice to have one drop, or one crum? Lazarus was glad of a crum;
and thus it is here: A man full of his own righteousness, of his own
goodness, He loatheth all this preaching, he prefers his husks before the
fatted calf. But now take a man destitute of all these, and sensible of his
leanness: Oh how does his soul thirst and hunger after Christ! Thus Paul a
called one judges all things dung and dross for the knowledge of Christ: All
his former privileges he renounceth, and None but Christ, none but Christ does
replenish him. Oh while men have their own greatness, their own goodness and
righteousness, they will never come to this feast. David likewise he speaks
of his hunger and thirst after God, yea that his soul breaks for the longing
it has always unto him; such a disposition is supposed, when the grace of the
Gospel is compared to a Feast.

And then in the second place, It does suppose a satisfying and filling of the
soul. That whereas the wiseman observes, That the eye is not satisfied with
seeing; and There are four things which never say, There is enough; yet here,
he that thirsts when he drinks of this water, he never thirsts more. That
is not, as if he did not desire more grace, and more communion with Christ: Yea
the more they taste of this object, the more they long to have, but they never
thirst so, as to seek out for a better object; They never say of God, as the
Church of her Idols, I will go to my former lusts, and my former sins, for then
it was better with me, then since I cleaved to Christ. No, with Peter in his
transfiguration, they say, It is good to be here; and which Peter did not, they
know what they say. So then in making the grace of God offered to be like a
sumptuous feast, it implies, that there is no spiritual defect or want in
thee, but it shall be made up. That grace no more then nature will not suffer
any vacuum; Some Philosophers speaking how that Materia appetit omnes formas,
yet say that the heavenly matter does not, because there the excellency of the
form does satiate it. This is much more true in the godly heart, wherein God
dwells, there it desires, to make no more change. Now how great a matter it is
to have all thy spiritual longings satisfied, the godly only know.

Secondly, As this phrase supposes satisfaction of spiritual hunger; so it
also intends 2.
pleasure and delight. A feast is matter of joy and comfort. Hence a good
conscience is called a continual feast, Prove. 15. 15. And the Prophet Isaiah
speaking of the precious promises and excellencies under the Gospel, he calls
them A feast of fat things, Isa. 25. 6. At thy right hand, says the Psalmist,
are pleasures for evermore; Christ is said To knock at the door (the outward
Call here spoken of) and if any admit him, he will come in and sup with him,
Revel. 3. 20. So then you see, to be called to the graces and duties of the
Gospel, is matter of great joy and comfort; Insomuch that the kingdom of Heaven
is said to be in righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost, yea its called
unspeakable joy and full of glory. Oh then how great is the madness and folly
of all Recusants to this gracious offer! You are prejudiced against godliness,
as if it brought nothing but melancholy and despair, as if it would be
rottenness to the bones, and like the worm to the tree that consumes the very
entrails of it. No, its to be called to a feast, to matter of joy and heavenly
pleasure; certainly did the jolly worldling and merry voluptuous man, consider
these things, how would he defy and with indignation renounce all his former
pleasures? he would call them miserable comforters, and say, Though they were
honey in the mouth, yet they were gravel in the belly. Go to the world, or to
thy lusts, What is the feast they call thee to? What are the pleasures they
invite thee to? Are they not like that herb which puts a man into a laughter,
but kills him therewith? Seeing then that Vita non est vivere, sed valere, To
live is not merely to live, but to be healthful and cheerful, and comfortable:
Oh know this can never be, till thou art partaker of this Feast. What though
you see ungodly men jolly and merry, having their hearts ease, and nothing
troubles them, this is but a blaze? the crackling of thorns; Its but Jonah's
Gourd that gives him some refreshment for a season. This is but sweet poison,
the stings and torments will be the greater. The poorest godly man, that has
no raiment for covering, no food to expel hunger, may yet sit down at this
Feast with Christ every day. And there is no evil eye to grudge; but in the
Canticles the Spouse bids them Drink, yea drink abundantly, Cant. 5. 1. And if
the godly at any time are dejected, go bowed down, have nothing but gall to
eat, and vinegar to drink, without any comfort, any joy; Its their own fault,
their own imperfection. They drink not of this good wine, they feed not on
these fat things by faith; and therefore let the godly consider, that its their
duty to walk with joy and cheerfulness; All the while thou walk in
diffidence and dejections, thou go without a wedding garment, thou art not
in a suitable posture to a marriage feast. Thy praying, thy hearing is without a
wedding garment, thy mourning disparageth the feast.

Thirdly, Here is by this phrase implied, The great glory and honor that God
would put on all those whom he calls. He makes thee his choice friend, and gives
thee this token of friendship; David expressing a friend, said, We ate bread
together. Haman, how did he boast when the King made a great feast for the
Queen, And I am invited also, says Haman. And certainly we cannot be capable
of greater honor, then to be called to this communion and fellowship with God,
yea to this familiarity; hence all the faithful, as Abraham, are called Gods
friends; Now were faith alive in men's breasts, they would never refuse Gods
calling, for is it not from slavery and bondage to an heavenly freedom? Is it
not from communion with the devil in his works of darkness, to society with
God and his Angels?

Thus you see how eminently this Parable sets forth the privileges of the
Gospel in the tender thereof, you would wonder any in the world should refuse,
that all did not come in by an holy violence: yet in the next place, see the
sad Many called ones reject the Gospel-feast. 1.
event, how ill this love is requited: For

First, There are many persons thus outwardly called, that are profane
Atheists, believe none of these things. All these Parables of our Savior, and
all these excellent resemblances, they make but notions and fantasies. David
complained of this, Psalm. 4. when he exhorted men to serve the Lord, and to
offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving; he adds, Many say, Who will
show us any good? They counted nothing of that David mentioned, to be such a
great good that men should run after it. This made the Prophet complain, Who
has believed our report? Oh it is thy atheism, thy unbelief that makes thee
not presently answer Gods call. Otherwise thou would cry out with the Church,
Draw us and we will run after thee; For want of a divine faith comes all that
rebellion and disobedience which is; well therefore is the same word (...)
rendered unbelief and disobedience.

Secondly, There are the sottish and stupid worldlings who have the Serpents
curse 2.
on them, to feed only on the dust of the earth. These make no matter of this
gracious invitation; so in this Parable, and in another to this purpose, it is
said, When they were called, that they had bought their fields and their oxen,
Luke 14. 19. and so they went to see their earthly possessions; and thus tho
Pharisees, who were covetous, are said To deride Christ, Luke 16. 14. As the
earth of all elements is the heaviest, and inclines to the center; so these
who mind earthly things have their thoughts and affections furthest off from
God, and his calling. These earthly affections do at first resist the very
entrance of good affections, and if yet they be received, then they quickly
choke them: Never is the Gospel more likely to fall like water spilt upon the
ground, then when it meets with an earthy worldly heart: Oh he can find no
savor, no sweetness in approaches to God! When will the Sabbath and the new
moon be over, say they in the Prophet, that we may buy and sell again? Amos 8.
5.

Thirdly, There are an higher degree of wicked men, who do not only neglect and
slight this call of God, But they do wickedly and cruelly abuse and persecute 3.
the very messengers that come to invite them. As here in this Parable, when
they were called to the feast, They took the Messengers, and some they mocked,
and some they killed: Oh barbarous wickedness! What is the hurt that is done
to them? They are invited to a feast, and for this they stone the Messengers.
Thus the Prophets in all ages have been entertained: Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent to thee! Mat.
23. 37. Yea Christ the Son and Heir, he was put to death for inviting them to
this feast: and was this wickedness only in the former times? Is there not that
venom and enmity in many men's hearts? What hurt do the Ministers of God unto
thee? Because they would reclaim thee from thy wickedness, save thee from thy
lusts; this makes thee imbittered against them; forgive them this wrong.

Lastly, There are those who do not refuse, but come in upon invitation. They
sit 4.
down at the feast, none finds fault with them; The messengers they admit him,
the fellow-guests they eat with him, Only the Lord, he spieth him without a
wedding garment: Now by such an one is meant all those who have an external
profession of Christ, and so enjoy all the outward privileges in the Church,
none may prohibit them; yet for all that are without a wedding garment, and at
last to be cast out. And this is properly the person externally called that I
intend to treat on: As for the other, they are only called on Gods part, there
is no manner of consent on their part.

Use of Instruction. How inexcusable all they will be, who refuse God calling?
Use.
Is it not to a feast, to matter of satisfaction, delight, plenty and honor?
Why then do thou reject this Call? Go at the day of Judgment, and say, O
Lord, it is true, I was invited, I was convinced, I saw it was better to obey
then not; but my present lusts, my present pleasures, they drew me aside: say
unto God, unto Christ, unto Angels, I know you were better company, more glory
and happiness there was with you, yet I forsake you to be tormented with the
Devil and his Angels to all eternity.

SERMON CIX.
That most of those that are called, come short of what is absolutely
necessary; And who they be.

MAT. 22. 14. For many are called, but few are chosen.
THe persons called by God, who yet are not chosen, are of two sorts, as you
heard:

First, Those, who, though so graciously invited, do yet obstinately and
peremptorily refuse, and these are actively only called on Gods part.

The second sort is of those who do give consent, and yield to their call, but
because they do not rise up fully to all that is required, therefore they are
cast away. In this rank is the man, who being invited, made no opposition or
excuse, but went in, and sat down at the feast, was as confident as the other
guests, seems to be conscious to himself of no fault, but having no wedding
garment, the master is so wroth and displeased with him, that he is adjudged to
everlasting torments; and from this instance our Savior gathers this
conclusion in the Text; so that the meaning is, Of those many that are called,
and give a general acceptance of it, yet few are chosen to eternal glory: Those
enjoy the feast of the Ordinances here, who are to be tormented for ever
hereafter; those are admitted to eat in Gods presence here, who shall be
commanded to depart from him hereafter, he knows them not: Many are admitted
into the Temple, that may not enter into the holiest of holies.

That many of those who are called, and in many things obey, do yet come short
Observe.
in that which is absolutely necessary.

He that comes to the feast, was not guilty of such rebellion, as they that
opposed, and inhumanely handled the Messengers; yet because he did not prepare
the Wedding Garment, which is a conversation and life suitable to the outward
profession of Christ, therefore he is cast away: This is a necessary truth; for
though we have many Christians, yet we have indeed but few: Though all in the
Land come and sit down at the feast, yet we may say to many, Friends, how came
ye in here? How came you to profess Christ? how came you to say you are
Christians? What? such a sinner, such an ungodly person, and yet say, You
believe in Christ, you love Christ? What is the reproach of the Christian
profession this day, but the ungodly, ignorant, and profane lives of those who
are baptized into Christ's name? Monsters they are, and not Christians, who in
one part bear the image of Christ, and in another the image of the Devil; in
one part seem to be men, in another beasts: So that although the Christian
Religion may boast in the multitude of her followers, yet it may blush at the
lives of them: This was a point our Savior did much treat upon, That men did
receive the truth, as to some particulars, and some degrees, butnot wholly and
thoroughly. The Parables of the several sorts of ground, of the unwise builder,
especially that of the foolish Virgins, who were Virgins, had their lamps, went
out to meet the Bridegroom, only they wanted oil, and this was not perceived
till it was too late; all these tend to this purpose: You see then beloved,
that we may have our lamps lighted, we may have the external profession and
acknowledgement of Christ, but want oil in time of need. Certainly, while we
are preaching of this subject, we may say almost to every man, Nunc tua res
agitur, rouse up thy self and attend, for this matter belongs to thee: Thou
receivest Christ and his ways but in parcels, though thou have Baptism, the
title of a Christian, sit down at the Ordinances; yet where is the
Wedding Garment! where is the conversation that does agree, and belong to so
holy a matter?

To open this Doctrine, let us consider,

First, Wherein lies this outward obedience to Gods call, which yet is
ineffectual; Considerations to (...) po^nt.
for can any thing more concern you, then that you should not be Christians in
vain? that all thy praying, and frequenting of holy duties, may not be in vain?
that God may not take thee from this feast, as Haman was from his, in which he
so much boasted, to be put into confusion, and everlasting fear?

Now this external submission, lies in these things:

First, A consent to be Baptized, and entered into the number of those that own
1. The profane Christians ground of confidence.
Christ: They will not abide in the number of Jews, Turks or Pagans, but they
are willing to in^oll their names in Christ's Catalogue: Thus in the Apostles
times, yea, while Christ preached, you read, John 2. of many who believed in
him, yet Christ would not commit himself to them, because he knew what was in
their hearts. To come to Christ, is not the work of the tongue, or of the head,
but mainly and principally of the heart: With the mouth man is said to make
confession, but with the heart he is also said to believe, Romans 10. Now if you
observe the general deportment of those who are thus called, can you see any
more in them, then a mere bare and general consent to be accounted as a
Christian? Do they matter any more? Do they ever think, What? is this all
Christ would have me to do? No, but they sit down with this general
acknowledgement: Thus Simon Magus, he came to the feast without a Wedding
garment; though the Text says, He believed, and was baptized, yet he was in
the state of gall and bitterness, Acts 8. 17. it is true, he did not feel this
bitterness, he thought all was well, but it was so much the more dangerous:
Thus it is here, thou believe, thou art baptized, thou prayest, thou
professest Christ with the mouth, and yet thy soul may be in gall and wormwood,
a great gulf may be between thee and salvation, and thou all this while lie
down in peace and security of spirit.

Secondly, Upon this entering themselves into the number of Christ's flock, they
may be fully, but foolishly persuaded, that now they have done all: That this
will 2.
interest them into heavenly glory: Oh what a bewitching is this! and are not
most men surprised by this? they think this believing in God and Christ, this
external and visible profession, will instate them in all happiness. The Jews
of old did desperately miscarry upon this point, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7. this made them bold and confident; and in the New
Testament, see how industrious James is, to show the vanity of that faith,
James 3. which is titularly faith, and not effectual in godliness. They that
cried, Lord, Lord, and had prophesied, and wrought miracles in Christ's name,
are commanded to depart into eternal fire, because they were workers of
iniquity. Many times the Apostle bids them not be deceived, Neither fornicators
or extortioners, etc. should inherit the Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Be not
deceived, says he: We are very apt to think, that a profession, or bare
duties, will carry us to heaven, without this power of godliness: And if the
Apostle speaks but of the tongue only, James 1. 26. If any man seem to be
religious, and bridleth not his tongue, that man's Religion is in vain: How much
rather, if he do not mortify his sin, and refrain from all other gross
impieties? when will people drowned in sin, recover out of it? Awake thou that
sleep in this stupidity: What is Baptism? what is Christianity? what is
Protestantism, but a mere empty shadow and title, if thy life be polluted with
impieties: As the Heathens called their Idols gods, when yet they had no Deity
in them, being images of wood, Having eyes, and see not; ears, and hear not;
feet, and walk not: Thus are such Idol Christians, Idol Believers. There are
(says the Apostle) many called gods in the world, but we know that an Idol is
nothing: Thus it is here, there are many called Christians, many called
Believers, but we know this is nothing, where the life and power of godliness
is wanting: Trust not then to thy good faith, to these glorious titles, they
will deceive thee.

Thirdly, If in the primitive times, among those many that gave up their names
3. The number of chosen ones very few.
to Christ, few were chosen, how much a less number must there be now of chosen
ones: This I would have diligently considered, If so be in those primitive
times of those many thousands that believed in Christ, few were chosen, how
little a remnant or handful may we expect to be among our called persons! For
there were three Reasons, why all that were then called should be chosen: For

First, To accept of the Faith and Doctrine of Christ, was then a mere free and
spontaneous thing; there was no compulsion by outward power, it was not a
Religion they were educated and brought up in, their Parents did not teach them
faith in Christ: Now who could not think certainly, they are right indeed, they
must needs have the power of grace in them, who did thus readily and willingly
receive a Doctrine that was wholly new to them, their parents did not instruct
them in, no earthly power did force them to, but out of mere voluntary choice
they embraced it: Yet in that company there was more chaff then wheat, in that
garden there were more weeds then flowers: What then may we judge, when as the
contrary Reasons are with us? for the Christian faith we embrace, is that we
have by education, by Custom: Who is there that makes use of his own
understanding, of his own will to embrace the truths of Christ? who is there,
that upon searching the Scriptures, and trying all things, does thus adhere to
the truth? Are not men brutish in believing, as well as in living? Malunt
homines credere, quam judicare, They take up that Religion their parents taught
them, and its a mere hap, wholly accidental to them, that its the truth: Thus,
like beasts, they follow one another, they go qua itur, non qua eundum est;
certainly, this is far from having the spirit of God opening our hearts, and
inlightning our minds: This is not by understanding and judging, and proving
all things, to hold fast that which is good; This is not for a man to live by
his faith, but by his Fathers, or Grandfathers faith; indeed, to be brought up
in the true Doctrine of Christ, is a wonderful mercy, its an excellent
seasoning of the vessel betimes; but yet if a man have no more from the
Christian Doctrine, then his education, he has no more to say for the truth,
then the Jews and Turks have for their gross falsehoods.

Secondly, That all were not chosen, who were then called, we may wonder,
because of the great and wonderful miracles that they enjoyed, which might
greatly confirm their faith; for who could be but persuaded that Christ was the
Messiah, when he saw the dead raised from the grave, the blind made to see,
the deaf to hear, and the glorious things of God, showing themselves thereby?
and to these great miracles, we may add the zeal and remarkable godliness of
those who lived in the former times; Alas! no comparison may be made of the
grace and godliness that now is, with what has been formerly: Now then, if
those that were called in those days, had all those great incitements to the
power and life of godliness, and yet were defective; What may we look for, when
those are not enjoyed?

Thirdly, This may make us wonder that few only were chosen, of those many 3.
called in former times, because there was little or no outward encouragement
unto the way of Christ: There could be little satisfaction given to carnal
expectations. How often does our Savior call upon them for self denial?
foretell of the trouble and hatred they shall meet with in the world? and when
men have proffered their obedience to him, he tells them of the little worldly
encouragements they must look for. Now it may be a wonder, that men, who had
not the deep impression of godliness upon their hearts, should ever venture
upon such profession, where there were no earthly baits. We use to say, That
adversity tries a friend; yet here it did not hold: Well then, if many men
called in those days, did so miscarry, when yet we would think nothing but pure
love did set them on work? what little faithfulness may be thought to be in the
inward parts of those, who have temporal advantages by Christ; yea, they would
be subject to the Magistrates punishment, if they should renounce the faith of
Christ: Thus you see, how considerable a matter it is, that even in our
Saviors time, and primitive beginnings of the Church, there should be many
called, and few chosen: Oh, if ever, then we should have thought the Church
would have been constituted of those that were truly godly; if ever, then it
would have been altogether fair, and no spots in it, but we see the contrary:
^ts therefore sadly to be lamented, that even the greater part of those, who
yet give an external submission to Christ, should yet not have their names
written in the book of life.

Fourthly, These come upon the invitation, and yet are without the
Wedding Garment, 4.
That are diligent in the discharge of the external duties God requires, but
never look to the internal frame and change of the heart: That was the
universal disease among the Jews, for burnt-offerings and sacrifices they were
constant and diligent in; they did even weary God with the abundance of them:
but God rejected them all comparatively, Burnt offering and sacrifice God would
not have, but a broken spirit, and the Law of God written in their hearts. Our
Savior also is very earnest in this point, in acquainting people with this,
That the mere outward performance of any Religious duty, without any inward
change and work of the spirit, is but a shell, is but the skin; therefore he
tells them, The heart is the good or bad treasury, Mat. 1^. 35. the heart is
the fountain from whence all streams flow; and John 4. God is a spirit, and he
seeks for such who worship him in spirit and truth: No wonder then, if you
see many people submit to the external duties of praying and hearing, for these
are but a bodily labor: Here is no inward working upon their soul, they pray
not, they hear not with a powerful change upon the inward man: Speak to them of
a broken spirit, a contrite heart, which is of so great repute with God, you
speak a mere riddle to them. Observe then, if the greatest sort of persons do
any more then the mere external duty; and if so, these have but an outward
call, they have none of that spiritual glory within.

Fifthly, Those are outwardly called, and not chosen, who regard some
particulars 5.
in Christianity, to do them, but not all; when its the same Christ that
commands both, and the same hell and damnation is threatened to the violation of
one, as well as another: Its strange to see, how many things those that are
called, dare not but do; yet there are again, as plain and as necessary duties,
that they wilfully omit: Now the Apostle James in a pregnant manner does
confute this. He that breaks one of the Commandments, is guilty of all; and
he proves it, because there is the same authority offended, He that said, Thou
shall not kill, also said, Thou shall not commit adultry, James 2. 11. Now then
consider, Why do thou retain any parcels of Christianity, and not all: Thou
believe a God, thou believe Jesus Christ was God: Why? because the word of
God says so: Does not the same word say, Swear not at all? does not then the
same word say, Be not drunk with wine? does not the same word say, Whoremongers
and Adulterers God will judge? This man that was called in the parable, by the
same reason that he purposed to go to the feast, he should also have provided a
suitable garment; he could not but think what a neglect and contempt it would be
accounted to do otherwise: Oh then, that all who hear this truth, would deeply
consider of it, by what reason I obey the call of God in any thing, I should do
it in all things; by what ground I will go to pray and hear, I should also
leave such lusts, and forbear such sins, either all or none, for all duties
have the same Divine stamp upon them.

Sixthly, Those that are called, but not chosen, they are forward for the
privileges 6.
of th^calling, but not the duties of the calling: The Jews had many
privileges by their outward calling, they were thereby the people of God, Gods
presence and power was among them. The Apostle Romans 9. 4. reckons up many
prerogatives every Jew had by being a member of that Church; and thus under the
New Testament, every one externally called, though not inwardly sanctified,
partaketh of many advantages; The promise is made to him and his seed, he is
within the outward administration of the Covenant, he is accounted of the
Church, and the body of Christ: Now these things people make a great matter of;
Oh, to be reputed as a publican and an heathen, is an high reproach; should not
they be thought Christians, their children to be baptized, they would judge it
unsufferable wrong, not considering, that though they be thus forward for
privileges, they are negligent about duties: Thou would have thy child
baptized, thou considerest not, how God would have thee to walk, and what thy
duty is about the education of children: Thy wickedness, and thy ungodly ways
do provoke God, more then all those privileges will advantage thee.

Seventhly, Those that are called, but not chosen, they would indeed receive 7.
Christ as a Savior, and hope for pardon by him, but do not resign themselves
up to him as a Lord, whose commands they will obey: Its true, none can really
and truly believe in Christ for pardon, who do not also at the same time
receive power from him, in some measure, for sanctification and justification;
but yet many men have not faith, but a conceit or presumption of Christ's
satisfaction, without Scripture direction: Now he that is so, contents himself
with this, that he trusts in Christ, and hopes in him for salvation, when they
have not the spirit of Christ: No, the spirit of God convinces of sin, as well
as righteousness, and Christ he dyed not only for comfort for his people, but
for grace and holiness: Oh then, do no longer deceive thy self! thou take
Christ, thou hopest in him, all thy trust is in him; Oh but what feel you of
the sanctifying and mortifying power of the Lord Christ in thy soul and life.

Lastly, The persons called, but not chosen, do all the easy things in
Christianity, 8.
but not the difficult and exact things: The way to heaven is a straight way,
there must be striving, as in an agony, to enter therein. Prayer is to be
fervent, to have groans unutterable; the subduing of sin is mortifying and
crucifying, which argue the pain and reluctance of the flesh therein: But alas,
the greater sort of Christians look not to, nor mind those things; they go in
a formal road, they perform the outward duties sometimes, but as for this
spiritual combating, striving and wrestling, they are not acquainted with it:
How merry, how jolly, how unexercised are they with any temptations: Certainly,
if the way of Heaven be a straight way, thou art not in it; if the Kingdom of
Heaven be had only by violent persons, thou art never likely to obtain it.

Use of Exhortation, to tremble under this truth: Though the Physicians call
Use.
a disease Tremor cordis, yet the Scripture calls a grace, The trembling of the
heart: What if thou art in the number of one outwardly called merely; nay, are
there not many too clear proofs of it? is there any more then a general consent
or submission? do you not leave out the main and necessary things, though other
things you do? Is not thy life a large, loose life, and the duties of Religion
a mere formality: Oh this is too true of too many; help Lord, and give men
understanding to perceive these things: Think not that damnation is only for
Jews, and Turks, and Pagans; Oh you see how near it may come your own houses,
and then thy confusion will be greater: This man to be pulled away from a
feast, and to be severely punished, had the greater confusion and reproach. Oh
glory not in names, in Titles, in outward privileges! for if your lives be
full of ungodliness, you are not those Apostolical, but Apostatical Christians;
even as we see God, by the Prophet, makes an excellent mutation of the name
Israel, that was given to all the Nation, and is as much as a Prince, or one
that prevails with God: Now God calls it Iesreel, a place famous, for the
terrible slaughters that were made there; and signifies as much as the
dispersion or scattering of God; as if he had said, Ye are no more Israelites,
but Jesreelites: Thus will God handle all those, that though they have the name
of Christians, and glory in an outward calling; yet wanting the power of it,
shall be adjudged into eternal condemnation.

SERMON CX.
A Plea for strictness in Religion.

MAT. 22. 14. For many are called, but few are chosen.
WE have described the characters and properties of those who are called and
not chosen: And that which is most remarkable in them is, They are careful to
do many things, but not the main necessary things. This Guest mentioned before,
he was careful to come and sit down at the feast, but not as careful to prepare
a Wedding Garment; whereas common reason and discretion would have taught him,
if I go to this wedding, this Marriage Feast, which is also of so Royal a
person, I must prepare suitable garments, I shall dishonor them, and disgrace my
self, if I do otherwise?

Now the plain meaning of this Parable is thus much, I am called to be a The
meaning of the Parable of the Feast.
Christian, I am invited to the precious feast and dainties of the Gospel; now
if I go to them, and accept of them, my conscience tells me, I must live the
life of a Christian, I must not dishonor that Christ, whose servant and
Disciple I profess my self to be: But because men are so apt to divide these
two, which God has so necessarily conjoined together; and there is nothing
more ordinary then to have the faith of a Christian, and the life of a
Christian, as contrary as light and darkness whereby they are like those night
Bats, look upon their wings, and you would judge them Birds, but look upon
their body, you would judge them Vermin: So it is, look upon their faith, their
profession, you would then judge them Christians; look upon their lives and
ways, you would then say, they were Atheists or Heathens.

Because of this diverse mixture in men's lives, their plowing with an Ox and
Ass, their sowing with contrary seeds, I shall amplify and urge this
particular;

That by the same reason any man does receive any thing of Christ, he is bound
to A Proposition of great use.
receive all.

Upon what ground thou will pray, hear his word preached, thou art bound to
cast away all thy ungodliness, to set upon the strict and powerful means of
holiness: And O that God would by this truth convince you, how contradictory
every ill-lived Christian is to his own principles; that he is a self convinced
man, that he is the greatest hypocrite in the world, that God requires all or
none; that we are to love God with all our heart, all our soul, and all our
strength; that there is no taking half of God, or half of Christ: To be almost
a Christian, is to be almost saved, and that is to be wholly damned.

Before we come to lay down the grounds of this, consider these particulars:
Particular rules about this point. 1.


First, That the embracing of the Christian faith, and the Laws of Christ, are
to be an act of the freest choice, and voluntary acceptance that can be:
Though custom and education may help and prepare, and much incline, yet till a
man come to Christ by his own faith, and by his own willing inclination, its
not acceptable: Religio non potest cogi: Caesar non potest dare fidem, was the
saying of the Ancients; even as it is said of Moses, He chose the afflictions
of Christ, rather then the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. Thus a Christian, he
chooses rather the way of Christ, though requiring much self-denial, though
exposed to all hatred, rather then any other advantageous way in the world: Now
then grant this, That to obey Christ's call, is an act of mere voluntary choice,
then there is no intelligent man, can embrace any one command of Christ, who
does not likewise submit to all. Would you then know, how Christianity comes to
be thus divided and mingled, an ungodly life, to a godly faith, like a live
man, to a dead carcass; one main reason is, because we have this Religion by
education, by custom, by the Laws of the Land, if it had been any other, Popery
or Judaism, it had been all one: It is to the unknown God that most build an
Altar, and by this means men are not careful to bring up their lives to this
Christianity, but bring down that to them; whereas every man that takes this
holy and glorious profession upon him, should wisely weigh, what is this I have
taken upon me? what does it require of me? In all other worldly or external
callings we conclude, and much more this should be done in this heavenly
calling. Our Savior gives an excellent caution herein, making the profession
of Christianity, to be like war and building, Luke 14. 31. which are the two
most expensive attempts that can be: Do you not deride that builder, who goes
about to rear a glorious building, and has nothing to do it withal? Do you
not say, Where is your money? what will you do it with? will you not proclaim
your folly to all the world? So it is here, What? will thou be a Christian?
will thou believe in Christ? Why where is thy holiness, thy purity, thy
chastity, thy heavenliness? I tell thee, to profess Christ, and yet be a
drunkard, a whoremonger, is as great a mocking and scorning of Christ, as they
did who crucified him, that in scorn put on him a crown of thorns, and saluted
him as a King: Oh then, that this truth might sound as terribly in your ears,
as the Archangels trumpet will at the day of Judgment! Its no dallying matter,
its no matter of words and complement to come at Gods call: No, let every one
that calls on the name of Christ depart from iniquity.

Secondly, Consider this: we grant, That even the godliest men that are, though
they 2.
do for the substance and main, as the substantial acts of them, do all that
God commands, yet they fail in many things, and the degrees of their grace are
imperfect: So that although there be the same reason why they should fulfill all
the degrees of grace, yet they cannot in this life; and the reason is, because
God gives no man such measure of grace in this life, as to make him perfect
without sin; there are the stubs and relics of original corruption in the
most holy, which are an heavy conflict and combat in them: Therefore let not
the godly wring this truth till blood come from it, which is intended only for
milk: Say not, There is the same reason why I should do every thing perfectly,
as that I should do any thing at all; for although there be the same ground,
yet God gives not the same proportion of strength for one, as he does for
another; our perfection is, to acknowledge our imperfections: The relics of
sin are still acting in us, that the grace of the Gospel may be made the more
glorious.

Thirdly, In the matters of Christ, some are Doctrinal, some are practical; and
there is the same reason for the receiving of the one, as well as of the other:
For the matters (...).
of faith, some say, He that does discredit or misbelieve one main Article of
faith, he does misbelieve about all, because there is Eadem ratio formalis
fidei, in one as well as another; and therefore the Church never held a
Macedonian who denied the Holy Ghost to be God, though he were put to death by
the Arrians for maintaining Jesus Christ to be God, to be a Martyr; for though
he dyed for one fundamental Article, yet because he denied another, he did
believe nothing at all aright; only now in matters of faith, you must
distinguish between Fundamentals and Superstructions: For Fundamentals,
whosoever receives one, must receive all the rest, else the whole building
will fall to the ground; and for Superstructions, its true, all should be of
one accord and mind, speak the same thing, and judge the same thing, but
because these are not so clearly laid down in Scripture, nor are conclusions
that are very remote so easily discerned as principles, therefore some believe
that which another does not, but because the Wedding Garment consists not in
these things, the master of the feast will not cast out for this difference:
Then there are practicals, such things as Christ has commanded us to do, and
they are either moral duties, or positive duties: Moral duties are those which
are contained in the Moral Law of God, for Christ did not come to destroy
these, but confirm them; and for these none can plead ignorance: The inward
light of conscience, especially furthered by the light of the word, does
evidently demonstrate all this wickedness; yea, as is to be showed, there is
more reason for thy godly life, then thy true faith; for the former is more
easily discerned then the latter: And as for the positive duties, which concern
us as a Church, in the government of it, and the good orders he has prescribed
thereby; though all people that receive the former, should come up to the
latter, yet time and daily instruction must make way for that. Two things
Christ requires of you: First, duties of you as men; then duties as a Church,
as a Society meeting by order in all visible worship: Now these latter duties
are not so much known, because indeed men have not attained to the practice of
the former: The sum of this head is, That in the things of Christ, whether
Doctrinal or Practical, some things are obscure, and some things are evident
and plain: Now the meaning of the assertion is, That by what ground we receive
or do any thing Christ has required, by the same reason we are to do all the
rest that are of evident and plain knowledge. And I shall especially follow
this in practicals, viz. That what reason thou have to profess a faith in
Christ, to come to Church, to pray to him; there is the same to lay aside all
thy ungodliness and profaneness; insomuch, that it is a wonder, that any man
should think he is no good Christian, if he do not come to Church and pray, and
does not also say, I am no good Christian as long as I lie, swear, curse, live
in riotings and drunkenness: Oh! how has sin and Satan bewitched you, and
blinded your eyes, that you should not see these plain things? this matter
should so easily convince your conscience, that it needs not much enforcing;
but yet men are more senseless then the earth, in Divine and Heavenly things.
Bring we then the grounds forth, that, if possible, this day thy soul and thy
sins may be divorced from one another: And Reasons of the (...). 1.


First, That of the Apostle James is very urgent, James 2. 11. viz. The
Authority and Divine command of the Lawgiver: The Apostle speaks to him that
does all the Commandments, yet breaks one, that he is guilty of all; as a man
that breaks the round of a chain, he does in effect break the whole chain; And
why? because the same Authority is despised in one, as well as in all: He that
said, Believe Christ to be God, said also, No unrighteous or wicked person
shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven: If so be then, that though Christ
commanded thee to believe, and to be baptized, he had given thee an indulgence
to any lust or sin, that thou might commit any iniquity without control,
there had been no word of God against it, then thou might have answered all
well; but now thou must needs be speechless: Oh then that men would attend to
these things! We are not now preaching any sublime mysteries of Religion, we
have not a vail upon our matter; even the weakest and ignorant may hear and
understand this: The same God that bids me pray, and hear his word, bids me
give over my lusts, my drunkenness, my swearing; now why should I make
conscience of one, and not of the other? why should I do one because God
commands it, and not the other?

Secondly, There is the same necessity of one as well as the other: A man can
be no more saved, unless he part with all these ungodly ways, then if he should
2.
renounce the Christian faith: It is needless to reckon up all those places,
which make repentance and a godly life absolutely necessary to eternal
happiness; If then you should see a man deny his Christian faith, Renounce
Christ and his truth, you would then presently conclude, There is no hope for
this man: So it is here, If you see a man professing the faith of Christ, yet
doing the works of the Devil, renouncing all the holy works Christ has
commanded, there is no hope of such a man while abiding so; and therefore the
Scripture calls this A denying of God, and A denying of Christ, Tit. 1. 16.
when men in words do acknowledge him, but in their practice live contrary to
him: Oh I how near does this truth come many of you? Do not your deeds deny
God? do not your lusts, your oaths, unlawful pleasures deny him? and yet the
leaving of these is as indispensably necessary to salvation, as the outward
professing of the ways of Christ; going to the feast with a Wedding Garment,
was as necessary as going to the feast at all; and there was no more hope of
him that went without it, then those who did utterly refuse to come unto him.

Thirdly, There is not the same reason only, that thou should do all the
duties God requires, as well as externally profess him, and call on his name;
but also, that thou should do them with all accurateness, strictness, and all
diligence: There is no man that thinks himself bound to be a Christian, but he
is by the same argument to think; he is bound to be an accurate, diligent and
strict one; and he that is not a strict, precise one, is indeed none, as to
have any benefit by his Religion: This I would have you consider, for men think
it indeed their duty to be Christians at large, Protestants in a general loose
way, they are contented with this; but if you press them to a more exact
circumspect walking, not to be conformed to the World, then this is the
strictness they cannot abide; What needs all this? cannot we be saved without
all this nicety? as they call it. Now consider

First, No, ye cannot be saved without this strictness: The way to hell is a
broad 1.
way, the way to heaven is a strait way, the gate is a narrow gate, Mat. 7. 14.
and men must strive to enter in, ye are to walk circumspectly, (...), Ephesians. 5.
15. What singular thing do ye? says our Savior, do not even the publicans and
the heathens do the like? Matthew. 5. So that you see, there is a good
singularity, and we must be singular from the way of the world: Oh then
consider, that the same Bible which commands thee to be a Christian, commands
thee to be a strict and accurate one: That general, loose and formal way, is
too easy to be the way to heaven: In vain have David, Job and Paul watched
over themselves, if thy way will lead to heaven.

Secondly, Its a principle ingrafted in every man, that the best is still to be
given II.
to God: In the Old Testament, the first fruits, and the fat of the Sacrifices
were to be offered: The command is, To love God with all our heart, all our
might, and all our strength; that as God is He, quo nihil melius cogitari
potest, then whom nothing can be thought better; so if we have any better
affections, any better strength, any better power then other, we should spend
it wholly in service of God: Thus they cried, Hoc age, in offering their
Sacrifices; how then comes it about, that thou should have this foolish
persuasion, to think thou servest God, and thou please him, when the world
and the Devil have far more of thee then they have? This made Joshua say to the
people of Israel, when they proffered to serve God, Ye cannot serve God, for he
is a jealous God, Joshua 24. 19. ye cannot serve him, unless you become other
men then you are, and betake your selves wholly to him.

Thirdly, Thou must be an exact Christian, if any at all; because if you go
over III.
all the Religions in the world, you shall see, they have the greatest
approbation, that are more devout and fervent then others in serving their God:
Does not the heathen admire him who is most touched with a fear and reverence
about his Idol? In Popery, are not they Canonized for Saints, who have in the
most strict and precise way, given up themselves to their Religion? What then
should be the matter, that among us its the clean contrary? If a man walk in
the ways of Christ more strictly then others, if a man desire to follow his
orders directly, so that he does not either run into the same excess of riot,
or boundless superstition as others do, such a man is scorned, and most
abhorred of all men; yet thus it is, Be no more godly, be no more holy then the
custom of the world is, and you shall be applauded: but if you go faster then
they, will not sit down with such looseness and formality as they do, then they
cry out of you: Thus you see, that by what reason a man takes up any thing of
Christ, he is bound to receive all; and what he does, he is bound to do it with
that strictness and accurateness that possibly may be. You may ask the question
then, How comes it about, that when there is the same ground, yet most persons
think it enough to come to the Feast, though without a Wedding Garment; think
it enough to be called, though not chosen: And

First, They do not set Faith, Reason and Judgment on work; for if they did, 1
Why most persons think it enough to come to the feast, though without a
wedding garment.
this sun arising, would presently dispell that darkness: If men would take the
Psalmists counsel, To commune with their own hearts, and be still; To propound
these Questions to their Souls, Why do I take this of Christ's, and refuse the
other? Why do I own this particular, and neglect the other? The matter would be
so clear presently to a man's conscience, that he would cry out, All or none: As
the Apostle compares wicked men to bruit beasts, because they are led aside
with the present pleasures; so they are like to them, because they never
reflect upon themselves, and compare things rationally together. Be not as the
horse and mule, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 32, 9. even to men that have no
understanding.

Secondly, A mere speculative and external profession of Christ, is easy and 2.
cheap; it does not spiritually crucify or mortify a man, as the practical
power of godliness does; a man must deny himself, and the practice of his dear
lusts, if his life be conformable to so holy a Doctrine, the Wedding Garment
will sit straight upon a man: Wonder not then, if the greater sort of people
sit down with this general way, for it goes not to the quick, it tries them
not about the killing of any one Isaac.

Thirdly, A total mistake about Godliness and Regeneration: Men never seriously
3.
consider, what exactness, what labor, what conflicts are in that way; They
walk by the Rules of the multitude, they do as most do, especially they are
resolved, they will not stir up the hatred of the World against them: And by
these mistakes, and being thus blindfolded, no wonder if they fall into the
ditch.

Fourthly, An inordinate love to some lust, or to the world: So that although 4.
in the general they know better, and have this persuasion on the conscience,
yet the violence of some indeared lust carries away all with it, as some
violent torrent: Thus the young man, that thought he had kept all the
Commandments, when our Savior tried him in that where his heart lay, he went
away then very sorrowful, Matthew. 19. 22. So then, though Faith, though Christ,
through the Scripture, be never so plain, yet their custom and delight in sin,
makes them forget all.

Use of Instruction: How inexcusable all wicked men will be at the last day;
Use.
out of your own mouths God will judge you; Christ will say, If it was good to
call upon my Name, to make some profession of my Faith, Why was it not also
good to obey my commands? You need no Devil, no Law, no Justice of God to
accuse and indict you, you your selves will condemn your selves: As Peter told
Ananias, that kept back part of the money for which he sold his Land, Was it
not free to thee to do what thou would, before thou did promise? but since
thou have promised, and yet dealt deceitfully, Why have thou lied against the
holy Ghost? Oh thus it will be with thee: had thou been an Athiest, a Pagan,
had thou never engaged to be for Christ's way, then the sin had been more
tolerable; but now thou have lied to the Holy Ghost, thou have lied to God:
Hearken O heavens; and hear O earth, the just condemnation of such perfidious
men! set these things home upon your hearts; say, O Lord, How clear and evident
is this? have I any thing to say, why I should keep this sin, delight in this
lust? does not Christ, whom I believe in, condemn it? does not the word that I
read, judge it? does not the Ministry which I hear, reprove it? and does not
the Conscience I bear about with me, witness against it.

SERMON CXI.
Of Election and Reprobation, and of the Fewness and Properties of those that
are chosen; Answering the Objections of men, and clearing the Justice of God.

MAT. 22. 14. For many are called, but few are chosen.
I Have dispatched the former Proposition, Many are called, and now come to the
adversative, or exceptive Proposition, But few are chosen, (...); though this
Greek word may sometimes be taken as an adjective, signifying as much as
excellent, choice and precious; yet it is here a Participle, and does not so
much denote any inward dignity and excellency, as an external act of God,
selecting and choosing some to eternal life, and leaving others; thus the word
is used very plainly against the Arminian gloss, that would have it be an
Adjective, Mark 13. 20. (...) for the Elects sake, whom he has chosen; So that
this word does signify an extrinsecal favor and privilege of God, who does
all things according to his own will; why of these called, God chooses one and
not another, Noli Scrutari, said Augustine, do not curiously pry; and again
Quaerat doctiorem, sed caveat ne inveniat praesumptiorem. We cannot tell the
reason why of those many called, some have grace given them to obey, and others
remain in their obstinacy. And as we cannot tell why this man, and not another;
so neither why few, and not many. For as the glory of a King is in the
multitude of his Subjects; so we would, think, the glory of God would lie in
the multitude of those that are saved, but we see the peremptory assertion in
the Text, Few are chosen.

That of those many who are called, and enjoy the privileges of grace, few are
chosen Observe.
to eternal life.

Thus Christ called his people A little flock, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little
flock; As the number of precious stones is few to the pibble and gravel ones
that lie in the fields; and as the weeds are far more then the flowers; so
its here: In the Church of God there are more that are dross then gold, more
that are stubble for hell fire, then prepared persons for glory.

Now let us open this Doctrine; And

First, This truth about the paucity of those that are elected, may be handled
either sinfully or profitably; sinfully, as when it is treated on only to
satisfy curiosity, and to keep up a mere barren speculative dispute. Thus that
man was exercised, who came to our Savior, and asked him, Whether there were
few that should be saved? Luke 13. 23. Therefore our Savior did not directly
answer to the Question, because he would not nourish that sinful humor in man.
This point then of Election but of a remnant and few of mankind, is not to be
agitated in a verbal and contentious way, but in a saving way, to make us
tremble, and to set us upon a more diligent and close striving with God in
prayer and all other duties. Hence our Savior though he would not encourage
that Questionist in a way of curiosity, yet he did indirectly answer it, by
bidding the same person, Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for broad was
the way that did lead to death; but narrow was the way that did lead to eternal
life, and few enter therein; So then this Doctrine, if any other, should
produce sobriety, holy fear and trembling. For what prayer, agonies, conflicts
should this work in every hearer?

Secondly, Consider the aggravation of the Doctrine, Many are called and few 2.
are chosen, even of those that are called; and therefore, as you heard, it is
an inference made from the man who came to the feast, sat down with all
boldness, and yet because he had no wedding garment, was wholly excluded; and
this indeed makes the consideration of this point more terrible and sharp; for
had it been said, Of all the men in the world, there are but a few that are
elected to eternal glory, this would not have struck so much trembling; for who
would not have thought it very probable, that those who are within the Church,
those that are within the Ark, none of them should perish? But this should
wound at the very heart, that even of those who have called Lord, Lord, who
have prophesied, wrought miracles, enjoyed the Ordinances, that an handful of
these should be saved: Oh the depths of the counsel of God! How can man sit and
hear these things, and not be dar^ed into the very heart? As they cried out
when Christ said, One of you shall betray me, Is it I Lord? Is it I Lord? And
thus now when the Scripture speaks, Many of you persons called shall be damned,
Is not every one to say, Is it I Lord? Is it I Lord?

Thirdly, That notwithstanding few are elected comparatively to those that are
left 3.
by God; yet if you take the number of the elect absolutely in themselves, so
there is a great number of them. Hence many are said to come and sit down with
Abraham, Matthew. 8. 11. in the kingdom of Heaven; and the spiritual seed that is
given unto Christ, is very great, compared to the dew of the morning, Psalm.
110. Hence in the Revelation you read of many thousands sealed in every Tribe.
It has been a conceit of some of the Ancients, that so many shall be repaired
out of mankind, as will make up the number of the Angels that fell. Their
opinion is, That for the many Angels that fell, there shall rise up so many men
in their room, and God will have that number completed; but here is no ground
for this out of the Scripture; We may truly say, that howsoever it be a few in
respect of others, yet it is an All absolutely considered in themselves; and
therefore they are sometimes called the world, and all men, as some Divines do
expound those places.

Fourthly, The powerful and effectual preaching of this Doctrine, is no just
ground 4. The Doctrine of Reprobation no ground of despair to any.
of despair to any. None can rationally conclude, Because there are so few that
shall be saved, therefore its likely I shall be damned, I have no hopes. Oh if
this be true, then farewell all comfort and all joy, would I had never been
made a man, etc! The beasts of the field, and the birds of the air are happier.
But this is gathering poison out of a sweet herb; for howsoever this be true,
yet no man in his particular may conclude himself a reprobate; for these
Reasons:

First, God lays it as a duty upon every one to repent and to believe, to
come to him, 1.
and he shall have rest to his soul. If then it be thy duty to believe, to
repent, what do thou trouble thy self about thy election or reprobation? The
way to make this Election sure to thee, is by giving all heed and diligence
unto every work of grace: If then thou believe, thou repentest, this may be a
sure testimony unto thee of thy everlasting glory; so then notwithstanding this
truth, Few are chosen, yet those things are likewise true, Whosoever shall
believe, whosoever shall repent, shall be saved; And Whosoever comes unto
Christ he will in no wise cast out. Therefore this election of God does not
infringe those universal promises and invitations that the Scripture holds out.
Neither may a man thus query, Am I elected or reprobated? But, Is it my duty to
repent or not? Is it my duty to draw nigh unto God or not? And therefore you
may observe, That those who hold Absolute Election, can go as far in
administering comfort to any troubled sinner, as those that hold Universal Grace
or Redemption; for no Arminian dare say, God will save thee whether thou
believe and repent or not, that is all one; but thou must believe and repent,
then mercy is prepared for thee; and thus universally can and may the Orthodox
say.

Secondly, This is no ground of despair, because no man can know his
reprobation. 2.
No man can ever truly say, I know I am not chosen, I know I am not elected.
Its true, some have said so in temptations, some have cried out so in the
horror of conscience that has been upon them; but as Peter in a
transfiguration spoke he knew not what; so these in a black and sad temptation.
Secret things belong unto God, revealed things unto us: God keeps that book of
men's names that are eternally left by him in his own custody: Even as the day
of Judgment, the time of it, is kept secret. Its true indeed, There may be a
certain knowledge of our Election, not as it is in the fountain and decree of
God, but by the sure and blessed effects thereof, which the Scripture does
abundantly witness; and there is great use of such necessity, because hereby
God has the greater praise and glory; and a man is more imboldened and
encouraged in all the afflictions that do accompany the profession of Christ.
See how Paul does triumph over all by the sense of this love comforting his
heart. But now if a man should know he were reprobated in this life, it would
breed in him all desperate obstinacy to commit all wickedness with all
delight, and he would take himself disobliged from all the duties commanded,
that he was not bound to repent or believe, or to pray, no more then the
already damned in hell.

Thirdly, Therefore this cannot breed despair, because if there be any soul
broken 3.
for sin, troubled under the guilt of it, we Ministers of the Gospel have a
Commission to preach peace and pardon to such a soul. Oh then there is no cause
thou should bewail thy reprobate condition, that God had no thoughts of thee,
but rather thy hard and stony heart, that will not relent, that will not
grieve, that will not hunger and thirst after Christ. For let us meet with such
a soul, as the body of that man of Jericho, wounded with sin, and we must pour
oil into it. We dare not keep comfort from any one who discovers unfeigned
signs of repentance; yea if need be, we may in particular absolve, and acquit
in the name of the Lord, such a sinner from his sins, and the Lord he will
confirm it, Whose sins ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven, Matthew. 18.
Oh then that we had such occasions, as to administer this balm of Gilead! Oh
that we could meet with such persons, and we would say, Be of good comfort, thy
sins are forgiven thee.

Fourthly, It cannot be any ground of despair, for there is more possibility of
thy 4.
Salvation, by Gods absolute Election, then by Universal Grace or Redemption,
as the Authors of that Doctrine maintain it; So that if a man were put to
choose which Doctrine he would have, as putting him into the greater
possibility of salvation, he would rationally choose the former way. For by an
Absolute Election some are sure to be saved, but by the Doctrine of those
universalists, notwithstanding Universal Grace, and Christ's dying for all, not
one man may be saved; God may lose all the glory of his mercy, and Christ all
the fruit of his sufferings, and a man's salvation is hereby made the more
unlikely, in that they have not been able to instance of any one Heathen
amongst many thousands that improved his naturals so well, as to have Grace
given him.

Fifthly, This few number that are said to be chosen, are so precisely
determined 5.
and ordained by God, that it can neither be lessened or multiplied. When the
Apostle had spoken of the fall of some eminent persons, he adds,
Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2. 19. having this
title, The Lord knows who are his: So that if the days of a man's life are
numbered with God, that there cannot be one day taken from them, or added to
them; much more must this hold in that sovereign and glorious decree. Insomuch
that it is false Doctrine to say to any man, If thou art not predestined,
pray thou may be; for this is Gods eternal purpose before the foundations of
the world were laid, and are far stronger then those Decrees of the Medes and
Persians, which were so immutable that they could not be changed; and such a
prayer would be as if we would entreat God to create the world. There is none
of these chosen ones shall ever be cast away as a reprobate, None of the bones
of Christ were broken, much less will he lose any of his living members; The
love of God is unchangeably placed upon his people, and those that are his
Ammi, his people, in this sense have this mercy, he will never say to them,
Loammi, you are not my people.

Sixthly, These that are thus chosen by God, of his mere good will and gracious
6.
pleasure, God finds not any thing in one called person more then another that
should distinguish them. Paul said, Who has made thee to differ from another?
1 Cor. 4. 7. And indeed if in these earthly mercies, its God that gives some
riches, and not another; some wealth, and not another; some health, and not
another; How much rather then is it God, that gives one grace to repent, and
not another; one a broken and a contrite heart, and not another? Thus always
in the Scripture, you shall find that repentance is Gods gift. To believe and
understand the mystery of the Gospel, is given to one and not to another. Those
then that are thus chosen, are to be ravished with the consideration of free
Grace, that God out of his good pleasure should make such a large difference
between him and others that it may be have been less sinners, and have less
dishonored God then he has done. How thankful must the Israelite needs have
been to see the destroying Angel pass by his house, and strike at the next
Egyptian house to him! How much more then are the godly to rejoice, who have
the stroke of eternal damnation passing by them, but falling heavily upon
others!

And if you object, saying, All is of Gods mere pleasure, and its wholly of
God, Object.
that one is left, and another is taken; then a man's damnation and destruction
is wholly to be imputed unto God; then a man is no more in fault; for who has
resisted his will?

To this we answer: That howsoever it be Gods Sovereign good pleasure to Answ.
choose some and not others, yet a man's damnation is wholly of himself in
respect of the meritorious cause; for no man is damned precisely, because God
has not chosen him, because he is not elected, but because he is a sinner, and
does wilfully refuse the means of grace offered: insomuch that there is no
sinner, but he does as willingly and readily sin with as much choice and
delight, as if he were not at all left by God; and therefore the Scripture does
wholly attribute a man's destruction to his own self: Let no man think then to
evade Gods Justice under this pretense. No, God will be justified, and every
man will be found to be a sinner. Neither may this be thought injustice in God,
for if he had not saved one man, none could have blamed him; we see he did not
spare one of the Apostate Angels; Thus also might he have done with all
mankind. Let us therefore admire the goodness of God that chooses any to
eternal life.

But a second Objection, which cavillers use to make, is, If God has thus
Object.
chosen some, and left others, then all our labors and endeavors after
Godliness, are in vain; Why should I pray? Should I seek after God, all may be
in vain?

To this the Answer is easy: Thou must live by the revealed will of God, not
Answ.
by the secret: Now Gods revealed will calls for such duties, commands such
graces of every one. What is Gods secret will none can tell thee, but in the
Word he has showed thee, O man, what thou art to do: Do not thou then cavil,
and argue against thy Duty? But hear what the Scripture says, Tremble under
what God does require of thee, thou art sure the neglect of these Duties will
be unto thee an evident token of perdition. Neither do the Orthodox assert such
an Absolute Decree as does oppose ordered means, but Conditions suspended upon
the uncertain will of man. We see the Scripture positively asserting such an
Election of God before the foundations of the world: we see it also as positive
and peremptory in commands for the use of the means. Therefore these two things
may stand together: Let not then the difficulty of reconciling them make thee
deny either; and if upon prayer and study thou can not pitch on a way for
their concord (for several learned men differ herein, some going one way, some
another) do then rather submit thy understanding, then presumptuously deny the
truth, as thou do in the matter of the Trinity; and this counsel, about a
point very near it, not all one with this, does Cajetan the subtle Schoolman
give.

And thus much for Explication: The ground why of many called, few are Signs
that but but few are saved.
chosen a priori, is, as you heard, Gods will, Who does in Heaven and Earth
what pleases him. Paul in the ninth of the Romans has so fully determined
this, that its a wonder any have had the forehead to rise up and dispute
against it; We rather are to admire the mercy of God, that a few are chosen,
rather then to dispute why not more, or all. The Church in her temporal
affliction did bless God for the remnant that was saved; and we are much more
to praise God for any that are elected to eternal life.

And then the ground a Posteriori, or which is rather a sign that few are
saved, may be evidenced by considering the lives of those that are called, View
then and judge by the Scripture, and you must then conclude few are chosen. For
out of the number of those that are called outwardly, Take

First, All ignorant Persons; and then you remove a great number. That no
grossly ignorant person, living and dying so, is chosen, appears plainly,
Because God would have men come to the knowledge of the truth, and so to be
saved, 1 Timothy 2. 4. And conversion is an enlightening of the mind; its the
giving of a man a spiritual understanding; They are a people of no
understanding, therefore he that made them will not save them, Isa. 23. 11. So
then, we are to bid all ignorant people, Stand you by, you are not of the
chosen ones by any outward sign. As yet you are in a damnable condition: Oh
pray that God would open your blind eyes!

Secondly, From those that are called. Take away the profane and ungodly man
in his life, and then the number is still less and less. Are not the ignorant
and the profane men the greater part of called persons? But now if any man be
a vicious and ungodly person, he must also stand aloof off: Here are no signs
of thy Election, as yet; yea there are the Plague-tokens for the present of
Gods eternal displeasure.

Thirdly, There is a third sort to be taken away, and that is, Of those indeed
who live a civil and unblameable life, unspotted from all sin and
wickedness, but yet have never felt within themselves the mighty power of God
renewing their natures. What a small number by this time will that of the
chosen persons be, when those that live in a fair and ingenuous way, but never
tasted the good word of God upon their hearts, are also bid to depart, here is
no comfort for them.

Lastly, Yet once more take away all those, who have the common gifts and
graces of Gods Spirit, who have some inward workings of illumination, and joy,
and sorrow in their hearts; but yet because they do not dig deep enough, and
want root, are therefore carried no further then hypocrites and reprobates:
Such there are, and our Savior does often give his Disciples warning, lest
they go no further then these. Now then put all these together, The Ignorant
Person, The Profane, The Civil, and the Temporary Believer, and take the rest,
and you will say, Oh how few are chosen!

Use of Examination. Try your selves under this truth, Has Christ spoken it
Use.
once and twice? It will prove true, That though Many are called, yet few are
chosen: Oh then search, and again search and try your ways! Oh enquire,
whether thou art in the number of those chosen ones or no! for the thing may be
known. The Scripture gives many characters of those that are thus chosen, Do
thou then fall upon this study. Oh do not hear and hear, but fall presently
upon the work! The signs are these:

First, Those that are chosen to glory, they are likewise chosen to grace here.
Election will in due time have its effectual vocation. If God appoint thee to
eternal life, he does here in this world appoint thee to a gracious and
heavenly life. As thy glory and happiness is a choice mercy, so are thy
thoughts, thy actions choice actions. Is thy whole conversation selected and
removed from sin and filthiness. This is a sure argument, No Sanctification
no Election, No choice Grace no choice Glory. Thou art to be a precious jewel
here, ere God will make thee up at that great day.

Secondly, Those that are chosen, they have the Spirit of God bestowed on them:
He is the fruit of this Election, and a threefold work the Spirit of God puts
forth in them: Its

1. A Spirit of Prayer, Romans 8. which teaches us how to pray, and what to
pray; which makes our hearts full of conflicts and spiritual agonies in prayer.
Thy earnest, effectual prayers demonstrate thy Election.

2. Its the Spirit of Adoption, enabling us to call God Father: This is a
comfortable fruit in those that are chosen; They have a Filial and Evangelical
frame of heart. They have a godly boldness and confidence in Gods love.

3. Its a witnessing and sealing Spirit to them, it assures and seals unto them
the love and favor of God, and by the Spirits assistance they come to be thus
persuaded. Alas, they have no such certainty of themselves, as the choicest
colors cannot be seen without the benefit of the light.

Thirdly, Those that are thus chosen, they have a heavenly delight and
excellent joy in drawing nigh to God; His Ordinances are excellent, his Word is
excellent, his Sabbaths are a delight. They prize those things more then the
worldly man his treasure, the voluptuous man his pleasures.

Lastly, They that are thus chosen, they walk with an holy fear and trembling.
Their heavenly joy and assurance does not degenerate into presumption or
neglect of the means. No, Paul beats down his body, that he may not become a
reprobate; and he gives this general rule, Work out your Salvation with fear
and trembling. These are the fruits of Election, not as if all that were chosen
had them at all times, or altogether, or in a perfect manner, but with much
conflict and imperfection.

SERMON CXII.
More Signs and Effects of Election. And Directions to those that are
overwhelmed with Thoughts and Fears whether they are Elected or no.

MAT. 22. 14. For many are called, but few are chosen.
THe Doctrine contained in the adversative or exceptive part of this
Proposition, carries much terror with it; for how easily may the soul be
discouraged under this consideration, The fewness of those that are elected or
saved? Now although there are few who need encouragements, the greater part of
our Auditors being presumptuous and self-confident; yet that I may handle this
truth completely, I shall Answer this particular case of Conscience,

What that person should do, who is overwhelmed with fears and thoughts whether
he belong to Election or no, whether he has any interest in the Covenant of A
Case of conscience.
Grace; for though but few, yet some such there are, who through the tenderness
of their own heart, and Satan's subtle temptations, are many times cast down, as
if there were no hope for them: Though God be gracious to others, yet not to
them; insomuch, That they sit down like deflowred Tamar, weeping and wailing,
not knowing whether to go; would not therefore he be like a Messenger from God,
that could tell how to ease the soul of this burden? But before I apply my
self to this satisfaction, I shall add some further signs and effects of
Election, to what I propounded the last day; and certainly, if the hearts of
men were as careful to make their Election sure, as they are to make the
Evidences of their Estates, or any outward advantage they enjoy, even a little
said, may do good unto them. In worldly things that Rule is received, Tene
certum, dimitte incertum, Hold that which is certain, and let More signs and
effects of Election.
that go which is uncertain: Why then are ye not as wise in this respect? Thy
outward mercies, thy security, and quietness of conscience, these are no
certain signs of thy Election; therefore let them go and put no more confidence
in them. We proceed to add more, That he who is not convinced in the want of
one, may be in the want of the other. And

First, They that are thus chosen, the preaching of the Gospel comes not unto
them in word only, but in a full and efficacious power on their heart, and
assurance of their understanding: We Ministers of the Gospel may here take up
our lamentations, 4
To whom is the Gospel preached, any more then mere bare words? Do not our
Sermons, as the Psalmist said of our lives, Pass away as a tale that is told?
Oh this is an ill sign! consider that place, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4, 5. Knowing
(brethren) your Election of God: The Apostle speaks so of others, either in the
judgment of charity, or from that spirit of discerning, which was vouchsafed
some in the Apostles times: Well, how comes Paul to know this? by this glorious
effect, Verse 5. For our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in
power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance: See what the end and issue
of every Sermon should be, it should come with power, and with the Holy Ghost
into your hearts; viz. The Spirit of God accompanying the word, works faith,
conversion, and a through reformation of our lives: Its therefore very good to
consider, with what power the word preached falls into thy heart: Does it
convince thee, humble thee, mollify and soften thee, this argues thou
belongest to God. John 8. Our Savior argued on the contrary, that the
Pharisees were not of God, because they did not hear with faith and obedience
his word: Thus you see, great discoveries may be made of men, according to the
efficacy Gods word has upon their hearts. Every faithful Minister is like
John, a voice, but if he be no more, then he said of the Nightingale, vox and
praeterea nihil, a voice, and nothing else; woe be to that Auditor who feels it
no more: Ezekiel was no more to his hearers; God tell shim, He was like a
pleasant song to them, Ezekiel. 33. 32. they would come and hear as his people,
but they would do nothing; If therefore the Election of God ever put forth any
glorious power on thee, thou will find it in this some time or other, that the
word preached will be more then the word of a man, more then a mere humane
Oration, or verbal Declamation: Oh! it will be like fire in thy bowels, like a
two edged sword in the secret places of thy heart; thou will cry out, Verily
God is here: Oh the power, the conviction, the meltings of my soul that I feel
within me!

Secondly, A further effect of Predestination, is a conformity to the image of
Christ: 2.
Thus the Apostle expressly affirms, Romans 8. 26. Whom he did foreknow, he did
predestinate to be conformed to the image of his son: This is a glorious fruit,
to be made like Christ, to have the image of Christ in us, affections like
Christ, zeal and heavenliness like Christ. This conformity unto Christ, may be
in three things:

First, That which is future and to come; viz. To be glorified, as he is
glorified: Thus the Apostle elsewhere says, Our vile bodies, shall be made
conformable unto his glorious body, Phil. 3. 21. and as we have carried the
image of the earthly, so we shall the image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. 49. An
inestimable privilege it is: But I intend not that.

The Second particular of conformity, is the grace and holiness of Christ; that
as he was altogether holy, humble, doing the will of God readily in every
particular, so should we. Hence we are commanded To be followers of him, and,
To put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 12. 14 as a garment which covers the
whole body; so that we are to express the savor and life of Christ in all that
we do, let nothing of our sin, our nakedness appear, but every thing like
Christ: How excellently did Paul arrive to this, when he could say, I no longer
live, but Christ within me. Hierom said of Austin, That he did Diligere
Christum habitantem in Augustino, he loved Christ dwelling in Austin: Oh! this
image and superscription they bear who are elected; they shall, at least ere
they dye, manifest the life and power of Christ dwelling in them. Consider
then, are thy affections, thy thoughts, thy actions such as resemble Christ?
Those that are elected, are predestined to such a conformity.

Thirdly, There is a conformity unto Christ, in regard of his sufferings, and
patient obedience thereunto: This some interpreters make to be the chief scope
of the place; that as Christ had in this life a suffering, afflicted and
persecuted life, in all which he was full of humility and patience, and after
this he was exalted to glory; so it will fall out with every member of Christ;
every member, as well as the head, shall have a state of humiliation, before a
state of exaltation: Let not those then who will live in the power of
godliness, expect great and comfortable things always in this world: Though
they be chosen ones with God, yet with the world they may be the offscouring
and dregs of mankind.

Thirdly, The third effect, Is thankfulness, and continual hearty gratitude
unto 3.
God for this so great and unspeakable a mercy: You can no more keep in the
heart from overflowing, when its sensible of this everlasting love of God, then
you can put bounds to the sea: See Paul, Ephesians. 1. and in other places, with
what heavenly joy and enlarged thankfulness he amplifieth the love and grace of
God in electing of us before the foundations of the world; he cannot satisfy
himself with any words, but heaps them up one upon another; and certainly, in
that God has elected and chosen thee, he has done more for thee, then if he
should give thee all the glory of the world. That elect Lady John wrote unto,
was more happy in being elected, then in all the external glory she had; How
then is thy heart affected with joy, and praise, and thankfulness in this
matter? He that bestows great things, looks for great return of thanks,
especially this being all we can do.

Fourthly, Those that are elected, have a spirit of heavenly fortitude and
courage 4.
bestowed upon them, whereby they are able to rejoice and triumph in all
adversities and troubles: The apprehension of this does so animate them, that
like Salamanders, they live in the fire of persecution; like the Ark, they are
so far from being drowned in the waters, that thereby they are exalted nearer
Heaven. Read Romans 8. What glorious triumphs does Paul, in the person of all the
elected, make over all kind of Enemies that can be thought on! he challenges
every adversary to put forth his sting: Now whence comes all this boldness and
confidence? even because God had elected, and nothing can separate them from
this unchangeable love: How can men endure the loss of goods, estates, name and
life it self, did not a gracious assurance of this, raise them up above all
humane strength? This is the Aqua fortis unto their despondent spirits; this
makes them, with Paul, say to all friends that would hinder them in sustering
for God, Why do you break my heart? I am ready not only to be bound, but to
dye for Christ's sake.

Fifthly, The last and glorious effect of Election, is perseverance, and a
steadfast continuance in that way of grace they are at first set in: Final
Apostasy, and total 3.
backsliding from the ways of God, can never befall those that are thus chosen:
If it were possible, Mat. 24. 24. The elect would be deceived with the signs
and wonders of lying Prophets: They went from us, because they were not of us,
said the Apostle, 1 John 2. 19. many places might be brought to this purpose;
especially that promise, Ier. 32. 40. which is nothing but the Covenant of
Grace, and the execution of Gods decree from all eternity, I will put my fear
in their hearts, that they shall never depart from me: Oh what a blessed mercy
is this! when there are so many hours of temptation in the world, so many
blustering storms and tempests, that are able to raise up the very roots, did
not that immortal seed preserve them. Thus having added some more necessary
effects, that demonstrate this calling and election of God, I now apply my self
to pour oil into that wounded heart I mentioned, to that tender conscience who
is surprised with fear and trembling, least not so much as the crumbs that fall
from this table do belong to it; that refuse to be comforted, saying with Zion,
God has forsaken her. And

First, Let such an one consider, that it is no new or strange temptation, even
for the 1. The Case of consciu^^^ r^solved.
godly to be possessed with these thoughts and fears, that God has left them,
God has forsaken them: How often may you have the Church sighing such
complaints in David's Psalms, Has the Lord cast off for ever? will he be
gracious no more? and so in Isaiah, Zion has said, The Lord has forsaken me:
But all that she said, and she thought was not true; nay, what need we wonder
at this, seeing that Isa. 49. 1^.
even Christ himself was tempted in this manner, though without sin: Was not
this the meaning of those heavy groans and cries, the Apostle says he uttered,
saying, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? My God, my God, there were
the expressions of faith, adhering and relying; but, why have thou forsaken me?
they were the words of one not feeling the sensible comfort and support of God
at that present; which was not simply a sin, but part of that soulagony, and
soul-sufferings he did undergo for us. Well then, let no tender heart, and
troubled soul be dejected, if it be exercised with such black temptations; for
these things have befallen the godly, yea, Christ himself.

Secondly, Lay this down assuredly, that all those thoughts and suggestions, as
2.
if thou were not chosen, come only from the Devil, and are his poisoned
arrows that he darts into thee: He is the Prince of darkness, and loves to
keep the soul in darkness; he is the Accuser of the Brethren, not only to God,
but accuses God to them, as an hard master, as one that did watch to damn and
destroy: Now that they come from Satan, is plain, because they are contrary to
the scripture: All spirits must be tried by the Scripture, and so thou must try
thy spirit by the Scripture: Well then, thy spirit says, God has not chosen
thee, God has not ordained thee to eternal glory; now say, Where does the
Scripture reveal any such thing? where does Gods word manifest any such thing?
If then the Scripture discover no such thing, it comes but from that lying
spirit, and thy lying heart together; say therefore in all such temptations,
Get thee behind me Satan, these things savor not of the Scripture, these
things come not from Gods spirit; therefore Gods spirit is called The
Comforter, because he inclines the soul to believe in Gods gracious promises;
Gods spirit, is the spirit of Adoption, which inableth us to cry, Abba Father;
thus the spirit of God, where that is, dispels all tormenting fears, all sinful
dejections, carries on the heart to Evangelical considerations: Now this
should exceedingly prevail with the tender heart, when it feels all those sad
and heavy pressures: All these things are contrary to Gods spirit, they grieve
the spirit of God, as well as my own spirit.

Thirdly, Consider, We are not to live by our own experiences and feelings that
we have, whether of joy, or fears, but by the word of God: Its a very dangerous
3.
delusion, when a man makes his own sense and experience, the rule to walk by:
He must bring his heart, and all things to the word, to be directed by it,
guided by it. Now the word of God that commands every one in particular to
believe, to repent, to draw near to God; this the word enjoyneth every one, Why
then art thou troubling thy self about the secret things of God, which can
never be known? These revealed commands and duties, they belong to thee; How
much better were it therefore to shake off all those temptations, as Paul did
the Viper from his hand; and say, Let me rise up and fall to my duty: The
command is plain, unquestionable, Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden,
Mat. 11. Ho every one that thirsts come, John 7. Now then, if these Texts be
so clear, so evident, how dare thou refuse them? If sin trouble thee, then
let sin against these Commandments trouble thee. We have a most pregnant
instance in this case, Mat. 11. 22. The woman of Canaan when she desired help
from Christ, see what a repulse Christ gave her, Its not fit to give childrens
bread to Dogs: He calls her a Dog, he tells her, childrens bread did not belong
to her; Whose heart would not this break? was not this in effect to tell her,
she was a reprobate, the promise of Grace did not belong to her? Though Christ
spoke this by way of trial, to draw out her importunity the more: Well, what
says the woman to all this? yet she will catch some thing for an argument
still of hope, Truth Lord, yet the Dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from the
table: Let me be a Dog, let me be unworthy, I confess my self so, I feel my
self so, yet deny not the crumbs, the least mercy I shall prize; and upon this
answer what great commendation did Christ give her faith? Look you then, here
is a copy for thee to write after, endeavor to be like this woman; O Lord,
though I feel no comfort, though I be a Castaway, though I be a dog, yet let
me have but the crumbs, the least expressions of thy love, and they will refresh
me: So that you see, these temptations are not to deject, but to draw out thy
importunity, to quicken up thy affections, as you shall hear afterward.

Fourthly, Thou ought to be so far from being discouraged, because of these
sad 4.
temptations and fears, that thou ought the more to rejoice, and to take
these groans and cries, as the sure signs and simptomes of thy predestination;
For so we told you, where this election was, there the spirit of God did
accompany the soul with prayers and groans unutterable: So that those exercises
and troubles of heart, they are to be a great ground of comfort and hope to
thee; thou art to rejoice and bless God, that puts thee in such agonies, such
exercises, though for the present so heavy and unsupportable: Alas! he that is
a reprobate, and indeed forsaken by God, he is never thus troubled, he is given
up to a stony heart, as Pharaoh was; and therefore such are said to have a
blind eye, a deaf ear, a fat heart, that cannot understand: No, those that are
thus forsaken by God, they make a mock of sin, they eat and drink, and go down
quick to hell: Let not then, those things which ought to comfort thee, be
matter of discouragement to thee: Turn not honey into gall.

Fifthly, Consider, The unprofitableness, and sinfulness of all such fears:
They 5.
come to no good at all, they are thorns in thy side, and hinder thee in all
that liveliness and power of godliness that ought to be; they hinder thy
praying, thy obedience, thy comfortable discharge of thy relation, duties: The
joy of the Lord is your strength, said Nehemiah, Nehem. 8. 10. and fear, that
makes feeble hands, and feeble knees: so that as that timber which is eaten
into by worms, cannot serve for strong building; so neither can those who are
devoured by these temptations, be for that while serviceable unto God: Know
then, if thou will fear, thou have cause to fear these fears, thou have cause
to take heed thou do not run into sin, while thou art afraid of sin.

Sixthly, Examine thy self, whether thou do not live in some known secret
sin unrepented 6.
of; and that puts thee upon the question of all; or whether thou have not
grossly fallen from thy former love, and power of godliness: These things many
times raise a dark and gloomy mist upon the soul. Psalm. 32. when David kept
close his sin, and did not confess it, that made great trouble and perplexity
in his soul. As vapors got in the bowels of the earth, and finding no vent,
make a terrible earthquake.

Seventhly and lastly, Grant all thy fears and troubles to be upon just
grounds, yet if 7.
thou must perish, perish depending upon God: Take up Jobs resolution, Though
he kill me, yet will I trust in him; as Hester, venture to go into Gods
presence, and say, If I perish, I perish, and thou will find as she did, the
King of Heaven Job 13. 15.
holding out the Scepter of grace: Thou art sure to be damned by unbelief, and
by keeping off from God, but its possible to meet with salvation, yea, its
sure, if thou draw near to God: As those Lepers were sure to perish with
famine, if they staid in the place they were in, therefore they would venture,
though in the enemies Country: And thus much for application of comfort.

I shall conclude with an Use of Admonition, Try your selves about these
forementioned fruits of election; do not reject these things, as nothing
belonging to thee: Oh! do not thou see thy self as yet in the state of gall
and bitterness? what mean those gross impieties, those unfruitful and
unreformed ways, under so much preaching? Put thy mouth in the dust, if yet
there may be hope; pray, and again pray, God would deliver thee from those sins
that overcome thee.

SERMON CXIII.
Of Christians walking worthy of their Calling; what to walk worthy implies,
and what are the Properties and Actions that will become and grace our holy
Calling.

EPHESIANS. 4. 1. I therefore the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called.
THe Apostle in this Epistle, as for the most part in others, divides his
Discourse into two parts; The first whereof is didactical, informing and
confirming in matters of Faith and Doctrine. The second is moral and practical,
wholly tending to form us in a Christian and heavenly life. Now in the
beginning of this Chapter, wherein my Text is the first verse, the Apostle
betakes himself to an wholesome and savoury Exhortation, to live in the powerful
expression of all the graces of Gods Spirit. And first, he lays down his
Exhortation in the general; and then instanceth in particulars.

The general Duty is my Text; wherein observe,

1. The Duty it self, Walk worthy: To walk implies the perpetual course and
exercise of a man's life. He that steps now and then occasionally in such a
path, is not said to walk in it: To be godly by fits, to have some pangs and
sudden resolution; for what is good, and the^ presently to let all vanish, is
not to walk. To walk worthy; This is not worth of merit or congruity antecedent
to Gods grace calling us. No, he plainly supposes the grace of God has called
us already: and therefore, as it to be showed, it denotes only a worth of
condecency and fitness that is subsequent to this holy calling, that all our
thoughts, words and actions should be decent, and becoming such an heavenly
call. Even as John bid them, Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, Luke 3.
8. that is, fit and beseeming repentance.

2. You have the object of this Duty, and that is The Vocation wherewith ye are
called; by this he means, that outward favor of God calling them from their
former ignorance and sins, to the profession of faith and obedience to the
Gospel. They are not now what they were once; They must be other men; They must
consider their heavenly dignity and condition. As Paul said, While he was a
child, he did all things as a child; but when a man, he left those childish
things, and did as a man: Thus it is here, when thou wast ignorant, profane,
and a stranger from God, thou did as such do, but when called by God, then
thou take up more holy and divine resolutions.

3. There is the argument to enforce it, and that is from the outward condition
of him, that does thus entreat them, A prisoner of the Lord; one that is in
bonds and prison for the Lords sake. This he does to excite their affections,
for how well might they part with their lusts and unlawful pleasures, when he
had parted with his liberty, and was ready to lose his life for the Lords sake!
And see here the gracious disposition of Paul, who being now in prison and
bonds, is not sollicitous about himself, does not write about means to set
himself at liberty; but all his care is, that these Ephesians might do nothing
which should be a scandal to Christianity, a reproach to the Gospel, that all
their life should be a praise and a glory to that calling God had called them
with.

That it is the earnest and hearty desire of the faithful Ministers of the
Gospel, that Observe.
all Christians should live such a life, that is worthy and beseeming so
excellent a Calling.

There are no sadder objects, then to see a profane, a debaucht, an ungodly
Christian; to see men profess Christ in words, and in works to deny him; For
these things their souls mourn in secret. Because of this, they entreat,
beseech and exhort without ceasing: See the like hot affection burning out in
Paul to the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. We pray always for you, that our
God would count you worthy of his calling. We pray always for you; This we
never forget; This is always in our heart, that ye may be a people becoming
this glorious calling. And indeed its a most absurd and even loathsome sight,
to see a man with the same mouth pray to God, yet to curse, swear and
blaspheme; with the same body, to worship God in the Congregations, and to
fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Solomon has two excellent sayings together,
Prove. 26. v. 7. and v. 9. The first is, The legs of the lame are not equal, so
is the parable in a fools mouth. A fool is the wicked man, and a parable is a
grave, holy sentence: Now, says he, as those that are lame and halt, they show
an uncomely inequality in their going, such a deformity there is in a wicked
man, that yet has holy truths in his mouth. The second is, As a thorn goes up
in the hand of a drunkard; so is a parable in the mouth of a fool. The drunkard
he feels no smart, though a thorn run into his hand. Thus a wicked man,
though the obligations of Christianity, and his Baptism be never so piercing
and powerful to godliness, yet he feels no efficacy in them.

To open this Doctrine, consider,

First, What it is to walk worthy (...) of this holy calling; and that implies
What it is to walk worthy. 1.
these things:

First, To do nothing but what is suitable and connatural with this calling.
Those actions are worthy such an agent, as are suitable and proper for him. All
Agents have their suitable operations; the fire ascends, the stone descends. If
therefore the fire should descend and go downwards, it would be against nature,
it would argue great violence. Thus the suitable and connatural actions of a
Christian are to avoid sin, to walk holily, to be above the world, to keep our
selves unspotted from it. Now if any one that is called a Christian be not
thus, he does unnatural actions. His principles, his obligations are against
these things. Oh (Beloved) if men were real Christians, as well as titular, you
should see no more profane and ungodly persons amongst us, then venomous and
poisonous creatures will be in some countries; It should be even a wonder, a
strange thing, that any one should among Christians be found in the way of
wickedness: Oh then reflect upon all thy words, all thy actions! Are these
suitable? Are these proper? Do these agree with my Baptism, with my profession
of Christ? How can I call on Christ, and do the things Christ hates?

Secondly, The word implies besides sutablenesse, a convenience and decency,
to 2.
do such things as are comely, that are no reproach or debasement unto our holy
profession. Whatsoever things are comely, whatsoever things are pure and just,
Phil. 4. 8. If there be any praise, any virtue, think on these things. Its a
rule that Tully gives in Moral Offices between man and man, that we should
observe the (...), what is convenient and decent: Though happily Pagans and
Heathens, and such who never heard of Christ may glory in all excess of riot,
yet this is not decent or becoming a Christian. The Apostle forbids foolish
jesting, which is not convenient, Ephesians. 5. 4. how much more then thy oaths,
thy lusts! Oh how indecent and unbecoming are such words and actions! Though
other men might drink wine, yet it was not befitting a Nazarite, who by vow had
separated himself to God, promising abstinence from these things; and so though
the world lies in wickedness, and glory in their impieties, yet these things
are not for thee to do, who art separated to God. What then shall we think of
such persons, who account their oaths a grace to their mouth, who judge
strictness and preciseness of walking, the most indecent and ridiculous way?
Oh what do such persons think of their Divine Vocation? Has God called us to
uncleanness, to lusts? Where are your consciences? Why do they lie so fast
asleep in your breasts, and are not awakened?

Thirdly, The word implies glory, and an ornament to this heavenly calling,
which 3.
is more then mere comeliness and decency. Glory is clara notitia, a famous
and illustrious manifestation of such godliness in our lives, that thereby all
others may honor the Gospel, and love that Christianity, which instruct them
in such things. This our Savior means, when he commands, That our light
should so shine before men, that others may glorify God for us, Matthew. 5. 16.
Oh, every Christian is to be like a Star or the Sun in the firmament; as lights
in the dark night, so these in the midst of a crooked and perverse people: Oh
its a woeful thing to be an offense or a stumbling block to others, and that
is, so to live, as that others are more confirmed and encouraged in their
wickedness! Look we then upon men's lives, and compare them with their
Christian calling, here is no more agreement then with light and darkness: Oh
the reproach and scandal they are to Christianity! Salvian a godly Ancient does
excellently describe this, What do Pagans say, when they see Christians live
wickedly? They think Christ taught them no better, he instructed them in no
more holiness. Christiani sancte vixissent, si Christus sancta docuisset;
Christians would have lived holily, if Christ had given them holy commands: Oh
blasphemy! Yet thus is the name of Christ blasphemed by thy ungodly life.

Fourthly, The word does imply a giving the pre-eminence and excellency to
those things that beseem this calling; That we mind this in the first place.
Many they 4.
attend to keep up their state, their pomp, their pedigree; but the true godly
man, he seeks this in the first place, how he may adorn that holy profession,
(...) from (...), and is properly from that side of the scales or balance that
weighs down the other; so it is here: Those things that become this holy
calling, that make for the glory of it, they should wiegh down all other
thoughts and affections: whatsoever is chief, precious and vigorous in thee, it
should go to glorify this heavenly calling. So that this shameth those, who
never seriously consider nor meditate, what this Christian profession binds
them to; As Nehemiah said, Shall such a man as I flee? He thought it a great
dishonor to him, whatsoever it might be to others. And so do thou reflect,
Shall such an one as I swear, curse, deal unjustly, be proud and earthly? Oh
when thou have been overcome with such things! say truly to thy self, that
which Michal did falsely to David, Thou have made thy self like one of the vile
and base ones of the earth. Thus you have heard what the word (...) worthy does
imply. What are the properties and actions that will become our holy call(...).
1.


Now let us consider, What are those properties or constant actions that will
thus become and grace our holy calling. And

First, They walk worthy of this calling, who have heartily and totally left
all that former life God has called them out from, and have no desires to
return to that again. By this call God takes us from all those former customary
ways of impieties, that we lived in: Were we profane? we are so no more: Were
we proud, earthly, unjust? we are so no more. God has called us from such a
wretched and cursed estate of life. Now a man cannot walk in a mere unworthy
way of this call, then to desire to return to his former lusts; To think it was
better then with us, then now; we had more pleasures, more love in the world,
more content and esteem, then since we have followed God thus calling of us: Oh
wherein can we show our selves a people more unworthy of this mercy, then in so
doing! As it was with the people of Israel, when God had delivered them out of
that place of bondage, and by a mighty hand had wrought wonderful deliverances
for them; wherein did they demonstrate their horrible ingratitude more then in
this, That they would go back again to Egypt? They prized not the Manna, but
thought of their old fleshpots. Thus its as unsufferable wickedness in any
man, whom God has called from his former lusts, and he begins to desire them
again, and to do as he has done: Oh what is this, but to repent of thy
marriage to God! To proclaim to the world, that thou did find more pleasure
and content in lusts, then in the service of God! Remember Lots wife; when God
had by a merciful hand pulled her out of Sodom, she looks back and was
immediately turned into a pillar of salt. Augustine said, It was to season us;
but the Hebrew word for salt, may signify brimstone, or such materials, and so
she was punished in some measure like the Sodomites, partaking of their
punishments, because she had some compliance with their sins: Oh then consider
thy self! Have thou forsaken all thy former dear lusts? Have thou bid them all
Be gone? Is the very memory of thy former life a shame and a bitterness to
thee? Art thou daily blessing God, that he has given thee eyes to see and an
heart to understand thy former life, and that for thousands of worlds, thou
would not be the man thou once were? This is to walk worthy of so holy a
calling.

Secondly, Those that walk worthy of this heavenly call, they keep themselves 2.
unspotted from the wickedness of the world, they are not conformed to the
ways and customs thereof. Thus the Apostle prays earnestly, Romans 12. That
they might not be conformed to the world, but transformed in their mind; and
true religion is that which keeps a man unspotted from the world, Jam. 1. 28.
If God has called thee out of this dungeon, out of this noisome and filthy
place, its for thee to cast off all thy rags, and not to carry about thee so
much as the smell thereof. The whole world lies in wickedness, says the
Apostle; And if ye were of the world, says Christ to his Disciples, the world
would love you. Though the godly are in it, yet not of it. Thou do therefore
then walk in a way beseeming this holy profession, when thy life is singular,
and contrary to the world, thou hate what that loves, thou love what that
hates. Thy thoughts and affections are above these things. As God made the
fowls at first out of the waters, but they left them, and fl^e up in the air
toward the heavens: So it ought to be with us; though we are born of flesh and
blood, and have one being from below, yet we are to soar above. Do not then
defile thy self with the pitch here below. Be as the Sunbeams upon the
dunghill, that are not polluted by the vapors thereof. Be as those three
worthies in this fire, and yet not have thy garments singed.

Thirdly, They are very attentive and diligent to avoid all those ways that
may be 3.
an active scandal or offense to others. To walk worthy of the Gospel is so to
carry our selves, that others may love it, that we may win others by our life
and conversation. Now on the other side, they walk unworthily of it, who give
just offense and scandal to others, that are stumbling blocks in other men's
ways. This is an heavy sin: our Savior cries out of a woe to such men, Mat.
18. 7. and says, It had been better they were thrown into the bottom of the
sea with a millstone about their necks. They had better never have been born,
that it might be said, There were never such men, then so to harden others in
impiety. How unworthy was Judas of that gracious call he had, when by his
secret theft and perfidious betraying of Christ, he gave him up to be
crucified? What such a man to be found in the number of those that left all and
followed Christ! What a scandal was thi^^ Those that are tender of Gods glory,
and of the repute of godliness they dare not do such things as shall make
Religion stink in the nostrils of men: Oh they have always a care to that,
that that may be well spoken of, may hear well! Indeed there are passive
scandals and offenses, such as wicked men take by their own corrupt and
malicious hearts, as the Pharisees did at Christ, but those are not to be
mattered; such persons do destroy their own selves, and like Serpents they turn
every thing they eat into poison; but we speak now of those things that give a
just offense, that are not justifiable and warrantable. These things, those
that desire to adorn religion will abstain from. If Augustus said, That an
Emperor was not only to be free from crimes, but also from the suspicion of
them; How much more should Christians, who are commanded to abstain from all
appearance of evil? 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.

Fourthly, They that walk worthy of his calling, they are endued with
magnanimous and high resolutions suitable thereunto. They are said to be born of
God; Fortes creantur 4.
fortibus. They resemble their father of whom they are born; Does earthly
greatness and nobility make men put themselves in a different behavior and
deportment from those that are of an inferior breed? we say, Such a man
shows his breeding, he is a Gentleman every inch of him; How much rather may
we say, Such a man shows his Christianity, He is a Christian in every
particular, you may know who is his father, he scorneth to debase himself by
sin? yet many men think the only gallantry in the world lies in the beastly
pleasures of the flesh; Thus while they think themselves more then other men,
they make themselves worse then the very beasts. Remember thy Christianity, and
that will raise up thy heart to things that are indeed glorious and excellent;
to mortify thy passions, to conquer thy lusts, to have fellowship and
communion with God in holy duties, to be above the allurements or
discouragements of the world, to fear nothing but sin; these are magnanimous
and generous things, and such only they do, who walk worthy of this calling.

Lastly, They walk worthy, who abound in the graces following this verse: For
the Apostle of all other duties, instanceth in lowliness and meekness of
mind, 5.
with all long-suffering and forbearance. Lowliness of mind is that humility
of heart, whereby we give all to Gods grace, and take nothing to our selves,
Praise is comely for the upright. Nothing but grace, grace should come out of
the mouth that is thus graciously called by God. Thus Paul often breaths out
the praises of the riches of Gods grace and long-suffering, with much patience
entreating and exhorting others to come out of their dangerous estate they are
in. They consider how much patience God and good men showed to them, how often
they were rebellious and refractory, yet God did not leave them. And certainly
this is a very great grace, not to be wearied out, but still importuning those
that gainsay, if God may yet give them grace to repent.

Use of Examination: Bring we our selves to these trials and touchstones. Is
Use.
all our calling thus holy? Is Christianity thus obliging unto all purity and
godliness? Oh then let the greater part of men amongst us be ashamed, and full
of confusion! Whose zeal must not burn like fire to see the reproach and
scandal to Christianity by the lives of those, who call themselves Christians,
but indeed are not? They have a name that they live, but are really dead. Does
your Christian religion teach you to lie, swear, and live in all carnal
jollity? Does the Scripture, does Christ teach you no better things? Let the
heavens blush, and the earth tremble to hear and see, what is done among those,
who yet profess the faith of Christ: Oh either lay aside such titles, or lay
aside those ungodly practices! Thou art bound to thy good and godly behavior,
its not for sheep to lie and wallow in the mire like swine; its not for flowers
to smell like weeds; not for the myrtle trees to become like the brambles; How
long shall these things sound in your ears, and yet the Lord not give you
understanding rightly to apply them? Cry out of your selves as unsavory salt;
stand aloof off as unclean Lepers, unworthy that God or good men should own you.

Use 2. To the godly: Let this be a go^d in their side, let not the same sins
and infirmities be in them, as in men of the world: Art thou proud, earthly,
passionate, discontented? say, How am I become thus like a beast, I forget my
self, I forget my holy calling.

SERMON CXIV.
Of the Nature, Extent and Example of that Holiness to which God calls a man.

1 PET. 1. 15. But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation.
THe Apostle having in the former part of the Chapter, spoken of glorious
encouragements in the way to heaven, at the 13 Verse, he presses to an exact
and accurate diligence in the exercise of grace, which is emphatically
expressed by that metaphorical phrase, Girdup the loins of your mind: The body
girt, is more expedite and prepared for any work, and so is the mind. In the
14 Verse he amplifieth this duty; first, Comparatively, As obedient children:
This shows the inward willingness and readiness that should be in them to all
acts of obedience; as also, the evangelical and filial motive to draw them out.
Secondly, This is pressed negatively, Not fashioning your selves, etc. You see
what it is to be men and women of the best fashion; viz. Such as do not conform
to those lusts and sins that the world does lie in: And that 2. Is positively
commanded, But be ye holy; where you have the duty enjoined, Be ye holy: There
are four words commonly used for this holiness, sometimes (...), sometimes
(...), sometimes (...), and most commonly (...). Whether this word came of
(...) and (...) without earth, or of (...), because holiness deserves all
reverence and veneration, I shall not much regard; this is certain, it does
imply a choice and sublime frame of soul, whereby we are carried out in
reference to God in all our actions. 2. There is the extent of this duty, In
all manner of conversation: Here this is considerable, that men may demonstrate
some holiness in some particular acts, and in some channels, but not in all
manner of conversation. 3. Here is the exemplary cause, after which we are to
be conformable, As he that has called you is holy. 4 There is an argument
confirming it by authority from Scripture, Because it is written, Be ye holy,
for I am holy: That is written many times, to raise up our thoughts in
godliness, not to propound any men, no not the most holy that are, but God
himself: Now the Apostle does not mean an equality; for how can a drop be equal
to the sea? or a spark to the Sun? but only of similitude and proportionable
imitation, as is more particularly to be showed. Observe,

That persons called, ought to be holy, even as God who calls them is most
Observe.
holy.

This very consideration should work an heavenly metamorphosis and change, who
and what is that God who calls me, should the soul say; God who made me after
his own image at first, does still require the reparation of it in my life: Of
all the attributes the Angels selected to glorify God with, this was that they
pitched on, Holy, holy, holy, Isa. 6. and certainly, of all things remarkable
and considerable in thee, this should be thy chief, Holy: Thou art wise, but
holy; thou art rich, but holy; this is the Diamond in the Jewel.

To illustrate this point, consider,

First, What this holiness is, and that is in these things: 1. What this
holiness is.


First, An inward rectitude of all the parts and faculties of the soul, whereby
they are employed and improved for holy ends: Holiness is not a particular
grace, or a particular healing of some disease in the soul, but it is an
universal medicine applied to all the soars of the soul, and if it does not
perfectly cure and heal all the disease, yet it does for the main: So that this
holiness is nothing but the sound and right temperament of the soul, whereby it
is enabled in mind, will and affection, yea, the whole man to be carried out
toward God; therefore this holiness is called The image of God; and we know,
an image is not an hand, or a leg, but a full delineation in all the parts
thereof; when therefore we are commanded thus to be holy, we are to look to
holiness in the fountain, to holiness in the root; even as God is not only
holy in actions, and in all his works he does, but in his essence and nature
also: So that although all thy actions have never such a show of holiness and
outward splendour, yet if not flowing from this inward image, they are but
gilded Sepulchers, and like the ashes of Sodom.

Secondly, This holiness is a pure and unmixed disposition of soul, from any
thing that may soil and debase it: So some make the word (...), that is,
without any 2.
terrene or earthly mixture; for as every thing is debased, when it is mixed
with that which is of an inferior nature to it; as lead with silver, water with
wine: So it is here, when the soul of man which was made for the enjoyment of
God, and communion with him, is bowed down to earthly things, and mingleth it
self with them, then it becomes base and degenerate. Now the soul may admit of
a twofold mixture, both which makes it unholy:

First: With the lusts of sin, and the beastly pleasures of the flesh; and this
is the deepest pollution, as if the Sun should become a dunghill; and therefore
wicked 1.
men are compared to Dogs, licking up their vomit, and Swine wallowing in their
mire, 2 Pet. 2. 22. Oh therefore remember, when thou have been committing any
gross sin, thou have made thy self like dirt and dung, thou have made thy self
like a loathsome Toad, God abhors thee, and were thy eyes opened, thou
would be abominable in thy own eyes, thou would not endure thy self, but
cry out with David, Wash me thoroughly, and I shall be clean. Psalm. 51. Or

Secondly, A defiling mixture may be by the inordinate and immoderate
affections 2.
of a man, even to lawful things; even as the waters that overflow the banks,
they get soil and filth by that means: So those affections that are carried out
beyond their limits, in over-loving, in over-grieving, in over-desiring, they
debase and make unholy. Hence Esau is called A profane person, Heb. 12. 16.
why? we read not of his gross, vicious, beastly sins, but because be had a low
and undervaluing esteem of heavenly things, of that birthright he sold: So
then, thou art an unholy and a profane man, though free from thy gross sins,
if thy thoughts, thy esteem about holy and heavenly things be low and careless:
Thou had rather have, as he said, Guttam vini, then cadum mentis, a drop of
pleasure, then an whole vessel of heavenly wisdom, this argues thou art
unholy. Holiness lies in the spiritual dieting and moderating of all thy
affections to worldly comforts: He that marries, as if he married not; he that
buyeth, as if he bought not, 1 Cor. 7. In all our estates and conditions, we
are to cut off those luxuriant branches, we are to put bounds to them, as God
to the sea, Hitherto thou shall go and no further.

Thirdly, Holiness is mainly seen in referring all unto God by pure and upright
intentions. The Pharisees holiness, though so dazzling in the eyes of the world,
3.
was no holiness, because they did all to be seen of men: This makes all the
civil and admirable actions of the Romans, and other Heathens, to be no holy
actions, but splendida peccata, because it was vain glory, or at least, the
love of their Country, that put them upon the accomplishment of such actions;
so that the greatest part of holiness is invisible, lies much in eying at the
true aim we ought to shoot at. Jehu in all those wonderful Reformations he made
in the Church and State of Israel, yet was not in the number of the holy Kings,
because his ends were selfish, worldly, and vain glorious. Look then thy
intentions fall not short of that ultimate end, the glory of God, and this
prove a dead fly in the box of thy ointment.

Fourthly, Holiness lies in bearing up the heart in all kind of duties, with
such 4.
heavenly and sublime motives, that flesh and blood can no ways attain unto:
Holiness is a power above all refined natural abilities: Thus faith is an holy
grace, because it bears up the heart with a promise, with the word of God,
when all natural reason and hopes are against it; and so he can rebuke those
strong winds and tempests of unbelief and discouragement, which natural
strength could never do: So to love God in adversities, not to mutter or repine
at him, though his hand be heavy on thee, yet thou have no hard thoughts about
him, but he is as good and as gracious a God in thy apprehension as ever: Here
is iron swimming, here are the rivers of Jordan running back, here is holiness
exalted above nature; so likewise to rejoice in tribulations, to triumph over
all troubles; to find honey in the dead carcass of the Lion, to get bread out
of stones; this is the work of holiness. And lastly, patience and forbearance
to men that hate us, love and pity to those that cruelly persecute us: Thus
holiness teaches, but the nature of man kicketh against all these things.

Fifthly, Holiness is in the dedicating of our selves wholly unto the Lord;
that we 5.
are no more our own, much less the worlds or Satan's: Thus there were holy
vessels, and an holy Temple, because altogether separated unto God, and might
not be employed unto any common use: Thus the persons that are holy, Are made
the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3. they may not touch any unclean thing.
Oh what a strong obligation is this, to depart from all evil and wicked
company! To whom were thou given up? Have thou not parted with self? and art
not thou given to God? Be then as the Temple, let no unclean thoughts or
affections pass through thee.

Sixthly, A necessary Concomitant of this holiness, is a reverence and aw it
breeds 6.
in the consciences, even of those who yet hate it: As the image of God put in
man, made him have dominion over the beasts of the earth; so this holy image of
God breeds an aw, a fear even in wicked men: Thus (...) is of (...); and hence
Herod, though a King, yet feared John, because he was a righteous and holy man,
Mat. 6. 20. This holiness is called by Peter (...), A Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.
4. and certainly, as the Sun makes a glorious dazzling upon the eyes of men; so
does holiness, powerfully expressed, make a throne in the hearts of the
ungodly, convincing and overawing them: Though therefore outwardly they may
deride and oppose the practice of holiness, yet in their consciences they count
such happy, and wish their souls might be in the same condition with such men's.

We come in the next place, to the extent of this duty, In all manner of
conversation: The extent of the duty. 1.
And

First, It must be in our conversation, (...). Now a man's conversation is not
some few acts, or some few times to be holily affected, but constantly and
customarily. Our conversation is in heaven, says the Apostle, Phil. 3. 20. and
its called a godly man's way, wherein he walks; so that unless holiness be thy
main business, unless Religion be thy chief employment, thou art not yet holy,
thy way is not an holy way, though there may be some occasional holy action;
neither is thy conversation an holy conversation, though there may seem to be
some holy fits: Oh this is greatly to be attended unto, for some men's holiness
is like the morning dew, or like the ebbings and flowings of the sea; its by
way of a transient passion, not as a permanent principle within them; its a
Land-flood that makes a great noise, its not a constant spring.

Secondly, It must be holiness in all manner of conversation: 2.


First, There must be all holiness subjective, that is, all the parts and
faculties of soul and body must have their peculiar holiness; the mind holy,
thoughts holy, meditations holy, the will holy, desires holy, and holy choices,
the affections holy, holy love, holy anger, holy grief, holy fear; the memory
an holy treasury to retain holy directions and instructions: Thus a man's soul
must be like that part of the Temple, Sanctum Sanctorum, The holiest of holies;
the body likewise, that is to be holy instrumentally, holy eyes, holy hands,
and holy tongues, holy words, holy actions, holy gestures: That as the Prophet
Zechariah prophesies, upon the horses bells there should be written, Holiness
to the Lord, Zech. 14. 21. so here upon the whole man shall be written,
Holiness to the Lord; and the meaning of that prophecy is, That he who is
holy, shall be in every respect holy; as Paul prays, I pray God ye be
sanctified throughout, both in spirit, soul, and body, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.

Secondly, This must be all holiness objective, in respect of the object: Our
actions must be holy in reference to God and man: I exercise my self, says
Paul, Acts 24 16. there was his conversation; to keep a good conscience toward
God and man, there was the extent to every object; for although all holiness
does immediately refer to God, yet when we do the duties of justice,
righteousness and charity toward man, because God commands, and out of love to
him, then these just and righteous actions, are likewise holy actions, because
of the consideration of God that draws out the soul: So that we may make our
very eating, drinking, and lawful refreshments, holy actions, when a motive
from God does put us upon them.

Thirdly, We are in our conversation to put forth all holiness, in respect of
the degrees of it: We are to endeavor, and to hunger and thirst after all the
degrees 3.
of holiness; if there be better believing in God, better heavenly mindedness,
more love to God then ever yet we have attained, this we are to press forward
to; as Paul, who was exalted to so high a degree of holiness, yet he forgets
all behind, and pursues that before, Phil. 3. as if he were but beginning to
be godly; and hence the godly are said, To hunger and thirst after
righteousness, Mat. 5. Alexander wept when he heard a Philosopher arguing
there were more worlds then one, when he had not yet conquered one: And thus
when thou hear the word of God requiring such a perfect holiness, such a
pure exercise of graces, thou may weep to see the dross, the defects and
weaknesses that are in thee; yet take heed thou do not reject thy holiness
as none at all, because it may be better; for perfection and fullness is not in
this life, still here is something wanting, but our prayers and endeavors
should be after perfection.

Fourthly, We are to put forth all the parts and kinds of godliness in our
conversation: Holiness is a chain, and we must not break one link: Add to
faith, 4.
virtue, and to virtue temperance, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 6. To be holy in some things,
and not in others, is to be holy in nothing: Holiness is universal, it comes in
with no buts, no ifs or ands, no exceptions; but as the word of God is
universal, and the rule is universal, so is his holiness: Oh its this partial
holiness, this holiness in some pittances, that makes such a reproach to
Religion: Holiness will no more swear then lie, or lie then swear; Holiness
will no more deal unjustly, then leave off praying and holy duties; if any do
so, the Scripture makes not such holy: Oh therefore be sure to study the extent
and largeness of holiness. Do I show forth all holiness? The Apostle bids us
pray, that under Magistrates we might live in all godliness: There is some
holiness, some godliness many times the world will suffer, but not all: And
none would think how false and guilful their hearts are, how much they are to
seek for some kind of godliness, when they are put to it.

Lastly, We are to show holiness at all times in our conversations: There is no
4.
hour, no moment, wherein thou can say, Now I may not be holy, now its not
required I should be holy: So that as wicked men, the imaginations of the
thoughts of their hearts are only evil, and that continually; so should ours
be holy, and that continually: This is our duty, though in this life it cannot
be fully practiced.

In the third place, consider, The example of our holiness; and that is, As God
The p(...) of holiness.
is holy: Not that we can be infinitely holy, and essentially holy, as he is;
but to imitate him: So that we must not take the world for a rule of holiness,
but God; and we are not required to be Omnipotent as he is, Mighty as he is,
but holy as he is. Now the grounds of this are:

First, It behooves a father and a son to be of the same nature: A man does not
Why. 1.
beget a beast of another nature, but a child of the same being: Thus the
Apostle, As obedient children; and hence they are said to Be born of God: How
then can ye call God father, who have not the likeness of his nature? Is there
such sin and impurity in God, as in thee? Oh tremble at such things! Gods eyes
are purer then to behold iniquity; so let thine be.

Secondly, Love to God, will put a man upon the immitation of him whom we love:
2.
So that similitude, as it is a cause, so its an effect of love; that as you
see fire assimilates every thing into its own nature, it turns every thing to
fire; so love to God, and delight in him, that makes us wholly to become like
him. A man that lives under the torrid Zone, gets a color from the sun, which
shines so hot upon him.

Thirdly, He must needs be holy, because else we are not prepared for any
communion 3.
or fellowship with God: Herein lies the happiness of a godly man, that he
has fellowship with God, that he enjoys his presence, that he sees his
face, as you may see it represented in the Canticles: Now how can this be, when
a man is profane and unholy? Christ speaks there of his heavenly love, and
spiritual imbracements, and how can this be to a soul that is loathsome and
uncomely through sin? God speaks by the Prophet, of the abominable and vile
condition of the Church of Israel in her sin, wallowing in her blood, Ezekiel. 16.
6. and till he put on comely ornaments on her, she was no fit object of love:
Follow holiness; without which no man shall see, enjoy God, Heb. 12. 14. As the
eye distempered with diseased humors, cannot comfortably behold the sun, so
neither can the soul, debased through sin, behold the favor of God; yea, as the
soul is not fit for such communion, so the presence and purity of God, if it
should draw near, would be an heavy burden to a wicked man. Heaven it self,
and enjoyment of God, is no suitable or welcome mercy to a wicked heart: So far
as the notion of safety and deliverance from hell is in heaven, they can be
glad of it; but take the positive part of heaven, which is indeed the heaven;
viz. Enjoyment of God, and delighting in him, a wicked man can no more agree
with it, then soar eyes do abide the dazzling sun.

Let us make Application of the point. And

First, Of Instruction: Is holiness thus necessarily required of every one
called Use 1.
by God, because he is holy? then to be sure do not mistake what true holiness
is; for if thou err about that, thy destruction is irrecoverable, who can help
it? Therefore to know what it is, study and peruse the Scripture: Oh what an
exact, sublime, and accurate thing is that represented to be! Will no less
serve then an holiness in some degree (though with vast disproportion) like
that of God? What shame, what trembling should this work in us? Thou judge of
holiness according to the principles of the world; and they, when a man is less
wicked, call it holiness; if there be worse men in the world, then they bless
themselves. As in an Hospital, the man that is less diseased then others, he is
judged healthful and strong: This undoeth you, holiness and godliness is made a
less and more easy business, then the Scripture describes.

Use 2. Of Terror and Woe to those called persons, who deride, oppose and Use 2.
malice holiness: Oh that the earth should bear, and the Sun shine upon such
incarnate devils! Wheresoever there is the power of holiness, there all their
venom is vented; Who would think that men called by so holy a God, should
deride holiness? That men convinced by an holy Spirit, should mock at
holiness? That men who read an holy Bible, who have an holy profession, should
thus be turned into Serpents, and no men? This is not to be holy as God is
holy, but malicious and envious as the devil is.

3. Of Exhortation to you who are indeed holy for the main, grow in this, Use 3.
be more quickened in it. The Apostle speaks to these that were already holy.
Holiness is a large field, an high hill, thou art but at the very bottom.
Alas, how much stronger might thy faith be? How much more mortified might thy
affections be? Is holiness suitable, connatural, constant and permanent in
thee? and certainly this is more to be looked at, then all outward mercies,
riches, honors, earthly greatness; for this only has the promise of eternal
life, and this present life. Thou may be rich, but damned; wise and learned,
but d^^^n^d; but not holy and damned: Oh there is no comfortable living an
hour, a moment without this holiness! And then to increase and preserve it:

First, Cherish and entertain the holy Spirit, this is peculiarly called holy,
because it works holiness; grieve it not then by committing known sins, or by
lazy and sluggish walking.

Secondly, Prize the Ordinances, the Ministry and preaching of the Word; men
grow loose and cold when they leave this fire.

Thirdly, Consider the nature of holiness is such, that the more we have, the
more hunger and thirst there should be after it.

SERMON CXV.
Of the Glorious Estate of the Saints in Heaven to which God calls all sinners
repenting and believing.

1 PET. 5. 10. The God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory
by Christ Jesus, etc.
THe Apostle Peter concludes his Epistle with a Petition in this verse, and a
doxology in the next. In the Petition we have these parts:

First, The Object to whom this Petition is addressed, viz. God, described by a
glorious property suitable to the matter of the prayer, The God of all grace; he
was to pray for grace, and therefore mentions the fountain of grace. This is
of great consolation, the people of God want more and more grace, and God is
clothed with allsufficiency: if you want it, you know where to be supplied.

Secondly, God is described by a gracious effect of this grace, Who has called
us: This fountain was not sealed up, but diffuseth it self.

The term to which, of this grace, described in its nature to be Glory.
Believers should lift up their heads at the very hearing of this: and there is
the adjunct of it, eternal glory.

Fourthly, There is the meritorious cause of this grace, By Christ Jesus.

Fifthly, The matter prayed for, which is in the accumulation of many words
together, Make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. Some do curiously
enquire after a difference between every one of these: but I take them to be
nothing but the vehement and holy Oratory of Paul affectionately expressing
himself in his prayer for them, and they are most of them metaphorical words
from the Artificer, who is careful to settle and establish his building. Now by
the matter prayed for, viz. further perfection and establishment in grace, we
may see even the best godly men, do need further addition and strengthening in
grace. As he cried out, O me nunquam sapientem, so may thou, O me nunquam
pium, still there is a further degree in every grace to be obtained. There is
imperfection, and there must be continual correcting; but this is not the
matter I intend, I come therefore to my purposed subject in this Text; and that
is the term to which, of Gods gracious effect mentioned in the Text, Who has
called us to eternal glory; That which the eye has not seen, nor has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive; that we are now to treat of, or
rather to stammer about, viz. that infinite and everlasting glory which God
calls wretched sinners, but repenting and believing unto. He has called us into
it: This shows how close and intimate that fruition is we have of this glory.
It may never trouble a man to part with his beloved lusts and sins, which are
but for a moment, for this eternal glory; it is to part with dirt and dung to
have gold and precious stones.

For the further opening of this you must know there is a twofold end of Gods
calling us, the near and proxim one, and that is, Repentance and Faith: So the
first thing God calls wicked and sinful men unto, is truly to repent of their
sin, and steadfastly to believe in him; But secondly, There is the remote and
further end, which is Salvation and Eternal Glory. Of this we are to speak at
this time.

God calls sinners repenting and believing, to no less then infinite and
eternal Observe.
Glory.

This point certainly may much affect you; for did the Devil think by showing
the glory of the world to tempt Christ to worship him? and shall not we by the
discovery of this heavenly glory, make you fall down and worship, and obey God
who has promised to give this unto all those that do so to him? There is a
parallel place, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. Who has called us unto his kingdom and glory.
What unspeakable condescension is this, that God should take us, and put us
into a communion with him of kingdom and glory, to set us upon thrones next to
Christ and him, yet the Scripture does frequently insist on this glory that God
intends to put on those that obey his calling. To open this, if they were so
many days to purify and prepare themselves for hearing the Law, which was a
ministration of death, and there was such glory on Moses his face in the
delivering of it, that the people could not steadfastly behold him: Certainly
there ought to be more cleansing and preparing of the soul to receive the
Doctrine of this Gospel-glory. We can only show you the back-parts of it, for
we cannot comprehend it in all its fullness, no more then a little shell can
hold the Ocean.

We shall first speak of the Nature of this Glory, and then the Properties. And

First, The Nature of it is seen in discovering the object to be enjoyed by us
to all The nature of Glory.
eternity, and that is God himself, the perfect, universal and sufficient good.
Our glory is in this, that we enjoy God to all eternity, who is the inexhausted
sea of all heavenly happiness. See how David does triumph in that enjoyment he
has of God in this life, which yet is but the cluster of grapes to that
heavenly Canaan. Whom have I in heaven but thee, and whom in earth but thee?
Psalm. 73. 25. And in other places, The Lord is my portion and my inheritance.
So then, if God enjoyed by faith do give so great a blessedness to the soul in
this life, how much more when he is enjoyed by immediate vision? This the
Scripture calls, Seeing of God face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. So then, herein
lies this unspeakable glory, that whatsoever goodness, excellency, fullness
and blessedness is in God, the same is communicated unto the glorified Saint
according to its capacity. Deus meus and omnia, said he: but this will be much
more in Heaven, where not only our sinful, but our animal lives will be ended;
Then shall we be with the Lord for ever, said Paul, that is spoken, as the
complete perfection of all happiness.

Secondly, This glory which may be called formal or subjective, as the former
objective, 2.
lies in the intellective and affective part of a man closing with, and
enjoying of God. When we say we are made glorious by enjoying of God, the
meaning is, the intellective and affective parts of the soul are wholly fixed
upon him to their utmost desire and capacity; for the glory of a man must
consist in his rational part, his understanding, will and affections, which are
the best faculties, must be united to the best good, in the best manner. And

First, For the intellectual or knowing part of a man, its plain there can be
nothing Of knowledge in heaven.
of this happiness, if that be not present. For as of an unknown thing there
can be no desire, so neither any love or delight: and the more clear and
intuitive this knowledge is, the more is our glory. Now the Scripture speaks,
that we shall then see him face to face, not as in a glass, 1 Cor. 13. 12. We
shall know him even as we are known of him; and our glory is expressed in this
phrase To see God. So then, herein will our blessedness and glory be, that we
shall fully and clearly know and behold all the excellency that is in God, all
the objects and motives of love and delight. That as the bodily eye descrying
the pulchritude of a sensible object, presently kindles love in the heart, Ut
vidi perii; So it is here, The soul of a man glorified, beholding all the
admirable loveliness and excellency in God, that holy and pure nature of his,
those gracious and free acts of his love to us, is hereupon set on fire, and
made glorious; That which the Apostle prays for us here to attain, will then
be completed, To know the breadth, and length, and depth of the love of Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 3. 18.

Again, This glory lies in the affective part of the soul, whereby it takes
infinite complacency and delight in God, who is thus made known; and certainly,
if good be the object of the will and love, then God being infinitely,
universally and in an unlimited manner good; the will and affections of a man
must needs be drawn out to the full.

Thirdly, That the soul of a man can thus gloriously enjoy God, its necessary
that all the filth and loathsome spots of sin should be wholly cleansed away:
For as 3.
long as there is any relic of this noisomnesse, as it is not fit or suitable
for such a glorious object, as God is; so neither has it complete and full
glory it self. The blood of Christ was shed, that we might be without spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing; but this loveliness cannot be obtained in this
life. Its true, Christ in those spiritual Songs of Solomon, calls his Church,
His Love, his Fair, his undefiled One, that she is altogether Lovely, but that
is merely because of the lovely Ornaments, and Excellency Christ put upon Her.
But in Heaven this Loveliness will be inherent, she will have all this Glory
inexistent, not imputed: Oh then what Tongue can express the gloriousness of
such a condition, when there shall not be the least imperfection, or defect in
thy Grace, thy Love perfect Love, thy Delight in God a full and perfect
Delight! Paul in Heaven does no longer complain, When I would do good, evil is
present with me, Romans 7. No, his heart is as godly and as holy as he can
desire. This then is the glory that the called ones of God should breath after;
when will the time come that all my spots and blemishes will be done away? I am
as yet ashamed to see so much dross and filth in my self; I blush because of
my nakedness; but the day is coming, when all things that are imperfect will
be done away. This should exceedingly support them for the present in their
conflicts and combats with sin: Oh what shall they do! Their hearts suffer
violence within them, they are loathsome beasts in their own eyes; they do not
love to see themselves in the pure Glass of Gods Word. Well, comfort thy self,
the time is coming, thy Graces will be made perfect, thy Soul will be glorified
with all fullness, not the least spot or blemish in it.

Fourthly, This Glory will be in the enlarging and extending of all the
faculties 4.
of the Soul to partake of God: For God being infinite, and the Soul of a
limited and finite Nature, has no proportion till God raise and elevate it up
to that which of it self it could not do. Hence the very Soul of an Infant
dying a member of Christ, and glorified in Heaven, is stretched out to an
actual capacity for the full enjoying of God. The Apostle Hebr. 12. calls them
The spirits of just men made perfect. So that God does widen and enlarge the
Soul of a man, whereby it does partake of God, and has communion with him in a
more powerful and transcendent manner, then of it self it could have.

Fifthly, This Glory does not only stay on the Soul, but reaches to the body
5.
also. Which the Scripture 1 Cor. 15. and in other places does often speak of,
Our vile bodies shall be made glorious bodies; That as the Artificer by his Art
out of earth can make curious and resplendent glasses, so God much more out of
the dust of our bodies, will make immortal, incorruptible and even spiritual
bodies, as the Apostle calls them. The glory of our bodies is, First in the
perfection of them; all the Defects, Imperfections, Deformities will then be
quite removed. Secondly, In impassibility, there will be no pains, no Diseases,
no bodily Grief, no Passion from, or suffering of, any offensive object.
Thirdly, In Immortality, it will be no more mortal, no more subject to fears
and pains of Death. And lastly, In Agility, in quick Motions, We shall be
snatched up into the Clouds, and be there with the Lord for ever: Oh who can
believe that this vile house of clay shall ever be made such a golden Palace!
who can ever think that so much glory should be put upon such vessels of
dishonor and infirmities?

Sixthly, This Glory is not only thus real and inherent, but it is also
manifested and revealed Glory in the eyes of others; For Glory is properly
illustris 6.
and clara notitia, the knowledge and favor of an excellency, the
manifestation of it to others; and thus the glory of called persons will be a
known manifested Glory. It will be seen by the eyes of the whole world, God
will put the Robes and Crown of Glory upon them, in the midst of all persons at
the Day of Judgment; Lo these are the persons whom I have thus honored, the
Angels they will bear witness of it; The Devils and wicked men condemned, they
shall see it and gnash their teeth. Those men whom we scorned, derided,
opposed, how does God honor them? So then, God will hereafter put such visible
glory upon his people, that all the world shall be witnesses of it; As yet it
does not appear, says the Apostle, 1 John 3. 2. but it shall be made manifest.
That as precious jewels have that naturally which covers their excellency, and
the choice gold lies in the earth, and at first shows not its full luster,
till by Art made so: So the godly who in this present life are despicable and
uncomely by their weaknesses, by their afflictions, by the outward meannesse of
their Condition, will hereafter have all these rags pulled off, and the day of
their glorious Coronation will appear. This is for the Nature of their Glory,
and for the Adjuncts and Properties of it they are admirable. The adjuncts and
properties of glory. 1.


First, Its eternal Glory, it abides for ever and ever. All the greatest
outward Glory and Pomp, is but like the burning of the Torch, Sic transit
gloria mundi, but there needs no M^mento te hominem esse, Then shall we be with
the Lord for ever: Oh that phrase For ever should astonish us, What is for
ever? What is eternal glory? After thou have sat down and thought, and thought
still; Eternity is above thy thoughts. The fear of death is like Jonah's Gourd
that eats up all our outward Glory. You are but glorious Gloe-worms that
shine for a night; but glorious Flowers that presently fade: Give me any
worldly glory, of which you can say, it is eternal, that it is for ever; yea
men of the greatest glory in this world have found it to be like a shadow, the
longest before the night come upon them. King Solomon in all his glory was not
above a Lilly, and a Lillies glory endures but for a day, when cropped from its
root. The Scripture says, Act. 24. 23. Agrippa and his wife came to the Court
of Judicatory with great pomp, (...), it was a great fancy that presently
passes away.

Secondly, This Glory is spiritual and heavenly as well as visible. The glory
of 2.
the body is indeed visible, and Heaven is a glorious visible place, but yet
that which is the greatest glory is spiritual, the soul made holy and perfect;
God who is the object of our glory is invisible; and although it be disputed,
yet many conclude, that God is not seen with the bodily eye there, only Christ
because of his humane nature is; So then, the greatest part of this glory is
spiritual and holy. And thus it is far above the glory of the world, which is
in outward sensible objects, that tend only to a bodily and carnal delight. If
the Queen of Sh^ba was so overwhelmed to see the external glory and pomp of
Solomon, How can we be able to bear all that heavenly glory?

Thirdly, This Glory is sound and solid, it is that which has a true bottom^
Paul calls it, The eternal weight of Glory; and the Hebrew word for Glory
signifies 3.
weight: So that the glory of believers is substantial and real, it will
inwardly and deeply possess the whole man: whereas if you look upon the
outward glory of the world, its but a puff, a bladder, an empty nothing. This
is a true solid glory, which is accepted of by God, to which he gives his
witness, that it is true; What is it to have glory among men, and to be
abominable before God? What is it for a while to have external pomp in this
world, and then God to raise thee out of the dust to everlasting contempt and
reproach? Thou gloriest in thy wealth, in thy beauty, in thy honors, but what
is this to the glory in Heaven?

Lastly, This is an universal and entire glory. There is nothing of glory ^o be
desired which is not here; In the world all their glory has some gall 4.
or other to bitter it. Haman had much outward glory, yet because crossed in his
ambition about Mord^chai, all his glory did him no good; Solomon that made it
his business to have all external happiness, yet found a vexation and vanity
in it. No worldly glory did ever satisfy a man, no more then the air or the
wind will an hungry stomach: yet this heavenly glory is so perfect and
complete, that there is nothing to mar it, to corrupt it; and it has this
admirable effect that it does wholly satisfy the desire, and yet excites it to
desire it more: they desire no other happiness, no other glory, they are in
their center, yet they are never wearied, as they were of the Manna; but this
glory is as admirable, as ravishing, as ever it was at the first moment they
enjoyed it. This may be greatly improved practically.

Use. What good reason is there for every sinner called by Gods grace to part
Use 1.
with any lust or sin, though never so profitable, so pleasant, so
delightful; for what is that sin thou art so ende^^ed unto? Is it comparable
to this eternal glory? Oh the madness and folly o^ men! Sin and the devil,
they call by their lusts to eternal horror and torment, and men readily obey;
but God calls to eternal glory, and they stop the ear. Hear, O heavens, and be
astonished, O earth! wicked men do not believe or consider these things, or
else the matter is so evident that it needs no deliberation, no dispute; for
what is the chaff to the wheat, dross to gold, gall to honey? Do then wicked
men know what they do? These lusts are dear lusts to thee, they will deprive
thee of this eternal glory, they will hinder thee of all this happiness, and
yet thou imbracest them.

Use 2. Of Instruction. How sad a thing it is to be moved to any good action
Use 2.
out of humane and vainglory, when yet this solid eternal glory does not
affect thee. What is more ordinary, though nothing scarce more abominable; you
shall have men to get glory and repute in the world, be diligent in the
external profession of religion, when the true glory of God does not at all
move them; The Pharisees they prayed, they gave alms; why? out of vainglory to
have repute with men. Thus its said of some that believed, but would not
confess Christ, that they loved the glory of men more then of God, Joh. 2. Oh
let this meditation make thee even a loathsome beast in thy own eyes; Shall I
pray, preach, have religious conference, give alms, do justly, that men may
praise me, that I may be exalted with humane glory, and neglect that eternal
glory which we ought principally to seek after?

Use 3. Are people called out of their sins, and endued with grace to partake
Use 3.
of this eternal weight of glory? then what vanity is it to glory in any
earthly thing, and yet to want this? Thou gloriest in thy birth, in thy
prosperity, in thy outward greatness: but oh miserable wretch, if destitute of
this eternal glory. Oh say, Its not for me to hold up my head, to go proudly,
to fare deliciously every day, but rather to throw my self in the dust and
tumble upon the ground, and to cry out, Oh me miserable sinner, worse then
beasts, undone for ever, till God fit me for this glory! Do not then glory in
thy rich apparel, for that is but the excrement of an unreasonable creature;
not in thy beauty that is the spoil of time and years; not in thy riches, they
are winged birds that quickly fly away: No not in any thing, but in grace and
the knowledge of God, which is accompanied with everlasting glory.

Use 4. Of Comfort unto the godly, who though despised, contemned, vilified Use
4.
and rejected as the offscouring of the world, yet are sure to inherit eternal
glory: Oh this should sweeten every affliction! this should make every bitter
^^ll to be swallowed down! Does not the Apostle bear up himself with this? We
account not these light afflictions, which are but for a moment, comparable to
that eternal weight of glory? See how he lessens his afflictions, they are but
light ones, but the glory to come is weighty and eternal; Could the people of
God live in a lively faith of this, make these things real to them, they would
be above the fear of any outward loss, or the love of any unlawful advantage.
He that has the Sun needs not the star, or the Ocean, a drop.

SERMON CXVI.
The Nature, Possibility, Duty and Means of the Assurance of ones Effectual
Calling.

2 PET. (...). 10. Wherefore the rather (Brethren) give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.
THe Apostle at the fifth verse, mentions a chain of graces, which every
Christian must keep linked together: They are like so many flowers to make up a
Garland that every believer is to wear; and to this purpose he suggests diverse
arguments. The first is, that then they will not be barren in the knowledge of
Christ: Christianity without these graces is like the figtre^ without fruit, it
deserves a perpetual curse from Christ. Look not to leaves or blossoms, but
to fruit. Secondly, He that has the title of a Believer, but wants these
graces, he is blind, and cannot see afar off. (...), some derive it from (...)
Mouls, or earth-mice, that can see nothing, though in the open light: Others
from shutting the eye, and so purblinde men are said (...), who see things that
are near, but not afar off. Though some say (...) is not lusciosus, but (...).
Thus wicked men have knowledge about the objects that are present to sense, but
the matters of faith, which are more remote, they cannot discern. Now here may
seem a contradiction by the Apostle, He is blind and cannot see afar off: For
if he be blind he cannot see, neither near or afar off. Some therefore make
these later words a correction to the former, He is blind, at least he cannot
see things that are afar; if he be not blind, he has a dim sight. But
without any straying, we may thus interpret the Apostle, He is blind, viz.
absolutely in respect of heavenly things, and although he can see those objects
that are obvious to sense, viz. all earthly things, yet he has no perceiving
about heavenly things. And indeed its very sad to consider how many are
eagle-eyed in the matters of the world, and very blind moles in heavenly
things. The third argument is from the ingratitude such men are guilty of: They
have forgotten they were purged from their old sins; when they undertook the
profession of faith in Christ, and were baptized, there was Sacramentally, at
least, a cleansing from their former ways of wickedness. Now it would be high
ingratitude for any not to preserve themselves from such defilements still.
Lastly, Here is another argument for abounding in all grace, which is laid down
by way of exhortation: There cannot be any assurance had of our calling or
elect on, unless we are fruitful in these graces. This should greatly awaken,
for it behooves us above all things in the world to have some comfortable
knowledge how it stands between God and our souls.

In the words then consider the duty enjoined, and the way how to accomplish
it. The duty enjoined is to make your calling and election sure. Calling, viz.
the graces of God we are called to in this life, justification, adoption, and
union with Christ, as also regeneration and sanctification of our natures, and
election that is the basis or the foundation of our calling. But how may we
make these things sure? not in themselves, for the purpose of God stands firm
in its own self. The foundation of the Lord stands sure, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 19. And the gifts or calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.
29. But sure in respect of our selves, that we may be upon good grounds
confirmed in our own hearts, that we are such whom God has called or chosen.
So that the holy Ghost does here blame all those who put their comforts and
hopes upon a venture; who maintain doubts and uncertainties in their own souls,
about their eternal condition, that will not seek out for comfortable evidences
herein. 2. You have the manner how this glorious privilege may be attained, by
giving diligence: and the rather by giving diligence; which words do imply,
that unless we set our main thoughts and strength about this matter; unless we
carefully set our souls to distinguish between true and false, we shall never
be persuaded upon good grounds. This text is much vexed in the controversy
between Papists and Protestants: The Papists denying this certainty (unless
some few) and the Protestants pleading strongly for it. And this text seems to
be an impregnable place for assurance.

That its not only possible, but a duty in Christians, to endeavor after an
assurance Observe.
of their effectual calling and election.

They are not to bring an ill report, as they did about Canaan, such Giants and
difficulties were in the way, that it could never be conquered; so this
assurance or certainty can never be had, it will breed presumption, and eat out
all humility and godly fear. It is not my intent to enter into the
controversall part, I shall only lay down some material particulars; and then
show you what are those things that may beget this assurance, those effects
that do necessarily argue such causes. And the rather, because formerly I
treated more largely about the nature of it.

To clear the doctrine consider, First, That when we say a believer may and
Some particulars to clear the doctrine. 1.
ought to be assured of his calling and election, we do not mean as if of his
own self he could have this divine persuasion. For then many of Gods own
children would never have lain in such uncomfortable desertions and dark
dungeons as they have done, having no light; crying out, they have no
certainty, no assurance, oh they cannot believe, they cannot find any comfort,
but their hearts are like a barren heath, or a black hell! They cannot, I say,
of themselves come to this sure persuasion, but it is the gift of the Spirit of
God, Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit that we
are the sons of God. So that Divines use to say, this certainty lies in a
practical syllogism, thus, Whosoever believes, repents, is heavenly
minded, is tender about all sin, These are called and elected; But I do so,
says the gracious heart, enlightened and enabled by Gods Spirit, Therefore I am
called and elected. Now this Assumption, I do so, the heart being blind or
deceitful, could never truly make, without the help of Gods Spirit. Hence it
is called the Spirit of Adoption sent into our hearts, whereby we cry
Abbafather. Oh then, till Gods Spirit thus Evangelizeth, as it were, and puts a
filial frame in us, we are afraid of God, our thoughts are slavish and
despairing, and we desire to hide our selves from him; but this Spirit of
Adoption casts out all tormenting fears, and does inlighten the mind, that
we may see the good things God has wrought in us. Hence is that exhortation,
not to grieve the Spirit of God, because it seals us to the day of
redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. So then, as it is with the colors that are the
object of the sight, though they be never so good, and visible, yet if there be
no light, the eye cannot see them: Thus it is here; though there be never such
excellent graces, and though God has wrought a wonderful change in thee, yet
thou art not able to see it, till the Spirit of God enable thee.

Secondly, You are to know, the soul of a man being a rational and spiritual
substance, 2.
has two kind of acts. There are first the direct acts of the soul, whereby
it is carried out immediately and directly to some object. And there are
secondly reflex acts, whereby the soul considers and takes notice of what acts
it does. It Is as if the eye were turned inward to see it self. The Apostle John
expresses it fully, We know that we know, 1 John 2. 3. So that when we believe
in God, that is a direct act of the soul; when we repent of sin, because God is
dishonored, that is a direct act; but when we know that we do believe, and
that we do repent, this is a reflex act: Now whether this certainty or
assurance be a certainty of faith, or of sense, or rather mixed of both, I
shall not dispute: To be sure, it is more then those probable conjectures and
mere humane certainty which the Papists plead for.

Thirdly, I say, This assurance is a privilege may be had, and it is our sin
if we breath not after it, or do any thing that may justly fill our hearts with
doubts and diffidence. 3.
Yet it is not of absolute necessity to salvation: Its not a necessary effect
of our calling and election at all times, as heat is an inseparable effect of
fire, and light of the sun. We see David and Christ himself in such spiritual
desertions, though there was unbelief in David, but not any sin in Christ.
Faith of adherence is many times where this faith of evidence is not. Although
therefore it be our great sin to do those things which may grieve the spirit of
God, and chase away our assurance; yet many times the people of God may walk
without this comfortable persuasion: Yea they may be greatly assaulted, as if
God had cast them offfor ever. They may be as Paul's fellow-passengers in the
Ship, who had seen no sun for many days together. Let not therefore any argue
they are not called, not elected, because this is not yet made sure to them;
for many times God works the greatest certainty out of the most perplexing
doubts, and the shakings of the soul make the root faster.

Fourthly; Neither yet is this assurance the Apostle presses us unto, such as
admits of no doubts, no temptations or oppositions by Satan. No, as he cried
out, Lord 4.
I believe, help my unbelief, so, Lord I am assured, yet give me more
certainty. When Nathan told David his sins were done away, yet he still prays
for pardon, Psalm. 51. because guilt and doubts in his soul were ready to
obscure and darken his faith: And therefore the Apostle John, 1 John 3. calls
this assurance, persuading of the heart: That does excellently imply the heart
sensible of sin, is full of arguments and cavils, brings many strong
contradictions against the promise. Hence the great word that is used often to
comfort, (...), is also for exhortation, because to the grieved and troubled
heart for sin, comfort will not be received but by frequent exhortation. That
opinion therefore of having such an assurance as to have no doubt, is much to
be suspected, as not being of the Spirit of God. For the flesh lusts against
the spirit, in all the actions of it. And the devil does diligently assault our
comfort and assurance. If therefore it be of God, if it be spiritual and
heavenly, it cannot be but that the heart of a man, and the devil will oppose
it; presumption indeed being a sin of a man's self-flattering heart meets with
no contradiction; so true is that saying of a solid Divine, Nulli sunt magis
desperati, quam qui minus sunt desperantes, None are more desperate, then those
that are least despairing, viz. in their own selves, though not of the grace of
God.

Lastly, Howsoever in practical divinity it be disputed, whether there be not
an assurance by the immediate testimony of the Spirit, viz. whether the Spirit
of 5.
God does not by immediate revelation persuade the soul of its good condition
and interest in God; yet I shall not touch upon that, but only speak to that
mediate assurance, viz. which the Spirit of God works, by the arguing from the
effects to the cause, from the fruits of grace to the root, and this is not
subject to such dangerous delusions, as the former is: for this goes upon a
sure ground, the fruits of mortification, and vivification; and the Apostle
plainly means this assurance, viz. by adding one grace to another, and by
abounding in the fruits of holiness, so they shall make their calling and
election sure.

In the next place let us consider what are those effects of grace, which if a
man walk in, he may be partaker of this privilege: not but that God by his
absolute sovereignty, and for holy ends, may leave the most exact and
circumspect Christians in darkness, without any light; as it was in Job: And
the Prophet intimates, Who is among you that seareth God, and has no light,
walking in darkness? Isa. 50. 10. One that fears God, and is precious to God,
may walk in darkness, having no light, and all that he can do is to stay his
soul on God by a mere act of recumbency, not of any assurance at all. This God
may do; but yet there are particular ways, which if walked in, God may give
thee this white stone, as it is called, Revel. 2. 17. Thou shall walk as one
acquitted from thy sin, and no man can tell what it is thou feel, but thy
self only.

And first, We must give all diligence and heed to the obtaining of this
privilege. Effects of grace, by having which a Saint may obtain Assurance. 1.
We must make it our business, it must be importunately begged for in prayer.
Thus the text, The rather give all diligence; neglect not this, whatsoever thou
passest by. Now it is no wonder that natural men they look on it as a matter
not to be regarded; because they have never been wounded with sin, they have
always had a self-fulness, a self-righteousness, and by this means have not
breathed and thirsted after this assurance; Qui nil dubitat, nil discit; he
that never doubts will never learn: And so he that has not been in the depths
of Gods displeasure for sin, he that has not felt his frowns and his anger, he
never comes to think, oh what a blessed and happy thing it is to be truly
assured of the grace of God! that I am such an one to whom the Covenant of
grace belongs! a child to whom the bread of the promise appertains, and not
a dog! Hence therefore it is that men sit down without this privilege, they do
not look at it as a great mercy; they do not prize it above all other things;
and therefore they do not, because they were never sensible of the want of it.
They never lay wounded with sin, they never were amazed at the hypocrisy and
unsoundness of their hearts; They never felt themselves dropping as it were
into hell; and hereupon they give no diligence for this assurance. You see in
earthly things, how careful men are to make all their bargains sure; in all
purchases to make their evidences sure: Poor men think they are undone, if they
lose their evidences about an earthly inheritance, and never think themselves
miserable, though they have no true ground or evidence for their spiritual
condition.

Secondly, The way to obtain this assurance is a fruitful, fervent and active
walking in all the ways of holiness. If these things be in you and abound,
says the Apostle. 2.
The sparks that are ready to go out, do hardly evidence there is any fire. We
doubt of life when we feel scarce any breath; and thus it is here; The more
remiss, and negligent, and lazy thou art in the ways of godliness, the less
certainty must needs be in thee: And the reason is plain; for if graces
exercised be the sign or seal, then the more these appear, the more thriving
and flourishing they are, the surer testimonies there will be of thy calling
and election. When the Church was lazy and negligent, she lost the comfortable
presence and enjoyment of Christ. The standing pools, and sluggish waters, they
beget the croking frogs: And thus he who prays, as if he prayed not;
believes, as if he believed not; this man takes the way to have wounds and
blows; and all manner of tormenting fears in his heart. Though grace exercised
be not the cause or merit of thy salvation, yet it is an infallible sign of thy
salvation; As the Rainbow is not a cause but a sign that God will never drown
the world. Hence Paul argues from his fervency in grace to assurance, I have
fought a good fight; henceforth is laid up for me a crown of glory, 2 Timothy 49,
10. I have fought a good fight: Christianity was a real combat with sin; with
the world, and all opposition; and he had not been idle or cowardly, but
always upon his watch, and therefore he had this comfortable persuasion. So
that nothing will darken thy soul, more then dull, lazy and negligent walking.
When thou abatest or decaiest in thy graces, these tend to make a sad division
between God and thy soul.

Thirdly, Another way to preserve or obtain this assurance, is, humility and
meekness, going out of our selves, avoiding all presumption, all
self-righteousnesse. 3.
Thus the Apostle, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.
12. That is, with exceeding great humility and debasement of your selves. So
that true assurance is so far from nourishing carnal presumption and sinful
confidence, that it is built upon the clean contrary, holy fear and trembling;
for although they be assured of grace in them, yet they do not trust in this
grace. These two things differ as much as heaven and hell. Paul who was so
highly assured that nothing could separate him from the love of God, Romans 8.
And speaking of Christ, he says, Who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal.
3. yet this Paul would not be found in his own righteousness, but in that of
Christ's by faith. So then the godly rejoice to see such testimonies and
arguments of grace in themselves, but they put no confidence in them: They
repent with an holy fear and trembling: They pray, they hear with an holy fear
and trembling.

Fourthly, This assurance is obtained and preserved by a tender watchfulness
against all known sin. For it being sin only that separates between God and the
soul, 4.
this only raises up the great gulf; therefore all witting and willing
allowing of this, is a direct destroier of all assurance: And herein this holy
certainty is expressly distinguished from all carnal presumption, which makes a
man have confidence and boldness, though in the constant custom of all gross
and foul sins. They can live in all uncleanness, in all lusts of the flesh, in
all contempt and neglect of God and his worship, and yet have as vehement
persuasions that their hearts are good, and that Christ will save them, as if
they committed no such sin; oh therefore that way might be made for Christ by
throwing away all such dangerous conclusions! If I regard iniquity in my heart,
the Lord will not hear me, says David. And the Apostle says expressly, If our
hearts condemn us not, we have boldness with God, 1 John 3. There is no man's
heart, but it condemns him for many defects, and several failings; but he
speaks of a condemning for the willing practice of known sins. No marvel then,
if thou complainest thou have no assurance, thou have no certainty; for as long
as there are these desperate venturings upon sin, it cannot be but continual
quakings should be upon thee. If Cain carry about with him guilt in his
conscience, no wonder if he fear every thing will destroy him. David could have
no peace in his bones, while any sin lay unconfessed and unforsaken.

Fifthly, Another way to obtain this is, To take heed of grieving the Spirit of
God or quenching the motions of it. For seeing it is the Spirit of God that 5.
witnesses, and it is the Spirit that seals, If we would have assurance, we
are to nourish it, to do nothing that may resist and repel it. His office is
to comfort and to bring gladness into the heart. Now if thou either by
rebelling against the motions of it, or by despairing thoughts, reject this
Comforter; thou take the ready way to make thy self an undone man. Know then
that as you are to hearken to Gods Spirit convincing of sin, and sanctifying
the nature, so also sealing and witnessing unto them the love of God. Though
the Spirit of God moved upon the waters at first, and still does on godly
sorrow, yet not on sorrow unbelieving, despairing, and accompanied with hard
thoughts of him.

Sixthly, If thou would attain to this assurance, Acquaint thy self well with
the Covenant of the Gospel, with the precious promises revealed there, with the
gracious 6.
condescentions of Gods love in Christ. Many of the children of God are kept in
a doubtful and perplexed estate, because they consider not the riches of
Christ's grace revealed in the Gospel; They judge unbelief and doubting even a
kind of a duty, and that to do otherwise were arrogance. As Luther said, His
soul hated that word Repent all the while he was a Papist, because he thought
there was nothing in it, but bitter sorrow and terror about sin; whereas when
he understood the Evangelical nature of it, and that it was to be accompanied
with faith (...) Christ; and that nothing was more acceptable unto God, then
believing in him, and to have good thoughts of him as a father; then the word
he did run from, as Moses from the serpent, he took up and embraced.

Use of severe Reproof, of that horrible, profane, and supine negligence of
Use.
most men in this point: Who gives all diligence to make their calling and
salvation sure in their own consciences? who does not put it upon a venture?
who does not trust all upon miserable uncertainties? They that in matters of
estate by the Law, or in matters of their health by physic, will be sure to go
upon good ground: In the matters of Religion they never enquire, they never
seek to search out things; Oh we would think, that Religion and a godly fear
should make thee of no rest in thy bones, till thou know in what condition
thy soul stands in toward God: Have thou never heard, That the heart is
deceitful above all things; it will tell thee, thou do repent, when thou
do not; that thou love God, when thou do not; And will thou still put
off all to this, If I be saved, I be saved, if damned, I am damned.

SERMON CXVII.
The Possibility and Duty of Assurance of our Calling demonstrated: And the
Reasons why some think a certain Assurance impossible; with Answers to the
Objections brought against it.

2 PET. 1. 10. Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your
calling and election sure.
YOu have heard of the possibility, yea, and necessary duty, to endeavor after
the certainty of our Calling and Election; as also, what are those means, in
the diligent exercise whereof, we may expect this privilege: And for the
clearer apprehension of this, I shall Answer one or two Objections, by the
discussion whereof, the truth will be more illustrious, as the file gets off
the rust: For whereas there were two things in the Doctrine, The possibility
and duty of this holy certainty, we may first question the possibility of it,
and then the duty. Now in these things I shall be brief, because the matter
has been formerly more largely handled: That therefore certainty is not
possible; among other Objections, I shall pitch upon one that is most
practical, and that which does most usually obstruct assurance in the godly;
and that is,

The Hypocrisy and the deceitfulness of the heart.

For thus commonly the Christian that is tender about his condition toward God
Objecteth:

I know the promises are true and good, it is without all question, He that
believes and repents, he shall be saved; he that is born of God, and
effectually Objection against the certainty of Assurance.
called, he may conclude, I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine; but whether
I do so or no, there is my perplexity: The heart is full of guile, and we read
of Ahabs humiliation, of the foolish Virgins, of the stony and thorny ground,
such who had some affections and delight in holy things, some sorrow and
humiliation about sin; yet for all that, their own hearts deceived them, their
gold proved dross, they took John Baptist for Christ, some imperfect
dispositions, for the complete and effectual workings of grace; and why may not
I delude my self? and the rather, because every one is apt to flatter himself:
We see all people, that are indeed far enough from the Kingdom of heaven,
between whom and godliness there is a great gulf; yet peremptorily conclude,
All is well with them: So true is that of Solomon, Every man's way is pure in
his own eyes; but then that which follows should make all tremble, But God
pondereth the heart, Prove. 21. 2.

This is very specious, and so far this Objection has strength, that no man
Answ.
should easily and speedily persuade himself that all is well with him: That
those duties of searching and trying the heart, and communing with our own
selves privately, are again and again to be practiced by us; but yet the
Doctrine of the hypocrisy and desperate guile of the heart overthrows not
this Scripture-certainty. And before I give you the reason of that, I shall set
down some arguments briefly, out of Scripture and Reason, that prove the
possibility, and then answer that; for let it once be manifested by Scripture,
that such a thing may be, then we are not to regard a thousand Objections that
may be made to the contrary.

Now the grounds for the possibility of it, may be taken from these general
Grounds for the possibility of assuranc. ^1
heads:

First, The Scripture requiring this of us: God would not put us upon such a
search, if to find had been impossible; for besides this Text, which seems to
speak this truth in the Sun beams, Give all diligence to make your calling
sure; if certainty hereof had been impossible, might not any one stand up and
say, This is to command one to give all diligence for that which cannot be? I
may be as well required to touch the heavens with my hands, or to remove the
earth from its center? Besides this (I say) I shall name you one impregnable
place, which has stood like a rock, that all the Popish Engines have not been
able to stir, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves, etc. where you have the duty
required, To examine, to prove our selves, as the Artificer does his metal, to
see whether it be counterfeit or true, so the Greek word signifies; and thus
they are to do to themselves: And he ingeminates the duty, to show his
earnestness and affection therein. 2. There is the object matter of this duty,
Whether ye be in the faith, whether Christ be in ye; that is, whether ye be
effectually called or no; and he brings a reason from an absurdity, If you do
not know Christ is in you, ye are reprobates: As we use the English word, it
may seem harsh, but the Greek word is no more then unskilful in mind, not able
to discern: So that reprobate is not here taken for one that is not elected,
but for one that is foolish, weak, unskilful, as the Scripture speaks of
reprobate silver: see more of this in the first Sermon. So that you see the
Apostle makes it an ignorant and weak unskilfulness in the ways of God, and in
the work of grace, when we are not able thus to discern our selves. So then,
let this Text put it out of all question; for when the Apostle commanded the
Corinthians to make this proof and examination, had the thing been impossible
to be found out: It would have been as absurd, as for a Physician to come to a
diseased person, and tell him, he cannot be cured, unless he eat of a Phoenix,
or use the Philosophers stone, which happily can never be found out.

Secondly, A second general ground is, From the peculiar office and work
attributed 2.
to Gods spirit; and that is, to witness with our spirit, to seal unto us; Its
the spirit of Adoption, subduing those tormenting and slavish fears about God,
which make the soul suspect every thing, and to be ^ossed up and down like the
uncertain waves, 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have received the spirit of God, that we
might know the things that are freely given us of God; especially that is
clear, 1 John 3. 24. So then in th^s doubt, we must attend to a greater cause
then our own hearts, we must consider, what great things that spirit of God can
do in our souls: No man naturally can hate his sin, can deny himself, yet the
spirit of God sanctifying, he is ready and willing in the work: So no man
seeing the horrible depths of wickedness in his own heart, can ever come to be
persuaded; but the spirit of God can rebuke these waves and tempests, and make
all serene and clear in the soul.

The third general head is, From those places where the people of God have
plainly 3.
declared their assurance: That therefore which the children of God have
attained unto, must needs be possible, and we ought to immitate them in.
Hezekiah is without question in this point, 2 Kings 20. 3. Remember how I have
walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart: He does not speak this
arrogantly, but humbly, making use of his sincerity, as a testimony to confirm
him in his prayer to God. Now Hezekiah could not make use of such an Argument
as this, had he not been assured, that he was not deceived in what he uttered
to God: And thus David is often in his Psalms, professing his love to God with
his whole heart, and the uprightness of his heart, which had been a vain brag,
and sinful ostentation, if he had not known it had been so. In the New
Testament Paul is often speaking of his assurance and confidence; and lest it
might be thought he had this by immediate revelation, he speaks as in the
person of all believers, The spirit witnesses with our spirit, Romans 8. and so
John, We know that we know, 1 John 2. He does not make this a peculiar
privilege vouchsafed to some favorites, but such a mercy as all Believers are
capable of. So when our Savior asked some, If they did believe with their
whole heart; it had been a vain question, to which no man could have returned
any answer, if they could not be certain whether they did believe or no; and
that man, who said, Lord I believe, help my unbelief: He showed the certainty
he had of his faith in the first place, as the weakness of it in the latter.

Lastly, The general head I shall end with is, the joy and thankfulness that 4.
ought to be in the people of God: Now what joy can there be, where the soul
knows not, or doubts much of Gods love? How can the heart be enlarged to
praise God, for those spiritual mercies, which finds them not in its self? For
joy, the children of God are said To joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. and
its called Unspeakable joy, full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. And can this be in a
matter that we know not whether it be ours or no? Can we joy in the promise,
and yet doubt whether it be ours? Can we rejoice in Christ Jesus, and yet
question whether he dyed for us? And so its for praise and thankfulness, Can
any man bless God for translating him out of darkness into light, for working
the fear of him in his soul, for the wonderful and mighty change he has made
on his heart? Can the soul bless and praise God, when he does not think God
has indeed done these things for him? These general heads may suffice, to
clear the possibility of it.

I shall give you also a Reason for it, which is this, Supernatural habits or
principles of grace, do vitally and evidently discover their actions and
effects, as rational and animal principles: As the principle of love to God, of
repentance for sin, do in the acts thereof manifest themselves spiritually, as
rational principles: So that as a rational man, he knows the arguments he
has, he discerns his acts of reason, he can tell you he is of this
judgment, and not of that: Thus it is with a spiritual man, he perceives the
faith in him, the love of God that is within him: Can the Animal lover find
sensible love burning within? and does not the spiritual lover feel such fire
in his bones? Does not David cry, That his soul breaths and longs for God?
Does not the Church cry out, She is sick of love? So then, supernatural
principles acting in the soul, are perceived spiritually, as rational acts are,
or sensible acts are. As Austin said, He that believes, finds he does
believe; viz. Gods spirit assisting him; otherwise, like Hagar, there may be a
pleasant fountain of refreshment hard by, and she not perceive it, till her
eyes be opened: What then should be the cause that men may think this certainty
impossible? This may arise from three grounds:

First, When we take no effects of grace to be sure signs, unless they be
perfect and Why men think this certainty impossible. 1.
complete: And this is very often a deceit, even to good and tender hearts;
they do not love God, they are not so heavenly minded, so zealous; they have
often failings, they have daily infirmities: And thus, because they have not
perfect workings of grace, they doubt of any grace at all; but then Hezekiah,
Paul, and all the worthies of God, who enjoyed this privilege, should have
been stripped of it, for at the same time they complain of the remainder of
their corruptions, they feel thorns and goads in their side: So great a matter
is it to make a difference between truth of grace in the Essence, and
perfection in the degrees.

Another ground may be, Because men for the most part keep at a remote distance
2.
from God: They are not diligent and constant in spiritual duties and
approaches to God: Thus because they draw not nigh to God, God draws not nigh
to them; because they are estranged from God, God is also from them: If
therefore we did take the Scriptures counsel, To walk with God, and to acquaint
our selves with God, which is done by lively meditation, and quickened duties of
Religion, we should then find that from God, which we thought impossible: You
see the effects of all acts are thought impossible, to those that have no skill
therein: And thus it is here Assurance is a mystery, and impossibility to thee,
because thou have no familiar acquaintance with God; thou come not into his
presence often, thou delightest not to draw nigh to him.

Thirdly, One main cause of this uncertainty, is also, A nourishing a servile
slavish 3.
fear about God; not praying for the spirit of Adoption, and a filial
Evangelical frame of heart: This is greatly to be attended unto by timorated
consciences, such as are shaken with fear and terror for sin; Nunquam satis
cavent etiam cum cavent, they distinguish not between Timor solicitudinis, and
Timor anxietatis, A fear of godly care and diligence, and a fear of perplexing
anxieties: Oh this many times is a labyrinth that good people are in; their
hearts are not directed into the way of believing, as the Apostle speaks 2 Thessalonians. 3. 5. they fear God as an austere Master, watching the opportunity to
damn them; they have not the reverential fear of a father, which is accompanied
with faith and love of God: Thus Cain and Judas, they did split their souls
upon this rock, they were terrified about their sins, horror had taken hold of
them, because of the wretched condition they were in; but they had not faith in
God as a father, which would have been the clue of thread to have helped them
out of their distress: Oh then do not delight in thy bondage disposition; do
not look upon God with a slavish fear; this will breed hatred at last, Odirunt
dum metuunt, and hatred blaspheming despair: These things dispatched, I come to
Answer the first Objection:

The heart of man is deceitful, its such a deep we cannot fathom: Who can
understand Object.
his errors? says David, Cleanse me from secret sins, Psalm. 19. 13. There may
be a great deal of unknown wickedness in me, such pride, such earthliness, such
unbelief, that I never can understand.

To this I Answer, That though a man may be deceived in his judgment about
himself, yet it does not follow, that he is always defacto deceived: We say,
General Answ.
Councels may err, yet they did not always defacto cry, so it may fall out,
that a man in judging about himself may be deceived, but that he is in every
act deceived, this would bring gross Skepticism into the world; no man could
tell his own thoughts, his own affections, and there could not be such a thing
as Truth in the world. Now the Scripture speaks the contrary, 1 Cor. 2. 11.
What man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man within him? So
that you see, a man may know the things of his own spirit. Again, if this were
so, then no man could discern his Dogmatical faith, as well as his saving
faith; no man could tell whether he were a Protestant or a Papist, or a
Socinian; for the heart being deceitful, as is objected, I may think I believe
such a point, and such a point, when indeed I do not; and so the Academical
doubting shall come in, Nothing is known, and nothing is believed.

But the second and full Answer is, That indeed the heart is naturally
deceitful, 2.
full of guile and hypocrisy, but when its sanctified and converted, its made
sincere and upright: Its no longer as those pictures that represent at a
distance such and such different Forms, but as a glass, sincerely representing
the form of the visage, if deformed, deformed, if comely, comely: Thus
Nathaniel is said to be a man, in whom was no guile; and, Blessed is the man,
Psalm. 32. to whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose heart there is no
guile: Hence its called An upright heart, A sincere heart, and, Truth in the
inward parts: Although therefore there are some relics of guile and
hypocrisy in the godly, as of all other sins, yet for the main they are made
sincere; and so all that self flattery, and self-love, is for the main
crucified: And this indeed is the full Answer to that Objection.

Secondly, Whereas it is said to be a duty, to this it may be Objected: Object.


That this Assurance would prove a dangerous temptation, men would grow secure,
and carnally confident; therefore as God keeps the hour of death, and the day
of judgment, to maks us always prepared; so by the same Reason, he should keep
the knowledge of our condition from our eyes, that so we might always fear.

To Answer this practical Objection (for I avoid all speculative and mere
controversal ones.) Anesw.


First, If the truth of God and the Scripture is not to be maintained or
asserted, because the corruption of men will abuse it, we must preach no divine
truth at all; E vero non nisi verum, E bono non nisi bonum, No good or sound
truth does produce as its genuine effect, any other then what is good; but by
accident, and by reason of the poisonous disposition in some men, they will
turn the sweetest flowers into poison: Paul did frequently preach the grace of
God in the Gospel, and some hearers turned this into wantonness, shall
therefore no mention be made of this grace? if therefore some men, through
Satan's delusions, think they have grace, when they have not, shall not he that
has true grace be persuaded of it? if a man in a dream do verily think he has
such riches, such honors; shall we conclude, that a man awake can have no
certainty whether he be in a dream or no? And further, by this reason no man
should contend earnestly for the true Doctrine of faith; no man should
inseparably adhere to the truth of God even unto death, because an Heretic
who pertinaciously maintains a damnable heresy, he may be as confident as
the Orthodox man: Should not the Israelites make a good use of the Manna,
because he that abused it, found it corrupted to worms.

But Secondly, This Doctrine from its own nature, cannot bread any arrogance,
or neglect of God and godliness for many Reasons:

First, Its only maintained and kept up by humility and holy fear: So that
when a man cease to be humble, to have an holy fear of God, his certainty
likewise cease, even as the lamp goes out when the oil is taken away: The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, says the Psalmist, Psalm 25. 14.

Secondly, It cannot breed arrogance, for these exercises of grace, are only
signs and testimonies of Election or Salvation, they are no causes of it, or
merit; wherein then can the soul be puffed up. And

Thirdly, These gracious effects that are signs, they are not of our working,
by our free will and power of nature: We are his workmanship created to good
works, Ephesians. 10. So that the discovery of these effects, may indeed enlarge
the soul much to praise and glorify God, but to stir up pride in us, there is
no consequence at all. And

Fourthly, These very effects of grace, though not wrought by us, but by God,
they are not purely good and perfect, there is much dross, and many
imperfections in them: So that the godly heart does at the same time rejoice
and debase its self; it rejoices to see the love of God in the soul, but that
this love is so weak, so languid and fainting, it does also grieve: It
discovers grace indeed, and therefore is assured; but it discovers also
thousands of failings and imperfections, and therefore is laid low: And yet
further, though they be in the heart, yet of our selves we have not eyes to
discern what God has wrought for us, till he enable us; so that its Gods gift
to be assured: How many dear children of God walk in darkness, and would give a
whole world if they had it, but to have this clear evidence of Gods love to
them, though for a day.

Use of further Exhortation, to prove and examine your selves, whether those
Use.
visible characters of Christ be in thee, or the marks of the Devil: See what
fruit ye bring forth, and then you may judge whether you are trees for eternal
burning or no: Oh its a sign all is not well, when thou art unwilling to put
thy self upon the touchstone; its an argument there is guilt within, thou shall
find thy self to be such an one as thou art afraid to think of; thou think,
If certainty be only had in the use of such means; then farewell my hopes, my
evidence for heaven. Oh! who says as David, Prove me, O Lord, and examine me,
if there be any evil in me. And to all the former means, we may add one main
one, which is a sign that never fails, If we love the brethren, if we love
and delight in those that are godly; as David's delight was in the Saints of the
earth: He that is not godly himself, cannot heartily love one that is godly,
because similitude is both a cause and an effect of love; and this is, when
godliness is the cause of love, not his riches, his parts, his love to thee,
but the holy image of God appearing in him.

SERMON CXVIII.
The Advantages the Godly have by Assurance: How it may be known from
Presumption; with Directions to the godly that want it.

2 PET. 2. 10. Wherefore the rather (Brethren) give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.
THe possibility and duty of this Assurance has been already declared and
proved; as also the practical objections against it, removed. I now come to
show the great advantage of this certainty. Where the godly heart has this
holy assurance and persuasion wrought by Gods Spirit, there it has many helps
which the tempted soul wants. It is therefore good to propound them to you,
that so the profitablenesse of it in heavens way, may excite you to seek it.

And first, Where there is certainty of this heavenly privilege, there the
soul is The advantages that the godly have by Assurance. 1.
more inslamed and enlarged to love God. It Is an assertion against all reason
and experience, which the Papists utter, That assurance of Gods love in us
would breed contempt, security and neglect of God. For with all ingenuous
natures (and such the children of God are) the more persuasion of another love
to them, the more they repay it with love again. The wife, the child, the more
they know they are beloved of husband or father, the more this inflames them.
Love is fire, and fire turns all things into fire. Thus David, when he could
say, God had forgiven his iniquities, and healed his diseases, in particular;
Then bless the Lord, O my soul, and all within me praise his holy Name, Psalm.
103. 1. Thus Paul in Romans 8. 6. what puts him into those extaticall raptures,
and transcendent expressions about God and Christ, but the assurance that he
was such an one whom God had elected, called and justified? Oh then, know all
the while thou have doubtings and servile fears upon thee, so long thy love to
God is very imperfect and cold. The fear of God brings hatred and wearisom
thoughts of God: And hence the Apostle shows, that fear, viz. slavish, has a
torment with it; and that love casts out this tormenting fear, 1 John 4 18.
Love to God as a gracious Father, would allay all those tempestuous and
swelling waves that are in the soul. Now this can never be done, but by some
certainty that we are such whom God loves. Tranquillus Deus, tranquillat
omnia; when we know God is pacified, then the soul is also pacified. As it is
with the sea, that is quiet as long as the air and winds from above are quiet
and still; so it is here; The soul, that is calm, comfortable and gracious, all
the while it can by assurance enjoy Gods favor. Now if we cannot so vigorously
love God, while we are without this certainty, how should this provoke us to
endeavor after it!

Secondly, Certainty of our calling and election will breed much spiritual
strength (...)
and heavenly ability to all graces and duties, to go through all relations
with much holiness and lively vigor. For fear which is the opposite to this,
that makes weak hands, and feeble knees, that disheartens, that says, A lion
is in the way: whereas the certainty of our good condition would put hope and
life into us. The testimony of a good conscience made Paul so active in the
course of his Ministry, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Certainty breeds joy, and the joy of the
Lord is our strength, as Nehemiah said, Nehem. 8. 10. Take a piece of timber
full of moths and worms eating into it, and it is no ways strong enough for any
building. Grief is made rottenness to the bones, which consumes the seat of
all our strength: so spiritual dejections and sinful doubtings about the work
of grace in us, they consume the very heart, they destroy the very foundations.
No man but a sanctified man can have a good conscience in a Scripture sense;
they may have a quiet conscience, not accusing them for gross sins committed
against the light of nature: But this is not a Scripture good conscience; for
that is freed not only from gross sins, but heart-sins, and soul-sins, and it
is sprinkled with the blood of Christ. And thus a good conscience is a
continual feast. Oh then, this should stir thee up for this holy certainty;
thou will be far more cheerful, more joyful in the work of the Lord: Thou will be more fervent and zealous; thou will be as the sun, like a giant running
his race. We complain of our barrenness, of our weakness, of our slothfulness:
What can be wings to us but this certainty of our gracious estate, This will be
like the Spirit in Ezekiels Wheels. This will be like the wind that gathered
the dry bones together. Oh then that the people of God would more matter this.
Thou could not be such a lump of earth, if this breath of life were breathed
into thee.

Thirdly, This certainty and assurance of grace, would exceedingly keep up the
heart under all afflictions and outward miseries. Had not Paul been assured of
that 3.
eternal weight of glory, he could not have judged these worldly miseries
light and easy. When David was in all that misery, all outward hopes gone, He
encouraged himself in his God, 1 Samuel 30. 6. His God, He knew God was his God,
though he had lost all things else. And thus Paul is more then a conqueror;
and does so highly challenge all troubles to hurt him if they can, because he
knows by Gods Spirit, that he is one called and chosen; and shall not this
prevail with you? Is it not a miserable thing to fear to be killed by men, and
to be damned by God at the same time: To be imprisoned by men, and imprisoned
in thy own conscience, Oh what will provoke thee if not this? Alas! I am sure
of nothing, not of my life, not of my outward comforts, not of any outward
enjoyment, and wilt not thou then be sure of grace within thee? Oh our vanity!
when will we be wise? We labor for those earthly things, which when we have,
we cannot be sure off, but not at all for grace. Is it not with many men, as
with the bees, when all the summer they have labored to fill their combs with
honey, then comes the husbandman and burns them, and takes their honey. So thou
have a long while labored to get up so much wealth, such an estate, and then
comes death, or some sudden public judgment, the sword and war, and that
takes all thy honey from thee. Oh when we can be sure of no outward thing we
have, let us be sure of inward grace.

Fourthly, This certainty of grace is a strong and mighty buckler against all
those violent assaules and temptations, that the devil uses to exercise the
godly with. His 4.
temptations are, That they are hypocrites, that all the calamities which fall
upon them are because God is not reconciled with them, that they seek
themselves and not the glory of God. Now there is no such brazen wall to repel
all his darts, as the testimony and knowledge of the truth of grace in our
hearts. This was the aqua vitae, that kept up Job. You know what fiery
temptations he had, God seemed to be against him; godly friends judged him an
hypocrite: The devil he assaults him; he says, Does Job serve God for naught?
God hedgeth him in, and gives him outward prosperity; no wonder then if Job
serve God, Job 1. These are strong tempestuous winds, able to tear up the root
of the strongest oak; but yet he stands like an immovable root; and all
because of that integrity and sincerity which he knew to be in himself; he knew
his aims and ends to be pure, he knew he served God for Gods sake. As this is
of great consequence to defend against the devils accusations, so also against
the calumnies and false clamours of the devils instruments. As the devil is
(...), The accuser, so all wicked men do diabolize; they charge the generation
of the godly for hypocrites, for dissemblers, for painted sepulchers; but the
knowledge of their own uprightness, and the graces of God in their soul, do
abundantly fortify them; whereas this is terrible to have other men condemning
us, and God also, and our own consciences condemning us.

Fifthly, This certainty is a special means to breed contentation of mind,
and a 5.
thankful, cheerful heart in every condition. As we told you, David in that
great exigency of his, encouraged himself in his God: and in his Psalms, that
the Lord was his portion, and his inheritance: Now this could not be known,
unless he also were certain of his godliness; for God is not the portion or
inheritance of wicked men. And upon this it is, that he says, God had put more
joy into his heart, then they have, when wine and oil increases, Psalm. 4. If
therefore thou would have that happiness on earth, true contentation of
spirit, it must be from the knowledge of thy grace, and sense of Gods love in
Christ, when thou can say, Soul, take thy spiritual ease and heavenly quiet,
for here are many good things stored up for thee: This is to be a godly Dives
indeed, a Dives in soul, and to fare deliciously, in a spiritual sense, every
day.

Lastly, This certainty of grace is a sure and special antidote against death
in all 6.
the fears of it. This makes the King of terrors, a King of all consolations:
For seeing that by grace we are the members of Christ, death has no more sting
on us, then on Christ our head. And therefore the godly may in Christ triumph,
O death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory! 1 Cor. 15. 55. These
serpents may be handled, because their stings are out. Let them howl and roar
out at the approach of death, who know not whether God be their friend, or
enemy, or rather may know he is their enemy; who have just cause to doubt,
whether they are going to hell or heaven: Oh to such, the very name and thought
of death and judgment, must be full of amazement and terror: But to those who
are in a holy manner persuaded of their interest in Christ, that perceive the
sure evidences of Gods grace in them; they may lift up their heads for their
redemption draws nigh: And indeed this should much incite you, to seek after
such a support at death. Hezekiah upon the sentence of death passed on him,
supported himself with this, 2 King. 20. 3. And what will thou do, when the
hour of death approaches: here is no longer the comfort of thy riches, wife and
children to be enjoyed; here is no longer the company of thy friends and
acquaintance to be retained. Oh then! when thou art to be sure no longer of any
earthly comfort, would it not be better then a world to thee to be sure of
heavenly comforts? Oh that you would be wise for your latter end. Do something
that may stand you in stead, when you are dying men, gasping at the last.
Drowning men use to catch hold on any thing. Oh dying and drowning men should
be sure of a fast hold to lean upon; These are the advantages. How to know true
certainty which is wrought by the Spirit, from the false persuasions of a man's
own heart. 1.


But the godly heart may inquire, How shall I know this holy certainty and
persuasion by Gods Spirit, from my own persuasion, from the self-flattery that
is in me? Are there not thousands of people that call darkness light, and
bitter sweet? that conclude the truth and goodness of their heart in all
respects toward God. It Is true it cannot be denied but that there are such
foolish dreamers, who dream of their fullness when they are indeed empty; yet
to a searching eye they may be quickly distinguished.

For first, Holy certainty is kept up in all exercises of grace, and constant
tender avoiding of all known sin: but presumption will agree with the practice
of all these. He is confident of Gods love, of his own good heart; yet a
notorious beast, a constant swearer, a constant liar, unjust in his dealing,
lustful and voluptuous in his life. Oh these must needs be horse-beetles that
can live in such dung; not Christ's doves who delight in neat and sweet places.
What? thou hope in God? thou trust thou have a good heart and a good conscience
when so much wickedness is in thy life! This is impudent presumption, and Gods
eyes are purer then to accept or love such. Does a man then think he has grace
in his heart, how careful is he to practice all good known duties, and to
avoid all known sin.

Secondly, Presumption is unwilling to be searched and tried. It flies from
the light, it cannot abide the touchstone; but this holy certainty loves a
deep search. 2.
It is here as between the Heretic and the Orthodox man; Heretics they are
lucifugae Scripturarum, as Tertull, said, The bats and owls that fly from the
light. The thief hates the light, says our Savior, John. 2. 20. But the true
doctrine, that desires to be tried and dived into. Then thus, where a true
knowledge of grace is, that man cries with David, Prove me, Lord, examine and
try if there be any false way, Psalm. 26. 2. But where presumption is, that
would not have a cracked title, or a forged evidence brought before the Judge.

Thirdly, Presumption bears up a man's heart, till a man come to some great
and extraordinary calamities, and then this bubble vanishes away. Its not
truly rooted, 3.
and so will not abide a violent storm. They fall from presumption into
despair. But see how Job and David can go through the hardest brunts; though
they be under many briars, yet these innocent sheep lose not their wool. Dross
will melt in the fire, but gold will be the more refined. The wind makes chaff
fly away, but leaves the corn more purified. The righteous has hope in his
death, Prove. 14. 32. then when the presumptuous man's hope does most wither many
times.

Fourthly, Presumption is not opposed nor assaulted by the devil. Satan does
not tempt and labor to drive people out of it, but nourishes them in it. But
out of 4.
this holy certainty, the devils main scope is to drive them. You see he was
not afraid to shoot out his fiery dart even at Christ himself, upon this,
Whether he was the Son of God. And his stratagem was to make Job think, and
condemn himself for an hypocrite. So that godly assurance is much opposed, both
by the devil and the unbelieving heart of man; its hardly obtained, and hardly
retained. But of presumption we may say, as Isaac did of his sons counterfeit
venison, how come thou by it so quickly my son? How come you to be confident
thus quickly, thus easily? This man-child is born, and your soul has not been
in travel and pangs: this is not Gods way.

Fifthly, It is the sure character of presumption, that it divides the means
and the end. It hopes for such privileges, though it never do the duties: Now
this is 5.
not assurance, but a presumptuous delusion, whereas you see this text is, To
give all diligence to make your calling sure. Presumption is like that charity
James speaks of, that gives good words, bids the party go home and be warmed
and clothed, but does not give any thing; and in this presumption most men
live: They hope for that end, the means whereof they are never conversant in.
Should they tempt God about their natural life (they will not eat and drink
and think to live) all men would say it were horrible presumption: but though
they do it palpably about supernatural life (they will neither repent or
forsake sin, or live holily) and yet hope Christ will be their Savior. Though
they do thus, yet men see not their own folly and madness therein.

Sixthly, Presumption is but a self-deceiving, false logic that a man
deceives himself with. Whereas you heard this certainty is a knowledge wrought
by Gods 6.
Spirit in us. The Apostle James says, If any man seem to be religious and
bridle not his tongue, (...), he makes a false syllogism, James 1. 26. He
takes non causa, procausa; and indeed all presumption is nothing but a false
syllogism; a man takes that for a cause which is not a cause: or else it is an
ignoration of the proper state of the question, that it is to be indeed godly,
how much goes to the nature of it.

Seventhly, The presumptuous man is full of haughty arrogance and proud
preferring 7.
of himself, contemning and undervaluing others. Thus that Pharisee, Lord I
thank thee that I am not as other men, etc. Whereas true assurance is
accompanied with deep humility, and a pitiful respect to others, praying and
mourning for others; Oh that their eyes were opened; Oh that they were enriched
with the grace of God, as they are. Humility and self-emptinesse is an
inseparable effect of godly assurance, and of precious esteem with God. Minimum
de se sensisse, tam magnum est quam maximas res fecisse, The lowest love, and
the least thoughts of our selves, is as great, as to have done the greatest and
most excellent things.

In the next place it may be questioned, What that godly person should do, What
a godly person should do that wants Assurance.
who has not this assurance; though grace be in him, he knows it not, yea he
thinks the clean contrary. Even as Luke 24. 16. When Jesus after his
resurrection appeared to the disciples, though he drew nigh to them, and talked
to them, yet says the text, Their eyes were holden, that they did not know
him. So it is with many a gracious heart, Christ is spiritually in the soul,
grace is present, yet he cannot feel this. Though the sun of righteousness be
in his heart, yet he walks in darkness.

Now to such an one we say, Let him walk in a faith of adherence and dependence
when he has none of these evidences. This the Scripture calls trusting,
relling, leaning and staying of the soul upon God. David in many Psalms has
only this plank to stand upon in the great Ocean: For this you must know,
though assurance be a duty, and to be pressed after, yet it is not the faith
that justifies. Thou may belong to God, and have an interest in the
promise, though thou feel no evidences of it. Who is he that fears God,
walking in darkness and has no light, let him stay himself upon God? Isa. 50.
10. So then, if thou find thy soul like a parched heath; thou go bowed
down, thinking thy self a withered branch, a dried tree; consider what is thy
duty, what does God require of thee? even a depending and waiting on him. And
this dependence of faith is far more noble then the assurance of faith.

For first, In assurance, there I go on in holy duties, and love of God,
because The dependence of faith more noble then Assurance 1.
of the sensible sweetness and delight that I have; but in dependence there I
trust in God, when I have no sense or feeling: So then, as it is a greater act
of love to God, when I love him though he afflicts me, though he blesses me
with no outward mercies; so it is a greater act of obedience to wait and depend
on God, when I feel my own unworthiness and load of sin, then when the
goodness of my heart is cleared up unto me.

Secondly, To depend and wait on God, though darkness be in thy soul, argues
2.
thy faith more firm and strong. As when the woman of Canaan would not give
over, though Christ called her dog, yet this made her faith to appear great
faith. It was an high expression in Job, Though he kill me I will trust in him.
Do not then give over thy constancy in holy duties, be not discouraged in
waiting, on God for assurance, for he will at last cause the sun to arise, and
the dark night to fly away.

And thus I shall conclude this text, still pressing you to be upon more sure
and certain terms about your souls, then many are. God bid Hezekiah set his
house in order before he died: Oh do thou set thy soul in order, cast up all
thy spiritual accounts. It is a woeful thing when thou art dying, then to cry
out, Oh I know not what to do, live I must not, die I dare not; every thing is
in disorder, there is nothing sure about my soul. What do you think my beloved
brethren? Are not these things the greatest reason in the world we persuade you
to? How unexcusable will ye be? when will ye go away and say, It is true
indeed, we should be upon sure terms, It is an happy thing to be so, but the
world, that hinders me, my lusts they hinder me. I tell you the consideration
of these things have so affected men heretofore, that they have gone and lived
in cells, and holds of the earth; they have shut themselves up in woods and
wildernesses, that they might attend to this great matter the salvation of
their souls. This indeed was their blind zeal and indiscreet forwardness, but
it will certainly at the day of Judgment rise up and condemn thy jollity, thy
carnal security in a sinful way.

SERMON CXIX.
Shows in how many respects wicked men (before their effectual Calling) are
afar off from God, and consequently miserable.

ACTS 2. For the Promise is unto you and your children, and to all that are
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.
THe later part of this Text will continue further new matter unto us, while we
treat of this Divine Vocation: and to bring you to the coherence of it, You may
take notice of two great and strange wonders recorded in the Chapter: The first
is, That admirable Apparition of the holy Ghost in fiery cloven Tongues upon
the heads of the Apostles: Wherein take notice of the time when this was, In
the day of Pentecost; on this time the Law was given on Mount Sinai by Moses;
and now the Gospel is to be preached to the whole world.

2. Consider the Manner of this Apparition, it was with a rushing mighty wind;
this did denote the great efficacy and mighty power of the Spirit in the Word
preached.

The second way was of Tongues, to show the gifts that God would bestow upon
the Apostles, and fiery Tongues to signify the light, and the heat, and the
purifying virtue that would be in the Word preached, and cloven Tongues,
because they would divide the Word aright to every hearer. Thus as once
diversity of Tongues was a judgment, and by it Babel was built; so here,
diverse Tongues are a mercy, and by it the spiritual Jerusalem is built.

In the next place you have the Efficacy of this Apparition demonstrated in the
Apostle Peter's Sermon. And

First, He confirms this wonderful work of God by a Prophecy out of Joel,
wherein God promised To pour out his Spirit (that denotes abundance) on their
sons and daughters, their menservants and maidservants, the meanest and most
contemptible, contrary to that wicked saying of the Rabbis, Spiritus Sanctus
non cadit super animum pauperis; And after the Apostle Peter had doctrinally
instructed them about Christ, and practically convinced them of their
particular sin in crucifying of him (for Singularia sunt quae pungunt) you
have the wonderful and savoury effect upon the hearers, described in two things:

1. Their remorse and trouble of conscience for sin, They were pricked in
heart, as a man that is stabbed at the heart with a dagger: This ought to be
the fruit of all our Sermons, to send you away grieved and troubled, wounded at
the very heart. The tears of the hearers are the praises of the Preacher.

2. Their desire and enquiry, What shall we do that we may be saved, then is
our Ministry blessed, when it puts you upon these serious Questions. When you
go home, What shall I do to be saved? I am out of the way, my sin is
discovered, this Sermon has told me of all the evil that ever I did: Oh what
shall I do to be saved! Now that which is the second wonder in this Chapter is,
The Number of those Persons that were converted at this time: its said, ver.
41. That they were about three thousand. Here is one to be admired more then
the Heathen Orpheus, that could make beasts follow him, and tame their natures;
for ignorant and profane enemies, even a great multitude embrace Christ. Here
is Peter catching of men, as once he did fish, and the net is so full, that it
is ready to break.

In the next place, You have Peter's Advice and Council, directing them into the
way of Salvation; wherein consider a twofold duty; 1. Repent. 2. Be baptized,
with the Object, Into the name of Christ; This does not exclude the other
persons.

3. You have a twofold encouragement; 1. From the benefit sealed in Baptism,
Remission of sins. 2. A gracious Effect God would vouchsife to them, Ye shall
receive the holy Ghost. And my Text is brought in as a reason, why they should
repent and be baptized, and hope for remission of sins, For the Promise is to
you, etc.

Which words are diligently to be opened, because of some late Questions
arising about Infant Baptism, that are started hence. In them you may observe,
The mercy spoken of or published, The Promise. 2. The Subject, and that is in a
threefold enumeration, To you, viz. the Jews to whom then he preached. 2.
Their Children. 3. To those that are afar off, (...). Some understand it of
place afar off from the Country of Judea; Some of the time to come, because
its (...), To the generations that are to come. To be sure its meant of the
Gentiles, who in other places are said To be afar off. And therefore you have
this explained in the last expression, Even as many as God shall call.

Now first let us consider, What is meant by the Promise. Those that would
elude this place so pregnant for baptizing of Infants of believers, because the
promise is made to them, say, Its meant of extraordinary gifts, such as those
miraculous gifts spoken of. But this is very absurd, because 1 Cor. 14. all
that did believe had not those extraordinary gifts, All did not speak with
tongues, all had not the gift of healings.

2. Its against experience, for if the promise of these extraordinary gifts be
made to believers, then why have they not all extraordinary gifts that thus
expound it? Why do they not speak in the Hebrew and Greek tongues? And

3. Verse. 16. The promise of these extraordinary gifts is said to be fulfilled
at that time, and therefore not to be expected at any other time. By the
promise therefore which sometimes is in the singular, and sometimes in the
plural number, because of the many good and spiritual things promised therein,
we are to understand the Covenant of grace, wherein God promises to be the God
of believers, and their seed; for that which was made to Abraham, setting aside
some personal privileges, is made to every believer. Now in this Covenant is
contained Pardon of sin, and all other mercies, which Baptism seals; and
that this is the meaning, is plain, Chap. 3. 25. Ye are the children of the
Prophets, and of the Covenant God made with our fathers; So the promise here,
is that gracious Covenant of God, whereby he offers grace to those that do
accept it; now those that accept it are such as are inwardly sanctified, and
these have the inward Covenant as well as the outward administration of it. But
secondly, Others do only outwardly accept of it, and profess their obedience
to it, are not inwardly regenerated, and these only have the external
Covenant, and a right to Church Priviledges, being destitute of the saving
benefit by them: So that this promise of grace in the outward offer of it, as
also in the Church Priviledges, are dispensed to such, who sometimes have an
external profession only, but are without the inward efficacy of it.

The second subject is Their Children: Here we see God taking parents into
Covenant, takes also the seed, and upon this one main ground Infant Baptism is
fastened: So that though children be not expressly named in the command to
baptize, yet they are in the promise accompanying the precept, and that may put
it out of all doubt.

I chose this verse for the later part, containing the Subjects enumerated,
viz. Those that are afar off, even as many as God shall call. From whence
observe,

First, That all men till called by God, are afar off from him. Observe.


This expression does contain the dreadful and woeful estate of all men by
nature, They are afar off from God. As Abraham said to Dives, There was a great
gulf between them two; so there is a remote distance between God and all men
till called, Ephesians. 2. 13. Ye who were sometimes afar off, says the Apostle
speaking of the Gentiles; and so verse. 17. Thus the Prodigal that took his
stock to spend it upon sin, and the lusts of the flesh, he is said To go into
a far country. Now when we say, All men till God call are afar off, you will
easily understand that we speak not of Gods omnipresence, for that is
impossible, none can be far off God in that sense. Whether can I go from thy
presence, says David; If I would take the wings of the morning, or go into the
depths, or dig into hell, I cannot go from thee, Psalm. 139. 7. Now in this
sense, God is near even every wicked man, but we speak of Gods gracious
presence and demonstration of his loving favor, in which sense its said, That
Cain was cast out of Gods presence.

But to open this more particularly, let us show in how many particulars they
In how many respects wicked men are afar off from God. 1.
are thus elongated, or made afar off from God. And

First, In regard of the knowledge of God in a true and saving way. They are as
little children, in utero ignorantiae, as Tertullian expressed it, no more
apprehensive in a right manner of God, then the children in the dark womb are
perceiving of the things of reason. Therefore Ephesians. 2. part of this distance
from God is in that they were (...), without God in the world. Athens that was
the eye of Graecia, yet that could see no better, then to dedicate an Altar To
the unknown god; Hence the Apostle speaking of the Heathens, said, They did
feel or grope in the dark after God, Acts 17. 27. Even as the Egyptians in
their thick darkness, or the Sodomites stricken with blindeness did; and
therefore Gods willing of men to be saved, is declared in this, That he would
have all men come to the knowledge of the truth; and generally the Nations of
the world are described by this, That they know not God. Its true, Romans 1. the
Apostle speaks of (...), something that by nature may be known of God, some
sparks, some embers, but this is so corrupted, so confuse, so imperfect, that
it grossly mistakes like that blind man recovering a little sight, that saw men
like trees: Oh then, if to be a corporally blind man be so heavy a misery,
that such cried to our Savior, Lord that we might receive our sight! How much
rather may we cry out to have the eyes of our eyes opened, who are wandering far
from God! For although these that are here said to be far off are Heathens
and Gentiles, yet even Christians by birth are also far off from God, till
they have this spiritual eye salve; and therefore in two respects men may be
said to be far off from God: First, both in respect of inward grace, and the
outward means of salvation: and thus all the Heathenish part of the world is
afar off God: Or secondly, in respect of the inward grace only: When men do
enjoy the outward means of salvation, and in this sense by their duties are
said To draw nigh God, but in respect of any saving work of grace, are as far
off as Heathens and Pagans: and this is the condition, as is to be feared, of
many thousands, They are nigh God in respect of the Christian faith they
profess in respect of the Duties and Ordinances they exercise themselves in,
but in respect of their affections and heart, so they are at as great distance
from God and his holy ways, as Heathen and Publicans. This distinction must be
attended unto, that we do not vainly deceive our selves, as the Jews did, with
The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord.

Secondly, They are afar off in respect of Gods special and gracious love to
justify 2.
their persons, to pardon their sins. This also is urged Ephesians. 2. He preached
peace to them that were afar off; Peace, so then there was war and enmity
before between God and them. And thus they may be said to be without God, both
actively and passively; actively as before, having no knowledge or love of God;
and passively, God has no approving knowledge or love of them. Thus are we
till God calls us, in a state of Gods displeasure; as Absalom cast out from
David's presence. His anger is toward us all the day long: And if the terror
of a King be like the roaring of a lion; what are the frowns and displeasures
of the King of Kings! Oh that people were wise to consider, what they are by
nature, under what heavy displeasure they are! Does the Scripture bid us agree
with a man that is an adversary quickly in the way, lest he deliver us to the
Judge; what reason then is it, to agree with God our adversary speedily, who
has such spiritual and eternal torments to scourge us with, that no man can
have? Do not thou please thy self then with these thoughts, that thou have free
access to the presence and into the favor of great ones on earth; for if thou
art far off from God, if he regard thee not, if his displeasure be toward
thee, thou art in the state of gall and wormwood.

Thirdly, We are by nature afar off from Christ the Mediator between God and 3.
man. And this indeed is the foundation of all calamity; for as in Christ we
are blessed with all heavenly blessings, so without him we are cursed with all
spiritual and temporal curses. You speak the sum and abstract of all
misery, when you say a people are without Christ. This also is mentioned Ephesians.
2. as part of that distance from God. For such is the contrariety between God
and man, God an holy and pure God, man a wretched and corrupt enemy to him,
that here could never be any reconciliation but by Christ. We see how far off
the Apostate Angels are cast from God, never to be reconciled, and all because
Christ took not their nature upon him: And thus men without Christ, for the
present, have no way of access to God; for why? Should they come in their own
names? alas! they are sinners, they are adversaries unto God, who then must
speak for them? who will plead for them? And consider, that not only the
heathens and Pagans in the remote places of the world may be without Christ;
but even many of those who have the title of Christians, and profess obedience
to him, may yet be without him in a saving manner. Will not Christ say to many
who did prophecy and cast out devils in his name, I know you not? So then
Christ may not know many within the Church, many that call on his name. Oh be
afraid lest this truth should be verified of any of you; that though you be
near Christ in words, in prayer, in profession, yet wholly without Christ in
respect of any gracious effects. Now what is it, to have riches and honors,
and to be without Christ? To have the great things of the world, and to have no
portion in him? When God promised great earthly mercies to Abraham, oh says
he, I go childlesse; that troubled him; what was all that wealth, if he had no
child? And thus; although God give thee all external happiness, and the
desires of thy heart; yet say, behold I am without Christ still, and what will
all these things avail me.

Fourthly, Such as are afar off, They have no hope. They are an hopeless
people; 4.
which way soever they look, every thing curses and condemns them; and no
marvel, for, if without the promise, they have not the ground of hope, and if
without Christ, the object of hope. And this also is added in the forementioned
place, Ephesians. 2. Without hope. Now you know the Heathens feigned, that when all
things were gone, yet hope was in the bottom of Pandoraes box; implying, though
we be environed with calamities, yet as long as there is hope, the heart will
not break. When Cain and Judas thought there was no hope (though that was their
sin) then they began to feel an hell burning in their conscience. And indeed
what is that which makes the fire of hell burn seven times hotter then it
would, but that there is no hope there? Hence hope is compared to an Anchor,
Heb. 6. 19. implying that a man without hope, is like a Ship without an Anchor
in the midst of the raging sea, and tempestuous waves. Thus not only the
Gentiles, but Christians also are afar off from hope, till sanctified. Now when
we say, They are without hope, the meaning is not, as if God might not show
mercy to them, for how many times does he call those his people, that were not
his people; but in respect of any visible humane help, no created power can
save them: They are like little Isaac, bound to be sacrificed, and the hand
lifted up to give the mortal blow; and then God comes in wonderfully, and
provideth a Ram in his room to be sacrificed. Lay it then home to your hearts,
you that are afar off in respect of saving grace, though not the outward means
of it; you are a people of no hope, no true solid hope. Indeed you have a
presumption, you have an hope that is a dream, a false imagination, and that
will perish like the blaze of straw; but it is not a lively hope, for that
property the Scripture gives the hope of a godly man, It is a lively hope, 1
Pet. 2. 3. such as is not overcome by death. The righteous has hope in his
death. If therefore thou would descend into a serious examination of this
matter, thou will see thy self for the present an hopeless man. Thou have no
ground to hope upon; there is no promise to draw out thy hope; What should be
like a two edged sword at thy heart, if this be not? This carnal hope of thine
will not endure, will not last, seek out for a better hope.

Fifthly, Such are afar off in respect of their love of God, and an universal
constant obedience to his holy will. As God loves not them, so neither do they
love God. 5.
As God is not gracious in his promises to them, so neither are they obedient
to his precepts. God is not only afar off from them, but they also are afar off
from God; hating and hated of God. As Paul, Romans 4. describing all men by
nature, says, they are all turned out of the way, and the way of God they have
not known. Neither is this also true only of the Heathens, who are in every
sense afar off, but also of all those, who within the outward means of grace,
yet have their hearts set contrary to God. Does not God of old complain of
such, that did draw nigh him with their lips, but their hearts were far from
him, Isa. 29. 13? And does not the same complaint still hold, that men draw
nigh him, when their affections and lives are wholly opposite to God? And thus
we may say of all those, who draw nigh to God in religious duties, but in their
hearts and lives are wholly contrary to him; they are afar off; they are at a
great distance from God and his grace. Christ saw a young man, and because he
answered some questions in a discreet manner, he told him he was not far from
the Kingdom of heaven; oh but when we see the profaneness, the ungodliness
of most men's lives, we have cause to say, They are far from the Kingdom of God,
or they are not far from the Kingdom of darkness. Oh then consider, you who
live dissolutely, and in the accomplishment of the lusts of your flesh, you are
wholly out of the way; and to the faster you run, still the further off you are
from happiness. You may fancy impossibilities, and think of making heaven and
earth meet together; for this you do, all the while you judge that this life
and way of yours is consistent with true peace and felicity.

Use first, What cause of thankfulness we have, who live under the means of
grace; for God has brought us many degrees nearer to him, then when once we
Use.
were the children of Heathens. The time has been, when this very Island was
wholly without God and Christ; the Gospel was not preached unto us, we lay like
a barren heath, and a cursed wilderness, forsaken, and no notice taken of us
by God. But since the Gospel has been preached, God has drawn near to us, and
we to him: Oh! but for all this, we may be as far off from saving Graces as
Heathens, if our lives be no better, if our conversations be no more
Christiannized: Those places to whom the Sun draws nearer, are warmer then
the remote, cold parts, where ice and cold is: Thus it should be with us, where
the Sun of Righteousness has appeared, there should be heat and zeal for God,
there should be meltings and mournings for sin, there should be a separating
from all dross, and every evil way: Coler separat hetrogenea; whereas frost and
cold has fastened many heterogenous things together, heat that separates them:
And thus the heat of the Gospel should separate us from our former lusts, and
from our bypast iniquities: and know this, he that is far off from God, he
cannot but be near to the Devil and Hell: Thus the Ephesians that were without
God, they were under the power of Satan, and in the state of darkness: why then
do thou not tremble and fear thy condition? the farther that thou art going
from God every day, the nearer thou art to hell: Your life is a motion, you are
always a going, every action is a step; now if it be sinful, it is from God,
and toward hell: What though thou find the way pleasant? though there be
many delights and temptations in the way: Per fallacia bona itur ad vera mala,
per fallacia mala itur ad vera bona, Through seeming good and pleasant things,
we come to real misery.

SERMON CXX.
That not all mankind are called with a saving call; How absurd it is to hold,
That the Works of God, the Sun, Moon and Stars, etc. may so call Men; And Gods
Justice cleared in that point, stirring up all to behold the severity and
goodness of the Lord.

ACTS. 2. 39. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.
WE have handled the third kind of persons enumerated in this Text; viz.
Those that are afar off. The next thing in order to be considered, Is the
further description of those that are afar off, which is by way of restriction
and limitation, As many as God shall call; wherein observe, 1. The limitation
of the number, As many as God shall call: You see its not an universal, its not
to all that are afar off, but only to those whom God shall call unto him. 2.
There is the benefit or privilege God vouchsafes, described; 1. From the
nature of it, Call. 2. From the efficient cause, The Lord our God shall call;
the Greek word is with the proposition, (...), shall call unto him, which does
partly denote, the great distance that all men by nature are from him; and
partly, the mighty power and strength of God, whose word only can make such a
change. Christ from heaven said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, and his
Blackamoor skin, yea, heart, was presently made white and clean: Christ did by
a word only call Matthew the Publican from his place of gain and profit, and
he presently leaves all and follows him: Thus as he said to Christ, Lord, if
thou say but the word, my servant shall live: So its here; Lord, if thou speak
but the word, the mountains will melt like wax, iron swim, the rivers of Jordan
run backward, the hills skip like lambs; that is, the lives, the thoughts, the
purposes of men will be wholly altered and changed; its but Gods call, and that
will make the deaf to hear, and the foolish to understand: And partly this does
imply, the mere good will and pleasure of God, it resolves all into his grace:
Here is no goodness, no worth in these men that are afar off, moving God, but,
As many as God shall call: The utmost into which all is resolved is God will
have mercy, on whom he will have mercy. I shall at this time pitch on the
restriction or limitation of the subject, Not all that are afar off, only such
whom God shall call: And from thence observe,

That not all of mankind, but some only does God call, with a saving call.
Observe.


The Apostle plainly makes a difference of these that are thus afar off, and
this only to come from God; some are so afar off, that they never hear the
voice of God in the word calling them to repent, and believe in Christ: Others
again have salvation brought unto their house; and if thou ask, why God calls
such, and not others? Noli Scrutari, do not curiously pry in this mystery, Gods
ways are just, even when they are hidden to us: Too much gazing on this Sun,
may quickly blind us.

To open and clear this point, consider,

First, That there is a general and common invitation, even of all in the world
by I. Considerations opening the point.
God; and there is Aspecial gracious one: The former invitation is by the
creatures, by the works of God; and as the Psalmist says, There is nothing hid
from the heat of the Sun, Psalm. 19. That does penetrate one way or other to
every sublunary thing: So its true of this invitation and call, none is denied
it, none are so afar off, but that God thus calls: Now indeed, this is not
properly, and in the Scripture sense a calling, I do not remember that the
Scripture any where makes the works of Creation and Providence, as a calling of
men, unless in a very large sense; as the heavens are said, to declare the
glory of God, And the rod of God, or his judgments (though that be spoken of
his judgments on the Church) are said to have a voice. Now that God by the
works of his Creation and Providence in the world, does teach and convince men,
and so in that general way call men, is plain, Romans 1. where the creatures made
by God, are said to declare those invisible properties of Gods wisdom, power
and goodness. Thus Divines speak of a twofold School God has, the School of
the Creatures, and the School of Grace by the Gospel: And though the books in
the first School, viz. Of the Creatures, be very dark, and in characters hardly
legible, yet God did punish and chastise men with very sore and heavy
judgments, yea, spiritual judgments, the worst of all, Romans 1. because they
did not learn this lesson, and were not proficients in that School: So then,
the whole world, in the excellent harmony of it, does necessarily teach a God:
Even Tully does by an excellent similitude demonstrate this: If (says he) you
should see a Book consisting of many letters, and all those exactly set
together and orderly, so as to make up a complete sense; no man will say, Those
letters and words put themselves together, or that they came together by
chance: So it is with the world, This great book, the excellent composition and
harmony of all things, do fully declare that these things did not make
themselves, or that they came accidently together, but a great God disposed
them by his wisdom and power. This invitation Paul considers of in his Sermon
at Athens, Acts 17. ^7. That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might
feel after him, and find him. Now there have been some of old, yea, and many
in these days, that would stretch these Texts too far, as if the invitation by
the creatures, were immediately saving, or that men might obtain salvation by
looking into these: They have not been afraid to say, That How abs(...) (...)
is to affirm, that by the works of God, the Sun, Moon and Stare, etc. Man may
be effectually called. 1.
by the Sun and Stars we may come to be effectually called, as well as by the
Apostles, and the preaching of the Gospel: But how senseless and absurd is
this? For

First, This invitation and call by the creatures, does not, nor cannot reveal
any thing of Christ, the only cause of salvation: Without Christ there is no
Salvation; Now how is it possible by the Creatures, in a natural way of
discourse, that ever we should come to know or believe in a Christ? The
Doctrine about him is still called a mystery, and the revelation of it has
been more or less clear, as God has pleased to dispense it: The very Angels
did not know it, till revealed to them. Indeed, by the Creatures we may prove a
Godhead, but to prove a Christ God and man, cannot be known by any Natural way
of Argument.

Secondly, The call by the creatures is not saving, because it discovers not
the way 2.
of Salvation, no more then the cause; viz. Faith: As Christ is wholly a
Supernatural object, and by revelation, so is faith the way to come to him, the
hand to lay hold on him, only by revelation: And therefore the Heathens, they
looked only for reason; the Gospel way was a foolishness to them, the
Christians were called Credentes, Believers, by way of scorn; yea, learned men
observe the very phrases, (...) and (...) are such phrases that no humane Greek
Authors ever used: So that not only the thing it self, but the very words to
express it, are altogether strange; where then there is no Christ, nor no
faith, there must necessarily be no call to salvation.

Thirdly, This call could not be saving, for the furthest and utmost effect it
had 3.
upon men, was only outwardly to reform their lives: It restrained many from
gross sins, and kept them in the exercises of temperance and justice, and such
Moral virtues; which though named virtues by Aristotle, yet the Fathers did
upon Scripture-grounds call them vices and splendida peccata, glistring sins;
for so indeed all that Piety and Morality which is out of the Church of God, is
a Sodom apple, fair to the eye, and inwardly nothing but ashes; for there is no
true Sanctification, no true and right principles of holiness, but within the
Church of God. As typically every vessel was unclean, that was not in the
Temple, and sanctified thereby. The heathens much boast of one Palaemon, a
profane beastly man, that came to hear Socrates at his Lectures, with a
purpose to scoff and deride him, but went away wholly changed in his mind, and
made sober; but what is this one external change, to those many thousands and
thousands of changes which have been made both internally and externally by the
word preached? But you may say, To what purpose is this call of God by the
Creatures, and the work of his providence, if it be not to salvation? Yes, it
is much every way:

First, Hereby even all men are made inexcusable: As the Apostle urges, God 1.
To what use and purpose is the call by Gods works and providence
had not left them without a witness or testimony, giving rain and plentiful
seasons: Thus because men did not glorify God according to what the creatures
might have taught them, they are given up to vile affections: Men therefore are
made inexcusable by this way; they cannot say, God has left them without any
conviction or manifestation of himself: No, the creatures they call, all the
works of Gods justice and Gods mercy, they call; and then conscience, which is
implanted in every man, the dictates and reasonings thereof, they also call:
Thus there will be enough to clear God, and to stop every man's mouth.

Secondly, Gods purpose in these calls, is to restrain sin, and to draw men on
2.
further then they do: There is no man that has no more then this remote and
confuse call, that does what he may do, and can do; He does not improve, no,
not that natural strength that is in him: (I do not say) to spiritual good
things; for so he has no natural strength: but to such objects as by nature he
might: He wilfully runs himself in the committing of sins, against his
conscience and knowledge; he does with delight and joy, tumble himself in the
mire and filth of sin: Now God calls by these natural ways, to curb and
restrain him, to put a bound to these waves: For if there were not these
general convictions, no Societies, no Commonwealths could consist.

In the third place, take notice of a twofold saving calling; The one is only
external, 4.
and saving in respect of the ability and sufficiency; the other is saving
effectually, and in respect of the event. Now when the Apostle says in the
Text, As many as God shall call, it comprehends both; those that are called
effectually, as well as outwardly: they have not only the outward
administration of the promise, and the privileges thereof, but all the inward
profit thereof; on the other side, those that have only the outward call, they
have only external privileges: And as Ismael had many gifts from Abraham, but
not the inheritance; so have these many favors and privileges from God, both
for themselves, and their posterity, but none of the inheritance it self. Now
you may understand the Doctrine of both these calls, Not all of mankind are
called with so much as an outward call, and of those that are called with an
outward all, not many, but few are called with an inward call; according to
that Text, Many are called, but few are chosen: So then, behold the wise and
dreadful ways of God herein; not the greatest, but the least part of mankind
are called with this outward invitation; and of those who enjoy this outward
invitation, not the greatest, but the least part partake of the inward power
and efficacy thereof.

Thirdly, That God does not call all men with this saving gracious call, will
III. That God does not effectually call all men, proved.
evidently de facto appear, if you consider the ways of God, even since there
was a Church, till now. In the beginning Gods call was only among some few, so
in Noah, and afterward to Abraham, and so to his posterity; and although we
read of some strangers, and a few Proselytes, yet they were but as gleanings,
to those thousands and thousands that never heard of God: And in the time of
the Jewish Church, God there seemed to enclose his vineyard; among them only
was he know, Salvation was of the Jews, they were the children to whom meat did
belong: So that no man can say, God did then hold out the Scepter of his grace
to other Nations. Well, if we descend to Christ's time, we must confess the
partition wall was broken down; all nations then might be made clean: Peter's
sheet of beasts, clean and unclean, taught him that; but yet even since the
preaching of the Gospel, there are many nations of the world where Christ and
the Gospel have never been preached; indeed their voice is said to sound over
the whole world, Romans 10. because its not forbidden to be preached to all men,
as heretofore; yet many remote corners of the world have not enjoyed the beams
of this Sun: That as they say, the virtue of the Sun does scarce ever come to
some parts, but it is always winter, and most part night; so it is with many
nations in the world, and the Jews who once were the children, now seem to be
the dogs: The Apostle does at large consider, Gods goodness to the Gentiles,
and severity to the Jews, the natural branches, Romans 11. Its here with them, as
it was with Gideons fleece and the floor, one while the dew was on the fleece,
and the floor was dry; then the dew was on the floor, and the fleece was dry:
Thus it is here, One while the Jews was a pleasant garden, and the Gentiles a
wilderness; now the Gentiles a garden, and the Jews a wilderness; and if you
ask, why is it thus: Its not for reason to dispute, but faite to adore: Ista
mulier taceat, Let this woman, this reason, hold her peace in Gods Church.

Fourthly, Its no injustice in God, though he do not give this universal call
of grace to all men: For this has been the stumbling block at which many have
IV. God cleared from injustice.
fallen: How can God (say they) be proclaimed so merciful, an ocean of all
honey, in whom is no gall? how can he be so compassionate, and full of tender
bowels, yet not give the greatest part of mankind so much as a saving call
outwardly; especially how are all those Texts made true, God would have all men
to be saved; and, I delight not in the death of a sinner, but that rather he
should be converted and live; especially this may serve to take off all fault
and blame from man, and to lay it wholly upon God, as if they would have
readily come to God, but God would not invite them. To remove this stone:

First, Consider, That if we could not satisfy the reason and disputes of men
1.
in this divine dispensation, yet if the Scripture be clear and peremptory in
this point, we must all stop our mouths, and not gainsay: Does not the
Apostle, Romans 9. expressly bring these carnal reasonings? Who has resisted his
will? and why then does he find fault? But see how he rebukes this unruliness
in man; Who art thou, O man, that disputest against God? If then Scripture and
exporience says thus much, we must conclude, Gods ways are just, though hidden
to us: Even so Father, for so it pleased then, said Christ, Mat. 11. upon the
consideration of Gods revealing things to babes and children, but hiding of
them the wise men of the world: The Doctrine of the Trinity, of Christ's
Incarnation, are they not transcendently above our reason, though not contrary
to it? Prorsus credibile quia impossible, said Tertullian: And thus all the
great things of God, cannot be perceived by us: Quicquid de Deo dici potest eo
ipso indignum est, quic dici potest, and periculosum est de Deo, etiam vera
dicere, said the Ancients.

But Secondly, Even reason enforced out of Scripture, may satisfy us in many 2.
things; for its no injustice in God, if he had not called any men in the world
with a gracious call; for seeing man by his fall had broken the Covenant with
God, all things became forfeited into his hand; he was not bound to set up man
with a new stock, after his first breaking; and this is evidently manifest, if
you compare this with Gods dealing and dispensation to the Apostate Angels;
they fell from their habitation, and what became of them? they all are chained
up in darkness, reserved for eternal torments: Now this judgment is executed
upon all, God did not spare one of them; to none of them was it said, Believe
and repent for the remission of sins: See here, it was no injustice in God to
damn all the Apostate Angels, and then it could not be injustice to damn all
Apostate men: This certainly may quiet thy heart.

Thirdly, There can be no injustice, where all that is done, is done wholly 3.
out of grace, and mere favor. Injustice is, where a debt is denied, not where
a favor is bestowed; now the Scripture attributes this call of God, to
whomsoever it is, wholly to the grace of God: Why then art thou murmuring if
God call no more? rather admire the grace of God that he calls any; Is thy eye
evil, because God is good to save? The Devil he thinks God is gracious too
much, and calls too many; he is tormented with malice, because so many escape
out of his Jaws.

Fourthly, Although God does not call every man with this immediate call of
grace, yet no man is damned merely because he wants this: The Apostle 4.
says, That those that are without the Law, viz. Written and revealed to them,
shall be judged without the Law: And thus those that are without the Gospel,
that have not the means of grace, they shall not be judged because they did not
believe in Christ, because they did not submit to him, but because they did not
walk in the practice of those things they did know: Thus because the Heathens
did not glorify God, according to the knowledge they had of him, therefore
they are condemned, Romans 1. Infidelity, merely negative, does not damn: He that
believes not, the anger of God abides on him; viz. Where the word is preached
and rejected, so that God does not reap where he sows not.

Fifthly, God is not unjust, no not to those that are afar off, because none 5.
among them have done what they might do, in a natural and moral way: for
although no man has power in a gracious manner, to any spiritual good thing,
yet they may restrain from the outward actings of many gross sins: The very
light of nature would teach a man to abhor many things, which yet the Heathens
committed; so that God has a just controversy with them, and will be cleared
when he judges the world.

Sixthly, Though God do not call all men, and thereby they are wholly impotent,
6.
and unable to any good; yet they do not sin so much, because they want power,
as because they have a willing delight in it; and this indeed does mainly
remove all objections; for its not a man's impotency, so much as his wilful
consent to sin, that damneth him: his non posse, is in some sense, his non
velle. Bernard says well of man's necessity that is now brought upon him to
sin; the necessity does not take away the voluntariness of it, nor the
voluntariness the necessity: There is no man can say, O Lord, I had a will, I
was very ready to come to thee, but thou did not give me power: No, the will
in every man is the grand enemy and adversary unto Christ in all his ways:
Damnation is to man, because unwilling, not because unable.

Use of Exhortation, Come and behold the severity and goodness of God, as Paul
in the like case; the severity of God, in that he passes over so many persons
and nations in the world; and his goodness, in that he draws nigh to you; you
are in the Land of Goshen, when others are in Egyptian darkness: This has
amazed and astonished all the wisest men in the world, they have not been able
to know what to say at this difference God makes; yea, many times God does not
vouchsafe the offer of grace to such a people, who in all probability would be
more affected with it, and gives it to such who refuse and reject it: How
unsearchable is his wisdom, and his ways past finding out! Does not our Savior
tell the men of Capernaum, that had the wonderful means of grace, Mat. 11. 31.
If those things had been done in Tire and Sidon (two Heathenish places) they
would have repented in dust, in ashes? Its thought, true repentance and
conversion is not here meant; but palpable and sensible demonstrations they
would have made of some sorrow and humiliation; and therefore Christ threatens
to take away the Kingdom of heaven from the Jews; viz. The Gospel, and give it
to a nation bringing forth fruit better then they: Oh consider then, whether
the very Heathens and Pagans would not give more respect, and show more joy at
the word preached then thou do: Take heed, for there are none further off
grace, then those that have been called, and yet reject it: There is more hopes
of those to whom the Gospel was never rendered; for those heavy judgments of
an eye blinded, an heart hardened, do only belong to those that have refused
this word of life: Then such are only fatted to destruction, who have been fed
in these pleasant pastures of the Ordinances.

FINIS.
REader, if notwithstanding all the care that has been used in the printing of
this book, thou meet with some faults, as thou will (for no book, if but a
quarter so big as this, can be printed without) I pray impute it not to the
Reverend Author, but to the Printer.

Tho. Underhill.

AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A
A Bortives as to the new birth, Page 234 Acting grace is requisite as well as
converting, 550 Following upon the principles of grace, make happy, 552
Adoption, what of duty, and what of privilege in it, 237
Affections.
Affections and sweet motions of heart in holy things, consistent with an
unregenerate (...), 117 Several grounds of such temporary affections, 119 Why
apt to be relied on, 120 Their insufficiency, 121 Sometimes not the work of the
Spirit when thought to be, 129


Afflictions.
Afflictions, Gods framing this evil, what it means 443 Why called evil, 446 Of
three sorts: Exploratory, 448 For sin, but medicinal, ibid. For sin, and
destructive, 449
Difference between medicinal and penal, ib. How operative to means conversion,
450

Assurance.
Assurance, To seek it a duty, 2 The benefits or advantage of it, 5 Hindrances
of it, 9 Attainable by signs, etc. with propositions about it. 17 Its adjuncts,
viz. Possibility, 23, 675 Necessity, 24 Difficulty, 25 Excellency, 26
How differenced from presumption, 27 What we must do when we want it, 34, 673
Why God denies it to those that have true grace, 35. Justification and
Sanctification ought to be sought from their fruits, 43
From Signs no argument of weakness and unbelief, 50 From graces no relying
upon a humane testimony, 51 Got by Signs, not useless, 52 From an immediate
voice from the Spirit questioned, ib. By Signs, freed from absurdity,
Impossibility and Difficulty, 53 Consisting of a practical Syllogism, is not by
mere humane reason, 54 In obtaining it by way of Signs, much skill and care is
required, 55
C
ALl are not called with a saving Call, 684
Change.
Change from wickedness and profaneness, not enough, 278 That grace makes a
man great, 373 Its qualities, 1. Necessary. 2. Rational. 3. Profitable. 373 4.
Honorable, 374


Christian^.
Christians of three sorts, 1^ If true are so universally and exactly, 638,
639, 640 Why some are not so, 641

Church.
Church Privileges and visible signs and duties therein no sign of grace, 104
Why apt to be rested on, 106 Proof that they are not signs, 107
Company, when wicked, retards the work of conversion, 9, 431 etc. How to be
thrown off, 433 Carnal- confidence, vide Presumption.
Conscience, why something of it in the worst, p. 336 Whence so silent and
stupid in some, 339

Conversion, vide Grace Sanctifying, and Turning to God.
Is wrought by the omnipotent and irresistible power of God, 569 Is absolutely
promised to the converted, 776 In what sense absolutely promised, and what not,
779 Corruption of nature set forth, 218 Shows a necessity of Regeneration, 222

Counterfeits.
Counterfeits of Regeneration, 230 Of the New Creature, 276 Of inherent grace,
viz. Moral honesty, 334 Of Sanctification, 391 Of the heart of flesh, 523

Covenant.
Covenant External sanctifies not, 393 Distinguished into External and Internal
as being variously administered, ib. External denominates men holy in opposition
to Heathens, 594 Requires a visible acceptance, 395 Holiness avails not
alone, ib.

Creation, vide New Creature.
Creation, The New in man surpasses the Old in man, 287 The great work of God
in the New Creation set out, 290 Gods end in choosing subjects indisposed, 293
It is unto good works, 296

D
MEn apt to Deceive themselves that after a wicked life may follow a happy
death, 364 The ground of this Deceit, 365 Motives to beware this
self-deceiving, 367
Delays of turning to God, whence men are prone to it, 453 Arguments against,
and the danger of it, 454, 455, etc.
Directions to the getting of the New Creature, 280
Vain Disputations.
Vain Disputations how to be prevented, 7 Disputes and opinions in Religion no
evidence of grace, 124 When lawful, 125 Their insufficiency as evidence, 127

Vain-Disputes establish not the heart as grace does, 316 May be several ways
abused, 317 How they may be rightly used, 320

Duties.
Duties. Spiritual performance of them a sign of grace, 90 Duty of a son of
God, 239 Signs of men performing Duties from a new Spirit within, 542

E
ILl Education a cause of stupidity of conscience 339
Election.
Election. Not of all that are called, 6, 12, 643 This Doctrine no ground of
despair, 644 Evidences of the paucity of elected ones, even of the called, 647
What to be done by him who is in fea^ about his Election, 649 Effects of
Election, ib.
Embryoes as to the New Birth, having only initial workings, 232 Ends in
actions to be looked to, 10
Establishment.
Establishment of the heart by grace, 309 How the heart becomes established,
311 It is better then all disputes and notions, etc. 316 Evidences, vide
Assurance and Signs. Experimental Knowledge, vid. Knowledge.

F
FAith, when only a persuasion of the truths in Religion not enough for
salvation, 167
False Signs of Grace, vid. Signs. Fleshly Heart, vid. Heart.
Form and outward shape of godliness not enough 276 Forsaking of gross sins no
sure sign of conversion, 187 Fruits of Justification and Sanctification argue
the graces themselves, 43, etc.
G
Gifts.
GIfts: Parts and abilities in Religion, no sign of grace, 111 Explicatory
considerations, ib. Why men are prone to rely on them: 112 Their insufficiency
as signs, 114
Common Gifts of the Spirit are not sanctification, 397
God.
Gods unwillingness to damn men proved, and Objections answered, 404 Dominion
over men's hearts asserted, 506 Seen in the way of Providence, 507 Justice, 508
Grace, 509

God in conversion works after an omnipotent, efficacious and irresistible
manner, 570 Godly men are careful and tender about Gods worship, and why, 559,
562 Conscientious in all duties of equity and righteousness, 564
Gospel calls are a feast, 629 Yet refused by many, 631
Government of the world misunderstood, a cause of senslesness of conscience,
341
Grace.
A being in the state of Grace may by signs be evidenced, 17 Concerning
inherent Grace, 37
Signs or Marks of Grace, vid. Signs.
Of diverse sorts, 38 Its Effects or Properties considered Absolutely or
Relatively, 40 To be known and evidenced by its fruits, 43, etc. Assurance
received from it depends not upon humane testimony, 51 Infallibly evidenced by
a respect to Gods Commandments, 61, etc. With many other Signs, vide Signs.
How it establishes the heart, 311 That there is such a work of God upon man's
heart, 322 It cannot justify, 323 The reason of the name Grace given to inward
holiness. 324 How it opposes sin, 326 Its effects in a man, 328 Some excellent
properties of it, 332 The counterfeit of it, viz. Moral Virtue, 334 Vouchsafed
sometimes to the greatest sinners 369 Gods ends in it, ibid. Makes a great
change, 372 Is an inward and deep work, 533 What reaches not to it, 534 What
this inward work is, 535 Signs and Effects of it, 537 First brings in inward
principles, and then causes holy actings, 538 Why God takes this method, 540
Inward principles of grace will appear in the life, 543 Exciting and actuating
is necessary after converting, 549 Great men of the world often rejected by
God, and why, 622, etc. Growth in grace a sign of grace, 84 The nature of it in
its necessity, from an inward principle of life, etc. 86 How evidenced, 88
False Growth, 90
H
Heart.
HEart: To turn to God with the whole of it, what it means, 479, etc. Rending
of the Heart requisite to conversion, with the meaning of this phrase, and
others equivalent, 489, etc. A rent one preferred by God above all outward
signs of humiliation, 493 Of man under Gods dominion, 506 Of stone in all men
naturally, and what it signifies, 511, etc. Of flesh bestowed in coversion, 516
What it implies, 517 Its effects and consequents, 518 Inducements to labor for
it, 521 Its counterfeits, 523


Heathens.
Heathens, Natural principles appeared in their Books, 346 Laws, 347 Worship
and terrors of mind, 348 Commendable improvements, 349 with the concernment
of this Doctrine, 352

Natural Excellencies reach not to grace, 353 Natural honesty and
righteousness, not grace, ib.
Heaven or Glory, the nature of it, 665 Adjuncts and Properties of it, 668

Holiness, vid. Sanctification. Federal Holiness, vid. Covenant.
They that are called should be holy as God is, 659, 663 Wherein true Holiness
consists, 660 The extent of the duty of being holy in all manner of
conversation, 662
Hypocrites.
Hypocrites, Whether they may attain to an experimental knowledge, 12 How far
they may go in it, 131 Wherein as to this knowledge they differ from the true
Christian, 15

I
IGnorance a cause of men's living in sin, 470 Impediments of turning to God,
414, etc. Indisposition of men to the work of grace, or the New Creation, 290
It advances Gods ends in the great chaning work, 293

Judgment well informed no sign of grace, 127 Justification, It may be
evidenced by inherent gracious qualifications,
K
KEeping the Commandments, vid. Obedience. Men's fond persuasions of their doing
it, with the causes, 142, etc.

Experimental Knowledge.
Experimental Knowledge of our selves Difficult, 5 Advantageous, ib. The best,
ib.
The end of all other Knowledge, 8 Establishes the soul, ibid. Its
impediments, 9 Whether in hypotrites, 12 How it differs in hypocrites and
regenerate, 15
Knowledge of our state of grace to be attained by marks and signs, 17
Establishes not the heart as grace does, 316

L
LEarning requisite in a Minister, 620 Lise and conversation of men evil give
testimony to true grace within, 543 Love to the people of God a sign of grace,
96 The Act it self, the Object, the Effects, 97 98, 99

M
MArks, vid. Signs.
Ministry.
Ministry of the word the way to turn men from their sins, 495 Of Gods
appointment, ib. For a supernatural end, 496
Gods wisdom in raising such low means for so high ends, 497 Not always
successful, and why, ib. That it may be effectual, what to be done by
Ministers, 498 Though not corrupt, yet may be without success, 500 The reasons
both from God, Ministers and people, 501, 502, 503 Though corrupt may prove
successful, 503
Mistakes in experimental knowledge easy, 4 Dangerous, ibid.
Moral virtue.
Moral virtue, the counterfeit of saving grace, 334 Philosophy, vid. Heathens,
Verrues, as Temperance, Fortitude, etc. no graces, Because 359 1. Not built
upon a good foundation, ib. 2. Not rightly obtained, ibid. 3. Not gui^ed by a
sure rule, 360 4. Not referred to God, ibid. 5. Not of faith, 361 6. Nothing of
Christ in it, ib. 7. Often an enemy to grace, 362

Mousters as to the New Birth, 235 Motions of ^^art, vid. Affections.
Motives to sanctification, 389 Conversion or turning to God, 420

N
NAture: Its corruptions set forth, 212 Its principles, etc. vid. Heathen.

New Birth, vid. Regeneration. New Creature.
New Creature. The nature of grace set out by it: Its Necessity, 245 Is
produced only by God, 251 His glorious Attributes appear in it, 255
What it does not imply, and to what it is opposed, 258, etc. Its
supernaturality and excellency set out, 264 Objections against it answered, 270
Counterfeits of it, an outward form of godliness, etc. 276 Helps and directions
to the attainment of it, 280 Gods workmanship, 283
Created unto good works, 296

O
OBedience unto Gods commands, A sure sign of grace, 61, etc. How impossible,
62 How possible, 63 When true and universal, 64, etc. External only not
sufficient, 161

Opinions, vid. Disputes.
Opposition against sin by grace, 326 Order of God in conversion; First he
works inward principles, then from them men act holily, 538 Why God takes this
Order, 540 Ordinances, to whom sweet and beneficial, 6 Sanctify not, 393

P
PArts, vid. Gifts. Peaceable frame of heart, no evidence of grace, 174
Performance, vid. Duties.
Persuasion of the truths in Religion, no evidence for salvation, 167 Gods love
no sign of grace, 174

Practical Knowledge, viz. Knowledge.
Presumption, How differenced from assurance, 27 Remedies against it, 3^
Principles as well as actions to be regarded, 10 Grace within will appear in
the life, 543 followed by acting grace, makes happy, 552
Privileges, vid. Church. Of a child of God, 242
Prosperity no sign of grace within, 180 Promise of conversion an absolute free
promise, 574 Purposes and resolutions of turning to God, sometimes
unsuccessfull with the account of it, 437
R
Regeneration.
REgeneration Absolutely necessary to salvation, 201 What it is not, wherein it
lies, and its resemblance to natural birth, ib, etc. Unknown often to learned,
and outwardly righteous men, 210 Grounds of the ignorance and excellency of the
knowledge of it, 212, etc. Absolutely necessary, because of man's corruption by
nature, 217 Its unexpressible nature, 224 The counterfeits of it, 230
Rightcousness and equity conscientiously followed by the people of God, 364,
etc.
S
SAlvation difficult, and in some sense impossible, 194 Why fancied so easy,
196

Sanctification.
Sanctification, It evidenceth Justification, 43 Diverse ways set out, vid.
Grace. The several meanings of sanctifying, 380 How the people of God are
sanctified, 381 By being, 1. Segregated from the world, 381 2. Dedicated to
God, ibid. 3. Prepared for good works, etc. 382
Its efficient and instrument, 383 Meritorious cause and extent, 384
Signs of true Sanctification, 1. The Spirits dwelling in the soul, 386 2.
Ready Obedience to the truth, ib. 3. Delight in sanctifying Ordinances, 387 4.
Preparation to holy Duties, etc. ib.
Motives to it, 389 Counterfeits of it, 391 1. Zeal in superstitious customs,
ib. 2. Duties and Ordinances, 393 3. External Covenant with God, ib. 4. Gifts
of the Spirit, 397
When evidences of it are wanting, what a sanctified person should do, 398 When
it is but in a low degree, what to be done, 401
Searching, vid. Trial.
Self-love an impediment as to experimental knowledge of our selves, 9
Senslesness and stupidity of conscience caused by 1. Ill education, 339 2. A
misunderstanding of the government of the world, 341 3. Cares and pleasures of
the world. 342
Settlement in the truth, whence it proceeds, 8
Signs.
Signs of Grace are different, 38 Evidencing to our selves or others, 39 Proper
to the godly only, ib. Positive and Negative, 40
Of a mixed nature as to natural and voluntary Signs, 41 To be used, 43, 44,
etc. Proceeding by them, Argues not weakness and unbelief, 50 Is not to rely
upon a humane testimony, 51 Not useless, 52 Not absurd, impossible or
difficult, 53 To the making up of a Practical Syllogism is not by mere humane
reason, 54

True Signs.
1. Obedience, 61, etc. 2. Sincerity, 67 3. Opposition against, and abstinence
from sin, 73 4. To be willing to be tried by God, 78 5. Growth in Grace, 84 6.
Spiritual performance of holy duties, 90 7. Love to the Brethren, 96
False Signs.
1. Church Priviledges, 104 2. Gifts and parts in matters of religion, 114 3.
Affections and sweet motions of heart, 110 4. Opinions, judgments and
disputes, 123 5. Strong workings move the heart not being from the Spirit, 129
6. Great sufferings for Christ, 135 7. Persuasions of an exact keeping the
Commandments, 142 8. A strict way of religion, 148 9. Diligence in the worship
of God, though not commanded, 155 10. External moral Obedience, 161 11. A
divine faith, or persuasions of the truths in religion, 167 12. A peaceable
frame of heart, or persuasion of Gods love, 174 13. Success and prosperity, 180
14. Forsaking gross sins, 187 Of Sanctification, 386 When wanting, what should
be done to obtain it, 398

Sin.
Abstinence from, and opposition against it, (...) sure sign of grace, 73 How a
sign, ib.
A forsaking gross sins, no sure sign of conversion, 187 May be upon diverse
grounds, is a mercy, etc. ibid. etc.
Aggravations of the sins of Christians above those of Heathens, 350 Great
sinners God makes subjects sometimes of sanctifying grace, and why, 369 With
its profit, pleasure and customariness objections against turning to God, 426.
to 431
Sins greatness helps against discouragement hence as to turning to God, 441
Beloved Sins, Considerations about them, 459 Signs which are they, 460
Conversion makes a man leave them, 461
All Sin to be turned from in conversion, 464, etc. Grounds of turning from sin
acceptable with God. 468 Hindrances of turning from it, 470 Some men outwardly
resolved against turning from it, ibid. Causes of obstinacy in it, 471 Turning
from sin not enough without turning to God, 475 How many ways men may do one
without the other, ibid. Sorrow for it to accompany turning to God, 484
Sincerity in motives and ends, a sure sign of grace, 67 How liable to abuse as
a sign, 68, etc. Its nature, and when a sign, 70
The Sons of God, their qualifications and privileges, 237 Sorrow for sin
often fruitless, and why. 230 Ought accompany turning to God, 484 A fourfold
spring of it 485 Intellectual or sensitive, 486 Why it should accompany turning
to God, 487

Spirit.
His work upon, and dwelling in, and leading of the Saints, 91, 92 To have Him
is more then to be merely civil, 93 That his sanctifying works, not common
gifts, evidence grace, ib. Much self-deceit in judging that to come from him
which does not, 129 His putting within men, what implied in it, 528 His various
and excellent operations, 531 Spiritual Performance of holy duties, a sign of
grace, 90^ From spiritual life wrought by the Spirit of God, 91 How manifested,
93, etc.

Sto^y Heart, vid. Heart.
Strictness taken up in Religion no sufficient evidence for happiness, 148 What
commendable, and what unwarrantable, 149, etc.
Stupidity and Silence of conscience, vid. Senslesness.
Success, vid. Prosperity.
Suffering for Christ and the truth no sign of grace, 135 Sinful ingredients
making them unprofitable, 137
Superstitious customs and humane constitutions sanctify not, proved by
Argument, 391
T
Tenderness of heart, 523
Tears, vid. Sorrow.
Trial; A willingness to be tried by God, a sign of grace, 78 How many ways
God does try a man, 79 In what particulars a willingness to be tried shows it
self, with its effects, 81, 82

Turning to God.
Explained. 409, 410, etc. Attributed sometimes to us as our work, sometimes to
God as his, 411 Its ingredients, 413 Its impediments, and on whom are more
visible symptoms of its difficulty, 414. to 420 Motives to it, 420. to 426
Objections against it answered, as from the pleasure, profit and custom of sin,
426. to 431 Wicked companions and relations great hindrances of it, 431, etc.
Discouragements as to it, from 1. Unprofitablenesse of former purposes, 437,
etc. 2. Greatness of sins, 441
How promoted by afflictions, 450 Ought be without delay, with causes of
delays in some, 453 If true, it is from the most beloved sins, 458
From all sin, vid. Sin.
Some men wilfully resolved against it, 470 To be joined to turning from sin,
475 What it is, 478 Must be with the whole heart, with the meaning of it, 479
Effects of it, 482 To be accompanied with sorrow for sin, 484 Rending of the
heart, 489
Ministry of the word, the means of it, 495
u
VOcation effectual opened, 583 Its nature, with the several ways of calling
externally, 586, etc. Wherein the internal consists, 589 From what: as from
blindness to light, 591 Its properties: According to Gods pleasure, holy,
heavenly, etc. 594 Its Effects and Signs, 596, etc. In it are considerable the
grace it self, the time, the persons, 602 Not often of the wise, mighty and
noble of the world, 611, and^ The Gospel-feast not always accepted, 629 To
many, of those that in part obey it, it proves uneffectual, 632 How the
outwardly called differ from the inwardly called, 633, etc. Of many that are
called few are chosen, 643 This doctrine no ground of despair, 644
Evidences of the paucity of elected ones amongst the called, 647 Christians
ought to walk worthy of it, 655 What it is to walk worthy of it, and who do so,
ib. Should engage men to be holy, as God that calls them is, 659 Uprightness,
vid. Sincerity.


W
VVAlking in Gods statutes, what it means, 554 Qualifications of it, 558
Washing, Regeneration meant by it, 376 Washing argues sins defiling nature,
which men's superstitious washings confess, ib. And therefore were such
external rites appointed, ib. Of the heart or hands, 377 What required to a
spiritual washing, 378
Wicked men prone to think they shall die happily, with grounds of this deceit,
364 Authors of their own tuine, which God delights not in, 404
Wicked company and relations hinderers of conversion, 431 Considerations
stirring up to the forsaking of them, 433 Their misery, 686
Will of God approving or decreeing. How God wills not the death of sinners, 404
Wisdom spiritual in what discovered. 607 Wise men after the flesh their
properties, 611 Reasons why the fleshly wise are rejected on Gods part and man's
part, 617 Difference between carnal wisdom and Christian prudence, 619
Word of God how used in calling sinners, 585, 586, 587
Good Works.
A necessary fruit of renovation, 295 What Creation to good works means, ib.
What works are good, 298 Why sometimes commended, and sometimes debased, 302 To
be extended as far as Gods commands, ib. Go not before Justification, and in
what sense are said to justify, 303 In their truth, and in their perfection to
be distinguished between, 304 To be carefully performed, but not at all relied
on, ib. Evil Works why to be avoided, 305 The Workmanship of God in man
sanctifying grace, 283 In what regards it is so, with its necessity, 284, 285
Its excellencv above the great work of Creation, 287 What a change it works,
290 Why such indisposed materials used, 293
Works of God not sufficient means of conversion, 692 Worship of God, when not
commanded, vain and unprofitable, 195 Converted persons are very careful of it,
559 Internal and external, Two sorts of Statute-worships mentioned, 560

FINIS.
ERRATA.
THere is come forth of late A General Martyrologie of all or most of the
Persecutions that have been in the world.

The second, third and fourth Part of Palmer and Cawdrey Of the Sabbath, an
excellent Piece.

An Exposition of the Epistle of Jude, by Mr William Jenkyn.

An excellent practical Book, entitled, Prima, media and ultima, The first,
middle and last things.

Books formerly published by Mr Anthony Burgess, are Vindiciae Legis, and, A
Treatise of Justification,


