Scriptural Poems. Being several Portions of SCRIPTURE Digested into ENGLISH
VERSE. VIZ. I. The Book of Ruth. II. The History of Sampson. III Christ's
Sermon on the Mount. IV. The Prophecy of Jonah. V. The Life of Joseph. VI. The
Epistle of James.


By JOHN BUNYAN.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for J. Blare, at the Looking-Glass on London Bridge, 1700.

TO THE READER.
Whoever thou art that shall peruse this Book,
This may inform thee, when I undertook
To write these Lines, it was not my Design
To publish this imperfect Work of mine:
Composed only for Diversion's sake.
But being inclined to think thou may partake
Some benefit thereby, I have thought fit,
(Imperfect as it is) to publish it.
The Subjects are a part of the Contents,
Both of the Old and the New Testaments;
The Word are for the most part all the same,
(For I affected Plainness more than Fame)
Nor could thou hope to have it better done:
For I Am no Poet, nor a Poet's Son
But a Mechanic, guided by no rule,
But what I gained in a Grammar School.
In my Minority: I cannot commend it,
Such as it is into the World I send it,
And should be glad to see some Hand to mend it.
Would but those Men whose Genius leads them to it,
And who have time and parts wherewith to do it,
Employ their Pens in such a Task as this,
'I would be a most delightsome Exercise,
Of Profit to themselves and others too:
If what the Learned Herbert says, holds true,
A Verse may find him, whom a Sermon flies,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice;
Thus I conclude, and wish it as delighting
To thee in reading as to me in writing.
JOHN BUNYAN.

THE Book of RUTH.


CHAP. I.
IN ancient Times, ever Israel knew the way
Of kingly Power, when Judges bore the sway,
A certain Man of Bethlehem Juda fled,
By Reason of a Famine that overspread
The Land, into the Land of Moab, where
He and his Wife, and Sons, sojourners were.
His Name Elimelech, his eldest Son
Was called Mahlon, the other Chilion.
His Wife was Naomi, Ephrathites they were:
They went to Moab and continued there:
Where of her Husband Naomi was bereft,
And only she, and her Two Sons were left:
Who took them Wives of Moab in their Youth:
The Name of one was Orpah, the other Ruth:
And there they died ever twice Five Years were gone;
And Naomi was wholly left alone.
Then she arose, and her Step-daughters with her,
To leave the Land of Moab altogether:
For she had heard the Lord had visited
Her native Country, with increase of Bread.
Wherefore the Land of Moab she forsook,
And to her native Place her course she took,
Her Daughters with her: Whom she did desire,
That to their Mother's House they would retire:
The Lord, said she, be kind to you again,
As you to me, and to the dead have been:
God grant you each may be with Husbands blessed,
And in the Enjoyment of them, both find rest.
Then she embraced them, and there withal,
Down from their Cheeks, the Tears began to fall:
They wept aloud, and said, Most surely we
Unto thy People will return with thee.
But Naomi replied, Wherefore will ye,
My Daughters, thus resolve to go with me?
Are there yet any more Sons in my Womb,
That may your Husbands be in time to come?
Return again, my Daughters, go your way,
For I Am too Old to marry: Should I say
I Have Hope? Should I this Night conceive a Son?
Would either of you stay till he is grown?
Would you so long without an Husband live?
Nay, nay, my Daughters, for it does me grieve
Exceedingly, even for your sakes, that I
Do under this so great Affliction lie.
And here they wept again: And Orpah kissed
Her Mother, but Ruth would not be dismissed
But clave unto her: Unto whom she spoke
And said, Behold, thy Sister is gone back,
With her own Gods, and People to abide,
Go thou along with her. But Ruth replied,
Entreat me not to leave thee, or return:
For where thou go, I Will go, where thou sojourn,
I Will sojourn also: And what People's thine,
And who thy God, the same shall both be mine:
Where thou shall die, there will I die likewise,
And I Will be buried where thy Body lies:
The Lord do so to me, and more, if I
Do leave thee, or forsake thee till I die.
And when she saw the Purpose of her Heart,
She left off to desire her to depart.
So they Two traveled along together
To Bethlehem, and when they were come thither,
Behold! the People were surpised, and cried
What is this Naomi? But she replied,
Oh! call me Mara, and not Naomi:
For I have been afflicted bitterly.
I went out from you full, but now I come.
As it has pleased God, quite empty home:
Why then call ye me Naomi? Since I
Have been afflicted so exceedingly.
So Naomi returned, and Ruth together,
Who had come from the Land of Moab with her:
And unto Bethlem Juda did they come,
Just as the Barley Harvest was begun.
CHAP. II.
THere was a Man of Kin to Naomi,
One that was of her Husband's Family,
His Name was Boaz, and his Wealth was great.
And Ruth the Moabitess did entreat
Her Mother's leave, that she might go, and gather
Some Ears of Corn, where she should most find favor:
Go, Daughter, go, said she. She went, and came
Near to the Reapers, to glean after them:
And, lo, it was her hap to light among
The Reapers, which to Boaz did belong.
Behold, now Boaz came from Bethlehem
Unto his Reapers, and saluted them,
And they blessed him again: and he inquired
Of him that was set over them he hired,
From whence the Damsel was, and was informed
She was the Moabitess that returned
With Naomi: And she did ask, said he,
That here amongst the Reapers she might be,
And that she might have liberty to glean
Among the Sheaves: And she all day has been,
Even from the morning until now, with us,
That she has stayed a little in the House.
Then Boaz said to Ruth, Observe my Daughter,
That thou go not from hence, or follow after
The Reapers of another Field, but where
My Maidens are, see that thou tarry there:
Observe what Field they reap, and go thou there,
Have I not charged the young Men to forbear
To touch thee? And when thou do thirst, approach
And drink of what the Youths have set abroach.
Then she fell on her Face, and to the Ground
She bowed her self, and said, Why have I found
Such favor in thine Eyes, That thou, to me
Who am a Stranger, should so courteous be?
And Boaz said, It has been fully shown
To me, what to thy Mother-in Law thou'st done,
Since of thine Husband thou have been bereft:
How thou thy Father and thy Mother left,
And thine own native Land to come unto
A Land, which thou before did never know:
The Lord, the God of Israel, the Defense
Whom now thou'st chosen, be thy recompense.
Then said she, let me in thy sight, my Lord,
Find favor, in that thou do thus afford
Me Comfort, and since thou so kind to me
Do speak, though I thereof unworthy be
And Boaz said, at Meal-time come thou near,
Eat of the Bread, and dip in the Vinegar.
And by the Reapers she sat down to Meat,
He gave her parched Corn, and she did eat,
And was sufficed, and left, and rose to glean:
And Boaz gave Command to the young Men,
Let her come in among the Sheaves, said he,
To glean, and let her not reproached be:
Let fall some handfuls also purposely,
And let her take them without injury.
So she till Even gleaned, and then beat out
Her Barley, being an Ephah or thereabout.
She took it up, and to the City went,
And to her Mother-in-Law did it present:
And what she had reserved to her she gave,
When she had took what she designed to have.
Then unto her, her Mother-in-Law did say,
In what Field have thou been to glean to day?
And where have thou been working? Blessed be he,
That thus has taken Cognizance of thee.
She told with whom, and furthermore did say,
The Man's Name's Boaz, Where I wrought to day.
And Naomi replied, May he be blessed,
Even of the Lord, whose Kindness manifest
Unto the Living and the Dead has been:
The Man's our Kinsman, yea the next of kin.
And Ruth the Moabitess said, He gave
Me likewise a Commandment not to leave,
Or to depart, from following his young Men,
Until they had brought all his Harvest in.
And Naomi said unto Ruth, My Daughter,
It Is good that thou observe to follow after
His Maidens, that they meet thee not elsewhere.
So she to Boaz's Maidens still kept near,
Till Barley and Wheat Harvest both, she saw
Were done, and she dwelt with her Mother-in-Law.
CHAP. III.
THen Naomi said, Shall I not, my Daughter,
Seek Rest for thee, that thou do well hereafter?
And is not Boaz, with whose Maids thou wast,
One of the nearest Kinsmen that thou have?
Behold, this Night he in his Threshing-Floor
Is winnowing Barley, wash thy self therefore,
Anoint thee, put thy Clothes on, and get down
Unto the Floor; but make not thy self known,
Till he has eat and drank, and shall prepare
To lie him down; then take good notice where
He goes about to take his Night's Repose,
And go thou in there, and lift up the Clothes
From off his Feet, and likewise lay thee down,
And what thou have to do he will make known.
And she made answer, Whatsoever thou
Have me commanded, will I gladly do.
And down unto the Floor she hasted, and
Forthwith fulfilled her Mother-in-Law's Command.
So now when Boaz had his Heart refreshed,
With Meat and Drink, he laid him down to rest,
Near to the heap of Corn; she softly came,
Uncover'd's Feet, and lay down by the same.
And, lo! at Midnight, as he turned him round,
He was afraid, for at his Feet he found
A Woman lay: Who art thou? then said he.
I am thine Handmaid Ruth, replied she,
Over thine Handmaid therefore spread thy Skirt,
I pray, because thou a near Kinsman art.
Blessed be thou, said he, because thou have
Made manifest more Kindness at the last,
Than at the first, in that thou did, my Daughter,
No young Men, whether poor or rich, go after:
And now, my Daughter, be not thou afraid,
I will do to thee all that thou have said:
For all the City of my People knows,
Thou art a Woman truly virtuous;
And now, though I am Kin undoubtedly,
Yet there is one that is nearer Kin than I:
Tarry this Night, and when it is Morning light,
If he will like a Kinsman do thee right,
We'll let him, but if not, I my self will,
As the Lord lives, till Morning lie thou still.
And till the Morning at his Feet she lay,
And then arose about the break of Day;
And he gave her a Charge, not to declare
That there had any Womankind been there:
He also said, Bring here thy Veil, and hold
To me; she did, and thereinto he told
Six Measures full of Barley, and did lay
It on her, and she hasted thence away.
And when unto her Mother-in-Law she came,
Art thou, said she, my Daughter, come again?
Then what the Man had done she told, and said,
He these six Measures full of Barley laid
Upon me, for said he, This I bestow,
Least to thy Mother thou should empty go.
Then, said she, sit still Daughter, till thou see
What the Event of this Intrigue will be;
For till the Man this Day has made an end,
No Satisfaction will on him attend.
CHAP. IV.
AND Boaz went up to the City Gate,
And after a short space, while there he sat,
The Kinsman, of whom he had spoke, came by,
To whom he said, Ho, such a one, draw nigh,
And sit down here: He came and sat him down:
Then he took Ten Men, Elders of the Town,
And caused them to sit down. Then to the Man
That was of Kin, thus he his Speech began,
Naomi, said he, who not long since sojourned
Amongst the Moabites, is now returned;
And does intend to sell a piece of Ground,
The which Elimelech our Brother owned:
And now to give thee notice, I thought fit,
That if thou please, thou may purchase it,
In Presence of these Men assembled here:
Then if thou will redeem it, now declare
Thy Mind, but if thou will not, then let me,
For thou art next of Kin, and I next thee.
Then said the Kinsman, I will it redeem.
Boaz replied, if good to thee it seem,
To buy it of the Hand of Naomi,
Thou also art obliged the same to buy
Of Ruth the Moabitess, Wife of the dead,
On his Inheritance to raise up Seed.
The Kinsman said, I cannot do this thing
My self, least I an Inconvenience bring
Upon mine own Inheritance, what is mine
By right, therefore I now to thee resign.
Now this in Israel did a Custom stand,
Concerning changing and redeeming Land;
To put all Controversy to an end,
A Man plucked off his Shoe, and gave his Friend;
And this in Israel was an Evidence,
When ever they changed an Inheritance.
Then said the Kinsman unto Boaz, do
Thou take my Right. And off he plucked his Shoe
Then Boaz to the Elders thus did say,
And to the People, All of you this Day
Appear for me as Witnesses, that I
Have bought all of the hand of Naomi,
That was Elimelech's, or did belong
Either to Mahlon or to Chilion:
And Ruth the Moabitess, who some time
Was Mahlon's Wife, I Have purchased to be mine,
Still to preserve alive the dead Man's Name
On his Inheritance, least that the same
Should in the Gate where he inhabited,
Or amongst his Brethren be extinguished:
Behold, this Day, my Witnesses you are.
Then all the People that were present there,
And Elders said, We are thy Witnesses:
May God this Woman thou have taken bless,
That she like Rachel, and like Leah be,
Which two did build up Israel's Family:
And thou in Ephratah exalt thy Name,
And through the Town of Bethlem spread thy Fame,
And may the Seed which God shall give to thee
Of this young Woman, full as prosperous be,
As was the House of Pharez heretofore,
(Pharez, whom Tamar unto Judah bore.)
So he took Ruth, and as his Wife he knew her,
And God was pleased, when he went in to her,
To grant the Blessing of Conception,
And she accordingly bare him a Son.
Then said the Women, Blessed be the Lord!
Bless thou him Naomi, who does afford
To thee this Day a Kinsman, which shall be
Famous in Israel; and shall be to thee
As the Restorer of thy Life again,
And in thy drooping Age shall thee sustain:
For that thy Daughter-in-Law, who loves thee well
And in thy Sight does Seven Sons excel,
Has born this Child. Then Naomi took the Boy
To Nurse, and did him in her Bosom lay:
Her Neighbors too, gave him a Name, for why,
This Son, say they, is born to Naomi:
They called him Obed, from whose Loins did spring
Jesse, the Sire of David, Israel's King.
The End of the Book of RUTH.
THE History of Sampson:
Judges, Chap. xiii.
WHen Israel's Sins the Almighty did provoke,
To make them subject to Philistine Yoke
For forty Years: In Zorah dwelt a Man,
His Name Manoah, of the Tribe of Dan;
His Wife was barren, unto whom appeared
The Angel of the Lord, and thus declared:
Though thou, said he, art barren, time shall come
Thou shall enjoy the Blessing of thy Womb;
Now therefore I entreat thee to refrain
From Wine, strong Drink, and things that are unclean.
For lo, thou shall conceive and bear a Son,
Upon whose Head there shall no Razor come,
For he to God a Nazarite shall be,
And shall begin to set his People free
From the Philistine Yoke. The Woman came
And told her Husband, she had seen a Man
Of God, his dreadful look made me, said she,
Think him an Angel of the Lord to be:
But I enquired not from whence he came,
Neither did he make known to me his Name:
But thus he said, Thou shall conceive a Son;
Wherefore Strong Drink and Wine, see that thou shun,
And have a care that thou be not defiled
With things that are unclean; for why, the Child
Shall from his Separation from the Womb,
Become a Nazarite, even to his Tomb.
Manoah then did supplicate the Lord,
And said, O Lord, be pleased to afford
This Favor unto me, to send again
The Man of God, more fully to explain
Thy Will to us, that we may rightly know,
When this Child shall be born, what we must do.
And to Manoah's Prayer God gave Ear,
And to his Wife the Angel did appear
Again, as she did in the Field retire,
At such time as her Husband was not nigh her.
And she made haste, and ran, and straight declared
Unto her Husband, that the Man appeared
Again, whom she had seen the other Day.
Manoah then arose, and went his way,
And when he came, he said, Art thou the Man
That spakest to my Wife? He said, I am:
Manoah said, Now let thy Words be true:
How shall we use the Child, what must we do?
Then said the Angel of the Lord, Let her
Of all that I have charged her beware:
She may not taste of what comes of the Vine,
Nor may she drink strong Drink, or any Wine,
Nor may she eat of things that are unclean,
From all that I have said, let her refrain.
Manoah said unto the Angel, stay
With us, till we have dressed a Kid, I pray.
But he replied, though thou shall me detain,
I Will eat no Bread, but if thou do design
A Sacrifice unto the Lord, then offer:
For never till now, Manoah did discover
It was a Man of God he spoke unto:
Then said he to the Angel, Let me know
Thy Name, that when these things shall be performed,
The Honor due to thee may be returned.
Whereto the Man of God made this Reply,
Why ask thou, since it is a Mystery?
So he a Kid, and a Meat-Off'ring took,
And offered to the Lord upon a Rock:
And there the Man of God did wondrously,
The whilst Manoah and his Wife stood by:
For as the Altar did send up the Flame,
The Man of God ascended in the same:
Manoah and his Wife stood looking on,
And on their Faces to the Ground fell down.
(But then the Angel did appear no more)
Manoah then knew who he was: Therefore
He said unto his Wife, Most surely we
Shall die, for we the Face of God did see.
But she replied, If God would such a thing,
He would not now accept our Offering,
Or would he have to us these things made known,
Or told us, as at this time he has done.
And now (according to the Angel's Word)
The Woman bare a Son, to whom the Lord
Was pleased, his Blessing graciously to give;
She called him Sampson, and the Child did thrive:
And lo! the Spirit of the Lord began,
At times to move him in the Camp of Dan.
CHAP. XIV.
NOw down to Timnah Sampson's Steps incline,
Where seeing the Daughter of a Philistine,
He came up and did of his Parents crave,
That he in Marriage might the Woman have.
Then thus his Father and his Mother said
Amongst all thy Kin can thou find never a Maid;
Nor yet among my People, fit to make
A Wife, but thou will this Philistine take,
Of Race uncircumcised? He replied,
Get her for me, for I Am well satisfied.
But neither of his Parents then did know,
It was the Lord that moved him thereto,
To seek a way to accomplish his Designs,
Upon the then o'er-ruling Philistines.
Then Sampson and his Parents both went down
To Timnah, and as they came near the Town,
Among the Vineyards a young Lion roared:
Then on him came the Spirit of the Lord,
And though unarmed, he rent him like a Kid,
But he discovered not to them the Deed:
And he went down, and with the Woman treated,
And was well pleased to have the Match completed.
And in a while as he returned again
To take his Wife, behold, where he had slain
The Beast, he there a Swarm of Bees set Eye on,
And Honey in the Carcass of the Lion:
He took thereof, and eating, on he wen^,
And to his Parents did a part present,
And they did also eat, but did not know
That from the Lion's Carcass it did flow.
So down his Father went unto the Woman,
And Sampson made a Feast, as it was common
Among young Men. The Philistines provide
Thirty Companions with him to abide;
And Sampson said unto them, now behold,
I have a Riddle for you to unfold,
Which if you do before the Seven Days Feast
Be ended, I will give to every Guest
A Sheet and change of Garments, but if ye
Cannot declare it, you shall give to me
Full Thirty Sheets, and Thirty Changes too:
Then said they, What Is thy Riddle, let us know?
And Sampson said, The Eater sent forth Meat,
And from the Strong there came a thing most sweet.
And they could not in Three Days find it out,
Wherefore before the seventh came about,
They said unto his Wife, Thou must entice
Thy Husband to discover this Device,
Least we burn thee, and all thy Father's House:
Is it not so, that ye have called us
To make a Spoil? And Sampson's Wife wept sore,
And said, Thou do but hate me, and no more;
To put a Riddle to my Countrymen,
And not tell't me: And he replied again,
I have not told my Father or my Mother,
And shall I now to thee this thing discover.
And she continually before him wept,
During the time the Feasting Days were kept:
And now behold it came to pass that he,
By reason of her Importunity,
Did on the Seventh Day to her unfold
The Riddle, which she to her Brethren told;
And ever the Sun went down, on that same Day,
The Philistines to Sampson thus did say,
What is more sweet than Honey? What more strong
Than is a Lion? And he said, How long
Would it have been, ever you had understood
This thing had you not with my Heifer plowed?
Then came the Spirit of the Lord upon
Him, and he hasted down to Askelon,
And Thirty of the Philistines he slew,
And took their Clothes, and gave the Garments due
To every one of them that had disclosed
The meaning of the Riddle he proposed,
And toward them his Anger fiercely burned,
And he unto his Father's House returned.
But Sampson's Wife was given unto one
What was his Friend and chief Companion.
CHAP. XV.
BUt in a while, as Sampson visited
His Wife, in the Wheat Harvest with a Kid,
To her into her Chamber he would go,
The which her Father would not let him do;
But said, I thought that thou had quite forsook her,
Wherefore I gave consent, and thy Friend took her.
Does not her Sister's Beauty hers exceed,
Though young? I pray then take her in her stead.
And Sampson said, I shall more blameless be
Than they, though I shall do them injury:
And then he caught Three hundred Foxes, and
Turned Tail to Tail, and put a fiery Brand
Between Two Tails, and setting fire thereto,
Into the standing Corn he let them go,
And burnt both Shocks, and standing Corn and Vines,
And all the Olives of the Philistines.
Then they enquired who this thing had done,
And were informed, it was the Timnite's Son:
Because his Father took his Wife away,
And gave her his Companion to enjoy.
And the Philistines came up, full of Wrath,
And burnt with Fire, her and her Father both.
And Sampson said though you have done this thing,
A farther Evil I will on you bring,
And my avenging Hand shall cease hereafter:
And hip and thigh he smote them with great slaughter:
And he returned, and came up to the top
Of Etam, and dwelt there upon the Rock.
Then the Philistines up to Judah went,
And in the Vale of Lehi pitched their Tent.
Then said the Men of Judah for what reason
Are you come up against us at this season?
And they made answer, we are come to bind
Sampson, to do to him in the same kind
As he has done to us: Then there went up
Three thousand Men of Judah to the top
Of the Rock Etam, and to Sampson said,
Do thou not know that we have long obeyed
The Philistines? Wherefore is it that thou
Have done this thing, to bring this Evil now,
Upon us, let us know it? Then said he
I did to them, as they have done to me:
Then said they we are come, and have brought bands,
To bind, and give thee up into their hands:
And he made answer, you shall swear unto me,
That you your selves no Injury will do me:
And they replied, No, no, we will but bind thee,
We will not kill thee, but to them resign thee.
And they took two new Cords, and therewith tied him,
And from the Rock where he abode convey him:
Whom when they to the Camp at Lehi brought
The Philistines against him gave a shout:
And mightily the Spirit of the Lord
Came on him, and like burning Flax each cord
That was upon his Arms became, the Bands
Were likewise separated from his Hands.
And he the Jawbone of an Ass espied,
And took and smote them till a Thousand died:
Then said he with an Ass's Jawbone I
Have made mine Enemies in heaps to lie:
Behold I have destroyed a Thousand Men
With this same worthless Ass's Jaw: And when
He made an end to speak, it came to pass
He cast away the Jawbone of the Ass,
And said, Now let the place where this was done
Be by the Name of Ramath-Lehi known.
And he was sore a thirst, and to the Lord
He cried, and said, O Lord, thou did afford
This great Deliverance, and now shall I,
By reason of my Thirst fall down and die,
And fall into the most accursed Hands
Of these uncircumsised Philistine Bands?
But God was pleased to cleave an hollow place,
Within the Jaw, from whence did Water pass:
Whereof when he had drank, his Spirit came
As heretofore, and he revived again:
Wherefore that place, which is in Lehi, bore
Unto this Day the Name of En-hakkore.
And in the Days the Philistines bore sway,
Israel for Twenty Years did him obey.
CHAP. XVI.
THen down to Gaza Sampson went, and there
Seeing an Harlot, went in unto her
And when the Gazites heard he was come thither:
Straightway they gathered themselves together
To compass him about, and lay in wait
All Night, to take him in the City Gate,
And they were still all Night for why? say they,
To morrow we shall kill him when it is Day.
And he till Midnight lay, and then arose,
And with the City Gates away he goes,
Bearing the Posts, and bar and all away,
And on an Hill near Hebron did them lay.
And afterward it came to pass he saw,
And loved a Woman named Delilah,
Who in the Vale of Sorek dwelt to whom
There did the Lords of the Philistines come,
And said, if thou will but entice him to reveal
Where lies his Strength, and which way we may deal
With him, to bind him, to afflict him, we
Each one will give a great reward to thee.
And she to Sampson said, I pray thee, tell
Wherein thy Strength does other Men excel,
And how thou may be bound: And he replied,
If they with Seven green Withs that never were dried
Shall bind me Hand and Foot, I shall be then
As weak and impotent as other Men.
Then the Philistine Lords for her provide
The Seven green Withs which never had been dried,
And she therewith did bind him, (now there were
Men lying in wait whom she had placed there)
Then she cried out, and said, Now Sampson stand
Thy ground, for the Philistines are at hand.
And straight he brake the Withs, and they became
Like to a thread of Tow when touched with flame:
So was his Strength not found out. Then said she,
Sampson, behold, thou have deceived me,
And told me lies: Therefore no longer blind me,
But tell, I pray thee, wherewith I may bind thee:
Bind me with Ropes that never were used, said he;
Then weak as other Men are, shall I be:
She therefore took New Ropes, and bound him, and
Cried, Sampson, the Philistines are at Hand:
(And in the Chamber there were Men lay hid)
And from his Arms he brake them like a Thread.
Then said she, Thou have mocked me hitherto,
And told me Lies: Now tell we what to do
To bind thee. He replied, Thou with the Web
Must interweave the Seven Locks of my Head.
Then she his Locks did fasten with the Pin,
And said, the Philistines are coming in,
Shift, Sampson, for thy self; then he awoke,
And Pin and Web, and all away he took.
Then said she, How can thou pretend to love me,
When thus thy Doing toward me disprove thee?
For now, behold, thou have deceived me thrice,
And have not told me where thy great Strength lies.
At length his Soul being vexed exceedingly,
By reason of her Importunity:
He told the Secrets of his Heart, and said,
Never yet Razor on my Head was laid;
For I have been to God a Nazarite,
Even from the Day that first I saw the Light:
Wherefore like other Men, if I am shaven,
I shall be weak, and of my Strength bereaven.
And when she saw that he had told her all
The Secrets of his Heart, she sent to call
The Lords of the Philistines, Come, said she,
This once, for now he has made known to me
The very Truth. Then they came up together,
And brought the Money in their Hands to give her.
Then down to sleep upon her Knees she laid him,
And called a Man, who of his Locks betrayed him,
And to afflict him she began, and then
His Strength became like that of other Men:
Then said she, Sampson, thy Philistine Foes
Are just at hand: And he from sleep arose,
And as at other times went forth to shake him,
Not knowing that the Lord did now forsake him.
But the Philistines seized him, and brought
Him down to Gaza, having first put out
His Eyes, and did with brazen Fetters bind
And made him in the Prisonhouse to grind.
Howbeit the Hair upon his Head began,
After he had been shaved, to grow again.
Then the Philistine Lords together met,
And a Thanksgiving day apart they set,
For to rejojce, and unto Dagon pay
Their highest Service, For our God, say they,
Did this: And when the People did behold
Poor Captive Sampson, they their God extolled,
And said, our God, Has given into our hand,
Him that destroyed us, and laid waste our Land.
And in their height of Mirth, they sent to call
Sampson, to come and make sport for them all.
And from the Prisonhouse they brought him, and
Between the Pillars they set him to stand;
And there he made them Sport. Then to the Lad,
That led him by the Hand, thus Sampson said,
Let me now feel the Pillars that sustain
The House that I my self thereon may lean.
Now in the Home there was a mighty Throng
Of Men and Women gathered, and among
Them, all the Lords of the Philistines were:
Besides, upon the Roof there did appear,
About Three thousand Men and Women, who
Beheld, while Sampson made them sport below.
And Sampson calling on the Lord did say,
O Lord, my God, remember me, I pray,
This once give Strength, that I avenged may be
Of those Philistines who have blinded me.
And with his Right Hand and his Left, he held
Two middle Pillars which the House upheld;
And said, Let me with the Philistines die,
And then he bowed himself most mightily:
And down the House fell on the Lords, and all
The People that were in it: So that the fall
Thereof, slew at his Dying many more,
Than he had slain in all his Life before.
Then did his Brethren, and his Kinsfolks come
And took him up, and brought him with them home,
And laid him in his Father's Sepulcher,
When he had judged Israel twenty Year.
CHRIST'S Sermon on the Mount Matthew.
Chap. V.
AND Jesus, seeing the Multitudes, ascended
Up to a Mount, where sitting, and attended
By his Disciples; he began to Preach,
And on this manner following did them teach.
Blessed are all such as are poor in Spirit,
For they the Heavenly Kingdom do inherit.
Blessed are they that Mourn: For in the stead
Thereof shall Comfort be administered.
Blessed are they, whose Meekness does excel:
For on the Earth their Portion is to dwell.
Blessed are they, who after Righteousness
Hunger and Thrist: For they shall it possess.
Blessed are they, for they shall Mercy find,
Who to do mercifully are inclined.
Blessed are all such as are pure in Heart:
For God his Presence shall to them impart.
Blessed are they that do make Peace: For why?
They shall be called the Sons of the Most High.
Blessed are they which suffer for the sake
Of Righteousness: For they of Heaven partake.
Blessed are ye, when Men shall falsely speak
All kind of Ill against you for my sake,
And shall revile, and persecute you sore;
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad therefore:
For your Reward in Heaven will be great:
For thus of Old they did the Prophets treat.
Ye are the Salt of the Earth; but wherewith must
The Salt be seasoned when the savour's lost?
It is from thenceforth good for nothing, but
To be cast out, and trodd'n under foot.
Ye are the Light of the World: A City set
Upon an Hill cannot be hid: Nor yet
Do Men a Candle with a Bushel cover,
But set it where it lights the whole House over.
So shine your Light, your Good Work's seen there
Men may your Heavenly Father Glorify.
Think not that to destroy the Law I came,
Or Prophets; no, but to fulfill the same.
For till the Heaven and Earth shall pass away,
One jot or tittle from the Law, I say,
Shall never pass, till all shall be complete.
Whosoever therefore presumes to violate,
One of these least Commands, and teaches so,
Shall in God's Kingdom be accounted low:
But he that does, and teaches them likewise,
Shall in God's Kingdom have great Dignities.
For I declare unto you, that unless
You shall exceed the Scribes and Pharisees
In Righteousness: You shall on no condition,
Into the Heavenly Kingdom gain admission.
Ye've heard 'twas said of Old; Thou shall not kill:
And he incurs the Judgment who shall spill
His Brothers Blood: But I to you declare,
That he that is wroth without a cause, shall bear
The Judgment: Likewise of the Council he
That says Racha shall in danger be:
But whosoe'er shall say thou Fool, the same
Shall be in danger of Eternal Flame.
When therefore to the Altar thou do bring
Thy Gift, and there remembrest any thing
Thy Brother has against thee: Leave it there
Before the Altar, and come thou not near,
Till thou have first made Reconciliation,
Then may thou come and offer thine Oblation.
Make an Agreement with thine Adversary
Whilst thou art in the way, and do not tarry;
Lest he at any time deliver thee
Unto the Judge, and by the Judge thou be
Unto the Officer forthwith resigned,
And to Imprisonment thou be confined;
I do affirm thou shall not be enlarged,
Till thou the utmost Farthing have discharged.
Ye've heard, that they of Old did testify,
That Men should not commit Adultery:
But I pronounce him an Adulterer,
Who views a Woman to lust after her.
And if thy Right Eye shall offensive be,
Pluck thou it out and cast the same from thee;
For it is better lose one, than that all
Thy Members should into Hell Torments fall.
And if thy Right Hand does offend cut off it,
And cast it from thee, for it will thee profit
Much rather, that one of thy Members fell,
Than that they should be all condemned to Hell.
It has been said, whosoever away shall force
His Wife, shall give her a Bill of Divorce:
But whosoe'er shall put his Wife away,
Except for Fornication's sake, I say,
Makes her Adult'ress, and who Marries her,
So put away, is an Adulterer.
Again: Ye've heard, Thou shall not be forsworn,
Was ancient Doctrine, but thou shall perform
Unto the Lord thine Oaths: But I declare,
That you shall not at all presume to Swear,
Neither by Heaven, for it is Gods Throne;
Nor by the Earth, for his Foot stands thereon:
Neither Swear by Jerusalem, for why?
It is the City of the King Most High:
Nor Swear thou by thine Head, for thou can make
No Hair thereof to be or white or black:
But let Yea, yea; Nay, nay, in Speech suffice,
For what is more from Evil does arise.
Ye've heard, it has been said; Eye for an Eye,
And Tooth for Tooth: But I do testify,
That you shall not resist; but let him smite
Thy left Cheek also, who assaults thy right.
And if that any by a Law Suit shall
Demand thy Coat, let them have Cloak and all.
And whosoe'er compels thee to go.
A Mile, refuse not to go with him two.
Give him that asks, and from him that may
Have need to borrow, turn not thou away.
Ye've heard, 'twas said: that thou shall love thy Friend
And hate thy Foe: But let your love extend
Unto your Enemies: Thus I declare,
Bless them that Curse, do good to them that bear
Ill will, and for your Persecutors pray,
And them that do reproach you; that you may
Be Children of your Father that is in Heaven;
For he on good and bad alike has given
His Sun to rise, and in like manner does
Send Rain upon the Just and Unjust both.
For what is your Reward, if you love them
That love you? Do not Publicans the same?
And if your Brethren only you salute,
What more than they do ye? They also do it:
I will therefore that you be perfect, even
As is your Father perfect that is in Heaven.
CHAP. VI.
TAke heed you do not your Alms-deeds bestow
Before Men, purposely to make a show;
For then there will no recompense be given
Unto you of your Father that is in Heaven:
With sound of Trumpet do not thou therefore
Proclaim what thou art giving to the Poor;
As is the manner of the Hypocrites
To do in the Synagogues, and in the Streets;
That Men may give them Praises. Verily
They have their Recompense I testify.
But when thou do Alms, let thy left hand know
Not what thy right hand is about to do:
That giving secretly, thy Father may,
Who sees in secret openly repay.
And when thou Pray'st be not as Hypocrites;
For they love in the corners of the Streets,
And in the Synagogues to stand and Pray,
There to be seen: They Have their Reward I say.
But thou, when thou do make thy Prayer, go thee
Into thy Closet, shut thy Door unto thee,
And there in secret to thy Father cry,
Who se'ing thee shall reward thee openly.
But when ye Pray use not vain Repetitions,
As Heathens do, for they think their Petitions
Prevail, when they the same do multiply:
Be ye not like to them therefore; for why;
Your Father knows what things you need before
You ask him, on this wise pray ye therefore.
' Our Father which art in Heaven, thy Name alone
' Be hallowed. Thy glorious Kingdom come.
Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven.
Give us this day our daily Bread. And even
As we remit our Debtors, grant Remission
To us. And lead us not into Temptation,
' But from all Evil do thou us deliver,
' For the Kingdom, Power and Glory's thine for ever.
Amen.
For if you do forgive Men that offend,
Your Heavenly Father will to you extend
Forgiveness; but if not, nor will he spare,
At any time when you Offenders are.
Moreover when you Fast beware lest you
Look sad, as Hypocrites are wont to do;
For they disguise their Faces, that they may
Appear to Fast: They Have their reward I say.
But thou, when thou do Fast, anoint thine Head
And wash thy Face, that undiscovered
Thy Fasting may be unto Men, but rather
That thou be seen in secret of thy Father:
And then thy Father who in secrecy
Beholds thee, shall reward thee openly.
Lay not up Treasure for your selves in store
Upon the Earth, where Moth and Rust devour,
And where by Thieves you may be quite bereaven.
But lay up Treasure for your Selves in Heaven,
Where neither Moth, nor Rust, nor Thieves can enter;
For where is your Treasure there your Hearts will center.
The Eye's the light of the Body, which if right
Then thy whole Body will be full of Light:
But if thine Eye be evil, then there will
A total Darkness thy whole Body fill.
If therefore all the Light that is in thee
Be Darkness, How great must that Darkness be?
No Man can serve Two Masters, either he
Will hate one, and love the other, or will be
Faithful to one, and the other will forego.
Ye cannot serve both God and Mammon too.
Take no thought therefore for your Life, I say,
What you shall eat or drink; or how you may
Your Bodies cloth: Is not the life much more
Than meat, is not the Body far before
The clothes thereof? behold the fowls of the air,
Nor sow nor reap, nor take they any care:
How they provision into barns may gather;
Yet they are nourished by your Heavenly Father:
Are ye not worth much more? Which of you can
By taking thought add to his height one span?
And why for raiment are ye taking thought?
See how the Lilies grow, they labor not,
Nor do they spin; yet Solomon, I say,
In all his Pomp had no such gay Array.
If in the Field God so does cloth the Grass,
Which is to Day, and does to Morrow pass
Into the Oven, shall he not therefore
O ye of little Faith, cloth you much more?
Take no thought therefore, saying, What shall we eat,
Or drink, or where shall we our Raiment get?
(For thus the Heathen People use to do)
For that you need them does your Father know.
But seek God's Kingdom, and his Righteousness
First, and then all these things you shall possess.
Be not then exercised with Care and Sorrow,
In making Preparation for the Morrow;
The Morrow shall things for it self prepare:
Sufficient to the Day is each Day's Care.
CHAP. VII.
JUdge not that you may not be judged; for even
As you pass Judgment, Judgment shall be given:
And with such Measure as you meet to Men,
It shall be measured unto you again.
And why do thou take notice of the Mote
That Is in thy Brother's Eye, but do not note
The Beam that is in thine own? How will thou say
Unto thy Brother, let me take away
The Mote that is in thine Eye, when yet'tis plain
The Beam that is in thine own does still remain?
First cast away the Bean, thou Hypocrite,
From thine own Eye, so shall thy clearer Sight
The better be enabled to descry,
And pluck the Mote out of thy Brother's Eye.
Give not to Dogs the things that are Divine,
Neither cast ye your Pearls before the Swine,
Least that they should their Feet them trample under,
And turn upon you, and rent you asunder.
Ask, and obtain, seek, and ye shall find; do ye
Knock, and it shall be opened unto ye:
For he that seeks, shall find, that asks, obtain,
And he that knocks, shall an Admittance gain.
Or what Man is there of you, if his Son
Shall ask him Bread, will he give him a Stone?
Or if he ask a Fish, will he bestow
A Serpent? If then ye being evil know
To give your Children good Gifts, how much rather
To them that ask him, shall your Heavenly Father?
Then what you would Men should to you, so do
To them: for that is the Law and Prophets too.
Enter in at the strait Gate, for the Road
That does unto Destruction lead is broad,
And wide the Gate, and many there be that
Enter therein: because strait is the Gate,
And narrow is the way that is inclined
To Life, and which there are but few that find.
False Prophets shun, who in Sheeps Clothes appear,
But inwardly devouring Wolves they are:
Ye by their Fruits shall know them. Do Men either
Pluck Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles gather?
Even so each good Tree good Fruit will produce;
But a corrupt Tree Fruit unfit for use:
A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Food,
Nor can an evil Tree bear Fruit that is good:
Each Tree that bears not good Fruit's hewn down
And burnt; thus by their Fruits they shall be known.
Not every one that says Lord, Lord, but he
That does my Heavenly Father's Will, shall be
An Heir of Heaven: many in that day
Will call Lord, Lord, and thus to me will say;
Have we not Prophesied in thy Name?
Cast Devils out, done Wonders in the same?
And then will I profess I know you not:
Depart from me ye that have Evil wrought.
Whosoever therefore these Sayings of mine does hear,
And does them, to a Wise Man I Will compare,
The which upon a Rock his Building sounded;
The Rain descended and the Floods surrounded,
The Winds arose, and gave it many a shock,
And it fell not, being founded on a Rock.
And every one that hears these Sayings of mine,
And not to do them does his Heart incline,
Unto a Foolish Man shall be compared,
Who his Foundation on the Sand prepared;
The Rain descended and the Floods were great,
The Winds did blow, and vehemently beat
Against that House; and down the Building came,
And mighty was the downfall of the same.
And now when Jesus thus had finished
His Sayings, the People were astonished
Thereat: for not as do the Scribes taught he
Them, but as one that had Authority.
The End of Christ's Sermon on the Mount.
THE Prophecy of Jonah.
CHAP. I.
NOW unto Jonah, old Amittai's Son,
Thus did the Word of the Almighty come,
And said, Arise; Go thou forthwith and cry
Against that great City Nineveh; for why,
The Sins thereof are come up in my sight.
But he arose, that he to Tarshish might
Flee from God's Presence; and went down and found
A Ship at Joppa unto Tarshish bound:
He paid the Fare, and with them went on board
For Tarshish, from the Presence of the Lord.
But the Almighty a great Wind did raise,
And sent a mighty Tempest on the Seas,
So that the Ship was likely to be broken.
Then were the Mariners with Horror stricken;
And to his God they cried every one;
And overboard was the Ships lading thrown
To lighten it: but down into the Ship
Was Jonah gone, and there lay fast asleep.
So to him came the Master and did say,
What meanest thou, O Sleeper! Rise and pray
Unto thy God, and he perhaps will hear,
And save us from the danger that we fear.
Then said they to each other, come, let us try,
By casting Lots, on whom the Fault does lie,
In bringing all this evil now upon us.
So they cast Lots, and the Lot fell on Jonas.
Then said they, we entreat thee let us know,
For whose cause we this evil undergo,
Whence come thou? What is thine Occupation?
What Countryman art thou? And of what Nation?
And unto them himself he did deolare,
And said, I am an Hebrew, and do fear
The Living Lord, the God of Heaven, who
Alone has made the Sea and dry Land too.
Then were the Men exceedingly afraid;
And, wherefore have thou done this thing? they said
(For they did understand he did forgo
God's Presence, for himself had told them so.)
What shall we do unto thee then they said,
That so the raging of the Sea be stayed?
(For it did rage and foam.) Take me, said he,
And cast me over board into the Sea;
So shall the Sea be calm, for on my score
I know it is, that thus the Waves do roar.
Nevertheless they rowed hard to gain
The Land, but all their labor was in vain;
So much against them did the Tempest beat.
Wherefore they the Almighty did entreat,
And said, we do beseech thee, and we pray,
O Lord, that thou would not upon us lay
The charge of guiltless Blood, nor let it be,
That now we perish, on the account that we
Take this Man's Life away; for thou alone,
As it has pleased thee, O Lord, have done.
So they took Jonah up, and to the Seas
Committed him, then did the Tempest cease.
Then did the Dread of the Great God on high,
Seize on the Mariners exceedingly.
And they did offer up a Sacrifice,
And vowed Vows unto the Lord likewise.
And now the Lord for Jonah did contrive
A mighty Fish to swallow'im up alive,
And in the Fish's Belly for the space
Of three days and three nights, poor Jonah was.
CHAP. II.
UNto the Lord his God then Jonah prayed
Out of the Belly of the Fish, and said,
By reason of Affliction which lay sore
Upon me, I the Lord God did implore,
And he gave Ear; and from Hell's Belly I
Cried unto thee, and thou, Lord, heard'st my Cry;
For thou into the Deep had cast me out,
And there the Floods did compass me about,
In the midst of the Sea, thy Waves were sent,
And all thy Billows which my Head over went.
Then said I though thy Presence has forsook
Me, to thy Holy Temple will I look.
The Waters compassed about my Soul,
And the great Deeps did round about me roll,
The Weeds were wrapped about my Head, I went
Down to the bottom of the Element;
The Earth with her strong Bars surrounded me,
Yet thou, O Lord, from Death have set me free.
When my Soul fainted, on the Lord I thought,
And to thee to thy Temple then was brought
My Prayer. They their own Mercies do despise,
Who have regard to lying Vanities.
But with the Voice of my Thanksgiving, I
Will offer Sacrifice to thee on high,
And pay my Vows which I have vowed each one,
For why? Salvation's of the Lord alone.
And now the Fish, as God did give Command,
Did vomit Jonah out upon dry Land.
CHAP. III.
AND now the Second time to Jonah came
God's Word, and said, Arise, go and proclaim
To that great City Nineveh, what I
Have heretofore commanded thee to cry.
So Jonah rose up, and prepared to go
To Nineveh as God had bid him do:
(Now was the City Nineveh so great,
That it was three days Journey long complete)
And as into the City Jonah made
His first days Journey, he cried out, and said,
When forty days shall be expired and past,
This City Nineveh shall be laid waste.
Then did the Ninevites with one accord,
Believe this was the Message of the Lord,
And did proclaim a Fast, and every one,
From greatest to the least, put Sackcloth on:
For to the King this News was quickly flown,
And he arose, and came down from his Throne,
And having laid aside his Robes of State,
He put on Sackcloth, and in Ashes sat:
And issuing out his Royal Proclamation,
And through the City making Publication
Thereof, (being by the King and Council signed)
A solemn and a general Fast enjoined,
And said, I will, That neither Man nor Beast,
Nor Flock, nor Herd, shall their Provision taste:
But let them all put Sackcloth on, and cry
Unto the Lord with greatest fervency;
Yea, let them all their evil Ways refrain,
And from the Violence which they retain.
Who knows if God will yet be pleased to spare,
And turn away the Evil that we fear?
And God beheld their Works, and saw that they
Had turned from the Evil of their Way:
And God turned from his Wrath, and did revoke
The dreadful Judgment whereof he had spoke.
CHAP. IV.
BUT hereat Jonah was extremely vexed,
And in his mind exceedingly perplexed:
And to the Lord his God he prayed, and said,
O Lord, I pray thee, was not I afraid
Of this, when I was yet at home? Therefore
I unto Tarshish took my flight before:
For that thou art a gracious God I know,
Of tender Mercy, and to Anger slow,
Of great Compassion, and do often recall
The Evil thou do threat Mankind withal:
Now therefore, Lord, I earnestly do pray
That thou would please to take my Life away,
For I had better die than live. Do thou
Do well, said God, to be so angry now?
So then out of the City Jonah went,
And on the East Side of it made a Tent,
And underneath the shade thereof he sat,
Expecting what would be the City's Fate:
And over Jonah's Head behold, the Lord
Prepared, and caused to come up, a Gourd
To shadow him, and ease him of his Grief;
And Jonah was right glad of this Relief.
But God a Worm sent early the next day,
Which smote the Gourd, it withered away:
And when the Sun arose it came to pass,
That God a vehement East wind did raise;
Besides, the Sun did beat upon his Head,
So that he fainted, saying, would I were dead,
For it is better for me now to die,
Than thus to lead my Life in Misery.
And to distressed Jonah, said the Lord,
Do thou well to be angry for the Gourd?
And he unto the Lord made this Reply,
I do well to be angry even to die.
Thou have had pity, Jonah, on the Gourd,
For which thou did not labor, said the Lord,
Nor made it to grow, which also came
Up in a Night, and perished in the same:
And should not I extend my gracious Pity
To Nineveh, so populous a City,
Where more than Sixscore thousand Persons dwell
Who 'twixt their Right Hand, and their Left, can tell
No difference, wherein are also found
Cattle which do in Multitudes abound?
The End of the Prophecy of JONAH.
THE LIFE of JOSEPH, TAKEN Out of the latter Part of the Book of Genesis,
Chap. xxxvii.
WHen Jacob from his Brother Esau fled,
He by the Hand of Providence was led
To Padan-aram, in Assyria, where
He served his Uncle Laban twenty year;
During which time he was in all things blessed,
And with a numerous Issue amongst the rest:
Amongst whom none so pleasing in his sight
As Joseph was, who was his chief delight:
Who by the time that Jacob was returned
Into the Land, where is Fathers had sojourned,
Was full arrived at seventeen years of Age;
And by his Hopefulness did then presage,
He was endued with a noble Mind,
That would to virtuous Actions be inclined;
For being sent to feed his Father's Flock,
Among his Brethren, he great notice took
Of what they did, and if in any sort
They did amiss, he thereof made report
Unto his Father, and did thus create
His Father's favor, but his Brethren's hate.
His Father loved him better than the rest,
As being the Son wherewith his Age was blessed:
And that his Kindness might the more appear,
Made him a party colored Coat to wear.
But as it often haps, his Father's Love
Did in his Brethren greater Hatred move:
But that which most incensed them was his Dreams,
By which, in a Prophetic way, he seems
Their low Submission, and his future State
Of Greatness, plainly to Prognosticate.
For to his Brethren thus his Dreams he told,
And said, as we were binding Sheaves, behold,
My Sheaf arose and stood up in the Field,
And all your Sheaves stood round about, to yield
Obeisance unto mine: And what, must we
Indeed, say they, be subject unto thee?
Their Wrath increased, this added to his Crime.
And Joseph dreamed yet a second time;
And said, Behold, I saw the Sun and Moon,
And the eleven Stars to me fall down
At which his Father highly was offended,
And for these words, the Lad he reprehended,
And said, fond Youth, Do thou pretend to show
That I, thy Mother, and thy Brethren too,
Must all submit to thee? Thou do but dream:
But Jacob kept his words, and thought of them.
Now Jacob's Sons did feed their Flocks in Shechem,
And he desired Joseph to go seek 'em,
And find them out, and come again and tell
If all things with them and their Flocks were well.
So Joseph went, and wandered here and there,
But could not find out where his Brethren were,
Until a Man had told him their Intent
Of going to Dothan, where he also went.
And when his Brethren at a distance saw him,
They held a Consultation how to slay him,
And said, here comes the Dreamer, we shall see
What the Event of all his Dreams will be;
For we will kill, and in a Pit will hide him,
And say some Beast or other has destroyed him.
But Reuben somewhat tend'rer than the rest,
Endeavored to persuade them to desist
From Murder, saying, Into this Pit let us cast him,
And this he said in hopes to have released him.
And now when Joseph came not dreading ought,
They stripped him of his party colored Coat,
And led him to a Pit that was hard by,
And threw him into it, but the Pit was dry.
And sitting down to eat, they chanced to spy,
A Company of Ishmaelites pass by,
Who with Balm, Myrrh, and Spice, their Camels lading,
From Gilead came, and were to Egypt Trading:
Then Judah said, 'Twill do us little good
To slay our Brother, and conceal his Blood;
Come therefore, Brethren, be advised by me,
Let Us sell him to these Ishmaelites, for he
Is our own Flesh, and it is a cruel Deed,
To kill him, and to this they all agreed.
Their Brother then out of the Pit they hale,
And to these Merchants offered him to sale:
Who, him for twenty Silver Pieces bought,
And with them to the Land of Egypt brought.
But Reuben ignorant of what was done,
Came to the Pit, and seeing the Lad was gone,
He rent his Clothes in a great Consternation,
Returning back with heavy Lamentation.
And now that they might make their Story good
They killed a Kid, and dipped in the Blood
Their Brother Joseph's Coat, and home they came,
And to their Father's view exposed the same,
And said, this we have found, now thou do know
Whether it be thy Son's Coat, yea or no.
And Jacob knew the Coat full well, and said,
Now has some evil Beast devoured the Lad;
Joseph is torn in Pieces without doubt,
For, too, too well I know this is his Coat.
He rent his Clothes, and putting Sackcloath on,
He for a long time mourned for his Son.
His Children striving to assuage his Grief
Endeavored to administer Relief:
But he refused, and said, Since he is gone,
I will in Sorrow to the Grave go down.
Such Lamentation made he for his Son.
CHAP. XXXIX.
AND now these Merchants Sons of Ishmael,
Again did poor afflicted Joseph sell,
To an Egyptian, named Potiphar,
The Captain of King Pharaoh's Men of War
And God was with him, and did greatly bless,
And crown his Undertaking with Success:
Whereof his Master being well aware,
Committed all he had to Joseph's care;
And made him Overseer of his House,
And from the time his Master used him thus,
The Lord was pleased to give him to partake,
Of many Blessings even for Joseph's sake:
So that with Plenty he was hedged about,
And prospered within Door and without:
Such was his Master's Love, and he so Just,
That all things were committed to his Trust.
Now Joseph was grown up to manly Stature,
Of goodly Presence, and most comely Feature.
Wherefore his Mistress with a lustful Eye,
Beheld his Beauty, and resolved to try,
If to unchaste Embraces she could gain
The Youth, but her Endeavors proved in vain:
For he refused, and said, My Master knows
In all the House of nothing that he owes,
For his Concerns are all at my dispose:
There Is not a thing that he has kept from me,
But all is in my hand save only thee;
Then how can I commit so foul a Fact,
And the Displeasure of my God contract?
Yet still she sued, and still did he deny her,
Refusing to be with her, or lie by her.
Now on a time when all the Men were gone
Out of the House and she was left alone:
And Joseph at that Instant coming in,
About some Business he would to do within;
She took Advantage of their being together,
And held his Clothes to force him to lie with her
But Joseph strove, and from her hands got loose,
And left his Coat, and fled out of the House.
And when she saw that he had made's Escape,
She called her Servants, and proclaimed a Rape:
Come see now how this Hebrew Slave, said she,
Your Master's Favorite, has affronted me;
He came to violate my Chastity,
And when he heard that I began to cry,
And call for help, afraid least you should find him,
He Is fled, and left his Garment here behind him.
And now to give her words the greater credit,
Until her Husband's coming home, she hid it,
To whom she spoke, and said, Why have thou brought
This Hebrew here, to set me thus at naught?
The Slave attempted to defile my bed,
And when I cried, he left his Coat and fled,
See here it is. Which when he saw, and heard
The heavy Accusation she preferred,
He was exceeding wroth at his Behavior,
And utterly casheir'd him from his Favor;
Nay more, he cast him into Prison, where
In Fetters bound King Pharaoh's Prisoner's were.
But Joseph's God, who never yet forsook
Him in Extremity, was pleased to look,
With great Compassion on his Injuries,
And gave him Favor in the Keeper's eyes;
So that he was entrusted with the care
And charge of all the Prisoners that were there:
All were committed unto Joseph's hand,
And what was done, was done at his command,
The Prison-keeper took no care at all.
Of ought that he entrusted him withal,
Because he saw that God was with him, and
All things did prosper that he took in hand.
CHAP. XL.
AND now whilst Joseph in Confinement lay,
It came to pass upon a certain day,
That Pharaoh King of Egypt, being wroth
With his chief Butler, and chief Baker both,
For their Offenses, put them both in Ward,
In the House of the Captain of the Guard:
Into the Place where Joseph was confined,
Unto whose Custody they were resigned,
And he attended on them in the Prison.
And there they were continued for a season,
During which time, it chanced both of them
Did in the same Night dream each Man his Dream:
Which Dreams according to Interpretation,
Had to themselves particular Relation.
And Joseph coming early the next day,
Into the Room where Pharaoh's Servants lay,
Beheld their Countenances much dejected:
Wherefore he said. What Evil has effected
This melancholy Frame, what is it that causes
These marks of Coffeehouse in your Faces?
Then said they, we have dreamed each Man his Dream,
And there is no Man to interpret them.
Then Joseph said your Dreams to me make known;
Interpretations are from God alone.
Then unto Joseph the chief Butler told
His Dream, and said, Methought I did behold
A Vine, whereon three Branches did appear,
Which seemed to bud, to blossom, and to bear
Clusters of full ripe Grapes, which to my thinking
I pressed into the Cup for Pharaoh's drinking.
And Joseph said, Thy Dream does signify,
Thou shall enjoy thy former Dignity:
The Branches which thou saw are three days,
In which King Pharaoh will his Butler raise,
And to thy Place again will thee restore,
And thou shall serve him as thou'st done before:
But do not, when it shall be well with thee,
Forget me, but show Kindness unto me,
And unto Pharaoh represent my Case,
That I may be delivered from this Place,
For I was stolen out of the Hebrews Land,
And also here am wrongfully detained.
Then the chief Baker having understood,
That the Interpretation was so good,
He told his Dream to Joseph too, and said,
Lo, I had three white Baskets on my Head,
And in the Uppermost there seemed to be,
Of baked Provision, great variety,
Fit for King Pharaoh's Table, and there came
A Flock of Birds, and seemed to eat the same.
And Joseph said, Thy Dream portends thy fall,
For at the end of three days Pharaoh shall
Lift up thy Head, and hang thee on a Tree,
So that the Birds shall feast themselves on thee.
And on the third day Pharaoh made a Feast
Unto his Servants, and among the rest
The Butler and the Baker were brought forth,
The day being kept in Memory of his Birth:
And to his Place King Pharaoh did restore
His Butler, and he served him as before.
But the chief Baker he condemned to die,
According unto Joseph's Prophecy.
Yet though the Butler had regained his Place,
He was unmindful of poor Joseph's Case.
CHAP. XLI.
AND now when two years time was fully past,
And Joseph from Confinement not releast,
It came to pass that Pharaoh dreamed, and
He seemed by a River's side to stand,
Whence, he seven fat well-favour'd Kine beheld,
Came up and grazed in the neighboring Field.
And after them there came up seven more
Lean and ill-favored, and did soon devour
The seven fat Kine which came up just before.
So Pharaoh 'woke, and mused awhile, and then
Soon as his Sleep his Dream returned again.
Wherein he saw upon one stalk there stood
Seven ears of Corn, exceeding Rank and Good,
And seven others, with the East wind blasted,
And withered, sprang up, and quickly wasted
The seven good Ears, and quite devoured them:
And Pharaoh 'woke, and, Lo! it was a Dream.
And in the Morning he was discontent,
And for the wise Men, and Magicians sent,
To ease his Mind but there was none of them
That could interpret to the King his Dream.
Then the chief Butler making his address.
Unto King Pharaoh, said, I now confess
My former Faults, for when the King was wroth
With his chief Butler, and chief Baker both,
It pleased him, to put us both in Ward,
In the House of the Captain of the Guard:
And in one Night we dreamed a Dream, each one
According to's Interpretation;
And there was then an Hebrew there in Ward,
A Youth, that served the Captain of the Guard:
To whom we told whereof we had been dreaming,
And he interpreted to us the meaning,
And what he said fell out accordingly,
Me he restored to my Dignity,
But told the Baker he should surely die.
Then Pharaoh sent a Messenger in haste,
And Joseph from the Dungeon was releast:
And having shaved himself, and changed his Clothes,
Into the Presence of the King he goes.
To whom King Pharaoh said, I have been told
Thou can the meaning of a Dream unfold:
Now I have dreamed a Dream, and there is none
Can give me the Interpretation.
And Joseph said, I cannot do this thing
My self, but God shall answer thee, Oh, King.
Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, In my Dream,
As I stood by a River's side, there came
Up from the River seven well-favour'd Kine,
And fed upon the Banks, all fat and fine,
And after them there came up seven more,
Lean and ill-favored, and exceeding poor:
Such as the Land of Egypt never bred,
And on the seven well-favour'd Kine they fed,
And eat them up, but 'twas not to be seen
That they had eat them, they looked still so thin.
So I awoke, and mused a while, and then
Soon as my Sleep, my Dream returned again,
Wherein I saw upon one stalk there stood
Seven Ears of Corn, exceeding rank, and good:
Then seven others, with the East wind blasted,
And withered, came up, and quickly wasted
The seven good Ears, and quite devoured them.
And being unsatisfied about my Dream,
I sought unto the wise Men of the Nation,
But they could give me no Interpretation.
And Joseph said, Thy Dream, oh King! is one,
God shows to Pharaoh what he will have done.
The seven fat Kine, and seven good Ears agree
To show, seven years of Plenty there shall be:
The seven lean Kine, and seven blasted Ears,
Denote there shall be Famine seven years.
This I declare to Pharaoh, God does show
To thee, Oh King! what he is about to do.
Behold seven years of Plenty are at hand,
Which shall be very great throughout the Land:
And after them seven years of Famine shall
Arise, and shall consume the Land, and all
The former Plenty shall not be perceived,
So much the Land with Famine shall be grieved.
And since the Dream was doubled to the King,
It is because God has decreed the thing,
And on this Land the same will shortly bring:
Now therefore if I may the King advise,
Let him look out a Man discreet and wise,
And make him Overseer of the Land;
And substitute Men under his Command
To gather a fifth part for Public Use,
Of what the seven plenteous Years produce,
And in the Cities lay it up for Store,
Against the Famine in the Land grows sore;
And let it be reposed in Pharaoh's hand,
That so the Famine may not wast the Land.
And when King Pharaoh and his Servants heard
The Propositions Joseph had preferred,
They were acceptable in Pharaoh's Eyes,
And in the Eyes of all his Court likewise:
So that he said, can such an one be found?
A Man in whom God's Spirit does abound.
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, forasmuch
As God's great kindness unto thee is such,
As to reveal this thing to thee, I know
No Man so wise or so discreet as thou:
Be thou therefore the Ruler of the Land,
And let my People be at thy Command;
Thou shall in all things be as great as I,
Save only in the Royal Dignity.
Behold this day I have advanced thee
Said he, to be a Man of high Degree
Throughout the Land. And therewithal the King
Bestowed on Joseph his own Royal Ring;
And him with Robes of State did richly deck,
And put a Chain of Gold about his Neck,
And in his second Chariot made him ride,
And as he past, bow down the Knee they cried,
With so great Honor was he dignified.
And Pharaoh said moreover, I am King,
No Man shall dare to purpose any thing,
Or move his Hand or Foot in all this Nation,
Unless it shall be by thy approbation.
He also gave to Joseph a new Name,
And for a Wife gave him a Princely Dame,
Who was the Daughter of a Priest of Fame.
(Now Joseph had attained his Thirtieth Year,
When he before King Pharaoh did appear.)
And he went out from Pharaoh's Presence, and
Began his Progress over all the Land.
Now in the seven plenteous Years, the Field
Did its Increase in great abundance yield.
And Joseph gathered all that plenteous Crop,
And in the adjacent Cities laid it up:
Which like unto the Sand upon the shore,
Did so abound that he could count no more,
Such was the Plenty that the Earth then bore.
And unto Joseph there was born a Son,
Even by the Daughter of the Priest of On,
Before the Years of Famine were begun,
The which he called Manasseh, for, said he,
God makes me to forget my Misery,
And all my Father's House: And after him
Was born another he called Ephraim;
For God, says he, has made me to possess
Abundance in the Land of my Distress.
And when the seven plenteous Years were gone,
The seven Years of Famine next came on,
As Joseph said, and there was a great Dearth
In every Nation throughout all the Earth;
But in the Land of Egypt there was Bread.
And when the People, almost famished,
Complained to the King, he bad them go
To Joseph, and whatever he said to do.
And now the Famine daily waxing sore,
Joseph began to bring forth of his Store,
Which he had laid up for the Public Good;
To whom the Egyptians came and bought their Food.
And People from all Countries far and near
To Egypt came to buy Provision there;
For in all Lands the Famine was severe.
CHAP. XLII.
AND now, behold, when Jacob had been told
That there was Corn in Egypt to be sold,
He said unto his Sons, Why stand ye thus?
Go down to Egypt and buy Corn for us;
That so our craving Stomachs may be fed,
And not lie here and die for lack of Bread.
Thus Jacob's ten Sons were to Egypt sent,
But Joseph's Brother Benjamin never went;
For why, his Father said, I will not send him,
Lest peradventure some ill chance attend him.
And Joseph's Brethren came among the rest
To buy Provision, for they were distressed.
Now he was Governor of all the Land,
And all the Corn of Egypt in his hand.
Wherefore his Brethren when they came to treat
With him for Corn, bowed down even at his feet:
And he no sooner saw them but he knew them,
And showed himself extremely strange unto them:
And very roughly asked who they were,
From whence they came and what their business there
And they made answer, We thy Servants from
The Land of Canaan to buy Food are come.
Now though they knew him not, yet he knew them,
And calling now to mind his former Dream,
He said, I do suspect you are come as Spies,
To see in what distress our Country lies.
But they replied again, my Lord we are come
Only to buy some Food to carry home:
Think not thy Servants Spies, but true Men rather,
For we are all the Children of one Father.
Nay, nay, said he, but ye are come to pry
Into the Nations great necessity.
But they replied again, Thy Servants are
Inhabitants of Cana'n, and declare,
That we are twelve Brethren whom one Man begot,
The Youngest is at home and one is not.
Well then, said Joseph, hereby shall I know,
Whether you are Spies, as I have said, or no;
Now by the Life of Pharaoh do I swear,
Unless your Brother come I Will keep you here:
Send one of you and fetch the Lad to me,
And you shall be confined, so shall there be
A Proof of what you say before mine Eyes,
Or by the Life of Pharaoh ye are Spies.
Then he for three days put them all in Ward,
And on the third day said I have regard
To Equity, therefore if ye are true
And honest Men, do this; let one of you
Be bound in Prison here, and let the other
Go carry Corn home and bring me your Brother;
So shall ye be approved and shall not die.
And they prepared to do accordingly.
And as they were discoursing to each other,
They said, we were in fault about our Brother,
In that we saw his Soul in great distress,
And yet were so exceeding pitiless,
As not to hearken to his earnest cries:
This is the cause of these our Miseries.
And Reuben said, you know I did forewarn,
And beg that you would do the Child no harm;
But you would not do then as I desired,
And now his Blood is at our hands required.
Thus they discoursed about the cause that brought
Their present trouble, but they little thought
That Joseph knew of what they did confer,
Because he spoke by an Interpreter.
And he being moved at their words withdrew
To weep, and then returned to renew
His former talk; and choosing Simeon out,
Before them all he bound him hand and foot.
And gave command to fill their Sacks with Grain,
And to restore their Money to'em again;
And for their Journey give them Food to eat:
In such sort Joseph did his Brethren treat.
Then with their Asses laden toward home
They went, and when into their Inn they come,
As one of them his Sack of Corn untied,
To give his Ass some Provender, he spied
His Money in his Sack again returned;
Wherefore he called his Brethren and informed
Them that his Money was returned back,
Behold, said he, it is here in my Sack.
On sight whereof their Hearts were sore dismayed,
And being very much affrighted said,
What is the thing that God's about to do,
That we do thus these Troubles undergo?
Then coming to their Father they related,
After what sort they were in Egypt treated:
And said, the Man that is Lord of all the Land,
And has the store of Corn all in his hand,
Spoke roughly to us, and affirmed that we
Were come the weakness of the Land to see.
To whom we said, we are all honest Men;
We are twelve Brethren, whereof here are ten,
And two elsewhere, all which one Man begot,
The youngest's with our Father, one is not.
Then said the Ruler of the Land, hereby
Shall I make proof of your integrity:
Let one of you continue here with me,
And take Provision for your Family;
And get you gone and bring the youngest hither,
That so I may be satisfied whether
Ye are true Men, as you make protestation,
Then I Will release him, and give toleration
To you to come and Traffic in the Nation
And now behold, as they their Sacks unloos'd
To empty out their Corn, there was enclosed
In each Man's Sack his Money therein bound,
As when they came from home; which when they found,
Both they and their old Father were afraid;
And to his Sons afflicted Jacob said,
You of my Children have be^eaved me,
Joseph and Simeon now do cease to be
And of my Benjamin you would deprive me,
These things do even into distraction drive me.
Then Reuben said, My Father I resign
To thy disposing these two Sons of mine;
Give me the Lad, and let them both be slain,
If I do not return him safe again.
But he replied, I will not let him go,
For why, his Brother is deceased you know,
And if upon the way some evil thing
Should happen to the I ad, you then will bring
These my gray Hairs with sorrow to the Grave,
For he is the only comfort that I have.
CHAP. XLIII.
AND now the Famine still continuing sore,
And having spent all their late purchased store,
Their Father bids them to go down for more
To whom when Judah had himself addressed,
He said, The Man did solemnly protest,
If we without our Brother came again,
To seek his Face would be for us in vain:
If therefore thou will send him, well and good,
Then will we willingly go down for Food;
But if thou will not, we must let thee know,
We are resolved that we will not go:
For, as I said before, the Ruler swore,
Without him we should see his Face no more.
Then Israel said, why were you so unkind
To say you had a Brother left behind?
The Man, said they, was so inquisitive,
He asked if our Father were alive;
Or if we had a Brother, whereunto
Accordingly we answered, could we know
If he would bid us bring the Lad or no?
Moreover Judah to his Father said,
If thou will but entrust me with the Lad,
We will be gone, that so both thou and we
May be preserved with our Family:
I will be Surety for him, if I fail
To bring him back, on me the blame entail;
For if we had not lingered, we had been
By this time here the second time again.
Well then, said Israel, if it must be so,
My Sons, take my Advice before you go;
Provide some of the best Fruits of the Land,
To give the Man a present from your hand;
Balm, Myrrh and Spices, and a little Honey,
Some Nuts and Almonds, and take double Money.
For peradventure it was a mistake,
In that your Money was returned back;
And take your Brother Benjamin and go,
And God Almighty grant the Man may show
You Mercy, that you may bring back again
Your other Brother, and my Benjamin,
And if I am bereaved, so have I been.
Then did the Men prepare the Present, and
They took their Money double in their hand,
With Benjamin, and down to Egypt went,
Who unto Joseph did themselves present.
Who, when he saw that Benjamin was come,
Ordered his Steward to conduct them home,
And to provide a Dinner, for said he,
I do intend these Men shall Dine with me.
Then did the Steward as his Master said,
And brought them home, whereat they were afraid,
And said, the Man has caused us to come in,
Because our Money was returned again;
To take occasion now to fall upon us,
And make us Slaves and take our Asses from us.
Unto the Steward they drew nigh therefore,
And thus communed with him at the Door:
O Sir, say they, we came at first indeed
To buy Provision to supply our need;
And in our Inn as we our Sacks unloos'd,
We found our Money therein all enclosed
In its full weight, whereat surprised with fear,
Not knowing who had put our Money there,
We now have brought it in full weight again,
And other Money too, to buy more Grain.
Peace, Peace, said he, let not fear seize upon ye,
For I had the disposing of your Money:
God unto whom you and your Father bow,
Has given you Treasure in your Sacks I trow.
And then releasing Simeon, who had been
Confined in Joseph's House, he brought them in
And set them Water, and they washed their Feet,
And gave their Asses Provender to eat.
Then they made ready against Joseph came
Their Gifts, in order to present the same
At Noon, for they were told he did design
To have their Company with him to Dine.
And now when Joseph was returned home,
Into his Presence they with reverence come,
And brought their Presents in and laid before him,
And fell down at his Feet for to adore him.
Then he enquired if they all were well,
And said, When you were here I heard you tell
Of an old Man your Father, how does he?
Is he in Health, or does he cease to be?
Whereto in humble sort they thus replied,
Thy Servant, even our Father, does abide
In perfect Health, which having said,
They bowed their Heads and great obeisance made.
And Joseph viewing Benjamin his Brother
(They being both the Children of one Mother)
He asked if he were the Lad of whom
They spoke, then said, God give thee Grace my Son,
Then making have to find a secret place
To weep, because his Bowels yern'd apace
Upon his Brother, to his Chamber went,
Where having given his troubled Spirits vent,
He washed his Face and did himself refrain,
And to his Brethren then came sorth again.
And bad his Servants they should set on Bread:
At his command the Tables all were spread;
One for himself, and for his Friends another,
And for the Egyptians one apart from either,
That so they might not eat Bread altogether;
For it is held a great abomination
For them to eat among the Hebrew Nation.
And they were placed as their age required,
The Eldest first, whereat the Men admired:
And from his Table Joseph sent them Messes,
But in a larger manner he expresses
To Benjamin his kindness, which was such,
That he appointed him five times as much
As to the rest: and they drank plenteously,
Till they were merry in his Company.
CHAP. XLIV.
AND to his Steward Joseph spoke, and said,
Give these Men Corn as much as they can lade.
And in their Sacks bind each Man's Money up,
And in the Youngest's put my silver Cup
Besides his Money: and he made have and did
According as his Master had commanded.
And in the morning by the break of day,
With Asses laden they were sent away:
And now, ever they had scarce the Town's end past,
He sent his Steward after them in have,
And said, Go follow them and ask them why
They have dealt by me so ungratefully?
And say unto them, You have done great evil
To Rob my Master who has been so civil,
And steal the Cup wherein he drinks his Wine;
Is it not it whereby he does Divine?
Then he pursued and quickly overtook
Them, and these very words to them he spoke.
To whom they said, Why has my Lord such thought?
Oh, God forbid that we should be so naught;
Behold, thou know we brought the Money back
The which we found bound up in each Man's Sack,
Which shows that we had no design to cheat;
How then should we now steal your Masters Plate?
With which of us thy Servants it is found
Let him be slain, and we to Slavery bound.
Now as you say, said he, so let it be,
He shall be bound, but you shall all go free.
Then they unladed every Man his Beast,
And to his view exposed their Sacks in have;
And he from first to last them searched round,
And lo, the Cup on Benjamin was found:
Whereat surprised, each Man his Garment rent,
And lades his Beast, and back again they went.
And now when Judah and the rest were come
To Joseph's House (for he was yet at home)
They fell before him to the ground, to whom
He said, What deed is this that you have done;
Are you not sensible that such a one
As I, can certainly thereof make trial?
Then Judah said, my Lord there is no denial,
We cannot clear our selves: The Lord has sent,
For our mis deeds this heavy Punishment.
Behold, to be thy Slaves we all are bound,
Both we, and he on whom the Cup was sound.
Then Joseph said, the Lord forbid that I
Should exercise so great severity:
For he with whom it is found, and he alone
Shall be my Servant, you may all be gone.
Then unto Joseph, Judah drawing near,
Said, O my Lord! I pray be pleased to hear
Thy Servant speak, and be not angry now,
For as King Pharaoh is even so art thou.
My Lord did bid thy Servants to discover
Whether we had a Father or a Brother;
And we made answer that thy Servants had
An ancient Father and a little Lad,
The Child of his old age, who was our Brother,
And he the only Child left of his Mother,
His Brother being dead; and that this Lad
Was all the comfort that our Father had:
Then thou were pleased to bid thy Servants bring
The Lad, that thou might have a sight of him.
And we made answer, If the Lad should leave
His Father, it would bring him to his Grave:
And thou did then protest it was in vain
For us without him to come here again.
Then toward home thy Servants went their way,
And told our Father what my Lord did say:
And in a while when all our Corn was spent,
Thy Servant, even our Father would have sent
To buy more Food; to whom thy Servants said,
We cannot go except thou send the Lad:
Because the Man did solemnly declare,
Unless we brought him we should not come there.
And then thy Servant, even our Father said,
Ye know that by my Wife two Sons I had,
And one of them went forth and came no more,
Which made me think some Beast did him devour,
And if I now should also condescend
To let this go, and mischief should attend,
You will with sorrow bring me to my end.
When to my Father I shall come therefore,
And he shall see that I do not restore
The Lad again, he certainly will die,
(Since in his Life my Father's Life does lie)
And we shall bring him to his Grave thereby.
For I became a Surety for the Lad
Unto my Father, unto whom I said,
If I do not in safety him deliver,
Then let me bear the blame to thee for ever.
I humbly pray thee therefore to accept
Me in his stead, and let me here be kept
My Lord's Bondslave, and let the Lad go free:
For how can I, thy Servant bear to see
The Evil that shall on my Father come,
If that the Lad return not safely home.
CHAP. XLV.
THen Joseph, who by no means now could hide
His Brotherly affection longer, cried,
Put all Men forth; and he was left alone
When to his Brethren he himself made known.
Then Joseph weeping lifted up his Voice
So loud, that Pharaoh's Servants heard the noise.
And to his Brethren did himself discover,
And said, Lo! I am Joseph your own Brother;
And does my Father live? Whereat amazed,
They could not speak but at each other gazed.
Then Joseph said, Come near I pray, behold,
I am your Brother Joseph whom ye sold
To Egypt, be not grieved now therefore,
Nor vex your selves, for God sent me before
To save Life; for for these two Years there has been
A Famine, and five more to come, wherein
Seed-time nor Harvest shall at all be seen.
The Lord I say has sent me to provide
A Place, and strangely save your Lives beside.
So now ye sent me not, but it was rather
The Lord, and he has made me as a Father
Unto the King, Lord of his Household, and
A Ruler over all this spacious Land.
Unto my Father therefore go your way,
And tell him, Thus does thy Son Joseph say:
The Lord has raised me to an high degree
In Egypt, tarry not but come to me,
And thou shall dwell in Goshen and be nigh me,
And with Provision there will I supply thee,
Both thou and thine, Flocks, Herds, and all thou have,
(For yet these five Years will the Famine last)
Lest otherwise Provision being scant,
Thou and thy Family may come to want.
Behold, both you and Benjamin my Brother
Do see that it is I and not another:
Go tell my Father this amazing Story,
And bring him hither to behold my Glory.
Then falling on his youngest Brother's Neck,
And he on his, they over each other wept:
And to the rest he did likewise, wherefore
They now were more familiar than before.
And now whilst they discoursed, the Report
Of their arrival came to Pharaoh's Court,
And he was pleased thereat, wherefore he said
To Joseph, Let thy Brethren straitway lade
Their Beasts with Corn, and thus unto them say,
Unto your Native Country have away,
And fetch your Father and your Households, and
I Will feed you with the good things of the Land.
And since you are commanded by the King,
Take Wagons with you hence wherein to bring
Your Wives, your Little ones, and come down hither,
Your Father, you and yours altogether;
And never heed to bring your Household Stuff,
For here in Egypt you shall have enough.
Then did the Isr'elites accordingly:
And Joseph ord'ring them a large supply
Of Necessaries for their Journey, sent
Wagons according to the King's intent.
And to each Man he gave a Suit of Clothes,
But on his Brother Benjamin bestows
Five Suits, and as a Token of his Love,
A Sum of Money over and above.
And thus he sent even for his Father's use,
Of the best things that Egypt did produce,
Ten Asses load, and ten she-Asses load
Of Bread and Meat, to spend upon the Road.
Then sending them away, he said, I pray
See that you do not fall out by the way.
And leaving Egypt with their numerous Train,
Unto their Father they returned again:
To whom, as soon as ever they did arrive,
They said, Our Brother Joseph's yet alive,
And Lord of all the Land, which sore dismayed
Him, for he scarce believed what they said:
Then they of all that past gave him relation,
And showed the Wagons for a confirmation,
Which being manifest before his Eyes,
He raised himself and said, it does suffice;
Joseph my Son is yet alive, and I
Will go to see him once before I die.
CHAP. XLVI.
THen Israel setting forward on his way
With all his Household, came to Bersheba;
And offered Sacrifice there to implore
The God his Father Isaac did adore.
And in the Visions of the Night God spoke
To him, and said, fear not to undertake
This Journey into Egypt, for I am
The God of thy Forefathers, Abraham
And Isaac; to the Land of Egypt I
Will go with thee, and there will multiply
Thy Offspring, and of thee will surely make
A mighty Nation, and will bring thee back;
And thy Son Joseph there thine Eyes shall close.
After which Vision he from thence arose,
And in the Wagons which King Pharaoh sent,
He and his Family to Egypt went:
His Sons, their Wives and Children, and the rest
Of their Concerns, whereof they were possessed
When they in Cana'n dwelt, and they were then
No more in number but Threescore and Ten.
And when to Egypt Israel drew near,
He sent before him Judah, to prepare
His way to Goshen, which when Joseph heard,
Immediately his Chariot he prepared,
And unto Goshen he directly went,
And to his Father did himself present;
And being over joy'd fell on his Neck,
And for a good while thereupon he wept.
Then Jacob said, since thou yet liv'st, and I
Have seen thy face once more, now let me die.
And Joseph said, my Brethren I will go
Unto King Pharaoh, and will let him know
That you and all my Father's House are come;
And that your Occupation when at home,
Has been in feeding Cattle altogether,
And that you have brought your Flocks and Herds all hither
Now therefore when you come before the King,
And he shall ask you what your Trade has been,
Say thus: Thy Servants from our Youth till now
Have dealt in Cattle, we and our Fathers too;
That he may let you dwell in Goshen, for
The Egyptians do a Shepherd's-Life abhor.
CHAP. XLVII.
THen to King Pharaoh Joseph went, and said,
My Father and his Sons, with all they had
In their own Country, are come down to me,
And in the Land of Goshen now they be.
Five of his Brethren also with him went,
Whom he unto King Pharaoh did present.
And Pharaoh asked them about their Trade,
And they unto the King replied and said,
We and our Fathers while we were at home
Were Shepherds all, and now behold, we come
With all our Flocks, to get some Pasture here,
For in our Land the Famine is severe:
We therefore pray thee to appoint a Portion
Unto thy Servants in the Land of Goshen.
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, I impow'r thee
To use thy pleasure, Goshen is before thee;
Settle thy Father and thy Brethren there,
And if among them active Men there are,
Commit my Cattle to their special care.
And Joseph brought his aged Father in
Before the King, and Jacob blessed him.
And Pharaoh asking him about his Age,
He said, The Years of my Life's Pilgrimage
Are but an Hundred Thirty, very few
And evil, nor have I attained unto
The Years of my Forefathers longer age,
Which they past through in this their Pilgrimage.
And Jacob blessed the King again, and then
Out of his Presence he returned again.
And Joseph placed his Father and Relations
In Egypt, and appointed them Possessions
In the best of the Land, even in the Land
Of Ramases, according to the King's Command:
And there he nourisht them with fit supplies
Of Bread, according to their Families.
And now the People having spent their store,
And Famine still increasing more and more,
Egypt and Canaan too, for want of Bread,
Were sore distressed and almost famished.
And Joseph took the Money they did bring
To buy their Corn, and kept it for the King.
Wherefore the People came to represent
Their case to him, both Corn and Coin being spent.
And Joseph said, If Money be grown scant,
Bring me your Cattle and ye shall not want.
And they brought Horses, Asses and their Flocks
And Herds of Cattle, even all their Stocks,
And gave to Joseph in exchange for Bread,
For which the People he for that Year fed;
And when that Year was past, the second Year
They came again, and said, we cannot forbear
To let thee know our want, my Lord does know
Thou have our Money and our Cattle too,
And there is nothing left (so hard's our fate)
But only each Man's Person and Estate,
If thou will give us Bread, into thy hands
Will we resign our Persons and our Lands:
And be the Servants of the King for ever,
From Death therefore our hungry Souls deliver,
And take some pity on our wretched state,
Lest we dye, and the Land be desolate.
And the Egyptians sold each Man his Field,
Beaause the Famine over them prevailed;
And all their Lands became the King's Possession,
And Joseph placed them at his own discretion.
But the Land of the Priests he purchased not,
For Pharaoh had assigned to them their Lot;
And they received their Food from Pharaoh's hands,
Wherefore they had no need to sell their Lands.
And Joseph said unto them, now behold,
You and your Lands are unto Pharaoh sold:
Lo, here is Seed to sow in each Man's Field,
And when the Land its ripe increase shall yield,
A fifth part shall belong unto the Crown,
And the other four parts shall be your own,
For Seed to sow your Lands, and for supplies
Of Food convenient for your Families.
And they said; Thou have saved our Lives, my Lord,
Thy gracious favor unto us afford,
And we will do according to thy word.
And Joseph made it a Decree, to stand
Even to this day throughout the Egyptian Land,
That Pharaoh should have a fifth part, except
The Priests Lands, which unto themselves they kept.
And in the Land of Egypt, even in Goshen
Did Israel dwell, and therein had possession,
And grew and multiplied exceeding fast.
And Jacob lived till seventeen Years were past:
So that the sum of Jacob's age appears
To be an hundred forty seven Years.
And when the time approached that he must die,
He called Joseph, unto whom he said, If I
Have now found favor in thy sight, I pray,
Swear thou unto me that thou will not lay
My Bones in Egypt, for I fain would lie
Among my Ancestors when ever I die,
And not be buried here; therefore fulfill
This my Desire: and he replied, I will;
And he said, swear unto me, which he did:
Then Jacob bowed himself upon his Bed.
CHAP. XLVIII.
AND now when Joseph heard his Father lay
Even at the point of death, he hasts away
To visit him, and took along with him
His Son Manasseh, and's Son Ephraim.
Whereof when Jacob heard he strengthened
Himself, and rose and sat upon the Bed:
And thus to Joseph said, Lo, God appeared
To me at Luz in Canaan, and declared,
That he would bless, and make me a great Nation,
And give my Seed that Land for a Possession:
And Jacob said, Behold, these Sons of thine
As Reuben and as Simeon shall be mine,
And all the rest which shall be born to thee
Hereafter, shall be thine, and they shall be
Called by the Name of their own Family.
Behold thy Mother died upon the way,
When I from Padan came, near Ephratah,
The which is in the Land of Canaan, where,
To wit, in Bethlem, did I bury her.
And Jacob seeing Joseph's Sons were there,
He asked of him who the Children were.
And Joseph said, My Father, lo, these be
The Sons, God in this Place has given me.
Then Jacob said, I pray thee bring them nigh
To me, and I will bless them ever I die.
(Now Jacob's Eyes, by reason of Age, were dim)
And Joseph brought his Sons near unto him,
And Jacob kissed and embraced them:
And said I never thought to see thy Face,
And lo, the Lord has shown me of thy race.
And Joseph from between his Knees brought forth
His Sons, and bowed himself even to the Earth:
And in his Right hand held up Ephraim,
Toward his Father's Left hand guiding him,
And in his Left hand to his Father's right,
He held his Son Manasseh opposite.
And Israel stretching out his Right hand, laid
It on the youngest namely Ephraim's head:
And laid his Left hand wittingly upon
Manasseh's head, although the eldest Son.
And Jacob blessed Joseph, saying, The God
Of Heaven, in whose Paths my Fathers trod,
Who all my Life has nourished me, even he
Who from all Evil has redeemed me,
Bless both the Lads, and let them bear my Name,
And the Name of my Fathers Abraham
And Isaac, and let them multiply
In the midst of the Earth exceedingly.
And Joseph seeing his Father's Right hand laid
On Ephraim's head, he was displeased, and said,
Not so, my Father, lay this hand upon
Manasseh's head, for he is the eldest Son:
And therewithal attempted to have laid
His Father's Right hand on Manasseh's head.
But he refused and said, I know it, my Son,
I know it full well, he also shall become
A People, and be mighty: But indeed
His younger Brother shall him far exceed,
And many Nations shall come from his Seed.
Thus Jacob blessed them, and said, In thee
Shall Israel bless, and say, God make thee be
Like Ephraim and Manasseh. Thus did he
Prefer the youngest to the first degree.
And Israel said to Joseph, Lo, I (...)
But God shall visit you, and certainly
Shall bring you back unto your Fathers (...)
And thou shall have a Portion from my hand,
Above thy Brethren, which with Sword and Bow
I took from the Amorite, my deadly Foe.
CHAP. XLIX.
AND Jacob called all his Sons together,
And said, Ye Sons of Jacob come you hither:
And hearken what your aged Father says,
Who tells you what shall be in the last days.
Reuben my first born, of my Strength the Flower,
The excellency of Dignity and Power:
Unstable as Water, be for ever vile,
Because thou did thy Father's Bed defile.
Simeon and Levi're Brethren, Instruments
Of Cruelty are lodged in their Tents:
Come not, my Soul, their secret Councils nigh,
My Honor, with them have no Unity:
For in their Wrath they caused a Man to fall,
And in their Self-will dug down a Wall.
Cursed be their anger, fierce, yea cursed be
Their Wrath, for it was full of Cruelty:
In Jacob therefore let there Seed be spread,
And every where in Israel scattered.
Judah shall have his Brethren's Praise, and they
Shall bow before him, he his Foes shall slay.
Judah's a Lion's. Whelp returned from pray,
He stooped, he couched, and as a Lion lay,
As an old Lion, who shall dare molest,
Or rouse him up, when he lies down to rest:
The Scepter shall from Judah never start,
Nor a Lawgiver from his Feet depart,
Until the blessed Shiloh come, to whom
The scattered People shall from all parts come:
Binding his Foal unto the choicest Vine,
He washed his Garments, all of them in Wine,
His Eyes shall with the Blood of the Grapes look red,
And milky Whiteness shall his Teeth over spread.
Lo, Zebulun shall dwell upon the Sea,
An Haven for the Ships security,
And unto Zidon shall his Border be.
And Issacha^ is a strong Ass between
Two Burdens crouching, who when he had seen
That Rest was pleasant, and the Land was good,
His servile Neck unto the Yoke he bowed.
Dan as a Judge shall over Israel sway,
He shall be as a Serpent in the way,
To bite the Horse, and cast the Rider down.
O God! I have looked for thy Salvation.
Gad by a Troop shall be overcome, but he
Shall at the last obtain the Victory.
The Bread of Asher shall be fat indeed,
And Royal Dainties shall from him proceed
Like to an Hind let loose is Naphthali,
He speaks all his Words acceptably.
Joseph's a fruitful Bough, whose Branches tall
Grow by a Well, and overtop the Wall:
By reason of Hatred which the Archers bore,
They shot at him and grieved him very sore,
But Joseph's Bow in its full strength abode,
And by the Arm of Jacob's mighty God,
He was indu'd with strength, from whence alone
Is Israe'l's Shepherd, and chief corner Stone:
Even by my Father's God, who shall assist
Thee, by the Almighty God shall thou be blessed,
With Blessings from above, and from below,
With Blessings of the Breast, and Womb also.
Thy Father's Blessings have prevailed beyond
My Ancestors: Unto the utmost bound
Of the perpetual Hills, yea let them rest
On Joseph's head, and let him be possessed
Of all, who was divided from the rest.
Young Benjamin shall Wolf-like take his prey,
And part at night what he has took by day.
All these are the twelve Tribes of Israel,
And thus their Father did their Fate foretell:
And blessed every one of them apart,
According to their Personal desert:
Moreover he gave them a charge and said,
Lo, I shall die, but let my Bones be laid
Among my Ancestors in Canaan, where
Of Ephron, Abraham bought a Sepulcher,
Together with a Field, to be a Place
Of Burial, for him and all his Race:
(There Abraham and Sarah lie, and there
They Isaac and Rebecca did inter,
And there when Leah died I buried her.)
The Field was purchased of the Sons of Heth.
Thus having said, resigning up his Breath
To him that gave't, his Feet into the Bed
He drew, and so was numbered to the dead.
CHAP. L.
AND Joseph fell upon his Father's Face,
And did with Tears his lifeless Lips embrace:
And sends for his Physicians and advises
Them, to embalm his Father's Corpse with Spices:
And they did so, and forty days did pass.
(For so the manner of Embalming was)
And the Egyptians mourned for the space
Of threescore and ten days, which being expired
He spoke to Pharaoh's Servants and desired,
That they would please to speak in Pharaoh's Ear,
And tell him that my Father made me swear,
That I should bury him in Canaan, where
He has provided his own Sepulcher:
I therefore pray thee that I may obtain
Thy leave, and I will soon return again.
And Pharaoh said, Since thou have sworn, fulfill
Thy Oath, according to thy Father's Will.
And Joseph went up to accompany
His Father's Corpse with great Solemnity:
And with him went up Pharaoh's Servants, and
The prime Nobility of all the Land,
And Joseph's Household, and his Brethren all,
Only their Flocks, and Herds, and Children small
Were left behind: Moreover there went up
Chariots and Horsemen, even a mighty Troop.
And they came up to Arad's threshing floar
Beyond the River Jordan, where full sore
They mourned for him till seven days were past,
So long their Mourning in that Place did last.
Which when the Canaanites beheld they said,
Surely some eminent Egyptian's dead:
Wherefore they called it Abel-mizraim.
'Thus did his Sons as he commanded them.
For to the Land of Canaan they conveyed
Him, and in Machpelah near Mamre, laid
His Body in the Cave which Ephron sold
To Abraham, for him and his to hold.
And thus when Joseph fully had performed
His Father's Will, to Egypt he returned,
Together with his Brethren, and with all
Them that came with him to the Funeral.
Now Joseph's Brethren being well aware
That they were Fatherless, began to fear
That he would hate them, and requite them all
The Evil they had treated him withal.
Wherefore to him they sent a Messenger
And said, Behold our Father did declare
Before he died that we should come and say,
Forgive thy Brethren's Trespasses, I pray,
And their Misdeeds for they have been unkind:
And now we humbly pray thee be inclined
To Pardon our Offenses, and the rather
For that we serve the God even of thy Father.
And (...) wept when thus they spoke, and they
Came nearer, and before him prostrate lay,
And said, We are thy Servants all this day.
And Joseph bad them not to be afraid,
For in the place of God am I, he said:
For though you meant me Ill, God meant it Good,
And sent me hither to provide you Food:
Now therefore trouble not your selves, for I
Will nourish you, and all your Family.
After this manner did he satisfy
And treat them with extreme Civility.
And Joseph and his Father's House remained
In Egypt, and he lived till he attained
An Hundred and ten years, and lived to see
Of Ephraim's Children to the Third Degree:
And Machir's Children of Manasseh's Tribe
Were also born some time before he died.
Then Joseph said, My Brethren, lo I die,
But God will visit you undoubtedly;
And to that Land again whereof he spoke
Unto our Ancestors, will bring you back.
And Joseph also made his Brethren swear,
That they would not interr his Body there.
And thus he ended his Life's Pilgrimage,
Being an hundred and ten years of Age;
And was embalmed, and in a Coffin laid,
In Egypt, till he could be thence conveyed.
The End of the History of Joseph.
THE General Epistle of JAMES.
CHAP. I.
UNTO the twelve Tribes scattered abroad,
James, and Apostle of the living God,
And of the Lord Christ Jesus, Salutation.
My Brethren, when you fall into Temptation
Of diverse kinds, rejoice, as Men that know
From trial of your Faith does Patience flow:
But let your Patience have its full effect,
That you may be entire, without defect.
If any of you lack Wisdom, let him cry
To God, and he will give it lib'rally,
And not upbraid. But let him ask in Faith,
Not wavering, for he that wavereth,
Unto a Wave of the Sea I will compare,
Driven with the Wind and tossed here and there:
For let not such a Man himself deceive,
To think that he shall from the Lord receive.
A double-minded Man most surely lacks
Stability in all he undertaketh.
Let every Brother of a low degree
Rejoice in that he is advanced, but he
That Is Rich in being made low, for he shall pass
Away, as does the flower of the Grass.
For as the (...) does rise,
Is scorched by (...) and dies;
Its Flower fades, (...) more
The beauteous (...),
So fades the Rich Man, (...) his Store.
The Man is blessed that does endure Temptation:
For when he is tried, the Crown of God's Salvation,
The which the Lord has promised to give
To them that love him, that Man shall receive.
Let no Man be possessed with a persuasion,
To say, when he falls under a Temptation,
That God's the cause; for with no evil can
God be tempted, nor tempts he any Man.
But every Man is tempted when he is drawn
Away, and by his Lusts prevailed upon;
Then when Lust has conceived, it ushereth
In Sin, and Sin when finished brings Death.
Err not, my Brethren whom I dearly love.
Each good and perfect Gift is from above,
Down from the original of ^ights descending,
With whom's no change, nor shadow thereto tending
According to his own good pleasure, he
Begat us with the word of Truth, that we
Should as the first (...) of his Creatures be.
Wherefore, belov^d Brethren, I entreat
You to be swift (...) (...), and slow to speak,
And slow to wrath, for wrath cannot incline
The Sons of Men to Righteousness divine.
Wherefore avoiding every ^^hiness,
And superfluity of naught^^^s:
Receive with meekness the ^^grafted word,
Which can Salvation to your Souls afford.
But be ye doers of the word each one,
And not deceive your selves to hear alone;
For he that hears the word and does it not,
Is like unto a Man that has forgot
What kind of Man he was, though in a Glass
He just before beheld his natural Face.
But whosoever minds the Law of Liberty
In its perfection, and continually
Abides therein, forgets not what he is heard,
But does the Work and therein has Reward.
If any Man among you seem to be
Religious, he deceives himself if he
Does not his Tongue as with a Bit restrain;
And all that Man's Religion is but vain.
Religion, pure and undefiled, which is
Acceptable before the Lord, is this:
To visit Widows and the Fatherless,
In time of their affliction or distress;
And so to regulate his Conversation,
As to be spotless in his Generation.
CHAP. II.
FAith of the Lord of Glory, Jesus Christ,
Does with respect of Persons not consist;
For if, my Brethren, when there shall come in
To your Assembly one with a Gold Ring,
In goodly Clothes, and there shall also be
Another Man that is meanly clothed, and ye
Shall have respect to him in rich attire,
And say unto him, Come thou, sit up higher;
And bid the poor Man stand or sit below,
Are ye not partial then, and plainly show,
That you do judge amiss in what you do?
Hearken, my Brethren, has not God elected
The Poor, who by this World have been rejected,
Yet rich in Faith, and of that Kingdom Heirs,
Which God will give his foll'wers to be theirs?
But you, my Brethren, do the Poor despise.
Do not the rich Men over you tyrannize,
And hale you to their Courts; that worthy Name
By which you're called, do not they blaspheme?
Then if ye do the Royal Law fulfill,
To love thy Neighbor as thy self, it is well,
According to the Scripture; but if ye
Shall have respect to Persons, ye shall be
Guilty of Sin, and by the Law condemned,
As such who have its Righteousness contemned.
For he that shall but in one point offend,
Breaks the whole Law, whatever he may pretend.
For he that does forbid Adultery,
Forbids likewise all acts of Cruelty:
Now though thou be not an Adulterer,
Yet if thou kill, thou shall thy Judgment bear.
So speak and do as those Men that shall be
Judged by the perfect Law of Liberty:
For he shall Judgment without Mercy know,
That to his Neighbor does no Mercy show;
And Mercy triumphs against Judgment too.
Brethren what profit is it if a Man says
That he has Faith, and has not Works; can Faith
Save him? If any of the Brotherhood
Be destitute of Clothes or daily Food,
And one of you shall say, Depart in Peace,
Be warmed or be filled, ne'ertheless,
Ye do not furnish them with what they need,
What boots it? Thus Faith without Works is dead.
Yea may a Man say, thou do Faith profess
And I good Works, to me thy Faith express
Without thy Works, and I will plainly show
My Faith unto thee by the Works I do.
Thou do believe there is one God, it is true,
The Devils do believe and tremble too.
But will thou know, vain Man, that Faith is dead
Which with good Works is not accompanied.
Was not our Father Abraham justified
By Works, and by the same his Faith was tried,
When he his Isaac to the Altar brought,
Se'st thou how with his Works his Faith then wrought?
And with his Works he perfected his Faith?
And so the Scripture was fulfilled, which says,
Abraham believed God, and 'twas imputed
For Righteousness, and he Gods Friend reputed.
Thus may you see, that by Works every one
Is justified, and not by Faith alone
Thus was the Ha^lot R^hab justified
By Works when she the Messengers did hide,
And by another way their feet did guide.
For as the body's dead without the Spirit,
So Faith without Works never can inherit.
CHAP. III.
AFfect not, Brethren, Superiority,
As knowing that we shall receive thereby
The greater Condemnation in the end:
For we in many things do all offend.
Who does not with his Tongue offend, he can
Guide his whole Body, he is a perfect Man.
Behold, in Horses mouths we Bridles out,
To rule and turn their Bodies quite about:
Behold likewise the Ships, which though they be
Of mighty bulk, and through the raging Sea
Are driven by the strength of Winds, yet they
By a small Helm the Pilot's Will obey.
Even so the Tongue of Man, which though it be
But a small Member, in an high degree
It boasts of things. Behold, we may remark
How great a matter's kindled by a spark
The Tongue's a fire, a world of ill, which placed
Among the Members, often has disgraced
All the whole Body firing the whole frame
Of Nature, and is kindled by Hell flame.
All kinds of Beasts and Birds that can be named,
Serpents and Fishes, are and have been tamed
By Mankind; but the Tongue can no Man tame,
A stubborn Evil full of deadly bane.
We therewith God the Father bless, and we
Therewith curse Men made like the Deity:
Blessing and Cursing from the same Mouth flow,
These things, my Brethren, ought not to be so.
Is any Fountain of so strange a nature,
At once to send forth sweet and bitter water?
Can Olives, Brethren, on a Fig Tree grow,
Or Figs on Vines? No more can water flow
From the same Fountain sweet and bitter too.
He that is endu'd with wisdom and discretion
Amongst you, let that Man by the profession
Of Meekness, wisely give a demonstration
Of all his Works from a good Conversation.
But if your Hearts are full of bitterness
And strife, boast not, nor do the Truth profess.
This Wisdom is not from above descending,
But Earthly, sensual and to evil tending;
For where there is strife and envying there is confusion,
And every evil work in the conclusion.
But the true Wisdom that is from above.
Is, in the first place, pure, then full of love.
Then gentle, and entreated easily,
Next merciful, without partiality,
Full of good fruits, without hypocrisy;
And what is more, the fruits of Righteousness
Is sown in Peace, of them that do make Peace.
CHAP. IV.
FRom whence come Wars and Fights, come they not hence,
Even from the inordinate concupiscence
That in your Members prompts to variance?
You lust and have not, kill and desire to have,
But ne'ertheless obtain not what you crave:
With War and fighting ye contend, yet have not
The things which you desire, because you crave not,
Ye crave but don't receive, the reasons just,
Ye crave amiss to spend it on your Lust.
You that live in Adult'ry, know not ye
The friendship of the World is enmity
With God? He is God's Enemy therefore
That does the Friendship of the World adore.
Do ye think that the Scripture says in vai^
The Spirit that lusts to hate does in you reign?
But he bestows more Grace, wherefore he says,
God scorns the Proud, but does the Humble raise.
Unto the Lord therefore submissive be
Resist the Devil and he will from you flee.
Draw high to God and he will to you draw nigh.
Make clean your Hands you Sinners, purify
Your Hearts you double-minded, weep and mourn,
And be afflicted, let your laughter turn
To sorrow, and your joy to sadness; stoop
Before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
My Brethren, speak not evil of each other:
He that does judge and speak ill of his Brother,
Does judge and speak ill of the Law; therefore
If thou do judge the Law, thou art no more
A doer of the same, but do assume
The Judgment Seat, and art thy self become
A Judge thereof. There is but one Lawgiver
That Is able to destroy and to deliver;
Who then art thou that do condemn thy Neighbor?
Go to now, you that say, To such a place
To morrow will we go, and for the space
Of one whole Year, or so, will there remain,
And buy and sell, and get great store of Gain:
Whereas ye know not what a day may do.
For what is the Life of Man? Even like unto
A Vapor, which though for a while it may
Appear, it quickly vanishes away
So that ye ought to say, If God permit
Us life and Health, we will accomplish it.
But now ye glory in your confidence,
Such glorying is of evil consequence.
He therefore that does know, and does not act
The thing that is good, does guilt thereby contract.
CHAP. XLVI.
GO to now, O ye rich Men, howl and cry,
Because of your approaching misery:
Your Riches are corrupted, and the Moths
Have entered, and have eaten up your Clothes;
Your Gold and Silver's cankered, and the rust
Thereof, shall be an Evidence that is just
Against you, and like fire your flesh devour:
Against the last days ye have heaped up store.
The hire of them that reaped down your Field,
The which by you is wrongfully witheld,
Cries, and the Voice thereof has reached the Ears
Even of the God of Sabbath, and he hears.
Your Lives in pleasure ye on Earth have led,
And as in days of slaughter nourished
Your wanton Hearts, and have condemned and slain
The Just, and he does not resist again.
Be patient therefore, Brethren, even unto
The coming of the Lord: behold, even so
The Husbandman expects patiently
The precious increase of the Earth to see,
With patience waiting, till he does obtain
The showers of early and of later Rain.
So be ye patient, fixing steadfastly
Your Hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.
Grieve not each other, Brethren, lest ye bear
The condemnation; lo, the Judge stands near.
The Prophets, Brethren, who all heretofore
In the Name of the Lord their witness bore,
Take for Examples in their Sufferings
And Patience: they that endure such things,
Ye know are counted blessed. Have ye not read
Of Job, how patiently he suffered?
Have ye not seen in him what (...) God's end,
How he does pity and great love extend?
My Brethren, but above all things forbear
By Heaven or Earth, or otherwise to swear;
But let your Yea be Yea, your Nay be Nay,
Lest ye become reproveable I say.
Let him sing Psalms that is merry; he that is grieved,
Let him by Prayer seek to be relieved.
If any of you by Sickness be distressed,
Let him the Elders of the Church request,
That they would come and pray for him awhile,
Anointing him in the Lord's Name with Oil;
So shall the Prayer that is of Faith restore
The Sick, and God shall raise him as before,
And all the Offenses which he has committed
Shall be forgiven, and he shall be acquitted.
Confess your Faults each one unto his Brother,
And put up Supplications for each other,
That so you may be healed; the fervency
Of just Men's Prayers prevails effectually.
Elias was a Man as frail as we are.
And he was earnest with the Lord in Prayer,
That there might be no Rain, and or the space
Of three Years and six Months no Rain there was;
And afterward, when he again made suit,
The Heaven gave Rain, the Earth brought forth her Fruit.
If any one shall from the Truth desert,
And one, my Brethren, shall that Man convert;
Let him be sure, that he that does recall
The poor backsliding Sinner from his fall,
Shall save a Soul from Death, and certainly
Shall hide a multitude of Sins thereby.
THE END.
Books lately Printed for and Sold by Jos. Blare, Bookseller, at the
Looking-Glass, near St. Magnus. Church on London Bridge.
1. SEven Sermons, viz. 1. Of the Unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost. 2.
The Saints Duty and Exercise. 3. The accepted Time and Day of Salvation. 4. The
end of Time and beginning of Eternity. 5. Joshua's Resolution to serve the
Lord. 6. The way to Heaven made plain. 7. The future State of Man; or a
Treatise of the Resurrection. Written by Robert Russel, of Wadhust in Sussex.
Price bound one Shilling.

2. A Treatise on the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, with an earnest
Invitation and Encouragement thereto; with Prayers, Meditations and
Ejaculations. By Robert Russel, Author of the Seven Sermons. Price bound one
Shilling.

3. The Progress of the Christian Pilgrim from this present World to the World
to come. In Two Parts. Written by way of Dream. Price bound one Shilling.

4. Ayres's Arithmetic. A Treatise designed for the Use and Benefit of
Tradesmen. With the use of Fractions both Vulgar and Decimal. Price bound one
Shilling.

5. The accomplished Lady's Rich Closet of Rarities, or the ingenious
Gentlewoman's and Servant-Maid's delightful Companion. Containing many
excellent things for the Accomplishment of the Female Sex. Price bound one
Shilling.

6. The Complete English Secretary, or the newest Academy of Complements; with
the true Art of inditing Letters for Love and Business: to which (...) added,
the newest Songs sung now in Court and Theater, with a Treatise of Moles and
Dreams. Price bound one Shilling.

7. The Shepherds New Calendar, or the Citizen and Countryman's daily
Companion; treating of most things that are Useful, Profitable, Delightful and
Advantageous to Mankind: being the Thirty Years study of a Learned Shepherd.
Price bound one Shilling.

8. The Famous History of Parismus, the valiant Prince of Bohemia. In Three
Parts. Price bound one Shilling.

9. The English Don Quixot, or the Famous and Delightful History of a late
English Knight Errant; containing many Comical Exploits performed by him his
Amors and Love Intrigues with his Lady, and the pleasant Humors of his
Esquire: being an excellent Pill to purge Melancholy. Price sticht in 4 to 6 d.

10. Aristotle's Legacy, or his Golden Cabinet of Secrets. In Five Treatises.
Price bound Sixpence.

11. Practical Discourses, viz. 1. An Exhortation against the Fears of Death.
2. A Declaration of the Resurrection of the Dead, with suitable Prayers and
Meditations, and a Discourse of the Four last Things, Death, Judgment, Heaven
and Hell. By Dr. Gibbs. Price bound one Shilling.

12. A Discourse of the Vanity of the Life of Man from Youth to Old Age, with
Scriptural Poems. By John Bunyan. Price bound one Shilling.

13. The History of Amadis of Greece, surnamed the Knight of the Burning Sword.
Price bound one ^hilling sixpence.

14. The Mother's Blessing, or the Godly Counsel of a Gentlewoman not long
since Deceased, left behind her for her Children; containing many good
Exhortations and Admonitions, profitable for all Parents to leave as a Legacy
to their Children. By Mrs. Dorothy Lee. Price bound one Shilling.

15. The English Fortune Tellers, resolving Questions, and telling Fortunes,
whether Good or Bad, by the casting of Three Dies. Price one Shilling sixpence.

16. The Honor of the Taylers, or the Famous and Renowned History of Sir John
Hawkwood, Knight: Containing his many rare and singular Adventures, witty
Exploits, heroic Achievements, and noble Performances, relating to Love and
Arms in many Lands: In the series of which History are contained likewise, the
no less Famous Actions and Enterprises of others of the same Art and Mystery;
with many remarkable Passages relating to Customs, Manners, etc. ancient and
modern. Illustrated with Pictures, embellished with Verses and Songs, wonderful
pleasant and delightful. To which is added, a brief Account of the Original of
(...) Merchant-Taylers, as to their being Incorporated, ^^c. their Progress and
Success from time to time; (...) Favors they have received from diverse Kings
and Princes; their many Structures of Magnificence and Charity; with many other
things exer^ing their Worth and Grandeur. Quarto. Price stich'd Sixpence.

17. The Famous and Renowned History of Sir (...) of Southampton: Giving an
Account of his Birth, Education, Heroic Exploits and Enterprises, his Fights
with Giants, Monsters, Wild Beasts, and Armies; his Conquering Kings and
Kingdoms, his Love and Marriages, Fortunes and Misfortunes; and many other
famous and memorable things and Actions, worthy of Wonder: With the Adventures
of other Knights, Kings and Princes; exceeding pleasant and delightful. Price
stitched Sixpence.

18. The most Excellent History of the Valiant and Renowned Knight, Don Flores
of Greece, Knight of the Swans, second Son to Esphandran, Emperor of
Constantinople: being a Supplement to Amadis de Gaul; newly Translated into
English. Price stitched Sixpence.

19. The Crown Garland of Golden Roses, gathered out of England's Royal Garden;
set forth with many pleasant new Songs and Sonnets; with new Editions never
before Published. In two Parts. Price stitched Fourpence.


