(...).

Christians earnest Expectation an^ Longing for the glorious Appearing o^ the
great God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Set forth in a DISCOURSE Occasioned by the Decease of that Excellent Christian
and Minister of Christ.

Mr. NOAH WEBB, Lately of Sandhurst, in the County of Berks.

By Daniel Burgess, Minister of the Gospel.

The Prophets, do they live for ever? Zech. 1.5. I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me,
at that day; and not to me only, but unto them also that love his Appearing, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Printed for O.C. 1675.

To the Lady Martha Merryn, Wife of the right Worshipful Sr. Audley Merryn;
Mrs. Hester Whitfield, Wife of [my Honored Uncle] Henry Whitfield Esquire; and
Mrs. Elizabeth Briscoe, my justly Honored Dear Mother-in-law.
My Excellent, and very Dear Friends.
OTher Readers [probably] will mistake: But, I pray do not you. Here Is no
Epistle Dedicatory: I prefix your Names here for nothing else, but to make me
place to show you, that I Forget you not, nor my great Obligations to you. I
and mine, do commemorate often in England, your goodness to us in Ireland. And
being [you see on what Occasion] now prevailed with, to appear in public, it
liked me thus to have our Gratitude appear too. You will look on the following
Pages, for the Author's sake: And you will prize them for the Subjects sake; I
beseech you set your selves to the Duty they commend, for God and your Souls
sake: I believe I shall never see you more, till Jesus comes, Oh! may we then
meet him, and each other with joy! And in the mean time, all our Days, keep
providing for that great, and [if not provided for] Terrible one. It Is Death in
your Thoughts, must put Life into your Actions, said Blessed Vines. And Mr.
Baxter himself could say of Heaven, [ in Vines his Elegy]

Sin does not only keep me thence,
But makes me loath to go from hence.
Look well to your selves, My Invaluable dear Friends! You have sundry excelent
Monitors by you; Singularly [my thrice dearest] Dr. T. H. whose life and
labors the Lord continue to Dub^in. I commend you, and all your dearest Ones,
to divine Tuition and Grace; it is most incorruptly that I profess my self,

Your most Affectionate Remembrancer to the Lord, Dan. Burgess.
From my House in Bayden near Malbrough, Wilts, Aug. 30. 1675.
Upon the much Lamented Decease of Mr. Noah Webb, who Died Aug. 14. in the 42d.
year of his Age, A. D. 1675.
Blessed God!
OH Turn [the glorious lamp of Heaven] the Sun
To darkest Darkness! Let his Course be done!
Nor let [the Queen of Heav'n] the Moon take 's Light,
And with it color any future Night!
Black thou the Milkie way! Blow out the Stars,
No more to twinkle signs of Peace, of Wars!
Our Waters turn to Blood! to Lice our Dust!
The World to Ashes, if 't be thy righteous Lust!
For Pitie's sake thus Curse us, Righteous Lord,
Rather than Take the Teachers of thy Word,
From thy afflicted Church! Church, dare I say?
It Is Hell, not Church, without such Lights as they!
Much rather had we, Jesus strait should come,
Then let the World, more Aggravate their Doom!
Did there ten thousand Worlds to ruin fall,
One God could Save, one Christ Redeem them all,
(Well sang Orinda;) Grace [who doubts?] divine
One Spirit could infufe, and all Refine.
Thou could, Oh Blessed Trinity, without
One of the Ministers thou sendest out,
Convert, Build up, Confirm, and make to Increase
Thy Church, in Faith, in Purity, and Peace!
But oh! thy Will's thy Law! Teachers, we know,
Must be Co-workers; 'cause thy Will is so!
And seeing, Faith by Hearing them must come,
The day of their Loss, must b' a day of Doom!
Thrice direful Doom! The World may better spar^
The Elements, Mat. 5.13, 14. Rev. 2.1. Heb. 13.7. 2 Cor. 5.20. 1 Cor. 4.1. 1
Cor. 3.9. 1 Cor. 4.15. Joh. 21.15. 1 Cor. 3.10. Heb. 13.17. and Isai. 52.8. 2
Kings 13, 14.
than the Church spare them, that a^
Her Lights, Salt, Angels, Rulers, Legates; and
Stewards of thy both Heavenly house and land!
Husbandmen, Fathers, Shepherds, Builders, and
The Watch, which for thy Flocks, Oh Jesu, stand!
Horsemen and Chariots of thy Israel,
In whom her Safeties and her Glories dwell.
Oh then allow us, Lord, to Sigh and Groan,
Under the Loss of this Excelling One!
Smite, smite the Rocks too, that insensate be
Of its portending great Calamity!
The stop of Noah's preaching did of yore
Portend a Judgment, the in-dwelt World over!
Thy snatching our deer No'h into thine Ark,
Affrights us all; and chiefly such as mark,
How fast our Alleines, Janeways, and our Blakes,
Our Barrets and our Webbs, thy Hand up takes:
And do observe, what Sin and Strife be brewing,
For England's, Europe's, yea the World's undoing.
Next unto Sin, Oh God! [that's Strife with thee,]
Our mutual Strifes speak imminent Misery;
They both, in Gath and Ascalon are known!
One has the bitter last thus sweetly shown.
The Cross must now against the Cross be spread, Beaumont, in Psych.

(Blush, oh ye Heavens at this!) and they who are
Under the King of Peace all Marshalled
Be Barbarized by a mutual War.
Tearing the precious gentle Legacy,
Their Lord bequeathed to their Custody.
They who by Mystic Union are knit
Under one Head, no other Foes do seek,
But their Fraternal members; and forget,
That whilst on them their savage spite they wreak,
The tender Head feels every Wound, and will
Score up each drop, which of his Blood they spill.
Weep all good eyes, which see this dreadful Shame,
Os Christians digging Christian's bowels up;
Sure streams of Blood deserve your briny stream,
Weep then, and let your Bottels never stop!
Till you have washed away this purple stain,
Against which all Powers, without your Tears are vain!
Had but the thousandth part of this dear blood,
Adventured to be broached in Palestine;
Quite overwhelmed by its exuberant flood,
Had Mahomet's wide spread Contagion bin:
And woeful Greece had not enslaved lain,
Under the bondage of a Pagan chain.
Or had that Power of Policy, and Wrath,
Of Arms, of Horse, of Men, of stronger Gold,
Which in our self-destroying Britain has
Of late bin lavished out, (when England sold
Her peace to misery,) with provident
And pious Zeal, in Syria been spent;
Our guilty Swords had not now Blushed in
Fraternal blood; nor had our Palms and Bays
With any English curse deflowred bin;
But Salem her sad Head, had 'gan to raise,
Fleeing from her long pressed Neck, the yoke
Of Ottamanick Barbarism broke.
Oh Thou, who when thou did ascend on High, God in Christ, has committed to
us the Word of Reconciliation. 2 Cor. 5.19.

Did give thine own Peace-teaching Ministry!
A Gift whereof thy Church does humbly Boast,
As greatest,, next the Gift of the Holy Ghost!
Thy Church fill with those Teachers! and them fill
With that most Holy Ghost, if 't be thy will!
Send [like of this our Brother took away,]
More Shepherds in this Wolf-abounding Day!
So shall On Earth be Peace! [through GOD-MAN] then
Men shall b' at Peace with God, and God with Men!
And as the whole Earth never shall again
Be Drowned; thy Church too ever shall remain,
Safe from the Floods of Turk, of Pope, of Hell,
And all that against the Peace of Sion swell!
When the twelve hundred Sixty Days are gone,
Rome's Scarlet and our Sackcloth will be done!
Satan shall hang in Chains! Gentile and Jew
Shall both pray, Come Lord Jesus, Holy, True!
On winged Hours, Oh have that blessed Day!
Unanimous Saints and Angels, Amen say,
With the Chief of Sinners, And less than the least of Saints. D. B.

REV. 22.20. Amen! The whole Verse runs thus: He which testifies these things,
says, Surely I come quickly. Amen! Even so, come, Lord Jesus.
To the Lord Jesus, declaring that he will not let it be long e're he come to
judge the world, the Saints echo back, Amen!
Men and Brethren,
THE very Apostles who saw our Lord Jesus his Transfiguration on the Mount,
(which was a Rudiment and Specimen of that Glory wherein he shall appear at his
second coming), those Apostles (all three of them, as Junius thinks; two of
them, as Grotius, and all (necessarily confess) did in their time warn the
world, that he would soon be with them. He is ready to judge the quick and dead,
said Peter; adding, that he was not slack concerning the Promise of his coming:
see 1 Pet. 4.5. and 2 Pet. 3.9, 10. The Coming of the Lord draws nigh, the
judge stands before the door, said James, Jam. 5.8, 9. It is the last time (or
hour) the last time of the World, (the last Monarchy, some construe it), so
said John. There are more than sixteen hundred years expired and gone since;
and now certainly Christ's Ministers may, and with advantage, reurge those
warnings. He is, at least sixteen hundred years nigher to Coming now. Blessed
Souls they, that knowingly, and sincerely, and fervently too, can say unto
this, Amen!

That (which is the Doctrine I offer from this word) the Church of God does
Christ's members, say Amen, so be it unto, and cordially wish for, his Coming to
judgment, according to his Promise. Christ's Members do so, I say, and
(knowingly) none but they. His Enemies wish no more for his Coming, than
Malefactors, when surest of death, wish for the Assizes. Were it in their power
to stop him, he should never come. But Christ's Members all love his appearance
(as it is 2 Timothy 4.8.) and desire his Coming; as Prisoners, whose Friend is
Judge, and who have well-grounded hopes of releasement and liberty, long to hear
the Trumpets sounding. Yet do they not all, nay I Am confifident, not any at all
times thus desire and long for Christ's Coming. Children of light walk sometimes
in darkness, nor are they always themselves, as we use to speak. But then they
lament that so it is. And (mostly) while they cannot, its an heartake to them
that they cannot say Amen, to their Lords Coming. Still they have the wit,
though not always the Power, to say it. And it is not the least Care and
Business of their lives, to seek and pray for Will and Power and Act too. So
that, methinks, they do in a sort say Amen, when they do not and dare not.
Because though to Do they find not, yet even then, to Will is present with
them; to Will it, I mean, on the best terms. And (ordinarily) he who gives that
said Will, is not long before he gives to Do also: and so is this the keeping
of the Churches song, Amen! Come Lord Jesu, come quickly! It Is well known how
passionately the Church of old longed for his first coming; weary of the Shades
and Darkness She dwelt under; sick of desire to see him in the flesh: see Cant.
2.17. Godly Kings and Prophets would have given much to have seen it.

In like manner, the Church ever since, has, and till he comes, ever will
pray, Come Lord Jesu! The Jews retain it as an old maxim; That prayer wherein's
no mention of the Kingdom of God is no prayer. It Is true, whether meant of the
Kingdom of Grace or Glory. Christ teaches to pray for the coming of the
latter, as well as the former, Mat. 6.10. I understand that second Petition:
Thy Kingdom come, principally, if not wholly, of the Kingdom of Glory. Were it
intended of the Kingdom of Grace, I judge with them who think it would have been
thus worded; Thy Kingdom be promoted! for come it is already, that of Grace.
Many Learned and Godly Ancients and Moderns understand it purely of the Kingdom
of Glory, and (with submission) I think, upon good grounds.

But pass we on to the Consideration of those grounds and motives, which Saints
have for the foresaid Amen. These will singularly well make both for the proof
and Improvement of the Doctrine offered. I shall tender but these few, of which
some respect Saints themselves more nearly; and others, God himself, the whole
Trinity. For the first,

M. 1. Saints Sorrows and Troubles in this world are true and just motives to
them todesire their Lord's Coming. They know that they shall never be without
Sorrows of their own, and others too; never without Passions and Compassions,
Feelings of their own, and Fellow-feelings of others miseries, in this World.
They cannot look upon inferior Creatures without Trouble at their misery and
Bondage for man's sin. The Earth struck with barrenness, and fruitfulness of
things hurtful; the Air (how often) with Pestilential fumes; the Stars with
malign influences that infect the Air; the Sun and Moon with eclipses; the
tiresome drudgery of all poor Creatures for man's Necessity, Pleasure, yea and
sinful Lust too; these are Eyesores and Heart-sores to Saints. And so are (much
more) all the Oppressions done under the Sun to mankind, that is so full of
them. Their Contentions, Wars, Frauds, and all methods of making one the other
miserable, disquiet, and go to the hearts of Saints. The Persecutions of Gods
Church by professed Enemies, by false Friends, and (sometimes too) by mistaking
erring Brethren, these are gall and Wormwood to Saints. Add hereto what they
often suffer themselves, in Soul, Body, Name, Estate, and Friends: Sometimes,
because they have sinned; and sometimes, because they will not, dare not sin.
All these spur them up to pray for his coming, who will deliver (then) the
Creatures from their Bondage, Romans 8.21. and will wipe away all their Tears,
Rev. 7.16, 17, and drive away Sorrow and Crying, Rev. 21.4. yea will give
fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.

M. 2. Saints manifold Temptations and incessant ones unto sin, in every place,
time, and condition. This world is no pleasant place under the (first)
Consideration of it, as it is a great Hospital of sick and sad wretches; and
Bedlam of wild folks let loose, and tearing each other. But it is worse as it is
a Pesthouse, without one Room or part of it but hugely full of Noisome fumes;
and without any one Person in it but infected and infectious; and without
possibility of being lived in, for the infection, any longer than you use
strong Antidotes, and high Cordials. Were you locked into such an house and
could not get out, you and your dearest ones, till some good Friend came home;
would you not say Amen! to his speedy coming? Sirs, Sin is the Plague of
Plagues; The World's a Pesthouse of it. Where Is that spot of ground on it, but
the Flesh, Devil and Devilish men will be infecting one with it? Nay, where is
the man in it, that is not infected himself with it, and apt (of Wickedness or
weakness) to infect one with it, and tempt one into it? Can you live sinless a
minute without Gods preservatives? Without Gods Antidotes can you keep out
Disobedience? or without his cordials keep off Distrust? Saints are Souls that
know the defiling damning nature of Sin; and know the deceitfulness of their
own hearts, the bewitchingness of the Worlds favors and frowns and customs; as
also the Devils devices, snares, wiles darts, depths; and find so much ado to
keep a flood of Hell out, and a spark of Heaven in them, that they cannot
forbear longing for Christ to come and carry them into Heaven, and put them up,
above the Gunshot of Hell, and hellish men, and lusts. They know David's, and
Peter's, and Paul's, can no longer stand, than they Fight in this world, and they
know Jehovah-Jesus, when he comes, will find them a place, where the weary are
at rest and the wicked (Devils, men, Objects, and Lusts) cease from troubling,
as Job speaks, Job. 2.17.

M. 3. Saints Sins are yet the sharpest goades in their sides, and quickening
motives in their hearts to pray for Christ's coming. Patience will make
Troubles; and divine Valor makes Temptations Tolerable, though not Pleasant.
But for Sin, Oh what can a holy heart say, or do? Other men's sins, the World's,
the Kingdom's, wherein he lives, the Town's, Congregation's the Family's; Oh
how do all, join in with his own, to cut his Soul in meditation, His own
weakness of Grace, strength of Corruption, Frequency of offending and grieving
God the Holy Ghost, to the gratifying of damned Devils! what daggers are these
in a gracious heart? Saints consider further; before Conversion that they do
nothing but sin; that after it, they do nothing without sin, that if they
should also live a thousand years yet more, still sin against God they should,
more or less, as long as their pulses beat. And this makes heart-ake, and
Soul-smart, this is a Scorpion. Look into your Bibles, Brethren, yea look into
Houses where Saints are to be seen! You shall learn in the History of former
ones, and so in the Observation of the living ones this day, that sin is no
such Fleabite to them, as Formalists imagine. They know it is a Renouncing of the
Blessed God; yea a striking at him as far as Sinners can reach, and (as the
Schools say well) a murdering of God, his Essence, Sovereignty, Perfections,
Laws, all together virtually. They know sin's as evil (Objectively) as God is
Good, and therefore infinitely evil. They know that it has effected dismal
things in Heaven, Earth, and Hell; that it turned Angels into Devils, that it
(even one sin) damned the whole World, brought Gods wrath and curse on Mankind,
and all the Creatures for our sakes; that it founded Hell, kindled and set
flaming all the Fire there; that to expiate it, it cost the Eternal God's
becoming man, the Blessed God's being made a Curse, the Lord of Life's enduring
Death, the Prince of Glory's lying under Shame, with a load of his Fathers
wrath upon it, hotter and heavier than ten thousand mountains of melted
scalding Lead. And the sight of this cursed Quality, this evil of evils, sin,
the sight of it daily in themselves, their hearts and their Lives, this
overwhelms; and but for a great God Mediator, a Jehovah's righteousness, would
sink into distracting raving despair. Especially considering, (as I know not
what kind of Saints they be that do not consider) that there still cleaves a
Body of Sin (a heavy Noisome stinking carcass of it) and there dwells still
within, a busy stirring active Rebel-sin, never in this Life to be quite
expelled. But is it thus, may some say, with very Saints? I say read Romans 7th
Chapter and judge. Ask the Godliest Souls alive, and hear what they say! Observe on,
Saints do also know, that except but the sin against the Holy Ghost, there is no
sin but they may (and being left by God to themselves, they are most ready) to
fall into; even the foulest ones, that very graceless Moralists themselves
would abhor. They know (and shake in their thoughts) Aaron himself fell into
foul Idolatry, David into Adultery and Murder; Joseph's Brethren (the
Patriarchs) were in a sense Murderers of him. Sampson so sinful, that had not
God numbered him among Saints, men might justly have doubted his being one.
Peter Lied, Swear, Cursed; not Christ indeed I judge, but himself he cursed most
dreadfully. The Original word's such, that makes it as if he said in the late
dialect of Hell, God Damn him! or, God Curse his Soul! Saints I say know this,
and stand justly affected with Sollicitousness and Care, lest their feet slide
even so far away; and lest their sins in dwelling, like Snakes lurking in the
holes of a dunghill, when it is cold, should crawl out and come into Act, upon
the gloom of Temptation. Shall I add? Satan and their own hearts rise up
sometimes, and suggest, that they are from eternity Reprobates; be now but
Hypocrites, and one time or another before they dye, will prove Apostates: and
poor gracious hearts, frighted first into a discomposure and disability to make
a judgment reasonably of themselves, by and by faint under the doubt; nay
sometimes fall to stark raving in the dread that it is indeed, and 'twill be so,
with them. These things, my Brethren, (and what wonder?) stimulate and provoke
Saints (many of your selves I hope) to abound in hearty Amens to the speedy
coming of the great God and our Savior: of him I say, who when he appears,
will make his Saints like himself, 1 John 3.2. and set them far above and out
of the reach of Sorrow, Temptation, and sin, and sinful Doubts, and Fears. Yea
will also satisfy them with his likeness, Psalm. 17.15. Ult. make them joint
possessors of Grace and Glory with himself, Romans 8.17. and for ever hold them
in an undisturbed Possession.

M. 4. Saints (innocent, yea gracious) earnest Covetousness of the best things,
adds to all their foresaid incitements and incentives, to say Amen to their
Lords coming. As they are heart-weary of Troubles, Temptations, and sins, so
are they heart-sick for better things. Could you look through their breasts and
to the pit of their hearts, you would see there, 1. a Pit that all the Creation
cannot fill; and 2. an impossibility of being (fully) satisfied with but Grace
it self. Grace, I say, which is but a short antepast to them, to stay their
stomachs and appetites of Glory; the Glory which (alone) is their satisfying
feast, Psalm. 17.15. You would see, Sirs, 3. you would see their Cravings and
Pantings for Incorruption, and freedom from Poverty, Violence Sickness, etc.
for Honor, and such brightness and splendour as that of Christ was in his
Transfiguration, fairer than the Sun; for Power and Vigor, perfect freedom from
all impediments; and for Spirituality, no need of Clothing or Food or any
animal Provisions; all these do Saints crave, for their very Bodies, 1. Cor.
15.42, 43, 44. And what then for their Souls? Hear a few hints! Saints for
their Souls crave, 1. Full Sight of God as he is, and face to face; with such
perfection as leaves no Desire unsatisfied, or Capacity unfilled. 2. Full
Possession of God, with all the Faculties of their Souls as full of him, as the
Sun's of Light, or Sea of water. 3. Full Conformity unto Christ. 4. Full
Complacence and Delight in the sight, enjoyment and likeness of God; and
Communion with him, Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles,
Martyrs, all Gods, and our own Godly dear Relations, to everlasting Ages. Being
men of such Desires, (Desires so unfillable till Jesus comes,) what wonder if
Hope delayed make the hearts of Saints sick and sick of Love, to pray, Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly! who knows not the quickening force of enlarged
Desires?)

M. 5. Saints Loves of God, and hearty Desires of his Glory, do eminently and
excellently urge them to join their Amen to Christ's coming quickly. Attend you,
Sirs, 1. God is the dearly beloved Father of Saints; the Trinity is their one
God. 2. This Holy and beloved Trinity is in the world forgotten, scorned,
hated, rebelled against, wished out of Heaven yea out of Being. Most of the
Nations of the earth by far, make Professedly other gods. The Jews Curse our
Blessed Jehovah-Jesus every day. The Turks prefer a filthy impostor (Mahomet)
before him. The Papists (generally) go near the Jews in their doctrines, and
the Pagans in their manners: Especially the Italian, Spanish, and Irish
Papists. Protestants, if they must be so called, how many Hypocrites? how many
Profane? Socinians and Quakers, heretics knownly odious (in Doctrine and Life)
to God and Saints, how do they swarm? how very little is the flock of true
Israelites? And in this little flock it self, how very great sins be there, and
dishonours to God (as has been foresaid.) Saints see their Father has a small
income of Honor here; but Dishonor, every minute of time, unexpressible. And
3. They so Love God, that they cannot see it unconcernedly: No, Rivers of tears
it stood David in, Psalm. 119.136, 139. They know, in the day of Christ it must
be, that their Father is (I was about to say, any thing worth a speaking of,)
Glorified in his very saints themselves, 2 These. 1.10. They themselves can do
but little at that work before; others, be sure will do contrarily. Wherefore,
as dear Children, impatient of their Fathers dishonor, (by themselves and
others,) desirous of his Glory, longing to have it shine forth; and to behold
him Honoring and Magnifying himself upon his Friends and Enemies too, they
pour out Amen and Amen to the quick approach of the day thereof. In the former
Considerations, eye was had to their own Good and divine Glory therein: In
this, the respect of Saints is purely to the Glory of their Father. And I am
persuaded many there be, so concerned for his Glory, that were the Day of
Christ's coming to be a day of their Annihilation, yet they would wish for it;
and wish it straightways come, rather than Gods name and Glory should any
longer be such sufferers in the world. (I hope no man will say, But is 't not
fit we should wait Christ's own time? If any ask so weakly, I answer, yes
surely, it is so. And it is with holy submission that Saints, upon all these
Motives, do pray Come Lord Jesu! Also, that it is with Prayer of his first
accomplishing his Promises too, unto his elect.)

This Doctrine is of excellent Use (among others) unto these Purposes.

Use 1. It turns out all our carnalminded, earthly-spirited Professors, from
the number of Christs-members; and declares them to be but whiter (incarnate)
Devils, than Swinish Drunkards and filthy Whoremongers, etc. They, Christ's
members and Bride, and careless for, yea pleased with, his absence! A likely
matter! I am certain that as many of you as Love (inordinately) this world, you
wish it would last for ever; and that you could for ever dwell in it; and
(consequently) that Christ were never to come, and no Judgment-day to be; and
so (by consequence again) that there were no God. And, let your Consciences say
then, is it just we should esteem you Converts to God, and members of Jesus
Christ, or can you think your selves such? I Am persuaded, your hearts tell you,
that it is as proper to a Saint to Pray and Desire Christ's coming, as it is to a
loving Wife when her house is every day so pestered with the Clamors of
Outrages of Violent men upon her self, and her whole family, that she scarce
knows where to be, to Desire her Husbands return: Especially, if her Chastity
be assaulted, her Life endangered, and her only Hope of rescue be in his
return. I Pray let the same hearts of yours then tell you, that if you can lie
hugging the world, and brook it is troubles and temptations, and suffer your
sins, and be listless of Glory in Heaven, and unconcerned for the Dishonor
done to God in the world, and pour out no sincere Amens to Christ's coming, you
are then no members of his. You are strangers, enemies, Antichrists, for all
your Orthodoxie, for all your shadows and shapes of Godliness, for all your
presumptions and others Opinions of your being Well-inclin'd, Good, or whatever
it be. I am sure St. Paul stretches the promise of the Crown of Righteousness,
no further than to the Lovers of Christ's Appearance, 2. Tim. 4.8. And I know
not any ground they can have to expect that Crown, who wish not cordially for
that Appearance. Blessed Luther says plainly, ( Tom. 5. fol. 507.) He Is no
Christian, nor can he (without lying) say the Lords prayer, that wishes not
for Christ's coming (and that) with all his heart.

Use. 2. It sounds an alarm unto Heart-search, and enquiry how it is with you.
Whether you can say, say truly, and with any fervency, Amen to Jesus his speedy
Coming. We should not conclude overhastily; or by any means lie at
uncertainties in this thing. You are Certified that Gods true Church does say
Amen! and that you, if of that number, must say so too. I Charge and beseech
you by the tender mercies of God, and all the regards you bear to
Sanctification and Salvation, go labor to certify your selves, whether you
can and do verily say it. Away to your Closets, and the places of your
Retiracy, and ask your Souls in such manner as this, each of you! Oh my
never-dying Soul! ( Qu. 1.) Say not thou of this world, of this valley of
sin and sorrow and Temptation and absence from the Lord, as Peter of the mount,
It Is good to be here? Mat. 17.4. ( Qu. 2.) Art thou not at ease in Sion, fat at
heart, a Gallio and careless for the sins and miseries abroad in the world? As
of old, Noah's Soul, art thou vexed with them from day to day, 2 Pet. 2.8. (
Qu. 3) Art thou looking expecting and waiting for that blessed hope and the
glorious appearance of the great God and thy Savior Jesus Christ? Tit. 2.13.
Do look for and hasten to it, as it is 2 Pet. 3.12? Do join with the Souls
under the Altar, in their cry, for the cutting off all delays? Rev. 6.10. Does
the Holy Spirit in thee, and thou as Christ's bride say, come! as it is Rev.
22.17. ( Qu. 4.) Do thou live like one that does, and may say, safely say
Amen! How is that? That is, doing thy Gods will with diligence, and suffering
it with Patience; and so Cleaving to Jesus a Savior, that thou may not need
to fear him a Judge, as St. Austin speaks.

Use. 3. It writes in Sunbeams the blessed Estate of the truly Godly. (...)
seems, have in this world (...) that is more worth than all (...) the wallings
Enjoyments: and have (...) Coming, beyond measure, (...) imagination good. They
are Souls acquainted with, and interested in, the Heir of all things! They have
an assured Hope of a good Day of his bringing, when Flames fed with rivers of
brimstone and the wrath of God, shall mercilesly devour all besides. As well
the formal Hypocrite and empty Professor, as the Prophanest rakehel Helhound
that ever lived. Oh Blessed! thrice Blessed Souls without peradventure! If they
can say Amen to Christ's Coming, and long even for that day of Fire, tell me
whereof they need be afraid? or what in this world need they be very
sollicitous for, who are so well provided for the next? I have (with my own
ears) heard Persons of Honor and huge estate and substance in the world
profess, that they would give all, and Life it self too; for ability to say,
with the Church of God, this Amen! Nor wonder I any more, than if they should
say, they would give a pebble for a rock of Diamonds, or a nutshel for the
spice-Islands. Since the profane and Hypocritical World, have not the grace to
Love Saints, I will never wonder that they Envy them. It cannot be strange that
a Happiness so great is Envied, though it is sad that it is not rather learned
and sought for. Seek it, oh my Brethren, Wrestle humbly with God, Fight flesh
World and Devil; Rest not till your Longings for Jesus his Coming are restless,
and Mr. Herbert's ejaculation stirs daily in, and springs forth from your
Souls, to Jesus Christ.

Oh come thou down to me,
Or take me up to Thee!
Need you Motives hereunto? Sirs! your hearts are deceitful; the World's
Temptation-full; Devils (that in Nature be spirits, in Number be many, in place
be so near you, in Power be Lions, in Policy be serpents, in industry be
restless, in malice be implacable, in Plots and all Projects be soul-strikers:)
Devils, I say, are Opposition-full; your Lives be short, and most uncertain;
your Deaths be at hand; Gods judgment is just and unavoydable; Heaven's
infinitely desirable; Hell is as dreadful, and Eternity is boundless, to very
astonishment. Unto all which, add you this; The day of Grace is far spent; The
Night's at hand wherein no man can work; God is apace taking up to himself his
Ambassadors. An Observation-worthy token, that he intends not much longer to
await your Motion. The Prophets do not live for ever, Zech. 1.5. Yea neither
does God suffer them, [many of them] to live out so many years as the people
ordinarily do. Hereof, the Servant and Minister of Christ whose Translation we
lament, Mr. Noah Web.
is an instance; I need not superadd Blessed Jo. Alleine, Janeway, Hen. Blake,
Si. Barret, and others.

Methinks the late Translation of the first named, (whose Memory is so justly
Precious to you,) should be more than ordinary Impressive on you. I hope you
forget not, but will ever remember, how much his 1. Providential succession to
the Chrysostom of this age and most Powerful Preacher driven from you; his 2.
Unwearied pains and heavenly Teachings among you; also his 3. Conversation and
holy Life so passing Exemplary to you how much all these do add to your
Accounts at Gods bar! 'Twere a foul and fearful mistake, if any should dream
that they had answered all these, by procuring and attending his Funeral
Sermon. Alas, that must be done, by holding in Mind and Practice, his own more
Powerful ones.

Nevertheless-of (this in particular, and all) Funeral-Sermons, I am of
Renowned To. Bolton's mind, which he has left in these words ( Discourse of
true happiness, Page 63.) Neither do I mislike Funeral Sermons; I could rather
wish, that as the death of his Saints is precious in the sight of God; So that
it might be glorious in the eyes of men: I could rather desire, that the just
Praises and true sincerity of the child of God were published by some
seraphical tongue, that both the Glory of his Graces might pass along, and
shine bright to all Posterity; and that such a Zeal for imitation might be
inkindled in the hearts of all the hearers (especially the present occasion
making their minds more capable of persuasion,) that they, passing through the
same course of Holiness, might at length be made partakers of the same
happiness with the Saints of God. Indeed, if this stroke of Providence (taking
away him, who, so often in Journeying, and in Perils, so much in Weariness,
Painfulness, Watchings, etc. labored to espouse you to Christ Jesus,) if this
work not your minds into any more easy Perswadableness, if due Consideracy of
Blessed Mr. WEBS Sanctity, kindle not in you any fire for Zeal of imitation, I
shall reasonably esteem it portending, (and judge 't highly probable) that God
will follow you with more such blows; take away more of your Ministers, who I
can assure you, are (many of them) very willing to be gone; yea and by such
Obduracy of yours, will be made more willing. The Obduracy of one Congregation
[within twenty miles of this place] made a most excellent Minister of Jesus
Christ profess to me, that his Ejection in the year 1662. Mr. S. S
was unto him as the taking off of a heavy burden from tired shoulders. So
weary, so heavy-laden, so broken was his gracious Soul, for his peoples
unbrokenness. An eminent one in the City of Dublin in Ireland has often told me
his heart; and often in these words: Dr. D. R.
I am certain I am as willing to die, as God will allow me to be. He himself, I
think, feared, I Am sure I feared, that his peoples Obduracy made him more
willing than God approved. Think not this unworthy to be thought on.

But go ye, My Dearest Friends, go I beseech you to God, beseech him that
neither the Doctrine, the Life, nor the Death of this blessed Star now in
Glory, may rise up in Judgment against you! Cry mightily to God, to fill you
with the fruits of righteousness, to give you such fore-tasts of Glory, as may
enamour you of Heaven, and set you craving for that Day, which ye Profane and
ye Hypocrites too, [as close as they hide it from themselves and others] do
wish would never be: Pray to be enabled to Pray, yea to be made unable to
forbear Praying, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly! I need not tell you, (I think I
need not,) that 1. come he will, and quickly too, whether you will or no: And
that 2. when he comes, you will see the Wrath of the Lamb to be intolerable, (
Rev. 6.16, 17.) and his anger, though he be the Lamb of God, to be unavoidably
destructive, ( Psalm. 2.12.) Gods character of him being infinitely true, that
which I pray you consult, Exodus 22.21. Jesuits and Socinians would have an
Angel created on purpose to keep out the Blessed Jesus from being meant in that
Text. But he is so very plainly understood there, that besides all our sound
commentators, the Hebrew Rabbis say, it is meant of the Angel-Redeemer, the
Messiah. So Ainsworth from Rabbi Menahem, and he from the ancient Rabbis. Hear
it then, He will not let your sins go unpunished, for my Name is in him: that
is, he will be as severe as I am, says God the Father; for, he has just my
Nature, Justice, etc. and is no other than what I am. Neither are you to learn
now I hope, 3. that Christ's coming will bring with it enough and enough, to
quit the cost, defray all the charge, and make good amends for all losses and
labors spent in waiting and craving for it, even a bottomless depth and
dearest confluence of all Delights. Delights, [oh Amazement, where art thou?]
Delights in 1. glorious sight of God, his Face, Essence, Will, Counsels,
Perfections! and 2. in Blessed filledness with the fullness of God; even through
Jesus, by his Humane Nature uniting us to God, and through his Divine Nature
uniting God unto us; and so making us (in a manner unutterable) Partakers and
Possessors of God himself. The devout Ancients have soared high. Our Modern
Divines speak the words I put my mind in One of great same, has ventured to
say, that in Heaven, We may conceive an unexpressible Association (which is too
far off,) an Astimilation (which is not near enough,) the Schools would venture
to say an Identification with God: And thus he proceeds; As the Sun by shining
on the Moon, makes it a Planet and Star as well as it self, though it would
otherwise be but the thickest and darkest part of the Sphere; so those beams of
Glory which shall issue from my God, and fall upon me, shall make me that am
otherwise a clod of earth and worse, a dark soul, a spirit of darkness, to
become an Angel of light, a Star of glory, a something that I cannot name now,
nor imagine now, nor to morrow nor next year. -- I shall be so like God that the
Devil himself shall not know me from God, so as to find any more place to
fasten a Temptation on me, than on God himself, nor to conceive any more hope
of my falling from that Kingdom, than of Gods being driven out of it. (Dr. Jo.
Done in 2. Ser. on Genesis 1.26.) To conclude, I trust, ye need not that I stand
to tell you, 4. that Christ Jesus does heartily long for Saints coming to
Heaven to him, their speedy coming; and his longing is fervent and constant.
(See Dr. Tho. Goodwin's little Treatise, called the Heart of Christ in Heaven,
p. 49, etc.) And what eye is that which sees not, how hellish ungratitude
'twould be in them, either not to desire, or but coldly to desire Christ's
coming to them. Oh Brethren, who will be the gainers? Can a man be profitable
to God? No, No, not God: man. Christ by the Psalmist has told God, no. My
goodness (says he to the Father) extends not unto thee, but unto the Saints,
Psalm. 16.2, 3. It Is Jesus his goodness to Saints, not Saints that extends to
him. Have done, have done then with this world, wherein, sometimes in Poverty
you will be wanting other creatures; sometimes (it may be) in banishment,
wanting other men; sometimes in sickness wanting your own Bodies; sometimes in
Impatience wanting your Souls, and always (as long you are) in Sin wanting your
God. Live by Faith, Watch and wait in hope. Keep an open ear to Jesus
proclaiming his readiness to come. And thereto let your daily Antiphonie and
return be, Amen, come Lord Jesu, come quickly.

Upon Prove. 10.7. one of the Hebrew Doctors is reported to have thus glossed;
Whosoever makes mention either of a just man and blesses him not; or of an
unjust man, and curses him not, violates an affirmative Law. If so it indeed
be, I know what we have to do, as often as we name a Rabbin. But the very truth
is, we should break I think many of the Laws of God, (written in our own
hearts, and in the blessed Bible) if we should either make no mention, or no
honorable mention, or not bless the Memory of this holy Ambassador of Christ,
whose Decease is the providential occasion of this Discourse this day. Much
need not be said of him, because more is known than can (in our limited
Discourse) be said. And though it excuse not our duty, (as a Landlords having
money enough besides, excuses not a Tenant for not paying his rent) yet it
pleases us to consider, that his Life and Labors have found him very
sufficient Praise in the Church of Christ. And that which we utter in his
Praise, is but jointly to pay duty to his justly blessed memory, and learn duty
from his excellent Example. Wherefore all I shall offer concerning him, I shall
put into these few particulars.

First, His Parts and Endowments, (Natural and Acquired) were not ordinary, but
excelling; as the Judicious and Learned of his Acquaintance attest. He had
wherewithal to captivate and charm, and edify the lowest understandings, and
the while to satisfy and delight the highest. A faculty not bestown on every,
even of learned and godly Divines, and of justly considerable Repute in the
Church of God. I say nothing of his Parentage. What Honor is any Birth but the
New Birth? the Birth from that Heaven, whence he was Born, and whither he is
(as to his native place) returned. It Is known some Western Counties over, that
he had a Father of whom he might justly (in a sense) Glory; (Prove. 17.6.) and
to whom he was equally a Delight and Honor, Prove. 23.24, 25. The Father of the
Righteous shall greatly rejoice, etc.

Secondly, His Graces, in the eyes of the most spiritually discerning
Christians, were both True and great. Except but his humble self, I challenge
all that read me, to name that competent judge of him, who ever thought him
either no Saint, or no Excelling one? His dear Yokefellow tells me, that she
was informed by himself, that is Conversion was wrought in Oxford. Blessed Soul!
to whom the Holy Ghost (the Author and special In-worker of all Gifts, (1 Cor.
12.) gave Art and Grace, Divine and Humane Learning, in the same place! The
Vigilant Masters of the Literate Societies there, do sadly know, how very many
come away from them, without bringing either Sarah or Hagar, Grace (I mean) or
Learning with them; and how many more that get the Handmaid of Philosophy,
obtain not more than the Shadow or Shape of the Mistress, Divinity!
Thrice-Blessed, our dear Brother! to whom Free Grace vouchsafed Capacitating
Nature, Polishing Art, and Accomplishing Grace, now it self Accomplished in
Glory.

Thirdly, His Ministerial Labors, and Painfulness in the Lord's work, were
extraordinary. He did not only, more than others do Do, but more than he
himself could Do, with his health consulted for. The Devil knows to his woe, how
unweariedly he labored to get Souls out of his hands; (and how many he got
too.) No doubt but the hundreds made partakers of his Pains, give the Lord
thousands and ten-thousands of Praises with thanksgiving for them. Lions in the
way of duty, seemed no Lions to him. Though wisely Zealous, he was daringly
Good; I had almost said, Desperately. For even then would he Labor, when he
had no hope of avoiding the weakening consequents of it to his feeble
Consumptive body. Oh that they were not able to forbear Imitating his holy
industry, who will not be able to forbear Praising it! Ay, and (it may be)
coveting the Praise of it too.

Now to you, my Brethren, to whom his painfulness was so well known, by you (of
any Souls) let it not be unimitated! God, my God, persuade you to be such, as
he persuaded you to be; and to Labor in the Word and Practice of it, as he
labored in the Word, and Doctrine, and joynt-practice of it. Let not his
Counsels or Example dye with him! The Jews have a saying, that No day has in
it any so good a Man dying, but it has as good a one born on it. I pray God,
it may prove true of the day of our Blessed Brother's death. Recall, recall, I
charge you before God and the elect Angels, recall his heavenly Instructions!
Beg, beg on bended knees, the Holy Ghost to bring to your Remembrance those
Teachings that he sent you by him! Shall I give you some particular Hints,
which the Lord's good Providence has enabled me to do, by a sight of some
Notes kindly communicated by his Widow: hear, I beseech you, and with Solemn
attentiveness!

1. Excellently he taught you, the Vanity and Nothingness and less than nothing
of all that can be taught, besides the knowledge of Jesus. Not (to use his own
words,) the Carnal, the Historical, or General knowledge of Christ: but the
spiritual, particular, heart and Life-reforming, and transforming knowledge. He
showed you 'twas in Jesus that all the Attributes of God did Shine! that 'twas
to Jesus all the Types, Ceremonies, Legal washings, etc. of old, and all the
Prophecies, and Promises ever given of God, pointed! that Life-eternal in the
End, the excellent End, whereof knowledge of Christ is the excellent and only
means! that this knowledge of Christ is, 1. Revealed, 2. Certain, and 3. Sweet,
Savory knowledge. He roused you to the Trial, by heart-search, whether you had
this knowledge: And directed you to try, by a Consideracy of the Causes and
Effects: All this from that text, 1. Cor. 2.2.

2dly, He showed you likewise, what you are till you come to the foresaid
knowledge of Christ. Even, Children of wrath, and Alienated, and Enemies to God
in your minds by wicked works; both from Ephesians. 2.3. and Col. 1.2. He told you,
and proved, that you and all the world (no man, save God-man excepted) are by
Natural Propagation sinful: Sinful (not by imitation only, though very much;
but) 1. by nature; and 2. universally; all men, and in all of man. He showed
how 1. Fruitful of sin and misery this sin of Nature is! How 2. Powerful; it
self a Law (Rom 7.23.) and making your Souls Lawless. 3. How Fierce and
Furious! 4. How Unavoidable! 5. How (yet) Voluntary! Inherent in the Will, and
making men Wilfully to sell themselves to sin and Satan. He made it plain to
you, that unsanctified men are Gods Enemies, Haters of God; as it is Romans 1.30.
They Enemies to God, and God an Enemy to them. He showed you wherein men's
Enmity to God appears: In their Opposition to his Will! 2. Their hatred and
Opposition to his Saints and Servants, and Friends! 3 And their Friendship with
Gods Enemies; to wit, Devil, World and Sin. Also, 1. How unreasonable this
Enmity is; how, 2. Unprofitable; and 3. how Destructive.

3dly, He set forth the blessed Doctrine (the Soul of the Gospel,) of Christ's
being Peacemaker 'twixt God and Man. And that, 1. by Perchase, bearing the
Chastisement of our Peace: (as Isai. 53.) 2. by the Tendering of pu^chased Peace
to poor Souls; and 3. by Conquering the Enmity of the heart, and making Souls
willing to be Reconciled to God.

4ly. Incitingly and Invitingly, to your Reconciliation unto God, he s^ew'd
you, 1. That Reconciliation unto God, is a mercy highly to be valued, much to
be desired, and endeavored after: And 2. that taking hold of God in Christ is
the only and certain means of Reconciliation with God. And 3. to such laying
hold on God are required, 1. Conviction of the unableness of all beside Jesus,
to satisfy Gods Justice. 2. Sense of your inability to save your selves, and
to lay hold on Christ offered. 3. Faith of Christ's Allsufficiency. 5. Letting
go of your hold of all other things, which may hinder resting on him. 6. Speedy
laying hold on him, as offered in the Gospel: and 7. Union with him, Spiritual
Union by Faith. He told you, you had 1. Gods word, yea, 2. Gods Oath for your
peace on these terms: This, on Isai. 27.5.

5ly. Hereupon God directed him to tell you, that (as he made it his work) it
is the work of Ministers, to persuade sinners to accept of Christ as their
Husband. And that, whereas unto Marriage there is required, Consent of Parents
and consent of Parties; God, the only Parents willing, Christ, the one Partie's
willing; the query is, whether the Sinner be willing. He told you, you must
consent, 1. Understandingly, 2. Freely, 3. Presently, 4. Universally and
Perpetually. And come unto a 1. Real, a 2. Spiritual, and 3. Total Union with
Jesus; and 4. an Indissoluble one; one never to be broke off, by any threatening
or bribing Temptation.

To Conclude; he further showed you, Christ is the only way to Justification,
and Sanctification and Glory: and excellently displaid before you, how
altogether Lovely (his beloved, now fully enjoyed) Jesus is. Of the which
(though I can Hint no more) I pray God bring much more to your Remembrance,
Consideration, Practice, and Delight.

I am most certain, if the good Spirit of Grace shall Powerfully set home these
Instructions and Counsels, Dead hearts among you shall live; and they that have
spiritual Life, shall have it more abundantly; and the Jewish maxim aforesaid,
will be verisied, and more, even exceeded. Not one only, but many, shall be
born to God, and made to increase with the increases of God, and fitted (as our
Blessed Dear Brother) for an entrance into the Kingdom of God. Amen, and Amen

FINIS.

