SOME Gospel Truths Opened according to the Scriptures.

OR,

The Divine and Humane Nature of Christ Jesus, his coming into the World; his
Righteousness, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, and second coming
to Judgment, plainly demonstrated and proved.

And also,

Answers to several Questions, with profitable directions to stand fast in the
Doctrine of Jesus the son of Mary, against those blustering storms of the Devils
temptations, which do at this day, like so many Scorpions, break loose from the
bottomless pit, to bite and torment those that have not tasted the virtue of
Jesus by the revelation of the Spirit of God.

Published for the good of Gods chosen ones, by that unworthy servant of Christ
John Bunnyan, of Bedford, By the grace of God, Preacher of the Gospel of his
dear Son.

Jesus says, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man comes to the
Father, but by me, Jo. 14. 6. Neither is there salvation in any other, Act. 4.
12. London, Printed for J. Wright the younger at the Kings head in the
Old Bailey. 1656.

To the Reader,
REader:
thou have in this small Treatise, set beforethee, the several pieces of that
great and glorious mystery, Jesus Christ, God manifested in the flesh: and if
thou art enlightened by the spirit of Christ, here thou may see by that
spirit, how Jesus Christ the Son of God, the Son of Mary, is both true God and
true Man, both Natures making but one Christ one Jesus, as Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, verses, where speaking first of his being God, and then of his taking upon
him the nature of man; afterward in the 8 and 9 verses he says, he (meaning
this Jesus) humbled himself, etc. and God (meaning the Father) has highly
exalted him, etc. speaking of both natures God and Man as together making but
one Christ; who is the Savior, and is to be believed and trusted in for
Salvation, not only as God, but as man also; and those who do not thus make him
the object of their faith, will surely fall short of pardon of sin, and of
salvation, Act. 13. 38, 39. through this man (speaking of Christ as crucified
at Jerusalem) is preached unto you forgiveness of sins: and in the 1 Timothy 2. 5.
says he, there is one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; and
this discovers the damnable errors of those commonly called (...), who on the
(...) deny him that (...) of the Virgin (...) true God as (...) as true man:
and this is also quite contrary to those commonly called Familists, Ranters,
Quakers or others, who on the other hand either deny Christ to be a real man
without them, blasphemously fancying him to be only God manifest in their
flesh; or else make his humane nature with the fullness of the Godhead in it,
to be but a type of God to be manifest in the saints, and so according to their
wicked imagination, his humane nature was to be laid aside after he had offered
it up upon the cross without the gate at Jerusalem, contrary to Acts the 1. 1,
2, 3, 9, 10, 11 verses, compared with the last chapter of Luke verses 34, 39,
40, 50, 51. where it is clearly held forth that the man Christ rose again out
of the grave with the same body which was crucified and laid in the grave, and
was taken up above the clouds into heaven with the same real body, and that he
shall again descend from heaven in that same glorious body of flesh, as Acts 1.
9, 10, 11. and this sure truth, of Christ being the Savior and Mediator, as
man, and not only as God, will also show serious believers what to think of
some, who though they will not (it may be) deny that Christ is a real man
without them in the heavens as well as God, yet do own him to be the Savior
only as God, first dwelling in that flesh that was born of the Virgin, and then
dwelling in Saints, and thus both beginning and perfecting their Salvation
within them, and so indeed do hold Christ as man, to be only (I say to be
only) the saved or glorified one of God, together with the Saints his members,
only something in another and more glorious manner and meisure then the Saints;
and these highflown people are in this very like to Familists and Quakers,
undervaluing the Lord Jesus Christ, God-man, and though they may speak much of
Christ, yet they do not rightly and savingly lay him for their foundation. Now
as a help against all these dangerous things, thou have here the maine things
of Christ laid down before thee briefly, and fully proved by the Scriptures:
first of his being true God out of flesh from eternity, and then of his taking
flesh, or the nature of man upon him in the womb of the Virgin, and so his
fulfilling the Law, his dying for sins at Jerusalem, his rising again without,
his ascending into heaven without, and not into a fancyed heaven only within,
as some say; his interceding in heaven for all his, and his coming again in
his body of flesh to judge the world. And if thou art yet in a state of nature,
though covered over with an outside profession, here thou may find something
(if the spirit of Christ meet thee in reading) to convince thee of the sad
condition thou art in, and to show thee the righteousness thou art to fly to by
faith, and to trust in for salvation, when convinced of sin; which is a
righteousness wrought by that God-man Jesus Christ without thee, dying without
thee at Jerusalem for sinners: here also thou may see the difference between
true and faise faith. If thou art a true believer, as these things are the
foundation of thy faith; so they may be of great use for thee to meditate upon,
and to exercise thy faith in, particularly in meditation, and in this way to
seek daily for a higher faith in these truths to be given into thy heart from
heaven; and there is a great need of this, for though these truths be commonly
known amongst professors to the notion of them; yet very few know or believe
them aright: nay it may well be said in this age, that, if the faith of the
true saints was well sifted, and tradition notion and the apprehensions of their
own reason and fancy was sifted out, most of them would be found to have very
little knowledge of, and faith in, these common truths.

Secondly, these truths being put thus together and plainly proved by the
Scriptures may be a great help (through the Spirit concurring) to strengthen
thee against all those damnable heresies which are spread abroad, which deny
the Lord Jesus Christ either plainly or more cunningly and mysteriously. And
thirdly, the more thou art rooted and set down from heaven in the faith of
these truths of Christ, to believe fully the glorious reality of them, and
their interest in them, the more heavenly peace and joy, thou will have 1. Pet.
1. 7, 8. and also thou will hereby attain the more true holiness and purity of
heart and life, Acts 15. 9. purifying their hearts by faith: and then the more
thou have of the right faith of Christ and of his things in thy heart, the more
strong and valiant will thou be in spirit to do any work private or public
for Jestis Christ, like Stephen Acts 6 ver. 8. who being full of faith and of
the holy spirit was also full of power. In this book thou have also laid down
from the Scriptures how Jesus Christ is without the Saints as man, and yet
dwells within them, that is, something of his divine nature or his blessed
spirit dwells within them, which spirit is sometime called the spirit of Christ.
Romans 8. 9. he that has not the spirit of Christ, etc. and sometime called
Christ, Romans 8. 10. if Christ be in you, etc. and also how we may know whether
it be Christ and the spirit of Christ within or a false spirit calling it self
Christ, and that is thus, if it be indeed Christ within, that is, the spirit of
Christ God-man: why then it teaches that man or woman in whom it is, to apply,
and trust in Christ without for Salvation, Christ as born of the Virgin Mary,
as fulfilling the Law without them, as dying without the gate of Jerusalem as a
sacrifice for sin, it teaches them to trust in the man Christ as rising again
out of the grave without them, as ascending into, and interceding in heaven
without for them; and as to come from that heaven again in his flesh to judge
the world: Thus the man Christ himself says Joh. 16. 13. When he (the spirit
of truth) is come etc. he shall glorify me, v. 14. he shall make you more to
prize, admire and glorify me, who am both God and man; And who shall be absent
from you touching my body. Then follows, For he shall take of mine (of my
glorious things) and show them to you; He shall take my divine and humane
Nature, my birth, my person and offices, my obedience, death, satisfaction, my
resurrection, ascension, and intercession, and of my second coming in the
clouds with my mighty Angels to judgment, and shall show them, or clear them
up to you; He shall take of my salvation, which I have wrought for you in my
own person without you; And he shall take of my glory and exaltation in the
heavens, and show to you: Now to mind this one thing, and to be set down in a
right understanding of it, by the Spirit, from the Scriptures, will be of great
concernment to thee and me; for, for want of this, many professors have split
themselves, some looking only on what Christ has done and suffered without
them, resting in an historical, traditional and indeed a fancyed faith of it,
without looking for the Spirit of Jesus Christ to come with power into their
hearts, without which they cannot rightly know, nor rightly believe in Christ
the Son of God without them, so as to have any share or interest in him, Romans
8. 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: Others have
been depending too much upon something they call Christ and the righteousness of
Christ within them, in opposition to Christ and his righteousness without
them, from which all true saints have their justification and comfort, it being
received through the operation of the spirit* which dwells in them; and however
these may talk much of Christ within them, yet it is manifest, that it is not
the spirit of Christ, but the spirit of the Devil; in that it does not
glorify, but slight and reject the man Christ and his righteousness which
was wrought without them: Reader, in this book thou will not meet with
high-flown aerie notions, which some delight in, counting them high mysteries,
but the sound, plain, common (and yet spiritual and and mysterious) truths of
the Gospel, and if thou art a believer thou must needs reckon them so, and the
more, if thou have not only the faith of them in thy heart, but art daily
living in the spiritual sense and feeling of them, and of thy interest in them.
Neither does this Treatise offer to the doubtful controversial things, or
matters of opinion, as some Books chiefly do, which when insisted upon more,
the weightier things of the gospel, have always done more hurt then good: but
here thou have things certain, and necessary to be believed, which thou can
not too much study. Therefore pray, that thou may receive this word which is
according to the Scriptures in faith and love, not as the word of man, but as
the word of God, without respect of persons, and be not offended because Christ
holds forth the glorious treasure of the gospel to thee in a poor earthen
vessel, by one, who has neither the greatness nor the wisdom of this world
to commend him to thee; for as the Scripture says, Christ (who was low and
contemptible in the world himself) ordinarily chooses such for himself, and for
the doing of his work, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28. Not many wise men after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble are called: but God has chosen the foolish
things of the world, etc. this man is not chosen out of an earthly, but out of
the heavenly University, the Church of Christ, which Church, as furnished with
the spirit, gifts, and graces of Christ, was; in the beginning, and still (...)
will be to the end (...) the world, that, out o^ which the word of the Lord,
and (...) gospel Ministers (...) proceed, whether (...) or unlearned, as to
humane learning, 1 Cor. 12. 2^, 28. And though this man has not the learning
or wisdom of man, yet, through grace, he has received the teaching of God,
and the learning of the spirit of Christ, which is the thing that makes a man
both a Christian and a Minister of the Gospel, as Isa. 50. 4. The Lord God
has given me the tongue of the learned, etc. compared with Luke 2. 18. where
Christ, as man, says, the spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor, etc. He has, through grace,
taken these three heavenly degrees, to wit, union with Christ, the anointing of
the spirit, and experience of the temptations of Satan, which do more fit a
man for that weighty work of preaching the Gospel, then all University
Learning and degrees that can be had.

My end in writing these few lines is not to set up man, but having had
experience with many other saints of this man's soundness in the faith, of his
godly conversation, and his ability to preach the gospel not by humane art, but
by the spirit of Christ, and that with much success in the conversion of
sinners when there are so many carnal empty preachers both learned and
unlearned; I say, having had experience of this, and judging this Book may be
very profitable to many others, as well as to my self: I thought it my duty
upon this account (though I be very unfit for it) to bear witness with my
brother to the plain and simple (and yet glorious) truths of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And now Reader the Lord give thee and me a right understanding in these
things, that we may live and dye not with a traditional notional dead faith,
but with a right spiritual lively faith of Christ, in our heart^, wrought by
the mighty power of God; such a faith as may make Jesus Christ more real and
precious to us then any thing in the world, as may purify our hearts, and make
us new creatures, that so we may be sure to escape the wrath to come, and after
this life enjoy eternal life and glory through the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

Farewell. Thine to serve thee in the Lord Jesus, John Burton.

The Author to the Reader.
SEeing the Lord has been pleased to put it into mine heart, to write a few
things to thee (Reader) touching those things which are most surely believed by
all those that are, or shall be sav^d, Luke 1. 1. Acts 1^. 38. I think it meet
also, to stir up thy heart by way of remembrance, touching those thing that are
the hindrances of thy believing the things that are necessary to the welfare
of thine immortal soul. And indeed, this is the only thing necessary; it is
better to lose all that ever thou have, than to have thy soul and body for ever
cast into hell: and therefore, I beseech thee to consider with me a few things
touching the Stratagems, or subtle temptations of the Devil, whereby he lies
in wait, if by any means he may, to make thee fall short of eternal life, 1
Pet. 5. 8.

And first of all, he does endeavor by all means to keep thee in love with
thy sins and pleasures, knowing that he is sure of thee, if he can but bewitch
thee to live and die in them, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. 2 These. 2. 12. Yea he knows
that he is as sure of thee as if he had thee in hell already, Joh. 3. 19. And
that he might accomplish his design on thee in this particular, he labors
by all means possible to keep thy Conscience asleep in security and self
conceitednesse, keeping thee from all things that might be a means to awaken
and rowse up thine heart: As first, he will endeavor to keep thee from
hearing of the word, by suggesting unto thee this and the other wor^dly
business which must be performed; so that thou will not want excuse to keep
thee from the Ordinances of Christ, in hearing, reading, meditation, etc. or
else, he seeks to disturb, and distract thy mind when thou art conv^rsant in
these things, that thou can not attend to them diligently, and so they become
unprofitable; or else i^ thou art a little more stirred, he labors to rock
thee asleep again, by casting thee upon, and keeping thee in evil company, as
among rioters, drunkards, jesters, and other of his instruments, which he
imployeth on purpose to keep thee secure, and so ruin thy Soul and body for
ever and ever.

If not thus, then peradventure he will seek to persuade thee it is but a
melancholy fit, and will put thee upon the works of thy calling or thy
pleasures, or Physic; or some other trick he will invent such as best agrees
with thy nature: and thus thy heart is again deaded, and thou art kept in
carnal security, that thou might perish for ever* But if notwithstanding
these, and many cunning slights more which might be named, he cannot so blind,
and benumb thy conscience, but that it does see and ^eele sin to be a burden,
intolerable and exceeding sinful: Then in the 2d place, his design is to drive
thee to despair, by persuading thee that thy sins are too big to be pardoned,
he will seek by all means possible to aggrovate them by all the circumstances
of time, place, person, manner, nature and continuance of thy sins, he will
object in thy soul, thou have out-sinned grace, by rejecting so many
exhortations, and admonitions, so many reproofs, so many tenders of grace;
had thou closed in with them it had been well with thee, but now thou have
stood it out so long that there is no hope for thee: thou might have come
sooner, if thou did look to be saved, but now it is too late. And withal,
that he might carry on his design upon thee to purpose, he will be sure to
present to thy conscience, the most sad sentences of the Scripture; yea, and
set them home with such cunning arguments, that if it be possible, he will make
thee despair, and make away thy self, as did Judas.

But if he be prevented in this his intended purpose; the next thing he does
beset thee with, is to make thee rest upon thy own righteousness, telling
thee, that if thou will needs be saved, thou must earn heaven with thy fingers
ends; and it may be, he represents to thy soul such a Scripture; if thou do
well, shall thou not be accepted? And thou having (but in the strength of
nature) kept thy self from thy former grosser polutions, and it may be from
some more secret sins, art ready to conclude, now thou do well; now God
accepts thee; now he will pardon, yea, has pardoned thee; now thy condition is
good: and so go on till thou meetest with a searching word, and Ministry,
which tells thee, and discovers plainly unto thee, that thou do all this
while deceive thy self, by a vain hope and confidence; for though thou seek
after the Law of righteousness, thou have not yet attained to the Law of
righteousness, nor yet can, because, thou seekest^t not by faith, but as it
were by the works of the Law, Romans 9. 31, 32. Here again, thou art left in the
mire, and now peradventure thou see, that thou art not profited by the works
of the Law; nor thy own righteousness: And this makes thee stir a little, but
in process of time, (through the subtle sleights of the devil and the
wickedness of thine own heart;) thou forgettest thy trouble of Conscience, and
and slippest into a notion of the Gospel, and the grace thereof; and now thou
think thy self cock sure: Now thou art able to say, he that lives and dies
in his sins shall be damned for them: he that trusts in his own righteousness
shall not be saved: Now thou can cry Grace, Grace, its freely by grace, its
through the death of the man Christ Jesus, that sinners do attain unto eternal
life, Heb. 9. 14. This I say thou have in the notion, and have not the power of
the same in thine heart, and so it may be thine head is full of the knowledge
of the Scriptures, though thine heart be empty of sanctifying grace. And thus
thou do ^st rejoice for a time: yet because thou have not the root of the
matter within thee, in time of temptation thou fallest away, Luke 8. 13.

Now being in this condition, and thinking thy self to be wondrous well,
because of that Notion of the Truth, and that notion thou have in the things of
God: I say being in this state, thou art liable to these dangers. First, Thou
art like to perish if thou die with this notion in thine head, except God out
of his rich gr ace do work a saving work of grace, and knowledge in thy heart;
for know this, thou m^yest understand glorious mysteries and yet be a Castaway,
1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3. Or else. Secondly, thou art liable to the next damnable
heresy that the Devil sends into the world. See and consider, Luke 8. ^3. 2 Timothy 2. 18. I say thou do lie liable to be carried away with it, and to be
captivated by it (...) that at last through the delusions of the Devil, thou
may have thy conscience seared as with an hot iron, so hard, that neither
Law, nor Gospel, can make any entrance thereinto, to the doing of thee the
least good. And indeed, who are the men that at this day are so deluded by the
Quakers, and other pernicious Doctrines? but those who thought it enough to be
talkers of the Gospel, and Grace of God, without seeking and giving all
diligence to make it sure unto themselves? And for this cause God has sent
them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie: That they all might be
damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, as it
is written, 2 These. 2. 11, 12. And indeed if you mark it, you shall see, that
they be such kind of people, who at this day are so carried away with the
Quakers delusions; namely, a Company of loose Ranters, and light Notionists,
with here and there a Legalist, which were shaking in their principles from
time to time, sometimes on this Religion, sometimes on that: and thus these
Unstable Souls are deluded and beguiled at last, 2 Pet. 2. 14. So that these
who before (as one would have bought) had something of God in them, are now
turned such enemies to the glorious truths of the Gospel, that there is none so
obstinately erroneo^s as they. And indeed it is just with God, to give then
over to believe a lie, 2 These. 2. 11. who before were so idle that they would
not receive the Truth of God into their hearts, in the love of it: And to be
bewitched by the Devil to obey his temptations, and be damned, who would not
obey the truth, Gal. ^. 1. that they migth be saved.

But you will say, what lies are those, that the Devil beguileth poor souls
with all? I shall briefly tell you some of them, but having before said that
they especially are liable to the danger of them, who slip into high Notions,
and rest there; taking that for true faith which is not. I shall desire thee
seriously to consider this one Character a Notionist. Such an one, whether he
perceives it or not, is puffed up in his fleshly mind, and advances himself
above others, thinking but few may compare with him for religion and knowledge
in the Scriptures, but are ignorant and foolish in comparison of him: (thus
knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8. 1.) whereas when men receive truth in the love
of the truth, the more the head and heart is filled with the knowledge of the
mystery of Godliness, the more it is emptied of its own things, and is more
sensible of its own vileness, and so truly humbled in its own eyes.

And further, a Notionist, though he fall from his former strictness and
seeming holiness, and appear more loose, and vain in his practices; yet speaks
as confidently of himself, as to assurance of Salvation, the love of God, and
union with God, as ever. But now to return, and declare some of those lies
which the Devil persuades some of these men to believe. First, That salvation
was not fully, and completely wrought out for poor sinners by the man Christ
Jesus, though he did it gloriously, Acts 13. 38, 39. by his death upon the
cross, without the gates of Jerusalem, Heb* 13, 12. compared with Jo. 19. 20.

2. This is another of his lies wherewith he does deceive poor sinners, bidding
them follow the light that they brought into the world with them, telling them,
that light will lead them to the Kingdom; for (say they) it will convince of
sin, as swearing, lying, stealing, covetousness, and the rest of the sins
against the Law, Romans 3. 20. But the Law is not of faith, Gal. 3. 12. And then
I am sure, that it, with all its motions and convictions, is never able to
justify the soul of any poor sinner. For as many as are of the works of the
Law are under the Curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things that are written in the Book of the law to do them, Gal. 3.
10. but that no man is justified by the law is evident, for, The just shall
live by faith, ver. 11. Now because I am not altogether ignorant of the
delusion of the Devil touching this grace of faith also, I shall therefore in
short give thee (reader) a brief, yet true description from the Srcipture 1.
What true justifying faith is, and what it laye^ hold upon. 2. I shall show who
it does come from. 3. That every one has it not. 4. What are the fruits of it.
First therefore True faith is a fruit, work, or gift of the Spirit of God. (
Gal. 5. 22. 2 These. 1. 11. and 1 Cor. 12. 9.) whereby a poor soul is enabled
through the mighty operation of God ( Col. 2. 12.) in a sense of its sins and
wretched estate to lay hold on the righteousness, blood, death, resurrection,
ascension, intercession, and coming again of the Son of God which was
crucified without the gates of Jerusalem, for eternal life; Jo. 3. 16, 18.
compared with Mat. 3. 17. Gal. ^. 20. Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. To. 3. 25. Act. 16. 31.
Heb. 13. 12. according to that saying in Heb. 11. 1. Now faith is the substance
of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; that is, the things
that are hoped for faith sees, lays hold upon, and embraces them, Heb. 11. 13.
as if they were present: yea, it seals up the certainty of them to the soul.
Therefore says the Apostle it is the evidence, or testimony, or witness, of
those things that are not seen as yet with a bodily eye: which are obtained by
the blood of the man Christ Jesus, Heb. 9. 14. compar^d with Heb. 10. 12, 19,
20. by which the soul sees as in a glass the things that God has laid up for
them that fear him, 1 Cor. 13. 12. 2 Cor. 3. 18.

Secondly, If you would know who this faith comes from, read Ephesians. 2. 8. For
by grace ye are saved (says the Scripture) through faith, and that not of your
selves it is the gift of God. Again, in Phil. 1. 29. it is thus written. For
unto you (that is believers) it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake: And thus much do the Apostles
hold forth to us in their prayer, or request t^ the Lord Jesus, when they say,
Lord increase our faith, Luke 17. ^. and he is therefore called the Author and
finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. 3. also we find in Jam. 1. 17. that, Every good
and perfect gift is from above and comes down from the Father of lights, etc
and therefore faith comes from God, for true justifying faith (...) a good
gift, and perfect in respect of the Author God, in respect of its object,
Christ; and in respect of the nature, though not in respect of the degree, and
measure of it in us: even as a grain of gold, is as perfect gold, as a pound of
gold, though not so much.

3. All men have not faith, This the Apostle witnesses in so many words, as we
find, 2 These. ^. 2. and Deuteronomy. 32. 20. Also in Tit. 1. 15. To them that are
defil^d and unbelieving is nothing pure, etc. It appears also in this, that
all do not attain salvation, which they must needs do if they had true
justifying faith; compare Luke 13. 24. and 1 Jo. 5. 19. with Mar. 16. 16. And
Heb. 4. 3. with ver. 6. and 11. they that believe shall be saved, they that be.

4. The fruits of it are, first, to purify the heart, Acts 15. 9. and 1 Jo. 3.
3. and that, as I said be fore, by laying hold on what Jesus Christ has done
and suffered for sinners, Acts 13. 38, 39.

2. It fills the soul with peace and joy, in that it lays hold on the things
that are obtained for it, Romans 5, 1. 2 Timothy 1. 9. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 8.

3. It makes the Soul to wait patiently, for the glory that is to be revealed
at the second appearing of the man Christ Jesus, whom God has raised from the
dead; which has also delivered it from the wrath to come, as in Tit. 2. 13,
14. 1 Pet. 4. 13. and 5. v. 1, 4. 1 These. 1. 10.

But how (may some say) does the Devil make his de^usions take place in the
he^rts of poor creatures? Ans. Why. 1. he labors to render the doctrine of
the Lord Jesus, and Salvation by him alone, very odious and low: and also his
ordinances, as hearing, reading, meditation, use of the Scriptures, etc.
telling poor sinners that these things are but poor, low, carnal, beggarly,
empty Notions; preached up by the Clergymen, who are the Scribes and
Pharis^es of this Generation; who have the letter, but not the Spirit of God in
them; which lead men into the form, but not into the power of the Lord Jesus:
And with this persuasion, he also represents the ungodly and base carriage, or
behavior of some, who have taken in hand to preach the Doctrine of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thereby he does render the Gospel of our Lord Jesus the more
contemptible and base. But Woe, woe, woe, be to them by whom such offenses
come, Mat. 18. 7. Lu. 17. 1, 2.

2. He pretends to lead them up into some higher light, mysteries, and
revelations of the Spirit, into which but a very few have attained or can
attain, also bewitching their affections, and taking them with an earnest
pursuit after these his pretended truths: persuading them, that they shall be
as God himself, able to discern between good and evil, Genesis 3. 5. And in this
he is exceeding subtle and expert, as having practiced it ever since the days
of Adam. These things being thus considered, and in some measure hungered after,
and the rather because they are good (as they think) to make one wise, Genesis 3.
6. The poor Soul is all on the sudden possessed with a desperate Spirit of
delusion, which carries it away headlong with some high, light, frothy Notions,
and spiritual wickedness (which drown it in perdition and destruction) that
does feed and tickle the heart ^ while, to the end it may make way for a
farther manifestation of it self in the poor deluded soul; which when it
has attained to, it does then begin to bring the soul into a clearer sight of
those things, which it was loath it should know at the first: but having fitted
the soul by degrees, for a further possession of it self, at last it begins to
hold forth its new Gospel; showing the soul a new Christ, and new Scriptures.
The new and false Christ, is a Christ crucified within, dead within, risen
again within, and ascended within in opposition to the Son of Mary, who was
crucified without, dead without, risen again without, and ascended in a cloud
away from his Disciples into heaven ( Acts 1. 9. 10, 11.) without them.

Now this new and falls Christ has a new and false faith belonging to his
Gospel, which faith is this, to apprehend this Christ crucified within, dead
within, risen again within, and ascended within. But ask them for a Scripture
that does positively prove their Doctrine, they also have a Scripture, but it
is within, it does bear witness within, and if they had not that, (though that
be of the Devils making,) I am sure they would have none out of Gods holy
Scriptures, for they will allow of no crucified Christ but he that was
crucified without the gates of Jerusalem: Heb. 13. 12. Jo 16. 20
Dead and buried in the Sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathea: Jo. 19. 38 39, 40, 41.
was raised again out of that Sepulcher into which Joseph had laid him. Jo.
20. 1. 12.
Who went before his Disciples into Galilee: Mar, 16. 7.
And to Emaus: Luke 24 16.
Showed them his hands and his feet, Luke 24 39, 40.
where the nails had gone through: did eat and drink with them after his
resurrection: was seen of them on earth forty days after his resurrection:
Act. 1. 3.
and after that ascended away in a cloud, out of the sight of his Disciples
into Heaven: Act. 1. 9; 10, 11.
Which Christ ever lives to make intercession for us: Heb. 7. 24. 25. Act. 10.
42 and 17. 31. 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11.
Who will come again also at the end of the world to judgment. l Who also is
the same that has obtained eternal redemption for us: Act. 13. 37, 38, 39.
Romans 3. 25 Ephesians. 1. 7. Rev. 1. 5. Heb. 1. 2. and 9. 14.
This I say, or rather the Scripture^ say, is Gods Christ, Mat. 16* 16. in whom
hs is well pleased, Mat. 3. 17. neither does God own any other, or allow of
any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby
we must be saved, than the name of Jesus of Nazareth, Acts. 4. 10. compared
with v. 11. 1^. But as I told you before, the way to be thus deluded, is first
to render Gods Christ odious and low, with a pretense of some further light and
Revelations: and thus professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, Romans
1 22. But you will say, does not the Scripture make mention of a Christ within?
Col. 1. ^7. and 2 Cor. 13. 5. Romans 8. 10. I answer, I Gods Christ was, Though I
shall go seemingly about in answer to this question, yet it will be very
profitable to them who shall weigh and consider the several sentences hereof.
and is, true God and true man; he was born of the Virgin Mary, true God and
true Man, Mat. 1. 23. and They shall call his name Emanuell, which being
interpreted, is God with us, or God in our Nature, according to 1 Timothy 3. 16.
God was manifested in the flesh; and 1 John 1. 14. The word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, as of the only begotten of the Father
full of grace and truth. And in Heb. 1. 14. Forasmuch then as the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he, that is, God, Heb. 1. 8. also himself
likewise took part of the same, that through death he must destroy him that had
the power of death, that is, the Devil. Now as he was thus true God and true
man, so he became our redeemer, and Savior. Compare the first and second
chapters to the Heb. together, and you may clearly see that this is a glorious
truth, that he, who is the first and the last, Rev. 1. 17, 18. and ^. 8.
humbled himself, and made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of men: And was this all? No,
he humbled himself unto death, even the death of the cross, Phil. 2. 7, 8.
compared with Revel. 1. 17, 18. and Rev. 2. 8. with Gal. 1. 4. Now after this
Christ of God, true God, and true man, had wrought out eternal redemp^ion for
us poor miserable sinners, Heb. 9. 14. compared with 1 Timothy 1. 15. I say,
after he had done this, he ascended up into heaven, and there ever lives to
make intercession for us. Now this Christ, having thus completely wrought out
our Salvation, sends his Disciples abroad to preach the same to poor sinners,
Acts 2. and 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 1. 17. and so many as were ordained to
eternal life, when they heard the word, or the Gospel preached by the
Apostles, which Gospel was this Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 17. compared with ver. 23. I
say, so many as were ordained (...) eternal life, when they hear^ the word, the
Holy Ghost o^ Spirit of Christ fell upon them, Acts 10. 44. compare^ with Acts
13. 48. which di^ lead them into the Redemption and glorious things that the
Lord Jesus had laid up and prepared for them, Joh. 16. 13. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
Which Spirit was the earnest of their inheritance until the redemption of the
purchased possession to the praise of his glory, Ephesians. 1. 13. 14. This earnest
of their inheritance was a glorious encouragment to them that had it, to hope
for the glory that was revealed at the appearing of Jesus Christ, which is the
meaning of that place in Col. 1. 27. The Spirit of Christ is the earnest of
that ^heritance that Christ as he was God and man did obtain. Col. 1 2^. Ephesians
1. 13. 14.
And that will be seen clearly if we truly compare it with Ephesians. 1. 13, 4.
before cited. Now this Spirit, which sometimes is called the Spirit of Christ,
2 Cor. 13. 5. This spirit I say, being given to all those that were ordained to
eternal life, it must ne^ds follow, that those that had not this Spirit, but
did live and die without it, were not ordained to eternal life, and so were
none of Christ's: but were reprobates, Romans 8. 9. for the Spirit of Christ is
the distinguishing Character betwixt a believer and an unbeliever; he that has
it, and is led by it, is a child of God, Romans ^. 14. but he that has it not is
none of Christ's. So then, the The objection answered.
Answer that I give to the question, is this. The Spirit of Christ that is
given to believers, is the Earnest, or hope of that Inheritance that Christ
has already purchased, and is now preparing for so many as he has given, or
shall give this holy Spirit unto. And for the proof hereof, Read Ephesians. 1. 13,
14. In whom (says the Scripture) ye also trusted after that ye heard the word
of truth, the G^spel of your Salvation (...) whom also after that ye believed,
ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance: (which inheritance is the eternal redemption that was purchased by
Christ for poor sinners, Heb. 9. 14.) until the redemption of the purchased
possession, unto the praise of his glory. Again; Gal. 5. 5. for ye through
the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. And Col. 1. 27. the
Apostle speaking of this great mystery, says, To whom God would make known
what is the riches of the glory of this Mystery among the Gentiles, which is,
Christ in you the hope of glory, which glory was then revealed to the Saints no
otherwise then by faith, as the Apostle says, We rejoice in hope of the glory
of God, Romans 5. 2. Which hope is begotten by the Spirits shedding abroad the
love of God in our hearts, ver. 5. which hope is not yet seen, that is, not yet
actually enjoyed; for we are saved by hope; but hope that is seen is not hope;
for what a man sees, why does he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see
not, then do we with patience wait for it, Romans 8. 24, 25. And as I say, the
cause of believers hope is this, Christ, or the Spirit of Christ in them, the
hope of glory. And indeed he may well hope for glory to come, who has already
an earnest thereof given him of God, and that earnest no less than the Spirit
of the Lord Jesus, Romans 8. 16, 17.

But now, this Spirit, which is the Cause of a believers hope, all men have
not, Jude 19. Ephesians. 2. 12. Romans 8. 9. Jo. 14. 16, 17. Therefore what a sad
doctrine is that which says, follow the light that Christ has enlightn^d
every man withal which comes into the world, which light is the Conscience *
that convinces of Sins against the Law; Joh. 8. 9.
and that you may see clearly if you mind that Scripture, Jo. 8. 9. which
says, that the Pharisees which had neither the love of God, nor yet his word
abiding in them, Jo. 5. 38, 43. when they had heard Christ speaking thus to
them, He that is without sin among you, etc. being convicted by their own
Consciences, It is the spirit of the devil that does tender the Scriptures
contemptible and low.
went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even to the least. But the
Devil, that he might be sure not to miss of his design, labors by all means
to render the Scriptures also odious and low, telling them of the Scriptures
within; which Christ never taught, nor yet his Disciples: But they being given
up of God to a reprobate mind, have given themselves over, rather to follow
the suggestions of the Devil, then the holy Scriptures which God has commanded
us to betake our selves to, Isa. 8. 20. compared with Jo. 5. 39. which
Scripture is called the sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6 17. which weapon our Lord
Jesus himself held up, to overcome the Devil withal, Mat. 4. 4, 7, 10. Luke
4. 4. 8. 12. But this design (as I told you) the Devil carries on, by
pretending to show them a more excellent way which they may attain to, if they
be but wise, and follow what is made known to them from the light within them.

But (Reader) that thou may be able to escape the snare of this cunning
hunter, I shall lay thee down some few directions, which if the Lord give thee
grace to follow, thou shall escape these wicked delusions.

And first of all, I admonish thee to be very serious touching thine estate and
condition; and examine thine own heart by the rule of the word of God, whether
or no, thou have as yet any beginnings of desiring after religion: and if thou
find that thou have lived until now in ignorance, and have not set thy
self to remember thy Creator as thou art commanded, Eccles. 12. 1. then I
beseech thee consider that thou art under the wrath of Almighty God, and have
been so ever since thou came into the world, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. being thou in thy
first parents did transgress against thy Maker, Romans 5. 18. Therefore as by
the offense of one, that is, of Adam, ver. 14. judgment came upon all men unto
condemnation. Besides the many sins thou have committed ever since thou wast
born: Sins against the Law of God, and sins against the Gospel of the grace
of God: Sins against the long suffering and forbearance of God, and sins
against his judgments: Sins of Omission and sins of Commission, in thoughts,
words and actions: Consider I say thy condition; yea get a very great sense of
thy sins that thou have committed; and that thou may so do, Beg of God to
convince thee by his holy Spirit, not only of sins against the Law, but also of
that damning sin, the sin of unbelief.

2. If thou by grace art but brought into such an estate, as to see thy self
in a lost Condition because of sin, without the Lord Jesus: then in the next
place, have a care of resting on any duty done, though it be never so
specious; I say, have a care of making any stay any where on this side the Lord
Jesus Christ: but above all strive to believe, that that very man that was
borne of the Virgin Mary, did come into the World, on purpose to save thee, as
well as other poor sinners: I say, thou must not be content till thou art
enabled to say, Gal. 2. 20. Rev. 22. 17.
He loved me, and gave himself for me. And that thou may be sure to attain
to this most precious faith, (for so it is) be much in applying the freest
promises to thy own soul; yea those that have no conditions annexed to them,
as these, or other like, Jer. 3. 3. Jer. 3 John 6. 37. also Jo. 14. 19. Hos.
14. 4. I say, labor to apply to thy own soul in particular, the most
glorious and freest promises in the book of God. And if at any time the devil
besets thee by his temptations (for so is his wonted manner to do, and so much
the more as he sees thee labor to get out of his reach) I say, when he (...)
thee with his fiery darts, be sure to act faith on the most free promises, and
have a care that thou do not enter into any dispute with him; but rather
resist him by those blessed promises that are laid down in the word of God: And
withal, be sure to meditate upon the blood of the Man Christ Jesus, who also
is the true God, and read those Scriptures that do most fully and clearly
speak of it; as 1 John 1. 7. Ephesians. 1. 7. Heb. 9. 14, Romans 3. 25.

But if thou say (as it is often the speech of poor souls lying under a sense
of Sin, and the apprehensions of wrath due to it) I cannot apply the promises
to mine own soul; and the reason is, because, my sins are so great, and so
many: Consider, and know it for a truth, that the more and greater thou see
thy sins to be, the more cause have thou to believe; yea, thou must therefore
believe because thy sinnss are great: David made it an encouragement to
himself, or rather the Spirit of the Lord made it his encouragement, to crave,
yea to hope for pardon, because he had greatly transgressed: Psalm. 25. 11. For
thy Name sake, O Lord (says he) pardon mine iniquity, for it is great. As if
he had said, O Lord, Thy name will be more glorified, the riches of thy grace
will be more advanced, thy Mercy and goodness will more shine, and be magnified
in pardoning me who am guilty of great iniquity, than if thou pardonest many
others who have not committed such heinous offenses. And I dare say, the reason
why thou believe not, is not because thy sins are great, but because thou
do reason too much with that wicked enemy of man's salvation, and give way
too much to the fleshly reasoning of thine own heart. For Christ has said, he
that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6. 37. And again, Though
thy sins be as red as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, Jsa. 1. 18. And
Christ calls those that labor, and are heavy laden, to come to him, with
promise to give them rest, Mat. 11. 28. Wherefore thou must not say, my sins
are too big; but thou must say, because I am a great sinner, yea, because I
have sinned above many of my companions, and am nearer to Hell and eternal
damnation than they, because of my sins, therefore will I cry unto the Lord,
and say, O Lord, Pardon my sins, for they are great.

Now that thou may not be deceived in a matter of so great concernment, have
a special care of these three things. First, have a care of putting off thy
trouble of Spirit the wrong way, which thou may do three ways. First, when
thy Conscience flies in thy face, and tells thee of thy sins, thou do put
off convictions the wrong way, if thou do stop thy Conscience by promising
to reform thy self, and lead a new life, and gettest off thy guilt by so
doing: For though thou may by this means still and quiet thy conscience for
a time, yet thou can not hereby satisfy and appease the wrath of God; Yea,
says God to such, though thou wash thee with Nitre, and take thee much Soap,
yet thine iniquity is marked before me, Jer. 2. 22.

2. If when thou art under the guilt of thy sins, thou put off convictions
by thy performances or duties, and so satisfiest thy Conscience, then also thou
do put off thy Convictions the wrong way: For God will not be satisfied with
any thing less then the blood, righteousness, resurrection, and intercession
of his own Son, Acts. 4. 12. and thou should not satisfy thy self with any
less then God would have thee to satisfy thy self withal; and that is the
water of life, Jsa. 55. 1, 2. which water of life, thy duties and all thy
righteousness is not, for it is but menstruous rags, Jsa. 64. 6.

3. Have a care that when thou art under conviction, thou do not satisfy
thy self with a notion of the free grace of the Gospel; My meaning is, do not
content thy self with any measure of knowledge that thou can attain unto, or
bottom thy peace upon it, thinking thou art now well enough, because thou
can speak much of the grace of God, and his love in Christ to poor sinners.
For this thou may have, and do; and yet be but a companion for Demas, yea,
for Judas and the rest of the damned multitude; As the Apostle says, For all
this thou may be but as sounding brass, and as a tinckling Cymball; that is,
nothing but a sound, 1 Cor. 13. 1. 2, 3.

But Secondly, if thou would not be deceived, then have a care to avoid false
Doctrines, which are according to the spirit of the devil, and not after Christ.

As first, If any Doctrine does come unto thee, that tel^ thee, Except thou art
circumcised after the manner o^ Moses, Nothing ^an make us accepted with God,
but the merits of Jesus Christ.
then can not be saved: That is, if any man come unto thee, and tells thee,
thou must do such and such works of the law, to the en^ thou may present
thy self the better before God, do not receive him: For to him that works
not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness, Romans 4. 5.

2. If any come unto thee, The Ranters doctrine is false.
and bring such a Doctrine as this; That thou may be saved by grace, though
thou walk in the imaginations of thy own wicked heart: his Doctrine also is
divellish, do not receive him, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

3. But if any come unto thee, and does in truth advance the blood,
righteousness, resurrection, intercession, and second coming of that very man
in the clouds of heaven, that was borne of the Virgin Mary; and does press
thee to believe on what he has done, (showing thee thy lost condition without
him) and to own it as done for thee in particular, and withal does admonish
thee, not to trust in a bare Notion of it, but to receive it into thy heart, so
really, that thy very heart and soul may burn in love to the Lord Jesus
Christ again: And does also teach thee, that the love of Christ should and
must constrain thee, not to live to thy self; but to him that loved thee and
gave himself for thee, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Ephesians. 4. 20, 21, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 7 23.
ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of Men. If hi^ conversation
be also agreeable to his doctrine, a believing, honest, loving, self-denying
counteous Conversation; (he also is a true Christian.) Receive that Doctrine *
and receive it really, The doctrine is true, and of God, whatever the man be.
for it is the Doctrine of God, and of Christ, Gal. 4. 4. Gal. 1. 4. Ephesians. 1. 7.
Rev. 1. 5 Acts 13. 38. Joh. 1. 19. Acts 4. 12. Acts 10. 40, 41, 42. and 1 These.
1. 10. Mar. 13. ult. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. 8, 9, 10. Considering the end of their
conversation Jesus Christ, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb.
13, 7, 8.

Again, if thou would not be deceived, then, beware of slighting any known
truth that thou find revealed, or made known to thee in the Gospel; but
honor, and obey it, in its place, be it (as thou think) never so low, Joh.
14. 15.

2. Have a care that thou do not undervalue, or entertain low thoughts of God,
Christ the Son of Mary and the holy Scriptures; but search them, John 5. 39.
And give attendance to the reading of them, 1 Timothy 4. 13 for, I will tell thee
he that slights the Scriptures, does also slight him of whom they testify. And
I will tell thee also, that for this cause, God has given up many to strong
delusions, that they might believe a lie: that they all might be damned who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 11, 12.

Therefore I say unto thee, In the name of the Lord Jesus, the Son of Mary, the
Son of God, the very Creator of heaven and earth, and all things that are
therein: have a care of thy self, for the devil does watch for thee day and
night, 1 Pet. 5. 8. thine own heart also does labor to deceive thee, if by any
means it may, Jer. 17. 10. Therefore do not thou trust it, for if thou do,
thou will not do wisely, Pro. 28. 26. I say therefore, have a care that thou
labor in the strength of the Lord Jesus, to escape all these things, For if
thou fall into any one of them, it will make way for a further income of sin
and the devil, through whose deceitfulness thy heart will be hardened, and
thou will be more incapable of receiving instruction, or reaping advantage, by
and from the Ordinances of Jesus Christ: The rather therefore, Give all
diligence to believe in the Christ of God, which is the Son of Mary, and be
sure to apply all that he has done, and is doing, unto thy felfe, as for thee
in particular; which thing if thou do, thou shall never fall.

And now Reader, I shall also give thee some few considerations, and so I shall
commit thee to the Lord.

1. Consider, That God does hold out his grace, and mercy freely, and that to
every one, Rev. 22. 17. Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7.

2. Consider, That there is no way to attain to this free mercy and grace, but
by him that was borne of the Virgin Mary, for he himself says, I am the way,
the truth, and the life; No man comes to the Father but by me. Joh. 14. 6.
compared with Mat. 1. 20, 21.

3. Consider, if thou strivest to go over any other way thou will be but a
thief and a robber, Joh. 10. 1. compared with ver. 9. And know that none of
these (so continuing) shall enter into the Kingdom of he even, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

4. Consider, that if the devil should be too hard for thee and deceive thee by
persuading thee to embrace, or entertain a new Gospel; which neither Christ,
nor his Disciples did allow of, it would make thee gnash thy teeth when it is
too late.

5. Consider, that though thou have been deluded by Satan to this day, yet if
now thine eyes be opened to see and acknowledge it, though as yet thou have
been either exceedingly wicked, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
or an idle, Mat. 20. 6, 7.
lukewarm hypocritical professor; Rev. 3. 17, 18, 19.
and have stood it out to the last, Exek. 18. 21, 22.
for all this there is hope, and if now thou receive the truth in the love of
the truth, being as willing to be rid of the filth of sin, as the guilt of it,
thou shall be saved.

6. Consider, that the Lord will call thee to judgment for all thy sins past,
present, and what else thou shall practice hereafter; especially for thy
rejecting, and trampling on the blood of his Son, the Man Christ Jesus: And if
thou do not agree with thine adversary, now, while thou art in the way, he
will deliver thee to the Judge, and the judge will deliver thee to the officer,
and if he cast thee into prison; I tell thee, thou shall not come out thence
till thou have paid the very last mite, Luke 12. 58, 59.

And therefore I beseech thee to consider: Here is at this time, life and
death; heaven and hell; everlasting joy, and everlasting torment set before
thee. Here is also the way to have the one, and the way to escape the other.
Now if the Lord shall do thee any good by what I have spoken, I hope it will be
a means to stir me up to thank the Lord that ever he did use such a sinner as
I am in the work of his Gospel. And here I shall close up what I have said,
destring thee ((...) thou be a Christian) to pray for him who desires to
continue

Thy Servant in the Lord Jesus Christ, though less then the least of all
Saints. JOHN BUNYAN.

For as much as many have taken in hand to set forth their several judgments
concerning the Son of the Virgin Mary, the Lord Jesus Christ; and some of those
many having most grossly erred from the simplicity of his Gospel, it seemed good
to me, having had some knowledge of these things, to write a few words, to the
end, if the Lord will, souls might not be so horribly deluded by those several
corrupt principles that are gone into the world concerning him.
NOw that there is such a thing as a Christ, I shall not spend much time in
proving of; only I shall show you, that he was first promised to the Fathers,
and afterward expected by their children. But before I do that, I shall speak
a few words, concerning Gods fore-ordaining and purposing, that a Christ the
Savior should be, and that before the world began. Now God in his own wisdom
and counsel, knowing what would come to pass, as if it were already done, Romans
4. 17. He knowing that man would break his commandments, and so throw himself
under eternal destruction, did in his own purpose fore-ordain such a thing as
the rise of him that should fall, and that by a Savior, Ephesians. 1. 4. According
as he has chosen us in him (meaning the Savior) before the foundation of the
world. That is, God seeing that we would transgress, and break his
commandment, did before choose some of those that would fall, and give them to
him that should afterward purchase them actually, though in the account of God
his blood was shed before the world was, Rev. 13. 8. I say, in the account of
God his son was slain; that is, according to Gods purpose and conclusion, which
he purposed in himself before the world was; as it is written, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who
has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, according to his own purpose
and grace which was given us in Christ before the world began. As also in 1
Pet. 1. 20. where the Apostle speaking of Christ, and the redemption purchased
by him for sinners; says of him, Who verily was foreordained before the
foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last days for you who by
^^m do believe in God that raised him from the dead. God having thus purposed
in himself that he would save some of them that by transgression had destroyed
themselves, did with the everlasting son of his love make an agreement, or
bargain, that upon such and such terms, he would give him a company of such
poor souls as had by transgression fallen from their own innocence and
uprightness, into those wicked inventions that they themselves had sought out,
Eccles. 7. 29. The agreement also how this should be, was made before the
foundation of the world was laid, Tit. 1. 2. The Apostle, speaking of the
promise, or covenant made between God and the Savior (for that is his meaning)
says on this wise, In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie,
promised before the world began. Now this promise, or covenant, was made with
none but with the son of God, the Savior: And it must needs be so, for there
was none with God before the world began, but he by whom he made the world; as
in Prove. 8. from v. 22. to v. 31. which was and is the Son of his love.

This Covenant, or Bargain, had these conditions in it.

First, that the Savior should take upon him flesh and blood, the same nature
that the sons of men were partakers of (sin only excepted) Heb. 2. 14.
Heb. 4. 15. And this was the will or agreement that God had made with him: And
therefore when he speaks of doing the will of God, Heb. 10. 5. he says, a body
have thou prepared me (as according to thy promise, Genesis 3. 15. which I was to
take of a woman) and in it I am come to do thy will O God, as it is written of
me in the volume of thy Book, v. 7.

2. The Savior was to bring everlasting righteousness to justify sinners
withal, Dan. 9. 24, 25. The Messiah, or Savior shall bring in everlasting
righteousness and put an end to iniquity, as it is there written. To make an
end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness. This, I say, was to be brought into the world by
the Savior, according to the covenant, or agreement, that was between God and
Christ before the world began, which God, that cannot lie, promised at that
time, Tit. 1. 2.
Tit. 1. 2.

3. He was to accomplish th^^ everlasting righteousness by spilling his most
precious blood, according to the terms of the covenant or bargain; and
therefore when God would show his people what the agreement was that he and the
Savior had made, even before the Covenant was accomplished and sealed
actually. See for this Zach. 9. When these words were spoken, the Covenant was
not actually sealed; for that was done when the blood of Christ was let out
upon the cross.
(where he is speaking of him that should be the Savior) v. 11. And as for
thee also (meaning the Savior) by the blood of thy Covenant; or as some render
it, whose Covenant is by blood (which is all to one purpose) I (meaning God)
have sent forth the Prisoners out of the pit wherein there was no water. The
meaning is this: As for thee also, seeing the covenant or bargain that was made
between me and thee before the world was, is accomplished in my account, as if
it were actually and really done; with all the conditions that were agreed upon
by me and thee; I have therefore, according to that agreement that was on my
part, sent forth the prisoners, and those that were under the curse of my Law,
out of the pit wherein there is no water; seeing thou also have completely
fulfilled in my account whatsoever was on thy part to be done, according to our
agreement. And thus is that place to be understood in John 17. ^ I pray for
them, I pray not (...) the world, but for th^se the thou have given me (which I
co^venanted with thee, for) thi^ they were, and thou gave the me (but on such
and such co^^ditions as are before mentioned, Zach. 9. And again; Ac^cording as
he has chosen us (...) him (that is, in Christ) be^^^ the foundation of the
world, the we should be holy and To be holy and without blame, is that which
God intended for us in that glorious Covenant; and by it alone we are holy and
without blame before him in love; for we are complete in him alone with whom
the Covenant was made, Col. 2. 10. Tit. 1. 2.
with^^ blame before him in love. No^ seeing this was thus conclud^ upon by
those that did (...) well to the souls and (...) of poor sinners; after (...)
world was made by them, a^ after they had said, Let ^ make man after our own
im^^^ after our likeness, Genesis 1. ^ And after man, whom Go^ had made upright,
had (...) transgression fallen from the state into which God at (...) placed
him, and throw^ himself into a miserable co^^dition by his transgression then
God brings out of his love that which before he and his Son had concluded upon
and begins now to make forth that to the world, which he had purposed in
himself before the world began, Ephesians. 1 4. 9. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Now the first
discovery that was made to a lost creature of the love of God, was made to
fallen Adam, Genesis 3. 15. where it is faid, I will put enmity between thee and
the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, which is the Savior, Gal. 4. 4.
it shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. This was the first
discovery of the love of God to lost man: This was the Gospel which was
preached to Adam in his generation; in these words was held forth to them in
that generation, that which should be further accomplished in after generations.

2. Another discovery of the love of God in the Gospel, was held forth to Noah,
in that he would have him to prepare an Ark to save himself withal^ which Ark
did type out the Lord that was to come, and be the Savior of those whom he
before had covenanted for with God the Father. And God said to Noah, the end of
all flesh is before me. Make thee an Ark of Gopher wood, Genesis 6. 13, 14. And
Chap. 7. 1. The Lord said unto Noah, come thou and all thy house into the Ark,
for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation.

3. God breaks out with a further discovery of himself in love to that
generation in which Abraham lived, Genesis 12. 3. where he says, And in thee,
(that is, from thee shall Christ come through, in whom) shall (...) the families
of the earth be blessed. This was also a further manifestation of the good will
of God to poor lost sinners; and through this discovery of the Gospel, did
Abraham see that which made him rejoice, Ioh. 8. 56.

4. When the time was come that Moses was to be a Prophet to the people of his
Generation, then God did more gloriously yet break forth with one type after
another; as the blood of Bulls, and Lambs, and Goats: Also Sacrifices of diverse
manners, and of several things, which held forth that Savior more clearly
which God had in his own purpose and decree determined to be sent; for these
things (the types) were a shadow of that which was to come, which was the
substance, Heb. 9. 9. 10. Heb. 10. 1, 5, 6, 7. Now when these things were thus
done, when God had thus signified to the world what he intended to do in after
times, presently all that had faith to believe that God would be as good as his
word, began to look for, and to expect that the Lord should accomplish and
bring to pass what he had promised, what his hand and counsel had before
determined to be done.

Now Abraham begins to look for what God had promised and signified; namely,
that he would send a Savior into the world in his appointed time; which thing
being promised, Abraham embraces, being persuaded of the certainty of it, as in
Heb. 11. 13. and this did fill his heart with joy and gladness, as I said
before; for he saw it, and was glad, John 8. 56.

2. Jacob also, while he was blessing his Sons concerning things to come,
breaks forth with these words, I have waited for thy salvation. He was also
put in expectation of salvation to come by this Savior.

3. David was in earnest expectation of this, which was held forth by types and
shadows in the law; for as ye^ the Savior was* not come, which made him cry
out with a longing after it, O that the salvation of Israel were come out of
Sion, Psalm. 53. 6. and again O that the salvation of Israel, were come out of
Sion, Psalm. 147. The thing that David* waited for, was not in his time come,
though before his time it was promised, which makes him cry out, O that it
were come; that it were come out of Sion* Where by the way take notice, that
the true Salvation and Savior of Israel, was to come out of Sion, that is, out
of the Church of God, touching the flesh, as it is written, A Prophet shall the
Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me, Deuteronomy. 18. 15,
18. And again, I have laid help upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one
chosen out of the people, Psalm. 89. 19. And Romans 9. 5. Whose are the fathers,
of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, wh^ is over all, God blessed for
ever. Christ as concerning the flesh, did come of the fathers.

4. Isaiah did prophecy of this, that God would thus save his people, yea, he
breaks forth with these words, But Israel shall be saved with an everlasting
Salvation, Isa. 45. 17. He also tells them how it shall be accomplished in that
53. Chap. Yea, he had such a glorious taste of the reality of it, that he
speaks a^ though it had then been actually done.

5. In the days of Jeremie this that God had promised to the fathers, was not
yet accomplished; in cap. 23. 5. he says, behold the days come says the
Lord, that I will (mark, it was not yet done.) but I will (says God) raise
unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper. In his days
Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, And this is his name
wherewith he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness.

6. He was also to come in Zacharies time, Zach. 3. 8. where he says, For
behold I will bring forth my servant the Branch.

7. He was not come in the time of Malachy neither, though he was indeed at
that time near his coming. For he says himself, Behold, I will send my
Messenger (meaning John the Baptist, Esaias 40 v. 3. Luke 1. 76. and he shall
prepare the way before me; And the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his
temple, even the messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in. Behold he shall
come says the Lord of Hosts.

8. Old Simeon did also wait for the consolation of Israel a long time, Luke 2.
25. where it is said, And behold there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was
Simeon, the same was a just man and devout, waiting for the consolation of
Israel, That is waiting for him that was to be the Savior; as is clear if you
read with understanding a little farther. And it was revealed to him by the
Spirit, God has a Christ own* distinct from all other things whatsoever that
is called Christ, whether they* be Spirit or body, or both spirit and body, and
this is signified, where he says, the Lord Christ.
that he should not see death, before he had fee^ the * Lords Christ, ver. 26.

And thus have I in brief showed you. 1. That there is such a thing as Christ.
2. That this Christ was promised and signified out by many things before he did
come. 3. How he was waited for, and expected before the time that God had
appointed in the which he should come.

The second thing that I will (through the strength of Christ) prove, is this,
that he that was of the Virgin, is he that is the Savior.
And first, I shall lay down this for a truth; That it is not any Spirit only
by, and of it self, without it do take the nature of man, that can be a
Savior of man from eternal ve^g^nce.

Or thus; That (...) will be a Savior of man, must in the nature of man
satis^^e and appeas^ the justice and wrath of God* and the arguments that I do
bring to ^rove it by are these.

1. Because, it was man that had offended, and justice required that man must
give the satisfaction: And therefore, when he that should be the Savior, was
come, he took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of
men, Phil. 2. 7. And in Heb. 2. 14. Because the children were partakers of
flesh and blond he also himself likewise took part of the same: to what end*
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death that is the
Dwell. And is that all? No, but also that he might deliver them who through
fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage.

The second argument is this, because, if a Spirit only could have made
satisfaction for the fin of mankind, and have subdued Satan for man; without
the nature of man; either there had been weakness in God when he made that
promise to fallen Adam, That the seed of the woman should break the serpents
head: (for there had been no need of, and so no room for that promise) or else
God having made it would have appeared unfaithful in not fulfilling his promise
by redeeming the world without it.

3. If a Spirit only could have made satisfaction, and so have saved man; then
Christ needed not to have come into the world, and to have been borne of a
woman, Gal. 4. 4. but in that he must come into the world, and must be borne of
a woman, it is clear, that without this he could not have been a Savior: for
he was made of a woman, made under the law, to this end, that he might redeem
them that were under the law; Implying, Gal. 3. 13.
No subjection to this ( viz. the taking of the nature of Man) no redemption
from the curse of the law. But Christ has delivered from the curse of the law,
(all that believe in his name) being in their Nature made a curse for them.

And this is the reason, why the fallen Angels are not recovered from their
damnable estate, because, he did not take hold of their They that are redeemed
must have redemption wrought out for them through their natures; for except that
nature that sinned do bring in recovery from the curse that is due to it for
its sin, that nature that sinned must suffer for its own sin.
nature, For he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the
seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16.

Now then, seeing this is the very truth of God, I shall next prove, that Jesus
that was born of the virgin, to be the Savior: And first, I shall prove it by
comparing some places of the old and new Testament together, and by some
arguments drawn from the Scriptures.

And first, see Genesis 3. 15. where he is called the seed of the woman, saying, I
will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed;
and so was Jesus, Gal. 4. 4. where it is said, God sen^ forth his son made of a
woman, or borne of a woman.

2. This woman must be a virgin, Isa. 7. 14. where it is said, a virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son and shall call his name Emanuel. And Jesus is he
that was the fulfilling of this Scripture, Matthew. 1. 22, 23. Now all thus was
done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet,
saying, Beh^ld a virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a son, and they shall
call his name Emanuel.

3. The Savior must be of the Tribe of Judah. And this Jacob prophesied of, on
his deathbed, saying, Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise, or
honor, Genesis 49. 8
th^^^ hand shall be on the (...) of thine enemies, thy fathers children shall
bow down before th^e.

And again Mic. 5. 2. But thou Be^hlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among
the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come, that is to be ruler in
Israel. Jesus (...) of the tribe of Judah, and that will clearly appear, i^
you read Mat. 1. Ma^the^ he begins first with Abraham, v. 2. and thence to
Judah, v. 3. from Judah to D^^x^d, ver. 6. From David to Zorobabel, v 13. then
to Jacob the father of Joseph the husband of Mary of whom was borne Jesus, ver.
16.

Now Mary was one of the same house also, and for this con^ider, Jesus came
from the loins of David; see Man. 1. but that he could not do, if M^^ had not
been of the seed (...) ^^vid: For Christ came (...) not from him, for (...) her
not till she had brought forth her first born, Mat. 1. 25. Again* the Angel
told her that he was the Son of David, saying, And the Lord God will give unto
him the throne of his father David, Luke 1. 32.

And again, The Jews knew this very well, or else they would have been sure to
have laid it open before all the world; for they sought by all means to disown
him. And though they did through the divellishnesse of their unbelief disown
him, yet could they find no such thing as to question the right of his birth
from Mary. If it had been to be done, they would no doubt have done it; they
did not want malice to whet them on; neither did they want means so far as
might help forward their malice, without manifest and apparent injury; For
they had exact Registers or records of their genealogies, so that, if they had
had any color for it, they would sure have denied him to have been the Son of
David. There was reasoning concerning him when he was with them, Joh. 7. and I
do believe, part of it was about the generation of which he came. And this was
so commonly known, that the blind man that sat by the way side could cry out,
Jesus thou Some of David, have mercy on me; thou Son of David, have mercy on
me, Luke 18. 38, 39. It was so common, that he came from the loins of his
Father David according to the flesh, that it was not so much as once
questioned. And when Herod demanded ( Mat. 2. 4, 5, 6.) of the chief Priests
and Scibes of the people where Christ should be borne, they said unto him in
Bethlehem of Judea: for thus it is written by the Prophet, And thou Bethlehem
in the land of Judea, art not the least among the Princes of Judah, for out of
thee shall come a Governor that shall rule my people Israel: (For out of thee)
Mark that; if Mary had not been of Judah, Christ had not come out of Judah. But
Christ came out of Judah, therefore Mary is also a daughter of Judah. and this
is evident, as says the Scripture, for our Lord sprang out of Judah, Heb. 7.
14.

Again, when Christ the Savior was to come into the world, at that time the
Scepter was to depart from Judah, according to the prophecy of Jacob. The
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between, his feet
until Shiloh come, Genesis 49. 10.

Now the Scepter was then departed from those that were Jews by nature, and
also the lawgiver, and Herod who was a stranger, and not of Judea, was King
over them, as Caesar's Deputy; and Caesar Augustus imposed laws on them.

The stuborn Jews also confessed the Scepter to be departed when before Pontius
Pilate a Roman governor of ^udea, they cried out against Christ: We have no
King but Caesar, Joh. 19. 15.

Nay further, the Jews from that day to this have been without a ^ing of
their own nation to govern them; they never had the Scepter swayed since by
any of themselves, but have been a scattered despised people, and have been as
it were liable to all dangers, and for a long time driven out from their
country, and scattered over all the Nations of the earth, as was prophesied
concerning them, Je^. 24. 9. Zek. 5. 14, 15. And yet these poor souls are so
horribly deluded by the devil, that though they see these things come to pass,
yet they will not believe. And one reason among many, of their being thus
deluded, is this, they say that the word Scepter in that 49. of Genesis is not
meant of a Kingly Government, but the me^ning is (say they) a rod, or
persecutions shall not depart from Judah, till Shiloh come, Now they do most
grossly mistake that place; for though I am not skilled in the Hebrew tongue,
yet through grace, I am enlightened into the Scriptures, whereby I find that the
meaning is not persecutions, no^ the rod of afflictions, but a Governor or
Scepter of the Kingdom shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh come. And that
this is the meaning of the place, weigh but the very next words of the same
verse, and you will find it to be the Scepter of a King that is meant: for he
adds nor a Lawgiver from between his feet. Mark it, The Scepter, nor a
Lawgiver; the Legislative power depending on the Scepter of the Kingdom shall
not depart from Judah until Shiloh come. According to that Scripture, written
in Isa. 7. 16. For before the Child shall know to refuse the evil and choose
the good, the land which thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her Kings:
which Scripture has been fulfilled, from that same time.

But a word to the Jews exposition of the Scepter to be a rod, or persecutions,
saying, that persecutions shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh come. This
cannot be the meaning of the place; for the Jews have had rest oftentimes, and
that before Shiloh did come, at one time they had rest fourscore years, Judges
3. 30. again, And the land had rest from war, Jo^h. 14, 15. And again, and
the Lord gave them rest round about according to all that he swear unto their
fathers; and there stood not up a man of all their enemies before them, Jos.
21. 44. Jos. 22. 4. 23. 1. And the land had rest forty years, Jud. 3. 11. There
was rest many a time from persecution and from the rod, th^ugh it we but for a
season, but the Scepter, or Kingdom, did no^ depart from Judah, and a lawgiver
from between his feet ti^^ Shiloh came.

Again, to prove that Jesus is the Christ, it is clear from the hand of God
against the Jews for putting him to death: What was the reason why they did put
him to death but this, he did say that he was the Christ the Son of God? Luke
22. 70. Then said they all, Art thou the Son of God? And he said, ye say that
I am: that is, Joh. 9. 37.
I am he as you say, I am the son of God, Yea the only begotten Son of the
Father, and I was with him before the world was. Joh. 17. 5.


Now the Jews did put him to death for his thus owning his own, That is, for
not denying of his Sonship, but making himself equal with God; therefore did
they put him to death, Joh. 1^. 7.

Now God did, and does most miserarably plague them to this very day for their
crucifying of him; But I say, (...) he not been the Christ of God, Gods Son, he
would not have laid sin to their charge, for crucifying him; but rather have
praised them for their zeal, and for taking him out of the way, who did rob
God of his honor, in that he made himself equal with God, and was not. He
would have praised them for doing the thing that was right, as he did Phinehas
the son of Eleaz^r, for executing judgment in his time, on the adulterer and
adultere^le, Numb. 25. 8.

But in that he said he was the Son of God, and accounted it no robbery so to
call himself, Phil. 2. And seeing that they did put him to death, because he
said he was the Son of God, And in that God does so severely charge them with,
and punish them for their sin in putting him to death, for saying that he was
the son of God, it is evident that he was and is the son of God, and that
Savior that should come into the world. For his blood has been upon them to
this very day for their hurt, according to their desire, Mat. 27. 25.

Again, Jesus himself does in his day hold forth that he is the Christ, where
he says, the time is fulfilled and the Kingdom of heaven is at hand, Mat. 1.
15. What time is this th^^ Jesus speaks of? Surely, (...) that of Daniels
Seventy weeks, spoken of in Chap. 9. 24. when he says Seventy weeks are
determined upon thy people to finish transgression, and to make an end of sin,
and to make reconciliation or satisfaction, for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to anoint the most ho^y: this time, that here
Daniel speaks of, is it that Christ says has an end* and the argument that
he brings to persuade them to believe the Gospel, is this, the Kingdom of God
is at hand, (according as was prphesied of it by Daniel) repent, and believe
the Gospel. Repent, and believe that this is the Gospel; And that this is the
truth of God, Consider, that Daniel had a revelation of these days from the
Angel of God, and also the time in which it should be accomplished: Namely,
Seventy weeks was the determined time of the Messiah his coming, from the
time when the Angel spoke these words to Daniel: Seventy weeks, that is about
490 years, if you reckon every day in the said twenty weeks for a year, a day
for a year: a day for a year; for so is the holy Spirits way sometime to
reckon days, Ezekiel. 4. 6. and this the Jews were convinced of, when Christ
says to them, ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, but can you
not discern the Signs of the time? Mat. 16. 3. Do you not see that those
things that are spoken of as forerunners of my coming, are accompli^hed? Do
you not see that the Scepter is departed from Judah? Do you not see the time
that Daniel spoke of is accompli^^ed also? There shall no Sign be given you
but the sign of the Proph^t J^nab^ O ye hypocritical generation, ver. 4.

Another argument to pr^ve that Jesus is ^he Chri^, is this, By his power, the
blind ^ee, the (...) walk, the dea heir, the d^mbe speak, the dead are raised
up, the devils are dis^o^fesled In Es^^ 5 (...). 4. it is thus pro^he^^ed of
him. Beh^ld, your God will come with a vengeance; even God with a recompense,
he will (...) and save you. But how shall we know when he is come? Why, th^n
the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be
unstopped, then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the ^o^gue of the
dumb shall sing, for in the wilderness shall waters break forth, and
streams in the desert, v^r. 5. 6. Now which John would know whether he were
the Christ or no, Jesus sends him this very answer, Go and tell John (says he)
what you hear and see, The bl^nd receive their sight, and the lame walk, the
^epers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the poor have the
Gospel preached unto them, Mat, 1^. 3 4. 5.

Another Argument that does prove this Jesus to be the Christ is this, namely,
he to whom it was revealed that he should see him, though he waited long for
him. So soon as ever he did but see that sweet B^be that was borne of the
Virgin Mary, he cried out, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace
according to thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou have
prepared before all people, as it is in Luke 2. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. The
Prophetess Anna also so soon as she had seen him, gave thanks to the Lord,
and spoke of him (...) all those that waited for redemption in Israel, ver. 36,
37, 38.

Another Argument is the sign of the Prophet Jonah. He, even Jonah, was three
days and three nights in the whales belly, Jonah 1. 17. And Jesus makes this
very thing an argument to the Jews that he was the true Messiah, where he
says, A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, that is, they
would have me to show them a sign to prove, that I am the Savior, and there
shall no sign be given to them, but the sign of the prophet Jonah. For as Jonah
wa^ Three days: and three nights in the whales belly, so shall the So^ of Man
be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth, Mat. 12. 39, 40. And
this, the Apostle makes mention of to be accomplished, where he says, The Jews
slew Jesus, and hanged him on a tree, Act. 10. 39. and laid him in a Sepulcher,
Mat. 27. But God raised him up the third day, and showed him openly, Acts 10.
40.

Another Scripture argument to prove that Jesus is the Christ, is this, that
there was not one of his bones broken, which thing was foretold and typed out
by the paschal Lamb, where he says, thou shall not leave any of it until the
morning, nor break a bone of him, Exodus 12. 46. Numb. 9. 12. which thing was
fulfilled in the Son of the Virgin, (though contrary to the customs of this
Nation) as it is written, Then came the Soldiers and brake the legs of the
first, and of the other that was crucified with him. But when they came to
Jesus and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs, Joh. 19. 31,
32. That the Scripture should be fulfilled, a bone of him shall not be broken,
ver. 36.

Another Scripture demonstration is, in that they did ful^^ the saying that was
written, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they did cast
lots. Psalm. 22. 18. But this was also ^ulfilled in Jesus, as it is written:
Then the Soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and made
four parts, to every Soldier a part, and also his coat. Now the coat was
without seame; They said therefore among themselves, let us not rent it, but
let us cast lot^ whose it shall be; that the Scripture might be fulfilled which
says, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesti^^ they did cas^
lots, John 19. 23, 24.

Again, the Scripture says, they shall look on me whom they have pierced,
Zach. 12. 10. But the Soldier thrust a spear into his side, that it might be
fulfilled which was written, They shall look on him whom they have pierced,
Joh. 19, 34, 35, 36, 37.

Now then, seeing this is the truth of God that Jesus that was borne of the
Virgin is the Christ of God; how horribly are those deceived who look on Jesus
the son of Mary, A believer has no law to fulfill for justification; only
believe on what the man Christ Jesus has done and be saved.
to be but a shadow or type, of something that was afterward to be revealed;
whereas the Scriptures most lively hold him forth to be the Christ of God, and
not a shadow of a spirit, or of a body afterward to be revealed, but himself
was the very substance of all things that did any way type out. Christ to come;
and when he was indeed come, then was an end put to the law for righteousness,
or justification to every one that believes; Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believes, as it is written, Romans 10. 4. That
is, he was the end of the ceremonial law, and of that commonly called the moral
law, the substance of which is laid down, Exodus 20. from the first to the 17
verse, though that law, as handed out by Christ, still remains of great use to
all believers, which they are b^und to keep for sanctification, as Christ
says, Mat. 5. 19. verse, to the end of the Chapter. But Christ Jesus has
obtained everlasting righteousness, having fulfilled all the law of God in the
body of his flesh wherein he also suffered on the Cross without the gates, and
does impute this righteousness to poor man, having accomplished it for him in
the body of his flesh, which he took of the Virgin, Gal. 4. 4 God sent forth
his son made of a woman That is, borne of the virgin.
, made under the law, that is, to obey it, and to bear the curse of it, being
made a Curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. to redeem them that were under the law, That
is to redeem such as were ordained to life eternal, from the curse of the law.
And this he did by his birth, being made or borne of a woman; by his obedience,
yea, by his perfect obedience he became the Author of eternal salvation to all
them that obey him, Heb. 5. 8, 9. and by his doing and suffering, did
completely satisfy the law and the justice of God, and bring in that glorious
and everlasting salvation, without which we had all eternally been undone, and
that without remedy; for without shedding of his blood there was no remission.
See Heb. 9. 22. and Compare it with Heb. 8. v. 3. where he says it is of
necessity that this man has somewhat also to offer, which man was Jesus, ch^.
7. 22.


Secondly, seeing Jesus Christ, ^he son of the virgin Mary, was and is the
Christ of God: and that Salvation came in alone by him, for there is salvation
in no other, Acts 4. 12. then how are they deceived, that think to obtain
salvation by following the Convictions of the Law, which they call Christ
(though falsely) when alas, let them follow those convictions that do come from
the law, and conscience set on work by it, I say, let them follow all the
Convictions that may be hinted in upou their Spirits from tha^ law, they shall
never be able to obtain salvation by their obedience to it, Gal. 2. 10. John.
10. 15. Heb. 9. 12 Gal. 3. 10.
for by the law is the kuowledge of sin, Romans 3. 20. And It is not of works
least any man should boast, as those fond Hypocrites called Quakers would do.
And again, If righteousness comes by the law, then Christ i^ dead in vain,
Gal. 2. 21. Bu^ that no man is justified by the works of the law, it is
evident, for the just shall live by faith, Gal. 3. 10. Which living by faith,
is to apply the Lord Jesus Christ his benefits, as birth, righteousness,
death, blood, resurrection, ascension, and intercession, with the glorious
benefits of his second coming to me, as mine, being given to me; and for me,
and thus much does the Apostle signi^ie, saying; The life which I now live in
the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, when loved me, and gave
himself for me, Gal. 2. 20.

Again, Seeing Gods Christ which was with him before the world was, John 17.
ver. 5. took upon him flesh and blood from the Virgin Mary, (who was espoused
to Joseph the Carpen^er) and in that humane nature yielded himself an offering
for sin, (for it was the body of his flesh by which sin was purged, Col. 1.
22.) I say, seeing the son of God as he was in a body of flesh, did bring in
salvation for sinners, and by this means, as I said before, we are saved, even
by faith in his blood righteousness, resurrection, etc. How are they then
deceived who own Christ no otherwise then as he was before the world began, who
was then without flesh and blood (for he took that in time of the virgin, Gal.
4. 4. Heb. 2. 14.) I say, they are wickedly deluded who own him no otherwise
but as he was before the world was: For in their owning of him thus and no
otherwise, they do directly deny him to be come in the flesh, and are of that
Antichristian party which John speaks of, Joh. 4. 3. v. Every Spirit that
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the (...), is not of God; and this
is that sprit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard that it should come, and
even now already it is in the world. Now because the enemy does most notably
wrest this Scripture, as they do others, to their own damnation, I shall speak
something to it; and therefore, when he says, every Spirit that confesses not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, his meaning is, Every
spirit that does not confess that that Christ that was with the father before
the world was, did in the appointed time of the father come into the World,
took on him a body from the virgin, and was very man as well as very God, and
in that body of flesh did do and suffer whatsoever belonged to the sons of men
for the breach of the holy law of God, and impute his glorious righteousness
which he fulfilled in that body of his flesh, to the souls that shall believe,
(...) what he has done and is a doing in the same body. And that this is the
mind of the Spirit of God, consider, First, he himself says, handle me and
see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have, when his
disciples had thought he had been but a spirit, Luke 24 39, 40. Now that in
this flesh he died for sins, consider secondly that Scripture which says, Who
his own sel^ (that is the Christ that was born of the Virgin) did bear our sins
in his own body on the tree. See Col. 1. 22. in the body of his flesh, says
he, to present you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight. Now
that he arose again from the dead with the body of flesh wherewith he was
crucified, consider, that forenamed Scripture, Luke 24. 39, 40. spoken after
his resurrection.

Now that he went away with the same body from them into heaven, consider that
it is said, And he led them out as, far as Bethany, and he lift up his hands
and blessed them: and it came to pass while he blessed them, he was carried
from them, and carried into heaven, Lu. 24. 50, 51. This is the meaning of
those words therefore; Jesus Christ is come into the flesh, that is, Jesus
Christ has come in the flesh that he took of the Virgin, has brought us who
were enthralled to the law, the devil, and sin, to liberty; and that by his
obedience and death. For as much then a^^h children were (...) of flesh and
blood (says the Scripture) he, Christ also himself took part of (...) same;
Wherefore? that though death (...) desir^y him (...) had the power of (...),
that is the devil, and deliver them who through fear of death, were all their
time subject to (...) Heb. 3. 14, 15. For he was delivered for our offer^es,
and was raised again for our justification, Rom 4. 25. For he, even that man,
through the power of the eternal Spirit, did offer up himself without spot to
God; and thereby, o^ by that offering, obtained eternal redemption for us,
Heb. 9 12, 14. And therefore I say again and again, look to your selves, that
you receive no Christ except Gods Christ: for he is like to be deceived that
will believe every thing that calls it self a Christ. For m^^y, says he, shall
^ome in my name, and shall deceive many, Matthew. 24. 5.

Now having spoken thus much touching the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, I
shall, according to the assiistance of the Lord Jesus, proceed, and shall speak
something of his Godhead, Birth, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and
Intercession; together with, his most glorious and personal appearing the
second time, which will be to raise the dead, and bring every work to judgment,
Eccles. 12. 14.
ANd first I shall show you that he is very God, Coeternal, and also Coequal
with his Father.

2. That by this Son of Mary (which is equal with his Father) the world was
made.

3. That he in the fullness of time, was made of a woman, made under the Law,
^al. 4. 4.
to redeem them them that were (or are) under the Law; that is, was borne of a
woman: And in our nature (for he made himself of no reputation, and took on
him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men) and in our
stead he did fulfill the Law in point of Justification, Romans 10. 4. and was
crucified for our transgre^^ions, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24, 25.

4. That very body of the son of Mary which was crucified, did rise again
from the dead, after he had been buried in Joseph's Sepulcher; that he in that
very body ascended up into heaven; and in that very body shall come again to
these ends. 1. First to judge the quick and the dead. 2. To receive his Saints
to himself. 3. To pass eternal condemnation on his enemies. These things in
brief I shall touch upon, according to the wisdom given me. And therefore that
Christ is very God, I shall first prove by plain texts of Scripture. 2. From
the testimony of God, Angels, and men, witnessed by the Scriptures. 3. By
several Arguments drawn from Scripture, which will prove the same clearly.

1. Then to prove it by the Scriptures; though indeed the whole Book of Gods
holy Scripture, testify these things plainly to be most true, yet there be
some places more pregnant and pertinent to the thing then others; and therefore
I shall mention some of them: As first, mind that in Prove. 8. v. 22, etc. and
there you shall find him spoken of under the name of Wisdom, the same name
that is given him in 1 Cor. 1. 24. I say in that place of the Prove. above
mentioned, you shall find these expressions from his own mouth. The Lord
possessed me in tho beginning of his way before his works of old. I was set up
from everlasting, from the beginning: or ever the earth was, when there was no
depths, I was brought forth; while there was no fountain abounding with water.
Before the mountains were s^tled, before the hills, was I brought forth. While
as yet he had not made the Earth, nor the fields, nor the highest places of the
dust of the world. When h^ prepared the Heavens, I was there; when he set a
compass upon the face of the depth: when he established the clouds above; when
he strengthened the fountains of the deep: When he gave to the Sea his decree,
that the waters should not pass ^his commandment. When he appointed the
foundations of the Earth; then was I by him, as one brought up with him: And I
was daily his delight, rejoicing in the habitable parts of the Earth, and my
delight was with the Son of men. Also John 1. 1 2. you have these words
spoken of Christ, In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and
the word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. As also in Heb. 1. 2.
the Apostle being about to prove the Son of Mary to be very God, says; He
has in these latter days spoken to us by his Son; which son is the son
of Mary, as in Matthew. 3. But (says the Apostle) Heb. 1. 8. to the Son he
says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, a Scepter of righteousness is
the Scepter of thy Kingdom. Again, in John 17 5. you have the words of the
son of Mary for it, saying, And now Father, glorify thou me with thine own
self, with the glory that I had with thee before the world was. Again, he
himself says, before Abraham was, I am: And again, I and my Father are one.
And in Phil. 2. 5. the Apostle says, Let the same mind be in you which was
also in Christ Jesus; who being in the form of God, thought it ^o robbery to be
equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form
of a servant, and was m^de in the likeness of men. Also Rev. 2. 8. Christ
himself says, I am the first and the last, which was dead, but am alive. And
thus have I quoted some few Scriptures to prove that the Son of Mary is the
true God.

2. I shall give you the testimony of God himself touching the truth of this,
viz. That Christ, the Son of the Virgin, is the true God. And first see Zach.
13. 7. and there you shall find these words, Awake O Sword against my
Shepherd, and against the Man that is my fellow, says the Lord of Hosts. In
this place the Lord does call that Man his fellow, which he does not do to any
mere creature. Again, in Man. 3. 17. he calls him his beloved son, saying,
This is my beleved Son in whom I am well pleased And in the foresaid place of
the Hebrews, Cap. 1. the Apostle advancing the Lord Jesus, brings in this
question, To which of the Angels said he at any time, thou art my Son? Ver.
5. But to the Son he s^^h, ver. 8. Thy Throne, O God, i^ for ever and ever.
And this far of the testimony that God himself has given of the Son of
Mary, Jesus Christ.

3. The Angels do show that he is God; first, in that they do obey him. 2. in
that they worship him.

1. That they obey him, is clear, if we compare Rev. 21. 9. with Rev 22. 6. In
the first of these places we find, that there came one of the Angels of the
seven vials, which had the seven last plagues, and talked with John. He came
not of himself; for in that 22 Cap. ver. 6. he says, The Lord sent his Angel,
to show unto his servants the things that must be done. Now, in the 16. verse
you may see who this Lord God is: He says there, I Jesus, have sent mine
Angel, to testify these things in the Churches. Compare Rev. 1. 1.
* I am the ro^t (as well as) the Offspring of David, and the bright and morning
star. I say this obedience of the Angels does testify that Jesus, which is the
Son of Mary, is the true and very God; for they do obey God only.

Secondly, The Angels do show that the son of Mary is the true God, in that
they do not only obey him, but worship him also yea, they are commanded so to
do, Heb. 1. 6. where it is wri^ten, When he brings his first bego^ten into
the world, he (i e) God, says, And let all the Angels of God worship him, viz.
the son of Mary. Now the Angels themselves command that we worship none but
God, Rev. 22. 8 9. When John fell down to worship the Angel, the Angel said,
See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants; worship God Now, if the
Angels should command to worship God, and they themselves should worship him
that by nature is no God, they should overthrow themselves, in comm^^ding one
thing, and doing another, and so lose their own habitations, and be shut up in
chains of darkness, to be punished with everlasting destruction from God
himself at the great day. And thus much concerning the testimony of Angels
touching Jesus, the Son of Mary, the Son of God, yea, very an^ true God
Isa. 9. 6.

Now follows David hi^ testimony among other of the Saints, who witness
Jesus the Son of Mary to be true God; and that you may find in Psa. 110. 1.
where he says, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, till I
make thine enemies thy footstool. Also Isaiah in the 9. Chap. verse 6. says,
For unto us a Child is borne, unto us a Son is given, and the government
shall be upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called Wonderful,
Councellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. Of the
increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the Throne of
David (which is not, nor never was the heart of any believer) and upon his
Kingdom to order it, and to establish it with judgment and justice, from
henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will do this. Again,
see Peter's testimony of this son of Mary; When Jesus asked his Disciples,
Whom say ye that I am? Peter, as the mouth of the rest, said, Thou art Christ,
the son of the living God, Matthew. 16. 16. Also, when Thomas, one of Christ's
disciples, would not be persuaded by the others that they had se^n the Lord,
except he did also see in his hands the print of the Nails, and put his
fingers into the prin^ of the Nails, and thrust his hand into his side (...) he
would not believe. Says the son of Mary, Reach hither thy singers, and
behold my h^nds, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my ^ide, and be
not faithless but believing; and then Thomas breaks out with a mighty faith,
and a glorious testimony for his Master, and says, My Lord, and m^ God, John
20. 27, 28. Again, see Paul's testimony of him, Romans 9* where, speaking of the
s^nne of Mary, he says, That Christ came of the Fathers, who is over all, God
blessed for ever, amen. And the Apostle John does also witness as much, 1 John
5. 20. where speaking of Jesus Christ, he says on this wise, And we know that
the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we might
know him that is true, and we are in him that is true (Who is that? why, says
John) even in his Son Jesus Christ. Who is he? Why, This is the true God, and
eternal life.

I could here also bring in the testimony of the very Devils themselves, as
Luke 4. 41. Luke 8. 28. where he is by them acknowledged to be the Son of the
living God: But it is needless so to do, for we have plainly proved it
already.

Now follows the several Scripture-arguments, which will prove that Jesus the
son of Mary is very God.

And First, There is none but he that is the true God, can satisfy the justice
of the true God for the breach of his holy Law: But if you compare Isa. 53. 6.
with Matthew. 3. 17. you shall find, that Jesus the son of Mary did give God a
full and complete satisfaction for the breach of his holy Law; therefore Jesus
the son of Mary must needs be the great and true God.

Secondly, He that has power of his own to lay down his life, and has power
of his own to take it up again, mu^^ needs be the true God; but this did Jesus
the son of Mary the Virgin; therefore h^ must needs be the true God, Job. 10.
8. Rom, 1. 4.

Thirdly, If all the Quakers and Ranters in the world,: were but under the
guilt of one sinful thought, it would make them to cry out with Cain my
punishment is greater then I can bear, Genesis 4. 13.
There was never any able to bear the sins of all the believers in the world,
that ever were, now are, or hereafter shall be, but the true God But Jesus, the
son of the Virgin Mary, did bear them all, in his own body on the (...) 1
Pet. 2. 24. Isa. 53 6. Therefore Jesus the^ son of Mary must needs be true
God as well as man.

Fourthly, There was never any mere man able, by his own power, to overcome the
Devil in all his temptations, but he that is also the true God (for Adam in his
state of innocence was overcome by them, and fell under them:) But Jesus the
son of the Virgin did overcome them all by his own power; there ore (see Genesis
3. 15. Isa. 51. 9. Isa. 63. 5. Matthew. 4. Luke 4.) he is very God as well as
very man.

Fifthly, There was never any that did call himself the true God (and was not)
which did please God in so doing, But Jesus the son of Mary did call himself
the true God, or account himself equal with God (which is all one) yet God was
well pleased with him, Mat. 3. 17.
Phil. 2, 6, 7. John 8. 29. And therefore Jesus the son of Mary must needs be
true God as well as man.

Sixthly, There was never any that had all power in heaven and in earth, but
the true God. Jesus the son of the Virgin Mary, who was espoused to Joseph,
has all power in Heaven and in Earth in his own hand. Therefore, Matthew. 28.
18. he is the true and great God.

Seventhly, There was never any able to keep poor souls from falling from God,
saving he that is that is the true God. Jesus the son of Mary did, and does
this, John 10. 27, 28, 29, 30. John 17. 12. Therefore, etc.

Eighthly, Never could any justly call himself the first and the last, except
the true God, nor truly (as the Lord did say) I am. But these did Jesus the
son of Mary, Rev. 1. 1. compared with v. 17, 18. Rev. 2. 8. and Joh. 8. 58.
Therefore Jesus must needs be true God as well as man.

9. Never was there any that could absolutely forgive sins but God, Mar. 2. 7
Luke 5. 21. But Jesus the son of the Virgin Mary, can forgive sins, Luke 5.
10. Mar^ 2. 5. Therefore Jesus the son of M^r^ must n^eds be true God as well
as man.

Tenthly, The Scriptures never call any the true and living God; but he that is
the true God. The Scriptures call Jesus, the son of the Virgin the true God,
Isa. 9 6. ^ John 5. 20. Therefore he is the true and great God.

11. He that made all things, whether they be visible or invisible* whether
they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, must needs be the
true God But Jesus the son of the Virgin Mary did make all these, Col 1. 14. ^0
the 18. John 1. to v. 16. Heb. 1, 2, 3. And thereforre he is the true God as
well as man.

12. The blood of a mere finite creature could never obtain eternal redemption
for sinners. Romans 3. 25.
But the blood of Jesus, Romans 5. 9.
the son of the Virgin Mary, has obtained eternal redemption for sinners,
Heb. 9. 12.
Ephesians. 1. 7. Heb. 9. 12, 14. Heb. 10. 19, 20. Therefore the blood of the son
of the Virgin must needs be the blood of God. And so the Apostle calls it,
saying to the Pastors of the Churches, feed the Church of God, which he has
puchased with his own blood, Acts 20. 28. 1 John 3. 16.

13. Never was there any that could overcome death in his own power, 1. Tim. 1.
10.
but the true God* Hos. 13. 14. Jesus the son of the Virgin Mary did overcome
death by himself, Heb. 1. 2,
Heb. 2. 14 Therefore, etc.

14. He that searches the hearts, and knows the thoughts of men, must needs
be the true God, Jer. 17. 10. But Jesus the son of the Virgin does, Luke 5.
22. Luke 9. 47. John 2. 24, 25. Therefore, etc.

15. He that by his own power commands the raging Sea, must needs be the true
God, Job 38. 10, 11. Prove. 8. 29. But this did Jesus the son of Mary, Mark 4.
39, 41. Luke 8. 24. Therefore, etc.

16. He that is the wisdom, power, and glory of God, must needs be the true
God. But Jesus the son of the Virgin is all these, as 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. Heb.
1. 1, 2, 3. Therefore Jesus the son of the Virgin must needs be true God as
well as man.

The next thing that I am to pro^ is this; Namely, That by ^^ Jesus Christ, the
son of the Virgin, the World was made And here I shall be brief, ^^ving
touched on it alrea^ Only I shall lay down some^ the Scriptures, that hold for
this to be a truth, and sop^ to the next things that I^tend to speak of.
ANd therefore in the f^^ place, see Heb. 1. 1, 2. wh^ the Apostle is speaking
of ^^ Son of God, which So^^ was borne of the Virgin M^^ according to these
Script^^ mentioned before, Matthew. 18, to 23. Luke 2. Matthew. 3. ^ where God
himself says, T^ is my beloved fonne, etc. T^ Son of God, says the Ap^stle,
by whom God has spoken to us, by him also he made the Worlds. And Col. 1. the
Apostle speaking of the deliverance of the Saints, says, Who has delivered
you front the power of darkness, and translated you into the Kingdom of his
dear Son, in whom we have Redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness
of sins. And is that all? No, but He is (also) the image of the invisible
God, ver. 15. The first born of every Creature. And in ver. 16, 17. By him were
all things created that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers:
all things were created by him and for him. And he is before all things, and by
him all things consist. Also Heb. 1. 10. it is thus written of this Son of
God, Christ Jesus the son of Mary, And then Lord in the beginning have laid
the foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy hands. And
again, John 1. and the first nine verses, the Evangelist or Apostle, speaking
of the Son, says, In the beginning was the Word, which Word was the Son, Rev.
19. 12, 13. This Word or Son was with God, and the Word was God. All things
were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. In him
was life, and the life was the light of men; And the light shined in the
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. But in the ninth verse of
this first Chapter of Joh. it is written, That was the true light, which
lights every one that comes into the world. Now seeing the Lord has brought
me thus far; and because the Quakers by wresting this Scripture, do not only
split themselves upon it, but endeavor also to split others, I shall therefore,
before I proceed any further' speak a few words to it; and they are these that
follow.

The Apostle in these nine first Verses, or most of them, is speaking of the
Divinity, or Godhead of the Son of Mary, and showing that he made the World:
Now in this ninth verse he speaks of Man as he is in his coming into the
world, and not as he is a regenerate person. Now every man, as he comes into
the world, receives a light from Christ as he is God, which light is the
Conscience, that some call Christ, though falsely. This Light, or Conscience,
will show a man that there is a God, and that this God is Eternal, Romans 1. 20.
This light does discover this Eternal God, by his works in the world; for says
the Scripture before named, The invis^ble things of him (meaning God) from the
Creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made; even his eternal power and Godhead. This light also will reprove of
sin, or convince of, and make manifest sins against the Law of this Eternal
God: So, that man, before he is regenerate, is able by that light to know that
sins against the Law, are sins against God, as is manifested in the unconverted
Pharisees, who, (as Christ told them) had neither the love of God, nor the word
of God abiding in them, John 5. 38, 42. yet knew sins against the Law to be
sins; for they were offended at a woman for committing adultery, which act was
forbidden, Mat. 5. 27, 28. by the Law; and ti^ said also, they were convicted
of sin by their own consciences, John 8. 7, 8, 9, 10.

Again, the Apostle writing to the Corinthians, and admoni^hing them to walk
orderly, 1 Cor. 11. 14. turns them to nature it self, saying, Does not even
Nature it self teach you etc. This Light surely is that wherewith Christ as he
is God, has enlightened every man that comes into the world, which does
convince of sins against the law of God. Therefore, as the Apostle says, Romans
1. 20. They are left without excuse. That is, they have their own conscience
that does show them there is a God; and that this God is to be served and
obeyed: and the neglect of this will be sure to damn them, though the obedience
to the Law will not save them because they are not able to make a full
recompense to God for the sins that are past; neither are they able for the
time to come, to yield a fall, con^in^al, and complete obedience ^o the law of
this Alm^ (...) finite, and Etern^l (...) as many as are of (...) of (...) for
it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the book of the Law to do them. If works would do it, what need as
there of Faith? But it is evident that works will not ^^ve, becau^^ there must
be (...) in the blo^d of Jesus the Son of Mary.
But that no man is justified by the works of the law, it is evident: For the
just shall live by faith, Gal. 3. 10, 11.

But now, though Christ, as he is God, does give a light to every one that
comes into the world, which light is the conscience (as they themselves
confess) yet it does not therefore follow that this conscience is the spirit
of Christ, or the work of grace, wrought in the heart of any man whatsoever;
for every one has conscience, yet every one has not the spirit of Christ: For
Jude speaks of a company of men in his days, who had not the spirit of Christ,
Jude 19. These be they who separate themselves, (says he) sensual, having not
the spirit. Yea, Heathens, Turks, Jews, Pagans, Atheists, have that also that
does convince of sin, and yet are so far from having the spirit of Christ
in them, that it is their great delight to serve their lusts, this world, their
sins; whereas the Apostle says plainly, If Christ be in you, the body is
dead because of sin, but the spirit is life for righteousness sake. So that
those who are alive to their sins, Romans 8. 10
have not the spirit of Christ. Nay, let me tell you, the very Devils
themselves, Jude 6.
who were thrown from their first state for sin, 2 Pet. 2. 4. have such a
taste of their horrible sins, that when they did but suppose that Jesus was
come to put an end to their tyrannical dealing with the world, and to bring
them to judgment for their sins (to which they know they shall be brought)
it made them cry out, Art thou com^ to torment us before Mat. 8. 26.
the time? James does also signify thus much to us, where he says, The Devils
also believe, and tremble, James 2. 19. Which belief of theirs is not a
believing in Christ to save them; for they know he did not take hold on their
Nature, Heb. 2. but they do believe that Christ will come to their everlasting
torment; and the belief of this does make these proud Spirits to tremble.

Again, Man at his coming into the world has this conscience given him, which
does convince of sin, John 1. 9. John 8. 9. yet man as he comes into the
world, has not the spirit of Christ in him; for that must be received
afterward, by the preaching of the word, which is preached by the Ministers and
servants of Jesus Christ. This is Gods usual way to communicate of his spirit
into the hearts of his Elect; and this is (...) in so many words, where ( Peter
preaching to a certain number, the Scrpture says, While Peter yet spoke these
words, the holy Ghost, o^ holy Spirit, fell on all those that heard the Word,
And again, in Galat. 3. verse 2. and 5. compared together, Received ye the
spirit by the works of the Law. (says the Apostle) or by the hearing of Faith?
or the Gospel, which is the word of faith preached by us? Which Spirit, as
Christ says, the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither
knows him, though his children shall have fellowship with him, to the great
comfort of their own souls, John 14. 16, 17.

But now, this merciless butcherer of men, the Devil, that he might be sure to
make the soul fall short of glory, if possible, endeavors to persuade the
soul, that its state is good; that it has the spirit of Christ in it; and for
a proof of the same, says he, turn thy mind inward, and listen within, and
see if there be not that within thee that does convince of sin: Now the poor
soul, finding this to be so, all on haste (if it be willing to profess)
through ignorance of the Gospel, Claps in with these motions of in own
conscience, which does command to abstain from this evil, and to practice that
good; which if neglected, will accuse and torment for the same neglect of
others, ( Romans 2. 15) both now and hereafter.

Now the soul seeing that there is something within that convinces of sin,
does all on a sudden close with that* supposing it is the spirit of Christ, and
so through this mistake is carried away with the teachings and convictions of
its own Conscience (being misinformed by the Devil) unto the works of the law;
under which, though it work all its d^ys, and labor with might and maine, yet
it never will be able to appease the wrath of God, nor get from under the curse
of the Law, nor get from under the guilt of one sinful thought the right way,
which is to be done by believing what another man has done by himself, Romans
5. 15.
Heb. 1. 2, 3. without us on the cross, without the gates of Jerusalem. See
for this, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Heb. 13. 12. The one says he bare our sins in his own
body on the tree; the other says it was done without the gate.

And thus the poor soul is most horribly carried away headlong, and thrown
down violently under the curse of the Law, under which it is held all its
days, if God of his mere mercy prevent not; and at the end of its life does
fall into the very belly of Hell.

Again, that the Devil might be sure to carry on his design, he now begins to
counterfeit the work of grace: Hence he is very subtle, and does transform
himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. Now he makes the soul believe
that he is its friend, and that he is a Gospel-Minister; and if the soul will
but be led by what shall be made known unto it by the light (or conscience)
within, it shall not need to fear, but it shall do well.

Now he counterfeits the new Birth, persuading them that it is wrought by
following the light that they brought into the ^world with them. Now he begins
also to make them run through difficulties; and now like Baals Priests, they
must lance themselves with knives, etc. Now they must wear no hatbands; now
they must live with bread and water; now they must give heed to seducing
spirits, and doctrines of Devils, which bids them abstain from marriage, and
commands them to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received
with thanksgiving, of them which love and know the truth, as in 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2,
3. Now they must not speak, except their spirit moves them, (I do not say the
spirit of Christ) though when it moves, they will speak such sad blasphemies,
and vent such horrible Doctrines, that it makes me wonder to see the patience
of God, in that he does not command, either the ground to open her mouth, and
swallow them up, or else suffer the Devil to fetch them away alive, to the
astonishment of the whole world.

Object. But you will say, Does not the Scripture say that it is the spirit of
Christ that does make manifest or convince of sin? John 16. 8.

Answ. Yes, it does so. But for the better understanding of this place, I shall
lay down this; namely, That there are two things spoken of in the Scriptures,
which do manifest sin, or convince of sin.

First, the Law, as says the Apostle, Romans 3. 20. Therefore by the deeds of
the Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight, viz. Gods sight: For by the
Law is the knowledge of sin.

2. The Spirit of Christ does make manifest, or reprove of sin, as it is
written, John 16. 8. 9. And when he ( the Spirit) is come, he will reprove the
world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment; of sin, because they
believe not on me, says the Son of Mary, which is Christ.

Now, the Law does sometimes by its own power manifest sin without the spirit
of Christ; Mat. 27. 3, 4, 5. He hanged himself immediately after.
as in the case of Judas who was convinced of the sin of marther, which made
made him cry out, I have sinned; yet at that time he was so far from having
the spirit of Christ in him, that he was most violently possessed of the Devil,
Luke 22. 3, 4.

Again, Sometimes the spirit of Christ takes the Law, and does effectually
convince of sin, of righteousness, and judgment to come.

Quaer. But you will say, How should I know whether I am convinced by the Law
alone, or that the Law is set home eff^ctually by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus
upon my Conscience?

Answ. Unto this I answer. First, when the Law does convince by its own power,
without the help of the spirit of Christ, it does only convince of sins against
the Law; as of swearing, lying, stealing, murdering, adultery, covetousness,
and the like. I say it does only make manifest sins against the Law,
pronouncing an horrible curse Gal. 3. 10
against thee, if thou fulfill it not, and so leaves thee; but it gives thee no
strength to fulfill it completely, and continually, (which thou must do, if
tho^ wilt be saved thereby) Now thy own strenth being insufficient for these
things, having lost it in Adam, thou art a breaker of the Law. Here the Law
finds thee in the Sins, and condemns thee for thy sins: but gives thee no power
to come wholly out of them: neither does it show thee thy right Savior, to
save thee from them For a proo^ here of take the carriage of the Pharisees
toward our Savior, who while they trusted in Moses, crucified Jesus, (...)
Cor. 2. 8.
(which is the son of the Virgin Mary, the Man Christ Jesus) but commands thee
upon pai^ of eternal d^mnation to continue in all things that are written in
the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. And therefore if thou have been
convinced of no other Sins, but wh^t are against the Law, for all thy
convictions and horror of Conscience, thou may be but a Natural^man at the
best, and so under ^he curse, Gal. 3. 10.

But, Objection
perhaps thou will say, I am not only convinced of my sins against the law, I
have also some power against my sins so that I do in some considerable measure,
abstain from those things that are forbidden in the Law.

This thou may have, and do, as thou think perfectly, as those blind
Pharisees called Quakers, do think that they also do, and yet be but a natural
man: And therefore I pray consider that place in Romans 2. 14. the Apostle there
speaks on this wise, concerning the Gentiles obedience to the law, For when the
Gentiles which have not the law, do by Nature the things contained in the law,
these having not the law are a law unto themselves; which show the work of the
Law written in their hearts. Which work of the law, Christ as he is God, has
enlightened every one withal, that comes into the world, Joh. 1. 19. which as
the Quakers say, does convince of Sin, yet of no other than sins against the
Law: and therefore must needs be all one light, or law; for the law is light,
Prove. 6. 23. and gives the knowledge of Sin, Romans 3. 20. And therefore as I
said before, so say I now again, If thy convictions are not other then for the
sins against the Law, though thy obedience be the strictest that ever was
wrought by any man (except the Lord Jesus, the son of Mary) thou art at the
best but under the Law, and so consequently under the Curse, and under the
wrath of God, Gal. 3. 10. Joh. 3. 36. whether thou believe it or not.

But now the second thing, Answ. 2.
how thou should know, whether the Spirit of Christ does effectually set
home the law upon thy Conscience, or not; And therefore to speak directly to
it; If the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, the Son of God, does set home the Law
effectually; then the same Spirit of Christ shows thee more sin then the
Sins against the Law. For first it shows thee, That all thy righteousness is
but as filthy-rags, Isa. 64. 6. Thou see, all thy praying, meditation,
hearing, reading, almsdeeds, fasting, reformation, and whatsoever else thou
have done, do, or can do being an unbeliever, deserves at the hands of
God his curse, and condemnation, and that for ever: And therefore thou art so
far from trusting to it that in some measure thou even loathest it, and art
ashamed of it, as being a thing abominable, both in Gods sight, and thine own.
Phil. 3. 8.
Thou countest thy own performances, when at best, and thine own
righteousness, a bed too short to stretch thy self upon; and a covering 109
narrow to wrap thy self in, Isa. 28. 20.

And these things thou see not overly, or slightly, and as at a great
distance, but realy, and seriously, and the sense of them sticks close unto
thee. Secondly, it shows thee that thou have no faith in the man Christ Jesus
by nature, and that though thou had no other sins, yet thou art in a
perishing state because o^ unbelief, according to that 16. of John v. 9. of
Sin, because they believe not on me. If therefore thou have been convinced
arigh^ by the Spirit, thou have seen that thou had no faith in Christ the
Son of Mary, the Son of God, before conversion. It shows thee also, that
thou can not believe in thine own strength, though thou would never so
willingly, yea though thou would give all the world (if thou had it) to
believe, Because, faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29.
thou could not. In the next place It will show thee, that if thou do not
believe in the Man Christ Jesus, And that with the faith of the operation of
God, Col. 2. 12.
thou will surely perish, and that without remedy. Also it shows thee that if
thou have not that righteousness, which the Man Christ Jesus accomplished in
his own person for sinners, I say if thou be not clo thed with that, in stead
of thine own, thou art gone for ever and therefore says Christ, (speaking of
the Spirit) when he is come, he shall reprove the world of Sir, and of
righteousness too, That is, The Spirit shall convince men and women of the
sufficiency, of that righteousness that Christ in his humane nature has
fulfilled: So that they need not run to the law for righteousness; for Christ
is the end of the law for righteousness, to every one that believes, Romans 10.
4. Again, if the Spirit of Jesus set eth home the Law upon thy conscience, thou will freely confess, that although the law curses, and condemns thee for
thy sins, and gives thee no power either to fulfill it, or to come out of thy
sins: yet God is just in giving that law, And the Law is ^oly, and the
Commandment hol, and just, and good, Romans 7. 12. Lastly, it also convinces of
Judgment to come; He (viz. the Spirit) shall reprove the world of Sin, of
Righteousness, yea, and of Judgment too. Acts 24. 25.
Then does the soul see, that that very Man, that was borne of the Virgin Mary,
crucified upon the cross without the gates of Jerusalem, shall so come again;
even that same Jesus, in like manner, Acts 1. 11
as he was seen to go up from his Disciples. Yea, they that are thus convinced
by the Spirit of Christ, know that God has appointed a day, in which he will
Judge the world in righteousness by that Man whom he has ordained, Act. 17. 31
which is the Man Christ Jesus: for it is he that is ordained of God to be the
Judge of quick and dead, Acts 10. 42.

And now, O man, or woman, who ever thou art, that art savingly convinced by
the Spirit of Christ, thou have such an endless desire after the Lord Jesus
Christ, that thou can not be satisfied or con^ent with any thing below the
blood of the son of God to purge thy conscience withal; even that blood that
was shed without the gates, Heb. 9. 14.
Heb. 13. 12. Also thou can not be at quiet, till thou do see by true
faith, that the righteousness of the son of Mary is imputed unto thee, and put
upon thee, Romans 3. 21, 22, 23. Then also thou can not be at quiet, till thou
have power over thy lusts and corruptions, till thou have brought them into
Subjection to the Lord Jesus Christ. Then thou will never think that thou have
enough faith. No, thou will be often crying out, Lord, give me more precious
faith, John 16. 5, 7.
Lord, more faith in thy righteousness, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
more faith in thy blood and death, more faith in thy resurrection: And Lord,
Heb. 7. 24, 25.
more faith in this, that thou art now at the right hand of thy Father in thy
humane Nat^r, making intercession for me a ^iserable sinner. And then O poor
Soul, if thou comme^h but hither, thou will never have an itch^ng ear after
another Gospel. Nay, thou will say, If a Preshyter, or Anabap^^st, or
Independent or Ranter, Gal. 1. 8.
or Qu^ker, or Papist, or Pope, or an Angel from heaven preach anyother Gospel,
let him be accu^s^d, again, and again. And thus have I briefly showed you,
First, how Christ, Romans 1. 20.
as he is God, does enlighten every man that comes into the world. Secondly,
what this light will do, vi^^ show them that there is a God by the things that
are made; and that this God must be worshipped Thirdly, I have showed you the
difference between that light, and the Spirit of Christ the Savior. Fourthly,
I have also showed you how you should know the one from the other, by their
several effects. As first, the first light convinces of sins, but of none other
then sins against the Law; neither does it show the soul a Savior, or deliver
(for that is the work of the Spirit) from the curse vvherevvith it does curse
it: Joh. 6. 44.
But I shevved you, Joh. 16. 24
that when the Spirit of Christ comes, and works effectually, it does not
only show men their sins against the Law; but also shows them their lost
condition, if they believe not in the righteousness, blood, death,
resurrection, and intercession of Jesus Christ the Son of Mary, the Son of God.
And thus much I thought necessary to be spoken at this time, Mat. 3. 17.
touching the nature of Conviction. Heb. 1. 9.


Now in the third place.
Though I have spoken something thing to this thing already, namely, concerning
our Lord the Savior, yet again, in few words, through grace, I shall show,
that he was made, that is, born of a woman, and made under the Law, to redeem
them that are under the Law. My meaning is That God is our Savior.

And for this, see Isa. 45, 15. where you have these words; Verily, thou art a
God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel, the Savior, and ver. 21. 22, you
have these words. Who has told it from ancient times? have not ^ the Lord? and
there is no God besides me: a just God and a Savior, and there is none besides
me. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth: Why, who art thou?
for I am God, and there is none else. Also in Isa. 54. 5. For thy maker is
thine husband, the Lord of hosts is his name: and thy redeemer the holy one of
Israel, the God of the whole earth shall he be called* read also verse. 6, 7, 8.
of that Chapter. I could abundantly multiply Scriptures to prove this to be a
truth, but I shall only m^nd you of two or three, and so pass on. The first is
in Jude, ver. 25. To the only wise God our Savior be glory, and Acts 20 28.
Joh. 3. 16. But you will say, 1 John 5. 20.
How is God a Savior of Sinners, Object.
seeing his eyes are so pure that he cannot behold iniquity, Habak. 1. 13.?

For answer hereunto. First, Gal. 4. 4.
when the fullness of time was come wherein the salvation of Sinners should be
actually wrought out, God sent forth his Son, (which Son is equal with the
Father) made of a woman, made under the Law, Joh. 1. 1.
(that is, he was subject to the power and curse of the Law) to this end, Joh.
17. 5
to redeem them that are or were, Joh. 10. 3
under the Law, that is, Gal. 3. 1^ 13.
to deliver us from the Curse of the Law being made a Curse for us.

From whence take notice, that when the salvation of Sinners was to be actually
wrought out, then God sent forth the everlasting son of his love into the
world, clothed with the humane nature, according to that in Joh. 1. 14. Heb.
2. 14. And 1 Timothy 3, 16. which says, God was manifested in the flesh, that is,
took flesh upon him.

2. This Son of God, which is equal with the Father, did in that Flesh, which
he took upon him, completely fulfill the whole Law: So that the Apostle says,
Christ is the very end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes. Romans 10. 4
This righteousness, which this Christ did accomplish, is called the
righteousness of God, Romans 3. 22. This righteousness of God, is by the faith
of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe: my meaning is, it is
imputed to so many as shall by faith lay hold on it. This is also part of the
meaning of that speech of the Apostle: Romans 3. 22
As many as were baptized into Christ, Gal. 3. 27.
have put on Christ. That is, by faith have put on the righteousness of
Christ, with the rest of that which Christ has bestowed upon you, having
accomplished it for you. This is also the meaning of the Apostle, Col 2. 9, 10.
where he says, For in him (that is, the son of Mary, chap. 1. 13 14.)
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. And ye are complete in him.
That is, in his obedience, and righteousness. Which also the Apostle himself
does so hard press after, Phil. 3. 6, 7, 8. saying, Doub^lesse, I count all
things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord,
which Lord was crucified by the Jews, as it is 1 Cor, 2. 8. for whom, that is
for Christ, I have suffered the loss of all things (as well the righteousness
of the Law, in which I was blameless, Phil. 3. 6
as all other things) and do count them but dung. that I may win Christ: And be
found in him, not having on mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but
that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith; Romans 3. 22.
which is unto all, and upon all them that believe. That place also in the
ninth of Daniel, v. 24, 25. holds forth as much, where prophesying of the
Messiah, he says* that it is he that came to finish transgression, and to make
an end of sin, and to make reconciliation for iniqui^y, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness. Now that the righteousness of the Son of Mary is
it, mind the 26. verse; where he says thus, And after Threescore and two weeks
shall Messiah be cut off, That is, Christ shall be crucified. But not for
himself, That is, not for any sin that he has committed; for he committed
none. Then surely, it must be for the sins of the people. Joh. 11. 50. as the
high Piest said, It is expedient that one man should die for the people, which
man was the true Messiah, Dan 9 24 Which also is the Son of Mary, Mat. 1. 18,
19* 20, 21, 22. And the son of God, Mat. 3. 17. And also the true God, 1 John
5. 20. And this Messiah, this son of the virgin, this son of God, this tree
God, did not die for himself, for he had not offended; Neither did he fulfill
the Law or finish transgression, and bring in everlasting righteousness for
himself, for he had not sinned, 1 Pet. 2. 22. therefore it must of necessity
follow, that this righteousness of God, this everlasting righteousness, is
imputed to all, and upon all them that believe, Romans 3. 22. 2 Cor. 5. 19. 20,
21.

But Secondly, this Messiah, this Son of Mary, this Son of God, this true God,
he was put to death for the sins that his children had committed, according to
that saying, Herein perceive we the love of God, in that he laid down his life
for us. 1 John 3. 16.
Also in Acts 20. the Apostle speaking to the Pastors of the Churches, Acts 20.
28.
says, ^ Zac. 12. 10
Feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood.

Now, I would not be mistaken. I do not think, or say, that he died in his
Divine Nature, ^ Pet. 2. 24
but as it is written, He in his own body on the tree did bear our sins; which
tree was the Cross, Col. 2. 14. And as the Apostle says again, Who when he
had by himself purged our sins, ^ Heb. 1. 3.
sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. And again, the Apostle
speaking of this glorious God, says on this wise, Col 1. (being before
speaking of his Godhead) in the 19. ^ol. 1. 19, ^o, 21, 22.
ver. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell; and
(having made peace by the blood of his cross) by him to reconci^^ all things
to himself: By him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in
heaven. And you who were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your minds by
wicked works, yet now has ^e reconciled. But how? Why in ver. 22. he tells
you, that it is in the body of his flesh, through death, to present you holy
and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight. That is, Christ, who is the
true God, after that he had finished all actual obedience on earth, John 19.
22, 30.
did in the power and strength of his Godhead See Heb. 9. 14. and read that
verse with under standing.
yield up himself to the wrath of his Father, Isa. 63. 3.
which was due to poor sinners (and that willingly) according to that saying in
1 Pet. 3. 18. ^or Christ also has once suffered for sinners, the just for the
unjust: That is, the Son of God for poor sinners; that he might bring us to
God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit. Again, 1
Pet. 4. ^. For as much then as Christ has suffered for us (not for himself) in
the flesh, Dan. 9. 26.
in his own body (which he took of the Virgin, 1 Pet. 2. 24.) let us arm our
selves with the same mind. Romans 6 10
That is, let us die to sin as he did, that we might live to God as he did, and
does. And thus have I briefly showed you, ^. That the Son of Mary is very God.
2. That he made the world. 3. That he is our Savior, Col. 1. 22.
and how. 4. That he died for sinners, and how. Namely, not in his divine
nature, but in his humane, in his own body, and in his own flesh, redeeming,
his Church with his own blood, Acts 20. 28. and with his own life, 1 John 3.
16. John 10. 8.

We shall now pass on to some other things (the Lord willing touching his
Burial, Resur^^ction, Ascen^on, Intercession, Second coming, Resurrection of
the body, and Eternal Judgment.

His Burial proved.
And first, I shall prove by several Scriptures that he was buried, and so
pass on. First therefore see that place, Matt. 27. v. 57. and so forward.
After that Jesus the Son of God had been crucified a while, he gave up the
Ghost; that is, he died; and after he had been a while dead, Joseph of
Arimathea went in to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus, and Pilate gave
consent thereto. And Joseph took the bod^ of Jesus, and wrapped it in clean
linen, and laid it ( viz.) the body of Jesus in his own Tomb, and rolled a
stone upon the mouth of the Sepulcher, and departed, Matthew. 27. 57, 58, 59, 60.
Also in Luke 24 51, 52, 53 The Apostle Paul also teaches so much, 1 Cor. 15.
3, 4. where he says, For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also
received, how that Christ di^d for our sins according to the Scriptures. And
that he was buried. Again, in Acts ^3 29. the Apostle speaking there of Jesus
Christ, says, And when they had fulfilled all that was written of him, they
took him down from the tree, and laid him in a Sepulcher. And so much touching
the burial of Jesus Christ the son of God.

In the next place I am to prove, That that very man, whom the Jews did
crucify between two thieves, called Jesus Christ, did rise again. That very
man, with that they body wherewith he was crucified upon the cross, did rise
again out of the grave in which he was laid. And this I shall prove by
Scriptures, by the testimony of Angels, by Christ's own words after he was
risen, and by the testimony of the Apostles in the Scriptures. First therefore
cons^der, Psalm. 16. v. 10. where the Prophet speaks on this wise of Christ's
Resurrection; For thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou
suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Which words the Apostle Peter cites in
Acts. 2. from v. 2^. to 32. also Isa. 26. 19. in the person of Christ, says,
Thy dead meh shall live, together with my dead body shall they rise. See also
John 20. 15, 16. where mention is made of his appearing unto Mary Magdalen, and
he called her Mary, and she called him Master; which signifies that he was
risen, and that she knew him after his resurrection; for he was come out of the
grave; see ver. 6, 7, 8. Again, another Scripture is that in Luke 24. 1, 2, 3.
The Disciples of Jesus coming to the Sepulcher, thinking to anoint the body of
Jesus, found the stone that was on the mouth of the Sepulcher rolled away; and
when* they wen^ in, they found not the body of the Lord Jesus; and at this they
were troubled and perplexed, v. 4. But as two of them went up to Emmaus, and
were talking of what had befallen to Jesus, Jesus himself drew near, and went
with them, v. 15. Another Scripture is that in Mark 16. v. 9. which says on
this wise, Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he
appeared first to Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seven devils. Where
take notice how the holy Ghost lays it down in these words, Out of whom he had
cast seven Devils. To intimate to u^ the certainty, that it was the same Jesus
that was born of the Virgin Mary, who did many miracles, and cured many
diseases, who did also cast seven Devils out of Mary Magdalen, that did rise
again. Yea, says the holy Ghost, it was the same Jesus that did work such a
wonderful miracle on Mary, he appeared to her first, out of whom he had cast
seven Devils. And let these Scriptures suffice to prove the Resurrection of the
son of God.

Secondly, you shall have the testimony of the holy Angels also by the
Scriptures. And first look into Mark 16. 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. verses, the words
are these, And they (viz the Disciples) said among themselves, Who shall roll
away the stone? They had a good mind to see their Lord, but they could not, as
they thought, get away the stone which covered the mouth of the Sepulcher. And
when they looked (that is, toward the Sepulcher) they saw the stone rolled
away, for it was great; and entering into the Sepulcher, they saw a young man,
that is, an Angel, sitting on the right side, clothed with a long white
garment. And they, the disciples, were affrighted. And he said unto them, be
not afraid (you have no cause for it) you seek Jesus of Nazareth which was
crucified; He is is not here, he is risen, behold the place where they laid
him. What Scripture can be plainer spoken then this? Here is an Angel of the
Lord ready to satisfy the Disciples of Jesus, that he was risen from the dead.
And lest they should think it was not the right Jesus he spoke of, yes, says
he, it is the same Jesus that you mean; you seek Jesus of Nazareth, do you not?
why, he is risen, he is not here. But do y^u speak seriously, and in good
earnest? Yea surely, if you will not believe me, behold the place where they
laid him. This Scripture, or Testimony, is very clear to our purpose. But
again, the next place is in Mat. 28. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. In the third verse there is
an Angel (as before) bearing witness of the resurrection of Jesus. His
countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow, and for fear of
him the Keepers did shake, and became as dead men. And the Angel answered and
said unto them ( viz. to the women who came to seek Jesus) Fear you not: but
let them that seek to keep the Lord in his grave fear They are they that had
need to fear and tremble; for they deny faith of the son of God.
if they will; for you have no ground of fear, who seek Jesus who was crucisied;
He is not here, for he is risen; he cannot in be body here and risen too: If
you will not believe me, come, see where the Lord lay, and go quickly and tell
his Disciples that ^e is risen from the dead, and behold, he goes before you
into Galilee, there shall you see him. But shall we be sure of it? yea, says
the Angel, Lo, it is that have told you. See how plainly this Scripture also
does testify of Christ his Resurrection. Here, says the Angel, you seek a
Savior, and none will content you but he, even the same that was crucified:
Well, you shall have him, but he is not here. Why where is he then? He is risen
from the dead. But are you sure it is the same that we look for? yea, it is the
same that was crucified, v. 5. But where should we find him? why he goes
before you into Galilee, where he used to be in his life time, before he was
crucified: And that you might be sure of it there to find him, know that he is
an Angel of God that has told you, ver. 7. And thus have you in brief the
testimony of the Angels of God, to witness that Jesus the Son of the Virgin,
the Son of God, is risen from the dead.

Object. But you will say, might they not be deceived? Might not their eyes
da^le, and they might think they did see such a thing, when indeed there was no
such matter?

Answ. Well, because it is so difficult a matter, to be persuaded of the truth
of this thing, that Christ is raised again out of the grave, that very man,
with that very body; though these things that have been already spoken, might
be enough (through grace) to satisfy, yet because of the unbelief of some, we
shall turn to some more of those infallible proofs that are spoken of in Acts
1. 3. to prove the point yet more clear. And therefore First of all, do but see
how the Lord does deal with an unbelieving Disciple, John 20, v. 23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28. You shall see in the 23. ver. Christ after his resurrection, is
talking with his Disciples, but Thomas was not with them. But when the
Disciples saw him again, they said to him, We have seen the Lord, ver. 25. but
Thomas would not believe them. Another time Jesus comes to his disciples again,
and then Thomas was with them* then so soon as the lord had said, Peace be unto
you, he turned himself to Thomas, and said to him. Thomas, Reach hither thy
finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my
side, and be not faithless but believing, v. 27. As* much as if the Lord should
have said, O how does the Lord condescend! to the end he might strengthen the
faith of one that is weak.
Come Thomas, thou have doubted of the truch of my resurrection very much; Thou
say that thou will not believe, except thou do feel with thy fingers the
print of the nails, and do thrust thy hand into my side. Come Thomas, reach
hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and see if there were not the nayls
driven through them; And reach hither thy hands and thrust them into my side,
and feel if I have not the very hole in it still, that was made with the
Spear that the Soldier did thrust into it, and be not so full of unbelief,
but believe that my resurrection is a glorious truth.

Another in fallible proof, is that in Luke 24. from the 36. to the end of the
44. verse. In v. 36 it is said that the Lord, (even while they were talking)
stood in the midst of them, and said, Peace be unto you: But they were so far
from being at peace, that they were terrified, and supp^sed that they had ^eet
a Spirit. And Jesus said to them, Why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts
arise in your hearts? what, do you think that I am a spirit? Do you think
your eyes dazzle? behold my hands and my feet. Look well upon me, and see my
hands, and the holes in them; and likewise my feet, and the holes in them, and
know that it is I my self, and not a spirit, as you suppose, Know, that it is I
my self, and not an there. Does your heart fail you? then take hold of me with
your hands, yea, handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as
ye see me have. And when he had spoken these things, he showed them his hand^
and his feet: As if he had said, Come my Disciples, take special notice of me;
do not be daunted, nor affrighted, but consider that it is I my self. Well,
they could not beli^ve as yet, but wondered that such a thing as this should
be: And while they were thus wondering he did give them another infallible v
41. As if the Lord had said, Come my Disciples, I see that you are very full of
unbelief, if you have here any meat, you shall see me eat before you all. And
they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honey comb, and he did eat
before them. Again, v. 42. the Lord strives with another infallible proof
against their doubting, saying, My Disciples, do you not remember Mark 8. 31
Mark 14. 21.
and I had before I was crucified, how that I told you, that all things must be
fulfilled, which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets
concerning me? Another infallible proof was, that appearance of Tiberias, where
he came to them on the shore, and called them, and provided for them a dinner,
and wrought a notable miracle while he was there with them at that time,
Namely, John 21. read that whole chapter. Act. 10. 4.
the catching of 153. great fishes, and yet their net brake not. Which as it
was a great miracle, so it did also show his power and authority over his
creatures. Besides his eating and drinking with his Disciples after his
resurrection; And also his preaching to them, Acts 1. 3. This is not the lead,
viz. that he was with his Disciples on earth 40 days, which was almost six
weeks, speaking to them the things concerning his kingdom: which was a mighty
confirmation of their faith in his resurrection.

I shall now briefly touch two or three Scriptures which hold forth the
Disciples testimony of his resurrection. And the first is in Acts 10. 40, 41.
In which place, the Apostle speaking of the Lord Jesus, says, ^im (...) raised
^y the third day, and showed him openly, yet not to all the people, but to
witnesses chosen before of God, even to us (says the Apostle:) who did eat and
drink w^^h him after he was risen from the dead. Again, Acts 4. 10. And Acts
13. 29. 30, 31. The words run thus. (the Apostle speaking of Jesus, says) And
when they had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took him (...) the
tree, and laid him in a Sepulcher. See 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5, 6, 7. 8.
But God raised him from the dead, and he was seen many d^yes of them which
came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses unto the
people. And thus far to^ching his resurrection from the dead.

In the next place, I am to prove that this very man, Christ Jesus, the Son of
the Virgin, in his very body, the same body that was crucified is above the
clouds* and the heavens. And though this is made light of by those men called
Quakers, and other in^idels of this generation: Yet I am sure that it will
prove true to their cost who re^ect it as erroneous and vain. But to prove it,
First I shall prove that he is ascended. Secondly, that he is ascended above
the clo^ds, and the heaven. For the first, that he is as^e^d^d, see Ephesians. 4.
8. 9, 10. Whereore (says the Apostle) when he ascended up on high, he led
captivity captive, and gave g^fts unto men. Now that he ascended, what is it
but that he descended first into the lower parts of the earth? he that
descended is the same that also ascended (again) up, far above all heavens.

Again, Joh. 20. 17.
read Joh. 20. 17. where Christ after his resurrection from the dead, says to
Mary Magdalene, Touch me not: for I am not yet ascended to my Father: That is,
I have not yet ascended with this my body wherewith I was crucified on the
cross. But go to my brethren, and ^ell them (meaning his Disciples) that I do
asc^nd to my father and your father, to my God and your God.

Object. But in that place ( may some say) Ephesians. 4. 10. he that descended, is
said to be the same that ascended: Now there was no humane nature with God in
heaven before the world was; Therefore if he be but the same that was with the
father from all eternity, then the humanity of the Son of Mary is not ascended
into heaven.

Answ. First, for answer, It is clear from Joh. 1. 1. that the word, Tit. 1. 2.
or Son of God, as he was a Spirit, was with the Father before the world was.
But now, in the fullness of time, that is, when that time that the Father and he
had concluded on, was come, Gal. 4. 4.
God sent forth his son (which was with him before the world was Joh. 7. 5.)
made of a woman, that is born of a woman. And he took on him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men, Phil. 2. 6, 7 Now as he was
borne of a woman, as he was in the likeness of men, ^o he ascended to the right
hand of his Father, in our nature And for this, I pray turn to Act. 1. Acts 1.
10, 11.
and there you shall find, that he is the same that was born of the Virgin,
that very man that was crucified; if you compare v. 3 with v. 9, 10, 11. you
will find it so to be. Now in the v. 9. after he had spoken many things, while
they beheld, that is, while his disciples looked on him, he was taken up, that
is, he was taken up from them into heaven, as in v. 11. and a cloud received
him out of their sight. And while they looked up steadfastly toward heaven, as
he went up (which heaven, was not within them; if it had, they needed not to
have looked toward the clouds and the heaven without them) behold two men stood
by them, not in them, in white apparel, which also said (that is, the two men,
or Angels which stood by them said) Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up
into heaven? Here again, they did not look within them, but stood gazing or
looking after the Lord Jesus, the son of Mary, who was carried away from them
in a cloud, v. 9. But why (say the Angels) do you stand gazing so much into
heaven: your Master will come again after a certain time. See Mat. 25, 19.
Man. 13 34 Acts 1. 3.
For* This same Jesus, Namely, which was crucified* which rose again* and ha^h
been with you these 40 days, which also you see go into heaven, shall so come,
(namely in a cloud) as ye have seen him go into heaven. But shall be not lose
his body before he come again? No say the Angels, h^ shall so come, that is, as
ye have seen him go; in like manner, that is with the same body. Or else I am
sure he cannot come in the same manner if he lose his body before he comes
again; for he went thither with that body. But that same Jesus that was
crucified, is he that went, or ascended up into heaven. If you compare Luke 2^.
v. 39* 40, 41, 42, 43. with the 50. and 5^. verses of the same Chap. you may
clearly find it so to be. And therefore if he come again in like manner, he
must come again with the same body wherewith he was crucified.

Object. But you will say, The Scripture says, he that descended is the same
that ascended, which to me (say you) implies, none but the spirits ascending.

Answ. For answer, We do not say, (as I said before) that it is another that
ascended, but the very same. That is, the very same Christ, that was with the
father from everlasting, did come down from heaven. That same Christ also that
came down from heaven did ascend up thither again: only, he descended without a
body from heaven, and took flesh and blood upon him from the Virgin. And though
he descended without a body, yet (he) the very same Christ, that descended
without a body, the same did ascend again with a body, even that very body that
he took of the virgin Mary, Act. 2. 30. 31.
See Luke 24. from 39 to the 51. verses. Now let me give you a Similitude, for
it is warrantable; for both Christ and his Apostles did sometimes use them, Joh
15. ^.
to the end, 1 Cor. 9. 24. 25.
souls might be the be^ter inf^rmed. The similitude is this. Suppose there
come into thine house a man that is naked, and without clothing, though he go
out of thy house again well clothed; yet the same man that came in without
clothing, is the same man also that go^s out of thy house, though very well
clothed. Even so it is in this case. The Lord Jesus came into the womb of the
virgin, ^ Spirit, Mat. 1^. 18. but he came out of the womb clothed with a body,
and went up into heaven again clothed with a body. Compare Luke 24. 39. with
Act. 1. 11. and Act. 2. 30, 31.

Now also I shall lay down some few things to be considered, for Joh. 14. 3.
Joh. 16. 7. yea, Mat. 25. 19
says he, I go and prepare a place for you) and then I will (after a long
time) come again and take you to my self, that where I am, that is, whither I
am going, there ye may be also. Now I say, If Christ had not gone from his
Disciples (for that was his meaning) touching his bodily presence; I say if he
had not gone away from them, in respect of his bodily presence, he had said
more then he had performed; which is horrible blasphemy once to assert; Which
going of his, is his going into heaven. See, 1 Pet. 3. 22.

Secondly, consider, that there the promise of the father, Luke 24. 49. 50, 51.
which promise was the shedding forth in an abundant manner the blessed Holy
Ghost. And for this see Act. 2. 33. Therefore being by the right hand of God
(which is in heaven) exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of
the holy Ghost, he has sh^d f^rth this which ye now see and hear^. For David
is not ascended into the heavens, but he says himself, The Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool.
Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly ( for it is very true) that
God has made that same Jesus whom you have crucified, both Lord and Christ.

Thirdly, Consider, that if he were on earth, he could not be a Heb. 8. 4. Now
the man Christ Jesus is a glorious Priest, Heb. 7. 24. in the heavens, Heb. 9.
24. And therefore he is able to save to the uttermost, all that come to God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. (That man v. 25.)

Fourthly, If he be not gone his Apostles doctrine is false, yea, the witness
of the Angels also, 1 Pet. 3. 22. Act. 1. 9, 10, 11. which to think were
damnable infidelity in any man.

Fifthly, Ephesians. 6. 9.
Know that he is gone in o^ heaven because the Scriptures say he is; 1 Pet. 3.
22.
which is the very truth of God, Heb. 9. 24.
spoken by his holy Apostles and Prophets: yea, holy men of God, spoke them as
they were moved by the holy Ghost.

Sixthly, Consider, If thou say that that man is not gone into heaven, then
thou must also conclude, that he is still in the grave: and if so, then thou
say, that the Prophets, Apostles, Angels, Christ, God, and all are liars,
who have testified these things in the Scriptures for glorious truths, Isa. 26.
19. Acts 10. 1* Pet. 3. 2.
v. 40, 41, 42. and 13. v. 30, 34, 36, 37, 38. Ac^s ^. 9, 10, 11. ^eb. 9. 24.
^ev. 1. 17, 8. ^ev. 2. 8.
And as the Apostle says of himself, and the rest of the Apostles and
ministers of Jesus Christ, And we are found false witnesses of God, because we
have testified of God that he raised up Christ, whom he raised not up, if so ^e
the dead rise not. But now is Christ risen, and become the first fruits of them
that sleep. For as by man came death, by Man came also the resurrection from
the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 15, 20, 21.

Secondly, The Scripture speaking of highest implies a lower.
now I am to prove that he is above the clouds and the heavens, my meaning is,
he is above the lowest heavens: for there are 3 as appears in 2 Cor. 12. 1, 2,
3, 4. I knew a man in Christ (says Paul there) caught up into the third
heaven: now,

Heaven in Scripture, is taken sometimes metaphorically, and sometimes
properly. First, metaphorically it is taken for the Church and people of God;
as in Rev. 12. 12. Secondly, properly, it is taken for the material heaven,
where the Sun, Moon, and Stars are placed; as in Genesis 1. v 8, 14, 15, 16,
compared together; above which heaven. Jesus the Son of Mary is ascended.

Therefore I pray you consider with me a little: John 14. 2, 3.
and first, that when he went into this Joh. 16. 7.
heaven into which he is gone, Acts 1. 9, 10, 11.
he went AWAY from his Disciples, as it is written, If I go not away, the
comforter will not come; so that he did not go into a heaven within them in his
person, and humane nature. If so, he must needs go into that heaven without
above the clouds and the Stars, Genesis 1. 8, 5, 16.

2. Consider, he was caught away in a cloud, yea and was caught upwards from
them, as it is Acts 1. 9, 10, 11. and carried away into heaven, yea, and his
disciples stood gazing or looking up after him into heaven, which heaven must
needs be that above the clouds. 1. If you consider the posture of the
Disciples, they looked upwards after the cloud that did take him away. 2.
Consider the manner of his going, it was in a cloud. 3. He was received out of
their sight. 4. And so received up into heaven; which heaven must needs be
above the clouds, Job 22. 12, 13, 14.
where God is in his special presence. But further,

3. Consider, that those believers that are alive at this day in the body, are
absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 6. but now, if the man Christ were ascended
into that heaven within them* he would neither be absent from them, nor they
from him; but in that he is absent from them touching his bodily presence, and
they from him touching the same* it is evident that that heaven into which he
is ascended, must needs be without above the clouds.

4 Consider, that that heaven into which the man Christ is ascended, must
contain him till the time of restitution of All things, as in Acts 3. 21. into
which heaven he has been ascended above sixteen hundred years by computation.
And I am sure there is not a Saint that does live in this world half so long,
before he fall asleep, and be gathered to his fathers; so that that heaven
into* which he is? scended, is not within, but must needs be that above the
clouds. But,

5. Consider, that he that ascended from his Disciples, was a man, with flesh
and bones, not a spirit only; for handle me, and s^e, (says he) for a spirit
has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have, Luke 24. 39, 50, 51. verses. Now
let the Adversaries show by the Scriptures that there is any place in them
called heaven, that is able to contain a man of some four or five foot long,
the space of fifteen or sixteen hundred years; besides that, therefore, it must
needs be that heaven without which is above the clouds and Stars.

6. Consider, That heaven into which the Lord Jesus that man is ascended, must
not contain him alwa^es for, says the Apostle, 1 These. 4. 16. The Lord himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of an Archangel. So that
there is another descending from that heaven into which he is ascended; and his
descending from that heaven is to this end, namely, to take his people to
himself, as it is v. 17. so that it is clear, that it is not any heaven within
thee, into which the Man Christ that was born of the Virgin Mary is ascended,
but it must needs be that heaven without which is above the clouds. 1. If thou
consider, that the place into which he is ascended, even the heaven into which
he is entered, Heb. 12. 22.
is the same place where all the the deceased Saints are in their Spirits:
Therefore says Paul, I desire to depart, and to be with Christ which is
better. Now Paul did not in this place, P^il, 1. 23. mean the enjoying of
Christ only in the spirit; for that he enjoyed in a great measure when he spoke
these words; but he speaks of a dying, and a being with Christ after this life
is ended; as is clear if you compare the 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 25, and 26, verse,
together, being absent from him while he was here in the b^dy, 2 Cor. 5. 6. for
whilst at hom^ in the body, we are absent from the Lord.

So that that heaven into 1 Timothy 2. 5
which the Man Christ is ascended, Joh. 16. 6, 7.
is not into his Church on earth; Joh. 14. 1, 2, 3.
but into heaven without above the clouds and the Stars. And this David does
prophe^ie of, Psalm. 47. 5. where he says, God is gone up with a shout, the
Lord with the sound of a Trumpet. Now Christ, as God merely could not go up,
being no less in one place then in another; but as God man, or in his humane
nature he went up; as will clearly appear, Epes. 4 8, 9, 10. where he speaks
of his trium^h over all the enemies of his people at his resurrection and
ascension into heaven above the clouds.

8. When Christ does descend from that heaven into which he is now ascended,
his Saints and he will meet one another, just in the air, according to the
Scripture, 1 These. 4. 16, 17. for (says he) the Lord shall descend from heaven
with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God, and
the dead in Christ shall rise first, (that is, they shall come out of their
graves) and then we which shall be saved alive (at that day) and remain, shall
be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and
so shall we ever be with the Lord.

Pray mark here a little, and see what heaven the man Christ is ascended into,
and see if it be not the heaven without, above the Sun, Moon, and Stars.

When Christ and his Saints do meet the second time together, the one ascends
and the other descends; the one is caught up in the clouds toward heaven, the
other descends from heaven toward the earth, and they must needs meet one
another just in the air, Phil. 3. 20.
that is, between the heaven and the earth. So then, 1 These 1. 10.
the one coming from heaven, and the other from the earth, and their meeting
being in the air, which is between heaven and earth, is an undeniable
demonstration, that that heaven into which the man Christ is ascended, must
needs be that heaven without above the Sun, Moon and Stars And thus much
touching the Son of Mary, his ascending up into the heaven without above the
clouds, Acts 1. 9, 10, 11. Acts 3. 21, and 1 Pet. 3 22

In the next place,

Now I shall prove the intercession of the man Christ Jesus, to be in the
heaven that I have been speaking of; though some have mocked at it and others
have called it juggling, whose names here I shall not m^ntion; only I shall
admonish them that they do not blaspheme the truth and Son of God in his
intercession

I shall quote some of the Scriptures that hold out this truth, and so pass on,

And first of all, see Psalm. 16. 4. where David prophesying of the intercession
of Christ, says, their sorrows shall be multiplied, that husten after another
God, ( speaking of the wicked) their drink offerings of blood will I not offer,
nor take up their names into my lips. Now, compare this with Heb. 8. 4. where
he says, If he were on earth, he should not be a Priest. And Heb. 9. 24. For
Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands ( meaning the temple
which Solomon built) which are figures of the true: but into heaven it self,
now to appear in the presence of God for us. Wherefore he is able to save to
the uttermost, them that come to God by him: seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them, Heb. 7. 25

But you will say, is there a man made mention of here? Yes; for the Scripture
says, There is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
the Man Christ Jesus. And in that 8. to the Heb. made mention of before; where
the Apostle is speaking of Christ's priestly office, as he is in the heavens,
compared with other Priests that are on earth; he says v. 3. for every high
Priest is ordained to offer gifts and Sacrifices; wherefore (speaking of
Christ) it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer: For if he
were on earth he should not be a Priest, seeing there are Priests that offer
according to the Law, (which law was the law of Moses, Chap. 9. from 19. to 23.
where also he is speaking of the Priesthood of the Priests under the law, and
their offering of the blood of Bulls and ^oats, ( verse 12. compared with verse
19, 20, 21.) And of the Lord Jesus the high Priest of Saints, and of his blood
( verse 14. compared with verse 24.) Now as men under the Law did offer up the
blood of B^lls and Goats, so the man Christ Jesus did offer up his own blood to
his father; and this you may clearly see, if you compare Heb. 9. 14. where he
says, How much more shall the blood of Christ who through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot to God; purge your consciences from dead works to
serve the living God, with Heb, 10. 12. where he s^i^h, But (...) man (meaning
the s^n of the Virgin (Cha^ 2. 14. compared with Mat. 1. 21. after he had
offered one sacrifice f^r s^ns for ever, sat down at the right hard of God.
Again. Heb. 7 the (...) I mentioned before, you shall find his intercession
plainly held forth, if you read verse 22. and so on, where the Scripture says,
By so much was Jesus made the surety of a better testament. And truly they were
many Priests (meaning the Priests under the Law) because they were not (...) to
continue by reas^n of death, P^^v. ^. 8.
(That is, P^^v. 17. ^8.
the high Priests under the Law could not live ever in this world, because it
was appointed to all men once to die.) But when he speaks of Christ Jesus, he
says on this wise, But this man, because he continues ever, has an
unchangeable Priesthood; wherefore he (this man) is able to save to the
uttermost them that come to God by him, seeing he (this man) ever lives to
make intercession for them. And thus in brief have I proved through the
assistance of the Lord, the intercession of the son of Mary, which is also the
son of God. And this concerning Christ's Priestly office, might serve also for a
proof of his being in the heaven without above the Stars. But all men may see
(unless they be blind) that these are the truths of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
of God his father; and that those men that oppose them (as the Quakers do) are
very violently possessed of the Devil, and beside themselves; and have neither
the truth of God, non his spirit in them, 2 John verse. 9, 10, Joh. 5. 38. 42.

And now through the assistance of the Lord, I shall come to the last that I
promised, and that is to prove, That this very man Christ, will come to judge
the quick and the dead.

And first, I shall prove the truth it self, viz. that that man shall come
again to judge the world, quick, and dead.

Secondly, I shall show you that his coming will be very shortly.

Thirdly, What shall be done a^ his coming.

Fourthly, Who shall stand when he shall come, and who not. For the first,

That that man that was ^orn of the Virgin Mary, shall come again to judge the
quick and the dead, read 2 Timothy 4. 1. l (says Paul) charge thee therefore
before God (speaking to him, even to Timothy, and so to all believers) and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and
Kingdom. Now if you would know who this Lord Jesus is, look into Acts 10. 38.
and you shall see it was Jesus of Nazareth; would you know who that was? read
Mat. 2 toward the end, and you shall see it was the son of Mary the Virgin, who
was espoused to Joseph the Carpenter. But read Acts 10. v. 38, 39, 40. 41, 42.
you shall find these words, God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost
and with power, who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed
of the Devil; for God was with him: And we are witnesses of all things that he
did, both in Jerusalem, and in the land of the Jews; whom they sl^w, and hanged
on a tree, even Jesus of Nazareth; him God raised up the third day, and showed
him openly, not to all the people, but unto witnesses, chosen before of God;
even to us who did (...) and drink with him, after he rose from the dead. And
he commanded us to preach unto the people, (that is, God commanded us) and to
testify (that is, to be bold in our preaching) that it is he (namely, Jesus of
Nazareth, whom the Jews did thus crucify) which was ordained of God to be
judge of quick and dead. This is he also that is spoken of in Acts 17. 30, 31.
The times of this ignorance God winked at (meaning men's being without the
Gospel) but now commands all men every where to repent, because he has
appointed a day (which day, is the day of judgment, Mat. 12. 36.) in the which
he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man (namely, Jesus of
Nazareth) whom he has ordained, (compare this with that in Acts 10. 38, 39,
40, 41, 42. whereof he has given assurance to all men, (that is, has given a
sure sign unto all men) in that he has raised him (that is, in that he has
raised Jesus of Nazareth) from the dead. This also is Christ's own meaning, Mat.
24. where speaking of his second coming, he styleth himself the son of man,
saying, And then shall appear the sign of the son of man, and so shall the
coming of the son of man be, v. 27. So shall also the coming of the son of man
be, v. 37. So shall also the coming of the son of man be, v. 39. Where by the
way it is observable to see how the Lord of life and glory, does in this
Chapter, where he speaks of his second coming, for the most part style
himself the son of man. Surely he does it to this end, because he would not
have his humanity and the doctrine thereof, to be rased out from under heaven;
For he knew, that in the last days, there would come mockers walking, after
their own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming, 2 Pet. 3. 3. I
could multiply Scriptures to prove this doctrine of his second coming, as Heb.
9. v. last 2 Pet. 3. 2 These. 1. 6, 7, 8. Luke 21. Mat. 24. Mat. 25. Rev. 22. 7,
12. and the last, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Romans 14. 10. Acts 24. 25. But,

Secondly, I will show you that his coming will be shortly. It is true, no man
can tell neither the day nor the hour, yet so far as the Scriptures will give us
light into the neernest of his coming, so far we may go. And therefore I shall
show that his coming draws nigh by those signs that he himself said should be
forerunners of his coming. And if you read Mat. 24. you shall see many signs of
his coming spoken of.

First, there is a falling away from the faith spoken of. And that has been
fulfilled and is fulfilling every day.

2. Wars and rumors of wars ^s another sign that his coming does draw nigh even
at the doors

3 The love of many waxing cold, is another sign that it is nigh, even the
coming of Christ: And how cold is the love of many at this day? They that were
hot two or three year ago* are now grown lukewarm and cold. They are cold in
love to the Lords appearing: they are cold in the profession of the Gospel.
They are cold in love to the Saints, they are cold in the worship of God; Yea,
very cold, which is a notable Demonstration that the coming of the Lord
draws nigh.

4. The Stars falling from heaven; (That is proof ^ors falling from the faith
which once they professed) is another sign that the coming of the Lord is at
hand: And how many professors do you see now a days, fall from the doctrine
of God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as though there were no such thing as a world
to come, and no such thing as a Lord Jesus Christ, and his second coming.

5. Many poor souls will go on in their profession with lamps without oil,
Mat. 25. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 6, 7.
just before his second coming. And the Lord knows that most of the
professors of this generation, These things I do but hint in, though I could
enlarge upon them Luke 18 8.
are such kind of professors, yea, very foolish professors, which is another
sure sign, that the coming of the Lord draws nigh.

6. When the time of Christ's second coming is at hand, there will be but a
very little lay 1 Jo. 3. 3. to thy heart, and compare thy condition with it,
and thou will find this a glorious truth.
faith in the world. And the Lord knows, that there be many, who are now as
high as Lucifer, that at that day for want to faith will be thrown down to the
sides of the pit: even into the very belly of Hell.

7. Another sign of Christ's second coming, is the carnal mindedness of the
most of the world; and the very carriages of almost all men now living do
discover this truth to be at this day fulfilled, and know that when they shall
say peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes, and they shall not escape,
1 These. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4.

8. Before Christ's second coming, Mat. 24. 24.
there shall come many falls Christ's, Mar. 13. 22.
and false Prophets, and shall show great signs, and wonders, to seduce if it
were possible the Elect. And is not this more clearly fulfilled in our days
then ever it was, especially among those men called Quakers, who being as
persons, whose consciences are seared with an hot iron, and they being sealed
up unto destruction, do some of them call themselves Christ, and show great
signs, (as their Quaking) and such a legal holiness, as makes the simple
admire them, and wonder after them, which shows the coming of Christ to be
very nigh.

9. Before Christ's second coming, ^ Pet. 3 3.
there shall come scoffers into the world, walking after their own lusts, and
if ever this Scripture was fulfilled; it is fulfilled on these men called
Quakers: 1 These. 1. 10.
For they are the men, P^l. 3. 20.
that at this day make a mock at Christ's second coming, which shall be from
heaven without; and therefore says the holy Ghost, these Mockers shall be such
as shall say, where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell a
sleep, all things continue as they were See 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and there
you shall see their mocking and the reason of it. Read, and the Lord give thee
understanding. But because I would not have thee think that I speak at
random, in this thing. Know for certain, that I my self have heard them
blaspheme; yea with a grinning countenance, at the doctrine of that man's second
coming from heaven above the stars, who was borne of the Virgin Mary. Yea they
have told me to my face, that I have used conjuration, and witchcraft, because
what I preached was according to the Scriptures. I was also told to my face,
that I preached up an Idol, because I said, that the Son of Mary was in
heaven, with the same body that was crucified on the Cross; And many other
things have they blasphemously vented against the Lord of life and glory, and
his precious Gospel. The Lord reward them according as their work shall be.

I could have hinted in many other things which Christ and his Apostles have
showed to be signs of his coming But I shall commend the holy Scriptures unto
thee, which are able to make the man of God perfect in all things, 2 Timothy 3.
16. 17.
through faith in the Lord Jesus.

Now you have also the manner of his coming how i^ shall be, most notably laid
down in the Scriptures. I shall (...) in a few things touching it; as first, He
will come when there is but very few looking for his coming. When they shall
s^y peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes, 1 These. 5. 1. 2, 3,
which sudden destruction will be at his second commin^, for that is it which
the Apostle spoke of in those three verses, Then will all the world be caught
at such an unexpected time that it will come upon them, even as a snare comes
upon those creatures that are caught in it. As it is written, Luke 21. 35. For
as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole ear^h.
Which is all on a sudden, before they are aware.

2. He comes with all his saints and Angels. Then will the Lord descend from
that heaven into which he now ascended, as it is written in 1 These. 4. 16. Then
will be come and all his Saints with him, as Jude says in his Epistle, v. 5.
Then shall Abell, and Enoch, Noah and Abraham, David and Job, Peter and Paul:
together with all the Saints which have been, now are, or hereafter shall be,
and they shall sit on the throne with the Lord Jesus Christ, as in Mat. 19. 28.
Before whom shall all the Nations of the world be gathered, as it is written,
Joel 3. 12. Let the heathen be wakene^. (or raised out of their graves, Dan.
12. 2) and come down to the valley of Jehoshaphat; for there will I sit to
judge all the heathen round about. Which never was yet accomplished, though it
shall certainly be, in in Gods time: to the astonishment, and everlasting
damnation of all those that shall continue mocking, or sinning against God and
his Christ.

3. He shall come in flaming fire, (when he does come again: he will come in
such a manner, as will make all that shall be found in their sins rather seek
to creep under a mountain, then to meet the Lord of Glory, Rev. 6. 15,) (As
Esaias says, For behold the Lord will come with fire, and with his Charets like
a whirlwind: to render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with flames of
fire, Esaias 66. 15. To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are
ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have committed, and
of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. Jude
15. as I shall show farther by and by.

And therefore in the next place, I shall show you, what shall be done when he
is come.

First, When Christ is come the second time, they that are in their graves
shall arise, and come forth of their graves (as I said before) in which they
have lain according to that in Job. 5. 28. Where Christ says, Marvel not at
this, for the hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves shall
hear his voice, and shall come forth: they that have done good unto the
resurrection of life; and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of
damnation. You will say, Are these graves spoken of here, the graves that are
made in the earth? yea, that they are, and for a further proof of the same,
look into Dan. 12. 2 Daniel there speaking of the same thing, says, And many
of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall arise, or awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to everlasting contempt, or damnation.

I shall not stand here to dispute any distinctions of the resurrections, only
prove that the dead shall arise; and that is a clear truth from the Scriptures,
Acts 10. 42. Rev. 20 11 12, 13, 14. and 1 These. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 52. the dead
shall be raised.

2. He shall call all men and women to an account for all their close sinful
thoughts, words, and actions; then will the secrets of all hearts be made
manifest. Then shall all thy adulterous, and theevish, and covetous,
idolatrous, and blasphemous thoughts be laid open, according to that saying,
Their consciences also bearing them witness, and their thoughts the mean time,
or while, accusing, or else excusing one another, Romans 2. 15. But when? why, in
the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, ver. 16. see
also 1 Cor. 4. 5. Therefore judge nothing before the time; what time is that?
why, when the Lord comes; what will he do? He will bring to light the hidden
things of darknes^^, that is, all those cunning, close, hidden wickednesses,
that thou in thy life time have committed; yea, he will make manifest the
counsels of the heart; that is, the most hidden and secret things that are
contrived and plotted by the sons of men; Then shall all the midnight
whoremongers be laid open with all their sins; Then thou (it may be) who have
committed such sins as thou would not have thy Neighbor, thy father, thy
wife, thy husband, or any one else know of for thousands, then thou shall have
them all laid open, even upon the house tops, Luke 12. 1, 2, 3. Then thou that
hate Gods children, his ways, his word, his spirit; then thou that make a
mock at Jesus of Nazareth, his second coming, then thou that live in open
profaneness or secret hypocrisy, then I say, will be such a time of reckoning
for you, as never was since the world began, then you that shall die in your
si^s, will cry to the mountains, fall on us, and cover us from the face of him
that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb (which Lamb is the man
Christ Jesus, Joh. 1. 19.) And ah, my friends! if the very looks of God be so
terrible, what will his blows be, think you? Then if all thy idle words shall
be accounted for, as it is written, But I say unto you, that every idle word
that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of
judgment, Mat. 12. 36. and also all thy filthy actions shall be then regarded
in such sort, as thou shall receive a just recompense for them. And know, says
the Scripture that for all these things Though sinners will be unwilling to
come to judgment, yet this will be their misery, God will bring them:
God will bring thee into judgment, Eccles. 11. 9. Then

Thou that are an unbeliever shall be sure to fall under the judgment for all
thy sins. Mal. 4. 1, 2.
first, thou must give account; Secondly, thou must fall in the judgment. Oh
my friends, there are hot days acoming for all those that are found out of the
Lord Jesus: Behold, says Malachi, the days come that shall burn as an oven,
and all the proud, yea, all that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and the day
that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hoasts; and it shall leave
them neither root nor branch. The day of judgment will burn like an oven, and
all that have not the righteousness of Christ upon them shall be as stubble. Ah
friends put a red hot oven, and stubble together, and what work will the^e be?
even the one will burn and destroy the other.

3. When Christ does come the second time, another end of his coming will be to
purge out all things that offend in his Kingdom, Mat. 13. 41, 42. Then shall
the son of man send forth his Angels and they shall gather out of his Kingdom
all things that offend, and them that do iniquity, and shall cast them into a
furnace of fire; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. There are many
things that do offend in his Kingdom now: namely, the lukewarm professor, he
does offend first the Lord, secondly, his people. But then thou lukewarm
offending professor shall offend the Church of God no more. Secondly, the loose
professors do also offend God, Christ and his Church. First, he scandals the
Gospel by his loose walking, and naughty carriages. Secondly, he does make the
world blaspheme the name of God by the same. Thirdly, he grieves the hearts of
Gods people, Phil. 3. 18. But know that thou also shall be taken away from
offending any more, God, Christ, and his Saints; and thou shall have weeping
and gnashing of teeth for thy thus offending, Mat. 18. 6. 7.

4 Another end of Christ's second coming is to cut of all the ignorant persons
that are in the world. There is a generation of poor souls that do think to be
excused for their ignorance: Alas says one, Men seeking to get encouragement
from their ignorance, do more harden themselves in sin, and ^^are in greater
danger of eternal damnation.
I am a poor ignorant man, or woman, and therefore I hope that the Lord will
have mercy upon me: We cannot, say others, do as such and such, and will the
Lord condemn us? And thus poor souls, as they are in the broad way to
destruction least they should miss of the way to hell; do swallow down by
clusters, that which will poison them body and soul for ever, and ever.

But you will say, What, will not the Lord have mercy on ignorant souls? Ans.
Not on those who live and die in their ignorance. He himself has said, Esaias
27. 11. Because it is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them
will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no favor.
Again, Paul also in that 2 These. 1. 8. says, that when Jesus Christ shall come
to judge the world, This 27 of Isaiah and the 11 verse is a notable confutation
of the ignorants hypocritical hope, where he says, He that made them will
have no me^cy on them, and he that formed them will show them no favor.
he does come to take vengeance on all them that know not God, and that obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But ye will say, who are those ignorant persons, that shall find no favor at
that day? or how does the ignorance discover it self?

I shall only mention three or four sorts of men, and leave thee to the
Scriptures, which if thou read them diligently, will further lay them open
before thee.

And first, the profane scoffer, who makes a mock at the truths of God, and
so goes on in his sins, for this see in 2 Pet. 3.

3. which the Apostle attributes to their ignorance ver. 5. And therefore he
likens them to bruit beasts, Chap. 2. 10. and 12. verses, who walk after the
flesh, in the lusts of uncleanness, and speak evil of the things they
understand not, and shall utterly perish in their corruption; who because they
understand not the Scriptures, nor the power of God in them, speak evil of the
truths therein contained, and think the Lord like unto themselves, Psalm. 50.

Secondly, the formal professor, who has only a notion of the Gospel, and
some seeming holiness, but wants Gospel faith: Such are called foolish virgins,
Mat 25. 2, 3. to whom Christ will say in that day, Verily, I know you not. Add
hereto, those that think it enough to confess Christ with their mouths, and
profess that they know God, but deny him in their works; such notwithstanding
all their profession, shall, if they so continue, perish eternally, being
abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, or void of
judgment, that is ignorant, Tit. 1. v. 16.

3. The legal righteous man or woman, though they walk blameless as touching
the righteousness that is in the law: For they being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, go about to establish their own righteousness, as reading,
hearing Sermons, prayers, public or private, peaceableness with their
Neighbors, Fasting, Alms, good works as they count them, just dealings,
abstinence from the grosser pollutions of the world, stricter obedience to the
commandments of the first and second table; all which with many other things
may be comprehended in their own righteousness, and it is grounded on their
ignorance, and goes on in rebellion; and such ignorant persons shall in that
day perish, not submitting through ignoranco to the righteousness of God, Romans
10. 3. compared with Luke 19. 27. where Christ says that when he shall come
the second time, he will command those his enemies, who submitted not
themselves to him, who is called the righteousness of God, Esaias 46. 13. or
would not have him to reign over them, to be slain before his face.

4. Those whose hearts are set upon the world, and follow the alluring
persuasions of it; the Lord calls such fools, Luke 12. 20 and Pro. 7. 7. who go
after it ( v^z the world, held forth by a similitude of a woman with the attire
of an harlot) as an ox to the slaughter, or a Fool to the correction of the
stocks, till a dart strike through his liver, as a bird hastes to the snare,
and knows not that it is for his life: and knows not, mark, it is through
ignorance, ver. 23.

A fifth end of Christ's coming, is, that his righteous ones might shine as the
Sun in the glory, or Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13. 43. there are many
things that do hinder the People of God from shining forth as the Sun now. As
first, they have a body of death which makes them fetch many a groan in their
journey to Canaan, Romans 7. 24. 2 Cor. 5. 2. They meet with many a sad
temptation, which also makes them in heaviness many a time, 1 Pet, 1. 6. They
have also many other things that do hinder their shining now; but then the
body of death shall be left off. My meaning is, that sin shall be no more in
the natures of Gods people then: Their bodies that are now so vile, shall then
be made like unto the glorious body of the son of God, who shall change our
vile body, that it may be like unto his glorious body, according to the
working whereby he is, able to subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3. ver. 21.

6. Another end of Christ's coming shall be to take an account of his children,
how they have laid out their talents, that he has committed to their trust,
Mat. 25. 19. Romans 14 12. 2 Cor. 5. 10.

7. Another end of his coming, is, to set up his Kingdom, which will be
glorious indeed at his appearing, 2 Timothy 3. 1. Romans 8. 19, 20, 21. I do but
touch these things, because I would hasten toward a conclusion; many other
things might have been spoken to, but at this time I shall forbear.

But you will say, Who shall stand when he appears? why, I told you before,
that the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous, Psa. 1. 5. let him be close or profane, as I
told you even now, all shall be laid open; all shall be made manifest, all
shall come into judgment.

Ah poor soul! it is not then thy brave words will save thee; it is not thine
eloquent tongue that will then do thee any good; if thou be without the wedding
garment, thou will be speechless, as in Mat. 22. 12. But thou that art a
converted person shall stand in the judgment; thou that are born again shall
enter into the Kingdom, and none else, Joh: 3. 5. Rev. 21. 27.

But how shall I know that I am born again? Answ. Why, if thou art born again,
then thou know that thou wast not born a Christian at first, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2,
3. you has the quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins.

2. Thou know that once thou had no faith in the Lord Jesus; and were
convinced of sin because thou did not believe in the son of Mary, Jol. 6. 9.

3. Thou see all true joy through the blood and righteousness of the son of
Mary. 1 Cor. 15. 57. Romans 7. 24. 25.

4. Art thou born again? then thou can not be quiet till thou see God
smile, and lift up the light of his countenance upon thee, 2 Cor 4. ^
Psa. 4. 6. and that through the face of the son of Mary, the son of God.

5. Thou know that God has given thee thy faith, Phil. 1. 29. Ephesians. 2. 8.

6. Art thou born again? then thou know that the doctrine of the son of M^ry
the Virgin, is a right doctrine, 2 John 9.

7. Then also thou look for the personal appearing of the son of Mary from
heaven in the clou^ls, Rev. 1. 7. the second time Heb. 9 28

These things, though plain, yet if the Lord set them home upon thy conscience,
may be profitable both to thee and me. Therefore let us examine the matter a
little. And first,

Thou think that thou art a Christian; thou should be sorry else; well,
but when did God show thee that thou were no Christian? when did thou see
that? and in the light of the spirit of Christ see that thou were under the
wrath of God because of original sin? Nay, do thou know what original sin
means? Is it not the least in thy thoughts? and do thou not rejoice in secret
that thou art the same that thou ever were? (...). 5. 12
If so. then know for certain that the wrath of God to this very day abides on
thee, Joh. 3. 36. And if so, then thou art one of those that will fall in the
judgment, except thou art born again, and made a new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17.

But secondly, thou think that thou have been born again, ('it is well if thou
have) but least thou should deceive thy poor soul, I pray thee consider, when
did the spirit of the Lord Jesus show thee that thou had no faith in thee by
nature? and when did the spirit of Christ convince thee of sin, because thou
did not believe in him? It may be thou have been convinced of sins against
the Law, by the Law, and thy own conscience, as the Pharisees were, Joh. 8. 9.
and Romans 3. 20. I, but when did thou see thy self a lost creature for want of
faith in the son of Mary? if not, thou have not yet been savingly convinced by
the spirit of Christ; for that when it convinces effectually of sin, it
convinces of unbelief; though thou have been never so much convinced of sins
against the Law, if thou have not seen thy self under the power and dominion,
guilt and punishment of ^in because thou did not believe in Christ, thou have
not yet been savingly convinced; for that's one work of the spirit to convince
of sin, because they believe not on me; says Jesus, the Son of Mary, who was
espoused to Joseph the Carpenter; But on the contrary, do thou not say in thy
heart, thou never had thy faith to seek, but have always believed with as good
a faith as any one alive; If so, then know for certain that thou have no faith
of the operation of God in thee, according to Gods ordinary working; and if so,
then know that if the Son of man should come to judge the world at this moment
of time, that thou with all thy faith (thou think thou have) would fall in
the judgment, 2 These. 2. 12.

3. Art thou born again? then thou see that thy great sin was want of faith
in the Son of Mary. Then thou see that it is he that was sent of God to die
for the sins of the world, J^h. ^. 19 Jo. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19. Act 13 38, 39. and
that thou art complete in him, without any works of the Law, Romans 4. 4. the^
thou rejoycest in Christ Jesus and put no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.
3. yet thou rejoycest in the flesh and blood of the son of Mary, knowing that
his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, Joh. 6. 55. out of
which thou would very willingly make thy life all thy days; out of his
birth, obedience, death, resurrection, ascension, and glorious intercession now
at the right hand of his father, Heb. 7. 24, 25. but if thou art wavering in
these things, know, that thou art but a babe at the best, and for ought thou
know, God maycut thee off in thy unbelief and cast thee into utter darkness,
where there shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.

4. Art thou born again? then thou see all true peace and joy comes through
the blood of the son of Mary, and his righteousness, as in Romans 7. 24. and 1
Cor. 15. 57. there are many poor souls that are taken with raptures of joy, and
false conceited consolation, Joh. 16 20. which does come from the Devil, and
their own deceitful hearts; but their joy shall be turned into mourning and
sorrow of heart, Luke 6. 24, 25. but thou that art a Christian indeed, and not
in word only, rejoycest in Christ Jesus the son of Ma^y; yea, though now you
see him not, yet believing, you rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory,
1 Pet. 1. 8. And these two things are the fruits of thy faith, and of thy joy.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ is very precious unto thee, 1 Pet. 2. ver. 7. 2. Thou
do purify thine heart by this faith, and the power of the spirit of Christ,
which thou have received into thy soul, Romans 8. 13. Acts 15. 9. and 1 John 3.
3. but if thy guilt of sin goes off, and convictions go off any other way then
by the blood and righteousness of the man Christ Jesus, thy guilt goes off not
right, but wrong, and thy latter end will be a very bitter end, without faith
and repentance; for it is his blood through which all true peace comes, Col. 1.
20. and there is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we should
be saved, but by the Lord Jesus of Nazareth, Acts 4. ver. 10, 11, 12. compared
together.

5. Art thou borne again? Then thou can not be quiet, till thou do see
God lift up the light of his Countenance upon thee, yea, thou have such a
desire after the light of Gods countenance, that all the glory, riches, honor,
pleasure, profits etc. of this world will not satisfy, till thou do see God
to be a reconciled father to thee in the Lord Jesus Christ; as it is Psalm. 4.
6. Joh. 14. 8. Ps. 35. 3. then thou will not be quiet till thou do hear from
the son of Mary, which is the Lord of glory, 1 Cor, 2. 8. such a voice as this,
Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee; and 2 Cor. 12 9.
My grace is sufficient for thee. But if thou can content thy self with any
thing below this, thou will, when all comes to all, be found but a
rotten-hearted professor, who wilt have thy portion among the slothful ones,
who will fall in the judgment of the son of Man, when he comes in flaming fire
with his mighty Angels, 2 These. 1. 8.

6. Art thou borne again? Then thou know that God has given thee thy faith
that thou have in his son: then thou art able to say through grace, there was a
time in which I had no faith, there was a time in which I could not believe in
the son of God for eternal life. But G^d, who is rich in mercy, for his great
love wherewith he loved me, even when I was dead in sins and unbelief, (which
is the greatest) has quickened me together with Christ: by grace I am saved,
Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. through faith v. 8.

7. Art thou borne again? Then thou know that the doctrine of the Son of
God, the son of Mary is a right doctrine, which is this.

First, that the Son of God which was with his Father before the world was (
Joh. 1. 1. John 17. 5.) came into the world in the fullness of time, and was
made in the likeness of Men, Phil. 2. 7. being made of a woman or virgin, made
under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, Gal. 4. 4. And that was
done in this wise. What the law could not do in that it was weak through the
flesh, that is through our flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that is condemned him in
the flesh for the sins of poor sinners; For this, compare Romans 8. 3. and 2 Cor.
5. 21. with Gal. 3. 13. and it will appear clearly to be the truth of God:
Also, that this Son of God, which is the true God, as well as the Son of Mary,
did bear our sins in his own body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. and did spill his
own blood, which is also the blood of God, Acts 20. 28. that he died, and was
laid in Joseph's Sepulcher, Joh. 19. 38, 39, 40, 41. and rose again the third
day, Acts 10. 40. that very man, Luke 24. v. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. and
ascended up into heaven in a cloud, Acts 1. 9, 10. and 11. and there ever lives
to make intercession for us, that very man Heb. 7. 24, 25. Heb. 8. 3 Heb. 10.
12.

And in the last place, If thou art a Christian, then thou look for that
very Jesus again, whom the Jews did crucify, John 19. whom God raised again
as it is, 1 These. 1. 10. I say thou look, thou waitest, thou hastenest after
the coming of this Lord Jesus, which does deliver thee from the wrath to come,
2 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12. Heb. 9. 26, ^7, 28. 1 These. 1. 10. Yea, thou know,
that this very man shall so come, in like manner, as his disciples did see him
go into heaven, which was a ver^ man, Luke 24. 30. compared with ver. 50. 51.
of the same chapter. Yea, in a cloud he went away from his disciples, and in
the clouds he shall come again, Rev. 1. 7. to judge all that are in their
graves, Joh. 5. 28, 29. Dan. 12. 2. and shall receive all that look for, and
love his second coming, to himself, Heb. 9. 27. 28. And they shall be for ever
with him, 1 These. 4. 16. 17. But the wicked shall be cast into eternal
damnation, Mat. 25. 46. These things I say, if thou be a Christian indeed, thou
believe, and ownest, and the faith of them does purify thy heart, 1 John 3.
3. and wean thee from this world, and the things thereof; and if it is not from
this principle, that is, if thy obedience do not flow from this faith, which is
the faith of Gods elect, as I have proved at large, thy obedience, thy zeal,
thy self-denial, thy holiness, righteousness, yea, all that thou can do, is
but sin in the sight of the great God of heaven and earth. Heb. 11. 6.
For all true sanctification comes through the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
Romans 14. 23.
by the operation of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 6. 11. But ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the Name of our Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God: And in Cant. 1. 3. Thy Name is as an o^niment poured forth,
therefore do the virgins love thee.

Well then, seeing this is a truth of so great concernment, I beseech you,
seek to be thoroughly rooted into it by faith. And that thou may so be,
examine thy heart; yea, beg of God to help thee to examine it, and to throw out
all that fancy that thou take in stead of faith; Also throw away all thy own
wisdom, yea, thy own righteousness also, and conie to God in the Name of the
Son of Mary, which is the Son of God, and beg faith of him, true faith, the
faith of the operation of God; such a faith as he gives to his own elect, which
will show thee clearly of these things; so that tho^r shall not deceive thy
self with a fancy of them* and the advantages will be many.

1. It will comfort thy heart against persecutions, temptations, and cross
providence, as also James says to his persecuted brethren; Be patient my
brethren, says be, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws
nigh. James 5. 8.

2: It will through grace wean thy heart and affections abundantly from this
world, and the things therein: Who is he that overcomes, the world (says John)
but ^e that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? 1 John 5. 5. who is he also
that purifies his heart, but he that looks for the second comeing of Christ
from heaven (as in 1 John 3. 3. compared with 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11.) to judge the
world?

3. Hereby thou will be able to Judge of all doctrines whatsoever, though they
come never so nigh the truth, yet if they be not indeed the very truth, thou will find them and their doctrine liars, Rev. 2. 2. and 1 Cor. 2. 15.

4. If thou be thoroughly set down in this doctrine, even in the faith of
this doctrine which I have held forth unto thee, thou will not be taken with
any other doctrine whatsoever. What is the reason I pray you, that there are so
many giddyheaded professors in these days that do stagger to and fro like a
company of drunkards, but this, They were never se led in the doctrine of the
Father, and the Son? They were never enabled to believe that that child that
was born of the virgin Mary, was the mighty God, Is. 9 6. No, says Christ, he
that is built upon this rock (meaning the faith of himself, which is to
believe that the Son of Mary is the Christ of God, Mat. 16. 16.) the gates of
hell shall not prevail against him, v. 18.

5. The faith of this doctrine, will make thee labor in the work of God in the
world. Oh, how it will liven thy heart in the work of the Lord; especially, if
thou live in the faith of thy interest in Christ, it will make thee labor to
be found watching when thy Lord shall return from the wedding; that when he
does come, thou may open to him immediately. Luke 12. 35. 36.

Now seeing the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ is so nigh, even at the doors,
what does this speak to all sorts of people (under heaven) but this? first, to
see whither they have oil in their lamps or not; that is, to search, and see,
whither the spirit of the man Christ Jesus be in them or no; for he that has
not the spirit of Christ in him, is none of Ch^ists, Rom 89* Thou that have not
the spirit of Christ in thee, why, at that day (let thy profession be what it
will) he will say to thee, depart, I know you not, Mat. 25. and if so, then thy
latter end will be worse then thy beginning, as in 2 Pet. 2. 20.

2. Then what will become of all the profane, ignorant, scoffers,
self-righteous, proud, bastard-professors in the world? If the children of God
shall scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? 1 Pet.
4* 18.

3. Then what will become of all those that creep into the society of God
people without a wedding garment on? why, it will be said unto them, Friends,
how came you hither? take them, and bind them hand and foot, and cast them into
utter darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of t^eth, Mat. 22 11, 12,
13.

4. Then what will become of all those that mock at the second coming of the
Man Christ, as do the Ranters, Quakere, Drunkards, and the like? why read their
doom in Mat. 24. 50, 51. The Lord of that, of these servants, shall come in a
day when they look not for him, and in an hour that they are not aware of, and
shall cut them asunder and appoint them their portion with hypocrites, and
there shall be weeping and gnashin of teeth.

5. Then what does this speak to the Lords own people? surely this, that they
should be in a watchful posture, Mark 13. 37.

Watch therefore over your own hearts, least they should be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkeness, and the cares ^f this life, and so that day come
upon you unawares; for as a snare shall it come upon all the dwelle^s upon the
face of the earth, as it is in Luke 21. 34, 35, 36.

2. Watch over the Devils temptations. Oh, have a care in the first place,
least by any means as the Serpent beguiled Eye, so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ: And the rather, because at
this day he is very busy with his doctrines, and his ministers; trying all
ways, if by any means he might deceive you with fair speeches, and enticing
carriages; with a fair show in the flesh, yet denying the Lord, and refusing to
be justified by the blood of Jesus the son of Mary, the son of God: Watch I say
over the Devil, touching doctrines, for he labors as much this way as any way,
for he knows if he can but get you to lay a rotten foundation he is sure of
you, live as godly in your conceit as you will, and therefore, it is worth your
observation, in that 24 of M^^. when Christ is speaking of the signs of his
coming, he breaks forth with a warning word to his Disciples, to beware of
false teachers, ver. 4. the very first words that he answers to a question that
his Disciples put to him, is this, Take heed that no man deceive you. Again,
ver. 11. And many false Prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many. And in
ver. 24. he says again, for there shall come, or arise, false Christ's and
false Prophets, and shall show signs and wonders, in so much that if it were
p^ssible they should deceive the very elect.

3. Take heed that he does not deceive you in point of worship, that he make
you not slight any of the ordinances of God; for if he do, he will quickly make
way for another temptation.

4. Take heed that you also have not your lamps to trim when the bridegroom
comes; if you have, you many paradventure be ashamed and blush, before him at
his coming, 1 Jo. 2 last ver. Therefore content not your selves with a
profession of Christ, and no more, for the devil may deceive, yea does deceive
a professing people many time. And if he will deceive a professing generation,
he must come in this manner; first, under the name Christ; secondly, with a
fair show in the flesh of outward holiness, Gal. 6. 12. Thirdly, he must come
with good words and fair speeches, Romans 16. 18. Now though he come to
drunkards, swearers, whoremongers, theives, liars, murderers, and covetous
persons, in his black colors; yet if he will come to deceive a profe^sing 2
Cor. 11. 14.
party, he must appear like an Angel of light. And the reason why souls are
deceived by him in these his appearances, is, because they are not able to
distinguish betwixt the Law and the Gospel, the conviction^ of conscience by
the Law only, and convictions by the spirit; but do (though they profess the
Lord Jesus) give ear to every wind of doctrine, and being unstable, as Peter
says, do fall into the temptations of the Devil, in wres^ing the Scripture to
their own destruction, 2. Pet. 3. 16.

In a word, you that have not yet laid hold on the Lord Jesus Christ, for
eternal life, lay hold upon him, upon his righteousness, blood, resurrection,
ascension, intercession, and wait for his second coming to judge the world in
righteousness, Acts 17. 31. And you that have laid hold. I say to you, lay
faster hold on your Lord Jesus, Who so has ^ares to hear, let him hear, Matthew.
13. 43.

Now, that thou may the more clearly understand my faith in the doctrine of
Gods dear son, I have thought good to hold forth again the doctrine in the
former Treatise by way of Question and Answer, as follows.

Qu. Seeing there are many (...) Christ's gone out into the world, according as
was prophesied of in former times (Mat. 24. 5, 23.) by the Lord himself; And
seeing (if we be saved) we must be saved by a Christ; for he that misses of him
(says the Scriptures) cannot be saved, because there is no way to come to the
father but by him, as it is written Joh. 14. 6. Acts 4. 12. How therefore, is
the knowledge of the true Christ to be attained unto, that we may be saved by
him?

Answ. Indeed to know Christ, (Gods Christ) is as the Scripture says, the one
thing necessary, Luke 10. 42. without which all other things will avail
nothing; And therefore I shall according to the Scriptures, first, tell you
what Gods Christ is, and secondly, how the knowledge of him is attained unto.
And therefore, first, Gods Christ is true God, and true man. That he is true
God, is manifest by that Scripture in Isaiah 9 6 where it is said, to us a
child is born, to us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his
shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful Counselor, the mighty God,
the everlasting Father the Prince of peace, also 1 John 5. 20. And we are in
him, that is true, ( says the Apostle) even in his son Jesus Christ, this is
true God, and eternal life, see Heb. 1. 8. Joh. 1. 12. Romans 9. 5. Joh. 20. 28.

But Secondly, that he is (...) Man, see again Isa. 9. 6. where it is said,
Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given; and compare it with Mat. 1.
21. where it is said, And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his
name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins, see John. 1. 14. And
the word was made flesh. 1. Tim. 3. 16. God was manifested in the flesh. These
two Scriptures are expounded by Heb. 2. 14. where it is said, Forasmuch then as
the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took
part of the same, that is, of flesh and blood, see Romans 8. 3. and compare it
with Luke 24. 39. where Christ says, Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I
my self; handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see ^e
have. And he does often call himself by the name of the Son of Man (Mat. 24.
Mat. 16. 13.) to signify that he is very man, as well as very God.

Q^. But why was he true God and true man?

Answ. He was true man, because man had offended, and Justice required that man
should suffer and make satisfaction, and so it is written 1 Cor. 1 5. 21. For
since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. And
again, All we like sheep have gone astray, and the Lord has laid on him the
iniquities of us all. And in 1 Pet. 2. 24. where that 53. of Esaias is mentioned,
he says, Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we
being dead to sins should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes we are
healed. And again, God did prepare this body, the humane nature of Christ,
that it should be a sacrifice for sins, wherefore he says, Sacrifices and
offerings (that is such as were offered by the Law of Moses) thou would not
have; but a body have thou prepared me, Heb. 10. 5. In this body which God had
prepared for him, which he took of the virgin, Gal. 4. 4. in this he did bear
all the sins of all his elect, 1 Pet. 2. 24.

And he must needs be true God, because, it was an infinite God that was
transgressed against, and Justice required an infinite satisfaction, and
therefore he must be infinite that must give this satisfaction, o^ else justice
could not be satisfied and so it written, where the Apostle is telling the
Pastors of the Church of Ephesus, by what they were redeemed, he tells them,
that God did purchase them with his own blood, Acts 20 28 see 1 John 3. 16.
where he says, herein perceive we the love of God in that He laid down his
life for us. Not in his divine but in his humane nature; for as I said before
Gods Christ was of both natures, Esaias 9. 6. R^m. 9. 5. 1 J^h. 5. 20. Joh. 1. 1.
14. True God and true man, and the divine nature did enable him to undergo in
his humane nature, all that sin, curse, and wrath that was laid upon him for
us; and to overcome, and obtain eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9. 24.

3. Q^. How did this Christ bring in redemption for man?

Ans. Why first, Man brake the law of God; but this man did fulfill it again,
and became the end of it for righteousness to every one that believes, Romans
10. 4.

2. Man was foiled and overcome by the devil; but this man Christ did overcome
him again, Romans 5. 12
Luke 4. Heb. 2. 14. 15. and that for us.

3. Man did lose the glory of God: but this Man has obtained it again.

4. Man by sin lost eternal salvation: But this man by his own blood has
obtained it again for him, Heb. 9. 12.

5. Man by sin brought death into the world: But Jesus Christ that Man has
destroyed it again, Heb. 2. 14. compared with Hos. 13 14. and brought in life
and immortality, 2 Timothy 1. 10. Romans 5. 15.

Q. But how are we justified by this Man's obedience?

Ans. All our iniquities were laid upon him, Isa. 53. 6, 8, 11, 12. And his
righteousness is bestowed on us, if we believe, as it is written, even the
righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all
them that believe. And this is it which Paul so much sought after, when he
says, yea doubtless, and I count all things loss, (...) do count them but
dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness of God by faith, Phil. 3. v. 8, 9.

Q. How do men come by this righteousness and everlasting life?

Ans. By faith men lay hold upon it, and apply it to their own souls in
particular, Gal. 2. 20. For it is by faith they are justified, as also faith
the Scripture, Romans 5. 1. That is faith lays hold on and applies, that which
this Christ of God has done, and is a doing, and owns it as his own.

Q. What is this faith that does thus justify the sinner?

Ans. It is a gift Ephesians. 2. 8
, fruit Gal. 5. 22.
, on work 2 These. ^. 21.
of the Spirit of God, whereby a soul is enabled, under a sight of its sins,
and wretched estate, to lay hold on the birth, righteousness, blood, death,
resurrection, ascension and intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the
assistance of the Spirit, whereby it is wrought, to apply all the virtue, life
and merit, of what has been done and suffered, or is a doing by the same Lord
Jesus Christ, to its own self in particular, Gal. 2. 20. Romans 7. 24. 25. as if
it self had really done all that the Lord Jesus Christ has done,: I do not
say, that the soul does any thing for justification, but it does know, that
whatsoever Jesus Christ has done in point of justification, is given to, and
bestowed upon it, Romans 3. 22. and God finding the soul in him, that is in
Christ, does justify it from all things, from which it could not be justified
by the law of Moses, Acts 13. 38, 39.

Q. Well, but is there no way to come to the father of mercies but by this man
that was borne of the virgin? is there no way to come to God but by the faith
of Him?

Ans. No, there is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must
be saved, Acts 4. 12. And Jesus himself, that was borne of the virgin Mary
said, I am the Way, the truth, and the life: No man comes to the father, but
by me, Joh, 14. 6.

Q. And where is this man, that was borne of the virgin, that we may come to
the father by him?

A. He ascended away from his Disciples in a cloud, into heaven, as we may read
Act. 1. 9, 10, 11.

Q. What does he there?

Ans. He ever lives to make intercession for all that come unto God by him,
Heb. 7. 25. That is, they that shall come out of themselves to him, and venture
their* souls on what he did and suffered when he was on earth, and is doing
now in heaven; shall certainly be saved: For he ever lives to save them, that
do thus come to the father by him. And it is, because, he spilt his blood for
all that shall by the faith of Gods elect lay hold upon him: and thus it is
written where he says, we are justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Mark it, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood; to declare his righteousness; that
is, to declare Gods righteousness, for the remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God; to declare I say at this time his
righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes
(or lays hold) on Jesus, Romans 3. 24, 25, 36.

Q. But did this man rise again from the dead, that very man, with that very
body wherewith he was crucified? for you do seem as I conceive to hold forth so
much by these your expressi^ns.

A. Why do you doubt of it?

Q. Do you believe it?

Ans. Yes, by the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, for he has enabled me so to
do.

Qu. And can you prove it by the Scriptures?

Answ. Yes.

Q. How?

Answ. First, from that Scripture in Luke 24. 37, 38, 39, 40. where Christ
himself after ^he was crucified appeared to his Disciples, (who having seen
him) supposed they had seen a Spirit. But he said, Why are ye troubled, and why
do thoughts arise in your hearts? behold my hand and my feet, that it is I my
self, and do not think you see a spirit; handle me, and see, for a spirit
has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. This he spoke after he was
crucified, Luke 23. 33. and buried, v. 53. and rose again from the dead, chap.
24. 6, 7. Many other Scriptures could I give for the proof hereof, as Acts 10.
39, 40, 41, 42. And Acts 13. 28, 29, 30, 31. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. only read Acts 2.
29, 30, 31. where the Apostle proves the same, bringing in the words of the
Prophet David for a testimony thereof, saying, He being a Prophet, and knowing
that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins
according to the flesh he would raise up Christ to sit on his Throne (says) he
seeing this before, spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not
left in hell, neither his flesh did see corruption. Mark it, his flesh did see
no corruption, v. 31. But if he had not risen again, his flesh had seen
corruption. But he rose again from the dead, that very man, that very body; for
his flesh did see no corruption!

Q. Why did he rise again from the dead with that very body?

Answ. 1. Because it was not possible he should be holden of death. 2. Because
in his humane nature he suffered for sin; Act. 2. 24.
and if he had not recovered himself from that very curse, even from under
death, and all other things that lay on him, which he had through the sins of
his children subjected himself unto, he had not overcome sin, hell; death, the
law, and the devil; but had been overcome by them; and if so, then had not
redemption been obtained for sinners; for it was at his resurrection from the
dead, that God said unto him, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee:
(As says the Apostle) And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the
promise made unto the Fathers, God had fulfilled the same unto us their
children, in that he has raised up Jesus again: as it is written in the second
Psalm. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten th^e, Acts 13 30, 31, 32, 33,
34, 35. And it is this, namely the resurrection of that man from the dead, that
does give us ground of hope; as in 1 Pet. 1. and 3. where he says, He has
begotten us again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
(...) dead.

3. Because God intends to redeem the bodies of his Saints out of their graves
in which they have lien many a year, John 5. 28, 29. Romans 8. 23. 1 Cor. 15.
52. and to possess them with his own glory; and when this comes to pass, then
shall that Scripture be fulfilled, that says, He shall change our vi^^ body,
that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body, according to the working
(of his mighty power) whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. Phil.
3. 21. And he has given us assurance thereof, in that he has raised up Jesus
our Lord again from the dead, Acts 17. 31.

Q. But do you think that these our bodies that we do carry about with us in
this world, after that they are dead and buried, and rotten, shall rise again
out of those graves into which they are laid; when the Scripture says, flesh
and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?

Answ. Flesh in Scripture is taken more ways then one; 1 Cor. 25. 50.
as first, it is taken for the works of the law; where the Apostle says,
Received ye the spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith?
Are ye so foolish, having begun in the spirit, are ye made perfect by the
flesh? By flesh here, he means the Law; as is clear, if you compare Gal. 3. v.
2. and 3. with v. 10, 11. 12. Again sometimes flesh is taken for sins, Romans
8. 1. 5. And sometimes is is taken for the bodies of the Saints,* as subject to
distempers, to pain, sickness, corruptions, to death, by reason of sin, * 2
Cor. 4. 11. 2 Cor. 7. 5. Now the Apostle in that place, where he says flesh
and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, or of God, his meaning is,
sinful flesh and blood, or the sin, with any imperfection that is in the bodies
of the Saints, shall not inherit the Kingdom; and that you shall find to be
the mind of the holy Ghost, if you read with understanding the latter end of
the same verse, where he says, Neither does corruption inherit incorruption.
That is, sin, or any imperfection of the body, shall not inherit eternal life;
for says he in ver. 53. This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality. Mark here I pray you, though he says flesh and
blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, yet he says this corruptible must
put on incorrution: For the Trump shall blow, and the dead shall be raised (as
Christ says, they that are in the graves shall hear his voi^e, John 5. 28. and
shall come forth of their graves incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15. 52. and shall all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Rev. 12. 1^. 13. See
also that Scripture Phil. 3. 20. 21 where the Apostle says, He waited for
Christ the Savior from Heaven. And what shall he do when he comes? Why, He
shall change our vile body. Mark it, it must be our vile body that must be
changed. But if it be changed, then how can it be the same? Not the same in
respect of sin, or bodily infirmities, but the very same in respect of
substance: For, says he, it is our vile body that must be changed, And it, the
very same, it shall be fashioned like to his glorious body. And if you ask, how
is it possible that this should be done? he answers, according to the working
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3. 21.

Q. But do you think this is certain? methinks the Scriptures semingly hold
forth so much, yet I cannot believe it, for it is contrary to all reason.

A. Truly the Scriptures do not only hold forth so much seemingly, but they do
most really, and plainly hold out these things, to all those that have received
the spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ. For it is it, and it alone, that can
reveal these things. For no man knows the things of God, but the spirit of God,
1 Cor. 2. 11. Now if thou would know these things, thou must first receive
the spirit of the son of God, without which, thou can not know so much as one
of the fundamental truths of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. But there are those in our du^es, who reject this doctrine that you lay
down, concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, as you lay it down, and they are for a
Christ within, for a cross within, for a resurrection, and intercession within;
and they do not hold as you do, a Christ without, and a resurrection of Christ
without, and intercession of Christ with u^; I, and they have very much
Scripture for that which they say too: And therefore what should such as we do,
that stand tottering and shaking in these distracted and dangerous times? for
our poor souls are in very much doubt what way to take.

Ans. Therefore, I will speak a few words to you by way of discovery of the
falsity of such opinions; and a word of direction how you should understand the
truth. First, therefore, he that cries up a Christ within, in opposition to a
Christ without, that man, instead of having the spirit of Christ in him, is
possessed with a spirit of delusion; for where the spirit of Christ is in
truth, that spirit causes the soul to look to the Christ that was born of the
Virgin, for all justification; as it is written, Howbeit, when he, the spirit
of truth is come, he shall lead you into all truth; for he shall not speak of
himself, but what soever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will show
you things to come, mark the next verse he (says the son of the Virgin) shall
take of mine and shall show unto you, Joh. 16. 13, 14. he shall take of mine;
what is that? why surely it is, he shall take of my Godhead, my humanity, my
birth, my righteousness, my blood, my death, my resurrection, my ascen^ion, and
intercession, my Kingly, Priestly, and prophetical offices, and shall show you
the life, merit, and value of them. And this was it which was revealed to Paul
by the holy spirit, here spoken of, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2. to the 8. Moreover
brethren, says he, I declare unto you the Gospel which I^p eached unto you,
which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand. By which also ye are saved,
if ye keep in memory what I preached unto you, unless ye have believed in
vain. But what is this doctrine? why, I delivered to you first of all, that
which I also receive ^. What was that? why, How that Christ died for our sins
according to the Scriptures. And that he was buried, and that he rose again the
third day according to the Scriptures, (there is his death and resurrection
preached) And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve; after that he was
seen of above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the greatest part remain
unto this present, but some are fallen asleep. After that he was seen of James,
then of all the Apostle. And last of all he was seen of me (says Paul) as of
one born out of due time. This is it I say, that the spirit of truth does hold
forth to poor sinners, a Christ crucified without the gates of Jerusalem, Luke
23. 32, 33. buried in Joseph^ se^ulcher, v. 53. risen again the third day,
Luke, 24 6. ascended away from his Disciples in a cloud into heaven, as in Act.
1. 9, 10, 11. And there ever lives, that very man, with that very body, to
make intercession for all that receive him, Heb. 7. 24, 25. This is I say the
doctrine of the spirit of truth, whatsoever is the spirit of error. Col. 1 27.


Q. But do not the Scriptures make mention of a Christ within? 2 Cor. 13 5.

A. Yes, And he that has not the spirit of Christ is none of his, Romans 8. 9.
But he that has it, is led out of himself by it; and as I said before, it
shows the soul, what the blessed son of the Virgin Mary has done and suffered,
and is a doing for it. Therefore hereby know we the spirit of truth from the
spirit of error. Every spirit that does confess that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, is of God; That is, that spirit that does confess that Jesus Christ
took flesh upon him, and in that flesh did bear our sins, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Col. 1.
20, 21, 22. 1 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Pet. 4. 1. and after he was taken down from the
cross, and laid in a sepulcher, rose again from the dead; that very man, with
that very body, wherewith he was crucified: That spirit that does believe and
confess this is of God, and is the blessed spirit of Christ, whereof h^ spoke,
when he was yet with his Disciples touching his bodily presence: for he (says
the Son of Mary) shall glorify me, for he shall take of Mine and show it to
you, Joh. 16. 13, 14.

I have answered this already in my Epistle to the first treatise. Therefore
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God, for many
false spirits and prophets are gone out into the world, therefore have a care
how thou receivest the voice that speaks to thee, but try whether they are
according to the truth of Gods word as it is written, To the law, and to the
testimony, if it be not according to this word, it is because there is no light
in them, Isa. 8. 20.

Therefore try a little, Do they flight Gods Christ which is the Son of the
virgin, that spirit is of the Devil, 1 Cor. 12. 3.

2. Do they say that that blood of his which was shed without the gates of
Jerusalem does not wash away sin, yea all sin from him that believes? that is a
spirit of Antichrist, 1 John 1. 7.

3. Do they say, that that man that was crucified without the gates of
Jerusalem, is not risen again (with that verybody wherewith he was crucified out
of the Sepulcher) Luke 24. 38, 39. That is a Spirit of Antichrist.

4. Do they say that that very man that was crucified with that very body, is
not now in the presence of his father, absent from his people touching his
bodily presence, though present in spirit? I say who ever they be, that say he
is not there, they are of the Devil: for the proof of this see Acts 5. 30. and
31. and compare it with Heb. 7. 24. 25. The God of our fathers (says the
Apostle) raised up Jesus. But what Jesus? Whom ye slew (says he to the Jews.
Him, the very same whom ye slew) has God exalted with his right hand to be a
prince and a Savior, to give repentance unto Israel and forgiveness of sins.

And indeed, here is my life, namely the birth of this man, the righteousness
of this man, the blood of this man, the death and resurrection of this man; the
ascension intercession of this man for me, and the second coming of this man
to judge the world in righteousness, Acts 17. 31. I say here is my life, if I
see this by faith without me, through the operation of the spirit within me; I
am safe, I am at peace, I am comforted, I am encouraged, and I know that my
comfort, peace, and encouragement is true, and given me from heaven, by the
father of Mercies, through the Son of the virgin Mary, Mat. 1. 21. who is the
way to the father of Mercies, Joh. 14. 6. who is able to save to the ut^^rmost,
all that come to the father by him, Heb. 7. 25. Because he, that very man; with
that very body wherewith he was crucified is ascended into heaven, Acts 1, 9,
10. 11. and there, ever lives to make intercession for them that come to God by
him. This is the rock, sinner, upon which if thou be built, the gates of Hell,
nor Ranter, Quaker, sin, law, death, no nor the Devil himself, shall ever be
able to prevail against thee, Mat. 16. 16, 17. 18. And here I leave thee to the
wisdom of the great God, who if he has chosen thee in his Son, and brought
thee to him; and has made thee by faith to lay hold on him, thou needst not
fear the devil with his siftings, snares, wiles, and fiery darts, wherewith he
does destroy thousands; but may with the Apostle (if thou live in the power
and life of the love of God toward thee) cry out, I am persuaded, that neither
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate thee from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord, Romans 8. 38, 39. And now Reader, if thou be a true Christian I am
sure, that these be the things that appearto be the glorious substantial truths
to thy soul, and thou do not care for that comfort that does not make this
Man, the Son of the virgin precious to thy soul, 1 Pet. 2. 7. for thou know,
that it is he, that has delivered thee from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10.
B^t as for you that are disobedient, except you mend your manners, you will
stumble and fall backwards, and be broken, and snared and taken, Isa. 28. 13.
and wonder and perish because you believe not. Act. 17. 21


A few words more, and so I shall have done, and they are words of counsel to
thee; Have a care thou receive not every Christ that is proffered to thee,
though it may appear very excellen^ to thy foolish heart: For under the name
Christ, are men deceived, as it is written, many shall come in my name, saying,
I am Christ, and shall deceive many. Mat. 24. 5. But have a care that thou
receive that Christ, that was borne without thee, fulfilled the Law in his
humane nature without thee; spilt his blood without thee, is risen again and
ascended without thee, and makes intercession without thee: And that he, that
very man that was borne of the Virgin, will come again in the clouds without
thee; And this truth must thou receive by that Spirit that he has promised to
send and give to them that ask him: And that shall dwell in thy heart, and
shall show thee what the Son of Mary the virgin the Son of Man, the Son of God,
the true God has in his body done for thy soul, Joh. 16. 13, 14. And if thou
receive him in truth, then though thou do not boast, nor brag of thy holiness,
as those painted hypocrites called Quakers do: yet thou will do more work for
God in one hour, then they, even all of them, can do in all then life time.

Take my counsel, and the Lord Jesus Christ have mercy upon thy soul and body.

Farewell.
Some Questions to the Quakers, Or a few quaeries to those who are possessed
with a spirit of delusion in this generation.
Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of
the hope that is in you, 1 Pet. 3. 15. And I beseech you do it in sincerity.
1. IF thou say that every one has a measure of the spirit of Jesus Christ
within him, why say the Scriptures that some are sensual having not the spirit,
Jude 19. And when Christ tells his Disciples of sending them the spirit, he
also says, The world can not receive it, Joh. 14 17.

2. What is the Church of God redeemed by, from the curse of the law? Is it by
something that is done within them, or by something done without them? If thou
answer, it is redeemed from the curse of the law by something that works in
them. Then I ask, why did the man Christ Jesus hang upon the Cross on mount
Calvary without the gates of Jerusalem, Gal. 3. 3.
for the sins of his people? Act. 13. 38
And why do the Scriptures say, Pet. 2 24
that through this man, Col. 1. 20. etc.
is preached to us the forgiveness of sins. That is, through his blood; Ephesians. 1.
7. which was shed without the gates of Jerusalem, Heb. 13. 12.

3. What Scripture have you to prove, that Christ is, or was crucified within
you, dead within you, risen within you, and ascended within you?

4. Is that very man that was crucified on mount Cal^a^y between two thieves,
whose name is Jesus, the son of Mary, I say, is he the very Christ of God, yea,
or no?

5. Is that very man, with that very body, within you, yea, or no?

6. Was that Jesus, that was born of the Virgin Mary, a real man of flesh and
bones, after his resurrection from the dead, out of Joseph's Sepulcher, yea, or
no? for the Scripture says he was, as in Luke 24. 39. If so, then did that man
that said handle me and see for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me
have; I say, did that man go away from his Disciples (and not into them, in his
body) as these Scriptures declare, Luke 24. 39, 40. compared with v. 50. 51.
also Acts 1. 9, 10, 11 or did he with that body of flesh go into his disciple,
as some fond dreamers think.

7. Has that Christ that was with God the father before the world was, no
other body but his Church? If you say no, as it is your wonted course. Then
again I ask you, what that was in which he did bear the sins of his children?
If you answer, It was in his own body on the tree, for so says the Scripture,
1 Pet. 2. 24. Then I ask you further, whither that body in which he did bear
our sins, (which is also called his own body) was, or is the Church of God,
yea, or no? again, if you say he has no body but the Church, the Saints, Then
I ask, what that was that was taken down from the Cross, and laid into Joseph's
Sepulcher, Luke 23. 51. 52.

Now I know, that as Christ is the head of his Church, so the Church is the
body of the head, which is Christ. But as Christ is the Mediator between God
and men, I say, as he is Mediator, so he is a man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. and absent from
his Saints in the world, as is clear 2 Cor. 5. 6. Therefore. as he is a
Mediator, Luke 24. 51
and a man, Act. 1 9, 10 11,
so he has a body that is absent from his Church, which body is descended from
his Disciples, above the clouds, into heaven. Luke 23. 26 and 33. 53.
If you say no, Luke 24 v 3, and 6. and 15. and 41, 42. and 39 and 50.
Then I ask you, Act. 10. 41
Did he leave the body behind him, which was born of the Virgin Mary, which
walked up and down with his disciples in the world, was afterward hanged upon
the Cross, buried, rose again from the dead, with which body he did eat, drink,
and likewise walk with his Disciples after his resurrection from the dead, and
did bid his Disciple see* if he were not flesh and bones, yea, or no?

Finis.
J. Bunyan.

