Some of the DIFFERENCES and ALTERATIONS In the Present Common Prayer Book,
FROM The BOOK established by LAW, in quinto and sexto, Edw. 6. and 1 Eliz.
The Calendar.
THere are sundry Saints days (although in black Letters) not found in the
Books of 5.6. Edw. 6. or 1. Eliz. to the number of 50. and more. Which however
it may seem a small matter, yet Time may turn them into Red Letters, and so
claim observance of them. For Dr Cousens in his Calendar (which he calls the
Calendar of the Church) in his Book of Devotions, has put one of them already:
viz. St Barnabies. Day, into Red, which, however the Epistle and Gospel for
that day, and for the Conversion of S. Paul, be extant in the Service Book;
yet, in 2. Edw. 6. and in 5.6. Edw. 6. those Days were expunged out of the
Catalogue of Holy Days.

On Aug. 7. The name of Jesus is put in for an old Holy Day; which, however
used in times of Popery (but, under a more gentle Title Fe^
) even in 2. as well as in 5.6. Edw. 6. and 1. Eliz. it was expelled. Howbeit,
Dr Cousens, in his forementioned Devotions, has already set down proper
Lessons for that day: viz. Mat. 1. and Philip. 2. which shows how desirous
some are to keep an Holy Day to a Name.

The Order for Proper Lessons.
On Whitsunday, 1 Eliz. the first Lesson at Even. Prayer was Deuteronomy. 18. now,
that is thrust out, and Wisd. 1. crept into the room. And if we look into the
Lessons for Holy Days, we shall find many Chapters of the Canonical Scripture
laid aside, and Apocryphal Chapters ordered to be read. See some instances in
the Margent, ^alendar. The New. ^en. 46. Wisd. 5. ^en. 47. Wisd. 6. ^xod. 12.
Wisd. 9. ^xod. 13. Wisd. 12. ^um. 33. Wisd. 19. ^b 31. Ecclus. 15. ^b 32.
Ecclus. 19. ^ccles. 10. Ecclus. 21. ^ccles. 11. Ecclus. 23. ^zek. 3. Ecclus.
25. ^zek. 6. Ecclus. 29. ^ic. 7. Ecclus. 35. ^aum. 1. Ecclus. 38. ^ech. 7.
Ecclus. 39. ^ech. 8. Ecclus. 44. ^udg. 14. Ecclus. 51. ^sa 60. Wisd. 1.
at the Letter C.

There are sundry other Lessons altered, which I here omit. It is true, the
Stat. of 1 Eliz. allows one alteration or addition of certain Lessons to be
used on every Sunday in the year: but, after mention of some by name, it
adds, And none other, or otherwise. Also in the present Kalendars, there are
four Chapters of Joshua left out, that were in the Kalendars of 5. and 6. Edw.
6. And, on October. 13. Judith 15, 16. are appointed now to be read; but no such
thing in 5, 6. Edw. 6. Which deserves consideration, seeing so many Canonical
Chapters of use, are not at all appointed to be read in public.

The Rubricks.
The first Page of the present Books, appoint Ministers to use such Ornaments
as were of use in 2. Edw. 6. not declaring what those be. The Book established
in 5.6. Edw. 6. has no such order. The Book of Canons, Can. 24. enjoyneth
other Ornaments. Hereby Ministers must break that Canon, or the present
Rubric, which the 14th. Canon requires all to observe. So that the 14th.
Canon and the 24th. contradict each other. And neither those Canons, nor that
Rubric, nor this Book, are established by Law.

After the Communion, there are in all Service-Books of 5, 6. Edw. 6. seven
Rubricks. Which number remains; but, the Third is divided into two, and the
fourth wholly lost. In which fourth, the Compilers have solidly and excellently
declared in what sense they intended Kneeling at the Communion. The loss
whereof has occasioned much stumbling and offense; yea, much trouble and
persecution. That Rubric was this.

Although no Order can be so perfectly devised, but it may be of some, either
for their Ignorance and Infirmity, or else of Malice and Obstinacy,
misconstrued, depraved, or interpreted in a wrong part; yet because brotherly
Charity wills that, so much as conveniently may be, Offenses should be taken
away; therefore we willing to do the same. Whereas it is Ordained in the Book
of Common Prayer, in the Administration of the Lords Supper, that the
Communicants, kneeling, should receive the Holy Communion; which thing being
well meant for a signification of the humble and grateful acknowledging of the
benefits of Christ, given unto the Worthy Receiver, and to avoid the
profanation and disorder which about the Holy Communion might else ensue. Lest
yet the same Kneeling might be thought or taken otherwise, we do declare, that
it is not meant thereby, that any Adoration is done, or ought to be done,
either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily received, or unto any
real and essential Presence there being of Christ's natural flesh and blood.
For, as concerning the Sacramental Bread and Wine, they remain still in their
very natural Substances, and therefore may not be adored: for, that were
Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians. And, as concerning the
natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ, they are in Heaven, and not here:
for it is contrary to the truth of Christ's true natural Body to be in more
places than one, at one time.

The Body of the Book it self.
There is a whole Prayer now left out, at the end of the Letany, which was
extant in the Books of 5.6. Edw. 6. to be used in times of Dearth or Famine:
which was this:

O God merciful Father, which in the time of Heliseus the Prophet, d^dst
suddenly turn in Samaria, great scarcity and dearth into plenty and cheapness,
and extreme famine into abundance of victual; have pity upon us that now be
punished for our sins with like adversity. Increase the fruits of the Earth by
thy heavenly benediction; and grant that we receiving thy bountiful liberality,
may use the same to thy glory, our comfort, and relief of our needy Neighbors,
through Jesu Christ our Lord, Amen.

Moreover, there are sundry Prayers (some before, some in King James his time)
put into the present Leiturgie; as also some things into the Catechism, which
are not confirmed by Parliament. Which Additions (although useful) being not
legally ratified, has imboldened some to make alterations at their pleasure.
For instance, The Prayer for the Queen and Royal Family, before the year 1627.
began thus; Almighty God which have promised to be a Father of thine elect and
of their seed: but now, thus; Almighty God the fountain of all goodness. Which
change was a great Presumption, and may seem to imply an exclusion of the Royal
Stem out of the number of Gods Elect. This alteration was first made in the
Books appointed to be used, about that time, at public Fasts; and thence, was
stolen into the Book of Common Prayer. Of which, no reason can be discovered,
unless this; that the word Elect, distasted the favorers of Popish Arminianism.

Likewise the reading Psalms, now thrust into the Common Prayer Books,
(pretended to be established by Law) were no part thereof in 5.6. Edw. 6. or in
1. Eliz. For neither of the Books then printed in Folio, for public use in
Churches, had the Psalms in them; but only a direction what Psalms should every
day be read; which were accordingly read out of the Bibles then used in
Churches. It is therefore, very hard, and unreasonable, to continue that
Translation; and, to enjoin, and tie men to read those abused Psalms, as now
they stand in that Book. And it is a great wrong to the people: that Version
being very defective and corrupt. Take some instances wherein that differs from
the Kings last authorized Translation now only allowed to be read in Churches;
as also, from the Original it self.

Psalm. ^transt. ^amon^ok.
28.9. The Lord is my strength. In the new, thus, The Lord is their strength,
ver. 8.
37.38. Keep innocence, and take heed to the thing that is right. In the new,
Mark the perfect man, and behold the just, ver. 37. 58.8. So let indignation
vex them as a thing that is raw. In the new, He takes them away as with a
whirlewind, both living and in his wrath, ver. 9. 68.6. Makes men to be of one
mind in an house. In the new, Sets the solitary in families. 105.28. They
were not obedient. In the new, They rebelled not against his word. 107.40.
Though he suffer them to be evil entreated. In the new, He pours contempt
upon Princes. 125.3. The rod of the wicked comes not. In the new, the rod of
the wicked rests not upon the lot of the righteous.
In Psalm. 14. there are three whole Verses, which are not in the Original, nor
in the revised Translation, nor in the Greek 72. but only in the Popish vulgar
Bibles. To excuse it by saying, All those Verses are found together in Romans 3.
is a fig-leaf. For, the Apostle never meant to produce all those words as taken
out of one place; but only to collect out of several Texts of the Old
Testament, sundry testimonies to prove all men to be sinners. Accordingly, he
took three Verses out of Psalm. 14. one out of Psalm. 140. another out of Psalm.
10. another out of Isa. 59. All which, the Old Translators unadvisedly thrust
into the 14. Psalm, as parts of that one Scripture.

I forbear to mention other Psalms, wherein, sometimes words, sometimes whole
verses are left out; and, much of the rest is very improperly and impertinently
translated: which in the Leiturgy provided for Scotland, was redressed; yet the
Book (for sundry other defects, impertinencies, and redundances) was refused.
This makes sport for Papists and Atheists, to find how much our Translations
publicly used, do enterfere, and jar; and, how corrupt some of them be.

Thus of the differences between the old Common-Prayer-Books confirmed by Law,
and the present Common-Prayer-Books so much magnified and adored, not only by
the common sort, but by too many of those who pretend to learning and skill in
the Public Offices of the Church of England; but abuse the people; yea,
Magistracy, and God himself therein. For, still the Preface of the Book runs
thus, That nothing is enjoined to be read, but that which is the pure word of
God, or that which is evidently grounded thereupon: which (as our bold Masters
have ordered the matter) is false, and a mere cheat put upon the people of God.

Having thus given a taste of the differences between the Old and New Books, I
hold it needful to show how unsafe it might be hereupon to conclude no more but
this, Then let the present Book of Common Prayer be compared with the old that
was established, and be reformed by it. For, even in the Book that was
established by Parliament, there are sundry incongruous and uncomely
expressions; and, some gross mistakes of the Scripture it self: especially in
the Translations of the Epistles and Gospels. Which Translation used in the
Book of Common Prayer, is as ancient as the 35. of Hen. 8. (and used first in
private Primmars, being translated out of the Mass-Books and other Offices of
the Romish Church) for want of a better Translation in the Reign of Edward the
sixth. For Example,

When men be drunk. ^rans-Gosp. on 2 Sund. after Epiph. Epist. on 4 Sund. in
Lent.
But, in the new, When men have well drunk.

Mount Sinai is Agar in Arabia, and bordereth upon the City which is now called
Jerusalem: a gross mistake both of Scripture, and Topography. The new
Translation therefore renders it thus: This Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and
answers to Jerusalem which now is. He says not, Mount Sinai is Agar; for,
that is not so. But, Hagar is mount Sinai: that is, a representation or figure
of it. Nor does the Apostle say, that mount Sinai in Arabia bordered upon
Jerusalem. For, that is false; Arabia being many hundred miles distant from
Jerusalem. And the Mount whereof St. Paul speaks, was a type of it, not
bordering on it.

He was found in his apparel as a man. Epist. on Palm Sunday.
In the new, He was found in fashion as a man. The word is (...) which imports,
not apparel, but the form, or figure, which includes the real substance and
true nature of the thing whereof it is a form.

Which is Father of all that is called father in heaven and in earth. Epist. on
16 Sun. after Trin.
(Then) the Father, must needs be Father to himself. The new Translation,
therefore renders it, Of whom the whole family of heaven and earth is named. So
the Original, (...).

Much more might be added, not only against the present unestablished Leiturgy,
but against that which was confirmed. But this shall suffice. For my intention
neither is, nor ever was to destroy, or cast off all Forms: but only to show
some grounds of exception against this. And seeing this is so much cried up,
that the most, place all their Devotion and Religion in it, and come little
short of the Israelites in abusing of the brazen Serpent, which by Gods own
command, was erected in the Wilderness; Authority may consider whether it be
not honorable, safe, and necessary to deal with both Books, as Hezekiah did
with that Idolized Serpent; and carefully to provide a better in the room; as
that good King did, in reforming the whole Public Service of God: there being
now far better means, and fairer opportunities of so doing, than in the times
of compiling the Ancient Leiturgy by those Reverend and Renowned Bishops and
Martyrs that did compose it.

ROMANS 10.22. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that thing which he
allows.

FINIS.

